

EDITORIAL
FRENCH POLITICS
La dame de fer
Strange that France's new prime minister, whose first major statement before the National Assembly included vows to establish a European industrial policy and defend the Common Agricultural Policy, should be compared so readily with Margaret Thatcher.
The thought of la belle dame de Bruges coming out with such stuff beggars belief.
Add in Edith Cresson's political affiliation, plus her deserved reputation for dirigisme , and the freshly coined sobriquet ‘Edithatcher’ seems to be nothing more than a phrase-monger's fancy.
But, as EC ministers of agriculture, trade and foreign affairs will bear out, Cresson is tough.
During her progression through these ministries in Paris, she showed she could fight France's corner with steely resolution.
She is admired by business, which is looking forward to an industrial policy for France: something it has lacked for years.
And she is expected to accelerate restructuring.
A believer in market forces, she differs from Thatcher in her interventionism, and it is a safe bet that what the French euphemistically call ‘positive actions’ will be brought to bear to shake the best out of the likes of Thomson.
It is equally safe to wager that some of her actions will bring her into conflict with the competition directorate in Brussels, while her community policy plans will draw fire from Britain and Germany.
But Thatcher was never afraid of starting a dust-up over matters which impinged on Britain's ‘rights’ and special interests.
And under the godfatherly patronage of François Mitterrand, we can be sure that neither will Cresson.
They are sisters under the skin.
TOBACCO
EC ban wagon
Article 36 of the Treaty of Rome, the fat volume which supports the wonky edifice of the European Community, has been involved by social affairs commissioner Vasso Papandreou to back her bid to ban tobacco advertising throughout the EC.
This clause states that EC members can limit or ban imports on grounds including public morality, order, safety and health.
Papandreou reckons that this would allow EC governments which already ban or severely limit promotion of the killer weed to block imports of magazines which carry cigarette advertisements.
In the name of harmonisation, and to avoid charges of unfair trading, she says all 12 countries must fall into step with the one with the toughest rules.
In which case Brussels will ban or otherwise limit advertising throughout the EC for spirits, certain over-the-counter drugs and contraceptives, simply because it is banned or controlled in one country or another.
If Papandreou wishes to continue her righteous quest, she should go back into the smoke-filled rooms of the Bâtiment Berlaymont and re-package her proposals rationally.
There is, for example, health research which she may find useful.
UK INTEREST RATES
Borrowing votes
Assorted pundits and government ministers have in recent times deliberately tried to create the impression that reducing interest rates is the main, or even the only, way to haul the British economy out of recession.
The issue never addressed is the level to which interest rates should be reduced to enable British industry to compete effectively, let alone give it an edge over the rest of the industrialised world — probably because they have not reached such a level for decades; nor is there reason to hope they might in the foreseeable future..
Someone, somewhere has to decide whether interest rates are political tools or cogs in the economic machine.
Local experience suggests that cannot be both at the same time
The steady erosion from astronomical to merely high has at least been good for morale: a further cut after the holidays might just jolly people into voting Tory if there were to be an autumn election.
Someone, somewhere has to decide whether interest rates are political tools or cogs in the economic machine.
Local experience suggests that they cannot be both at the same time.
Experience at home and abroad shows it to be the responsibility of the governor of an independent central bank, not of a party hack.
Even before the holiday season, banks and building societies were splashing out on brochures offering fancy loans with the chat-up line: ‘Now that interest rates are falling…’.
Seductive indeed.
After all we've been through, we need a holiday (in France).
The Japanese hi-fi's clapped out, the VW should have been replaced 18 months ago, and that new Miele dishwasher doesn't quite fit alongside the Swedish fridge.
And wouldn't it be wonderful to go ski-ing in Switzerland again, to get away from all this gloom?
BUSINESS PLAN
Our new look
When Charles Hennessy's Adwatch column won a ‘highly commended’ gong in the Periodical Publishers' Association annual awards in May, there were three options: sack him for not winning outright, pay him more, or promote him.
Business decided to promote him — from the back pages to the front, to join our other regular commentators.
This is an artful way of congratulating Charles, while at the same time unveiling changes in Business's presentation.
The new contents pages set the pattern of a project to increase the quantity and range of information and entertainment.
But we won't be slapping ‘10 per cent extra, free’ on the cover, Charles might not approve.
IN BRIEF If, as seems likely, drug makers, food companies and others who are obliged to have their new products approved by the US Food and Drug Administration are going to be asked to pay for their vetting, it seems only reasonable that they should have a say in how it is run.
Not to put too fine a point on it, Washington could save millions of dollars and industry years of wasted time by privatising this snail's-pace bureaucracy.
‘What struck me most was that everybody in America smiles all the time.
It's a striking contrast to see the sullen faces in our streets.
Only when we catch up with the Americans in this respect shall I feel comfortable’— Vadim Tumanov, displaced Soviet politician, reflecting on his first trip to the US.
When the Exxon Valdez sank in 1989, coating Prince William Sound in raw crude, more than 10,000 Americans and about $2 billion were drafted in to clean up.
Since Saddam Hussein drained Kuwait's oil reserves into the Gulf the Saudis, to their credit, have stumped up $60 million.
However, there is no record of any more funds, nor any reported expansion in the 500-strong workforce which is struggling with a spillage about 14 times as large as that in Alaska.
Yet at the last count there were six oil-rich states bordering the Gulf.
Could it be their governments do not believe that the Iraqi regime will eventually be forced to make good the costs of the operation?
In the end, who cares?
READERS' LETTERS
Readers with a point to make should write, with a daytime 'phone number, to Business The editor reserves the right to shorten letters.
The writer of the best letter each month will be presented with a Montblanc Solitaire fountain pen.
The winner this month is Michael Knight of London.
Board splits
Full marks to Business for analysing the performance of Top 1000 companies in which the roles of chairman and chief executive are combined (Inside Business, May).
It is further evidence that the issue of whether top roles should be split is complex, and that prevailing wisdom, which favours splitting the roles, should be challenged — something Rick Greenbury had the courage to do on his appointment as chairman and chief executive of Marks & Spencer.
Split roles can encompass an infinite variety of divisions of authority from an-all powerful chairman to an all-powerful chief executive, while the middle ground carries the risks of confused roles, blurred leadership and personality clashes.
Fundamentally, the debate is about how to ensure effective corporate governance.
Are there real checks and limits to the power of ‘the boss’?
And does the board add value by enhancing the wisdom of management as well as holding it to account?
The answer can be determined by the following criteria:
First, is every director wholly committed to the concept of the accountability of the board as a whole, primarily to shareholders but also to other constituencies?
Second, is every board member free to question corporate leadership on any matter?
If leaders do not foster and bestow this freedom it will not exist, at least not for executive directors.
Third, are the agendas, papers and forums for board meetings constructed with relevance, timeliness and appropriate information; do they offer policy options rather than single-path recommendations?
Fourth, does the board offer diversity of experience, background, age, sex, skills and knowledge of the business?
And fifth, are there enough non-executive directors that their views cannot be ignored?
Whether the roles of chairman and chief executive should be split is a secondary issue which can be meaningfully addressed only when the company's needs have been defined.
Irish question
Your rather subjective critique of Tony Ryan and GPA (‘GPA comes down to earth’, May) puts me in mind of Brendan Behan's description of critics: ‘They are the eunuchs in a harem.
They know how it's done: they've seen it done every day, but they're unable to do it themselves.’
Why not leave the begrudgery to us Irish?
At least we have Jack Charlton on our side.
Labs' labours lost
‘Seed capital’(May), raised an important issue relating to the accounting treatment of research and development costs and to the way the financial market apparently views companies whose results are depressed by R&D spending.
It seems we are losing sight of the fundamental need to invest for the future; as a result companies whose profits are reduced by R&D costs are being penalised because of their commitment to the future.
Unless we can devise an approach which recognises the need to incur such costs, the market's short-term mentality will continue to undervalue good and profitable companies and the fear of takeover to divert management from its most important tasks.
If we are not careful the innovation for which the UK has been famous will disappear in a headlong rush to maximise shareholder returns.
We need to get the balance right.
No U-turns
Unfortunately, the reversal of the growth trend in the service sector does not of itself mean UK industry will have a second coming (‘Britain: make or break?’,
May).
It may have been relatively easy for a large part of the workforce to switch from manufacturing to service industries in the 1980s, but to do the opposite is more difficult.
No doubt intelligent 20-year-olds have become successful foreign exchange dealers within a year, but to train a graduate-level engineer takes five years or more.
Manufacturing industry, unlike many parts of the service sector, is not something we can switch into and out of.
The expected decline in services may simply mean that we come to regret the time when we felt that having a significant manufacturing base was an optional extra we could do without.
Off the rails
‘Snow Joke’(Opinion, April) highlights a classic example of risk non-management.
British Rail has the risk: points frozen during a cold snap.
Its customers experience the loss: staff late for work, delayed shipments and so on.
Because BR's risk assessment evidently ignored customer losses, the investment in an all-weather rail system appears not to be justified.
With customer losses included, the results would better reflect what is best for the nation.
Unfortunately, the failure of public utilities to consider customer losses is common, and results in sub-optimal risk management decisions.
To a lesser extent, the same failure can be observed in the private sector.
Computer system users cannot control risk management decisions, but suffer big losses when inadequate protection fails to avert catastrophe.
Management information systems directors, focusing on monthly technical performance figures, balk at spending money on security.
Instead, they keep their fingers crossed and spend the money on hardware to enhance performance.
Proven techniques exist for quantitative assessment of risks.
Responsible officials should use them to serve the public interest.
Pitch victory
Why has American football so captured the imagination of the British public?
Why do the London Monarchs regularly achieve higher attendances than Liverpool or Manchester United football clubs?
Obviously, television has heightened awareness of the sport, but that is only half the story.
Simply, it has been marketed professionally.
The National Football League was nervous about London's reaction to the first game at Wembley a few years ago, and whether it would be profitable.
But the NFL recognised that it was in the entertainment business.
It gave the crowd a night to remember, on and off the field, and a sporting occasion was added to the calendar.
It followed up this insight with a basic marketing principle: that your best prospects are your previous customers.
Those who attended American Bowl '90 have been mailed twice with information about the 1991 match and how to secure tickets..
Golden rule: the London Monarchs' success owes much to the National Football League's classic marketing methods
CITY VIEW
LETTERS
Video game
Richard Roxburgh (Letters, April) seems to suggest that it is alright for BBC Enterprises to produce training videos as long as they are not successful.
In fact, these videos are successful — we estimate our market share at 8 per cent, achieved in only five years.
This year we forecast growth of 30 per cent.
Ever since we entered the training video market, competitors have claimed the only way we can offer training videos for less than they can is because we do not bear the full cost of production, by sourcing products from broadcast programmes.
These programmes are not free.
BBC Enterprises invested £45 million in BBC programme production in the last financial year — in addition to post-production costs.
Their claim has even less validity now that BBC Enterprises produces and pays for training videos by itself, with no broadcast element.
As a result, competitors now claim unfair competition because of‘inherent subsidy’ and ‘free advertising’.
The fact is, BBC Enterprises produces effective training videos which meet market needs.
They are marketed effectively and priced fairly, and a large number of people buy them.
The high volume of sales makes the low pricing policy profitable.
This is successful marketing, not unfair competition.
There is no ‘inherent subsidy’ in the training videos.
All direct costs and overheads are charged back to BBC Enterprises.
Neither is ‘free advertising’ a significant factor in BBC Training Videos' success.
No on-air promotion is allowed on any of our independently commissioned or distributed titles.
Roxburgh widens his argument to include the on-air trailing of BBC magazines.
Unlike other publishers' products, BBC magazines serve two masters: they must provide a public service enhancing viewers' and listeners' enjoyment and appreciation of programmes; and, in line with the government's exhortation, they must generate profit which feeds back into programme making, reducing pressure on licence fees.
Apathy and equity
The resistance of British savers to the charms of UK equities is a source of continuing frustration to the Conservative Party, the retail broking industry and pressure groups advocating wider share ownership.
The government has bombarded savers with opportunities to buy shares — generally on the cheap — in recognisable and profitable enterprises, it has tempted them with a succession of tax breaks designed to promote share ownership, and it has presided over the most sustained equity bull market of modern times.
All this should have been enough to turn us from a nation of householders into a nation of shareholders.
Instead, we sell our shares to the institutions and reinvest the proceeds in homes and holidays.
The government can, admittedly, point to a sharp increase in the number of people who own shares.
At the last count, Britain boasted about 11 million private shareholders, the majority of them beneficiaries of the privatisation boom.
Yet those hoping that privatisation would promote a share-buying habit have been disappointed.
The proportion of the London equity market accounted for by private shareholders appears to have stabilised in the past two years at about 18 per cent.
Even the share-holding habit has been hard to nurture.
Private investors account, on average, for about 20 per cent of the equity of privatised companies — scarcely more than the market norm.
The evidence suggests that, while privatised businesses retain more shareholders by number than the typical public company, the proportion of the equity they own soon gravitates towards the norm.
This pattern of selling undermines one of the standard explanations for the low level of private share ownership in the UK, namely that buying and selling shares is too complicated.
Not too complicated, it would seem, for the 3.4 million shareholders who sold their electricity distribution company shares within two months of their issue.
That leaves two plausible reasons for the British public's stubborn refusal to enjoy the fruits of share ownership: savers are either too dim or too smart.
It must be conceded that private shareholders to not always behave logically over their investments.
Personal equity plans, for example, have not until now commanded the following that their tax-exempt status would justify, whereas scrip dividend facilities have enjoyed a high take-up rate given their generally modest benefits and administrative inconvenience..
There are two plausible reasons why the British public doesn't buy shares: savers are either too dim or too smart
Savers have also missed out on an equity market which delivered average annual returns, including reinvested dividends, of 20 per cent during the Thatcher years.
No other category of asset came close to rivalling that performance.
Yet savers will still profit from the bull market as beneficiaries of the pension funds to which they sold their shares.
Sophisticated private investors might calculate that the tax breaks available to individuals are no match for the fiscal status of the pension funds.
Furthermore, private investors cannot trade shares on terms even approaching those available to fund managers.
Indirect investment in the market is simply cheaper and more tax advantageous than direct ownership of shares.
The government has done little to counter this.
Millions of pounds have been lavished on marketing privatisation issues, but little has been spent to promote the merits, or explain the mechanism, of corporate PEPs et al.
The thrust of the privatisation campaigns has been to persuade individuals to subscribe for shares, not to hold on to them once the issue is over.
Until someone can explain why it makes sense for individuals to maintain personal equity portfolios, the odds are that the selling will continue.
IN BRIEF The most dazzling early feature of the Hanson affair was Smith New Court's commitment to sell the company £250 million of ICI stock it did not own.
Had word of Hanson's interest leaked to the market, the stockbroker's chutzpah could almost have bankrupted the firm.
As it was, confidentiality was maintained and Smith managed to emerge smelling of roses and money.
The City's ability to keep a secret appears to have improved beyond measure over the past two years.
Recent rights issues, takeovers and even foreign exchange losses have all been sprung on an unsuspecting public rather than, as was the pattern in the mid-1980s, infiltrating the market through the columns of the Sunday newspapers.
The organisation housed on the corner of Old Broad Street and Throgmorton Street has mercifully reverted to a name which accurately describes where it is and what it does.
The International Stock Exchange, London, was pretentious and confusing, so welcome back the London Stock Exchange.
It has celebrated by sprucing up its Quality of Markets Quarterly Review , the first issue of which features an utterly gloomy article detailing the £350 million of losses made by member firms last year.
The page following features a big and bold advertisement for corporate hospitality and entertainment.
At least the City knows how to lose money in style.
INMAN'S AMERICA
LETTERS
UK advantage
Nigel Healey (Economics, April) over-estimates the real impact of wage inflation on Britain's industrial competitiveness.
Of greater importance to companies than wages are employment costs.
In Germany, Scandinavia and France, social costs — state pension contributions, national insurance and so on— take up about 60 per cent of salary compared with less than 20 per cent in the UK.
With such an advantage, British companies should be rushing to invest in training and capital equipment.
However, recent CBI figures show UK investment at below the German level; I suspect high interest rates are a major deterrent.
Rather than focusing on wage inflation, there are a number of short-term measures the government could adopt to encourage investment in training and equipment, without altering its fundamental anti-inflation policy.
Propaganda value
Businesses, says the Institute of Practitioners in Advertising in its press ads, are shooting themselves in the foot by not advertising in the recession.
Yet it is advertisers who have the gaping holes in their shoes.
Both the IPA and the Association of Media Independents have offered research evidence as ammunition for marketing directors pressed to justify their expenditure, which suggests that in the past marketing directors have defended advertising without evidence of its worth.
While recognising the power of advertising to build and create brands, clients are turning increasingly to direct marketing as an important part of their marketing requirement.
Unfortunately for the advertising industry the shift of expenditure is unlikely to reverse.
After all, why should the board cease to expect proof of the impact of their media spending once the recession is over?
BILL INMAN
Green-letter days
Junk mail.
Everybody hates it.
Everybody gets it — Americans more than most.
More than 63 billion pieces of junk poured across American thresholds last year.
That's about 250 unsolicited items per man, woman and child (five times the per capita junk volume in Britain).
Nobody rails against this more than environmental groups.
Junk mail clogs landfills, they say, and wipes out forests — 70,000 acres destroyed last year by catalogues alone.
To get the message across, the National Wildlife Federation sends out 60 million pieces of mail.
The American branch of Greenpeace dispatches another 33 million items.
The National Resources Defense Council sends out fat paperbacks to schools and businesses, usually unsolicited.
A favourite mail-out is the 160-page 50 Simple Things You Can Do to Save the Earth (3.5 million copies sold and distributed through a variety of sources).
Green groupers see no irony in all of this.
‘Mass mailings are a lifeline of communication and raise money for good causes,’ a Greenpeace official says.
Making money for good causes is probably why the National Wildlife Federation, the National Audubon Society and other environmental mailers sell their mailing lists to high-fashion clothiers, luxury-car dealers and other non-tree-hugging capitalists.
‘Here's an affluent, upscale audience it will really pay you to reach,’ reads the Audubon Society's mail-out promotion.
‘Plus, 33 per cent maintain liquid assets of over $75,000.’
At least one environmentalist is pained by the green overload.
‘It doesn't matter how beautiful the catalogue, how important the cause, how many people have been tortured in Iran or the number of pandas left in southern China,’ says Paul Hawken of Smith & Hawken, a California gardening-supply service.
‘If you don't want it, it's junk.’
Eugene Roscoe is also an expert in junk mail.
Fraud investigators say he posted hundreds of fake job applications last year, a few in Russian, a few in Turkish — anything to impress the big oil companies, some of which flew him to Riyadh and Aberdeen for interviews.
Inevitably, he flunked his first one.
Job screeners later said Roscoe, 55, seemed to flaunt his lack of technical knowledge.
But he wasn't stupid.
By billing different companies for the same visit to the same city, and padding each bill, Roscoe managed to clear $150,000 in income last year, $100,000 the year before.
Much to his regret, his last interview — with Houston detectives — earned him a trip to the county jail..
Greenpeace dispatches 33 million items of post a year in the US — to push the message that junk mail harms the environment
Jeans-maker Levi Strauss is launching a national call-in campaign for its hot new 501 line, asking 501 wearers to ring up and describe in detail what they do in their jeans.
Apparently a lot of callers who are innovative in the pants are unable to spell LEVIS (as in 1–800–24-LEVIS).
They dial LIVES instead, which connects them to Opto Plus, a small optical-parts maker in California.
‘The callers don't want to hear that they have the wrong number,’ says Howard Eckstein, Opto Plus's owner.
‘They just want to tell us which parts of their bodies are out of the Levi's at any one time.’
In a three-week period, the company logged 5,600 lust-in-denim calls.
Its optical business slumped.
Levi has apologised, but refuses to change the call-in number.
Jeans salesman David Fish says the correct number should not be hard to remember if 501 wearers simply turn round and examine the big letters printed on their backsides.
Nevertheless, Levi is offering Opto Plus a switchboard operator and plenty of free jeans.
Eckstein says he may ring up Levi's executives and tell them into which bodily part they can stick their proposal.
IN BRIEF Not to worry, says the president of Tower Records, about the new warehouse-sized stores opened by Britain's HMV Music on Tower's home turf in Manhattan.
‘If HMV does have any good ideas,’ Russ Solomon says, ‘we'll steal them.’
Campaigning against a savings and loans bill, a Ralph Nader consumer group sent an Elvis impersonator to Capitol Hill.
The rhinestone-clad figure warbled Tax Break Hotel, Bail-out Rock and other taxpayer blues.
Robert Bremel, a University of Wisconsin professor, milks mice in his laboratory.
He attaches tiny vacuum cups to hundreds of rodents as part of a government study of genetics and milk protein.
Bremel says it takes 6,000 lactating mice to match a cow's output.
But, he adds, mice are more energy efficient and less temperamental than cows.
The drawback?
‘You've got to have damn good eyes.’
Greyhound boss Fred Currey, who precipitated one of modern labour's bloodiest strikes (see Business , September 1990) insisted union ‘extortion’ would never oust him.
He was right.
‘Drop Dead Fred’, as the strikers called him, was recently forced out by Greyhound's loss-plagued institutional investors.
‘Well,’ says the ex-chief executive philosophically, ‘when you've managed a business in crisis mode as long as I have, you pick up a few enemies.’
ECONOMICS
LETTERS
Smart blow
The company that tops this year's Business Smart 100 (April), the ranking that identifies fast-growing companies most likely to survive recession, is Rolfe & Nolan.
It is interesting to note that Rolfe & Nolan's chairman is Tim Hearley, also chairman of C. H. Industries, which, unfortunately, has not survived the recession; administrators were appointed in March.
Spoils of Esops
‘Esop fable’(May) correctly suggests that employee share ownership plans have got off to a slow start.
Until the middle of last year firms wishing to adopt them were in danger of falling foul of the Companies Act, which prohibited companies from assisting in the purchase of their own shares.
The government has now relaxed this law to promote Esops, and interest has boomed.
However, little has been done to highlight their attractions for big plcs.
Esops have two parts: an employee benefit trust, which can buy and hold existing shares in its adopting company, and one or more share schemes which can be used to distribute shares to employees.
Quoted companies should consider Esops for three reasons.
First, the Esop can buy existing shares in the market, avoiding the need to issue new shares.
Second, it can be used to purchase many more shares for employees than is possible with existing share schemes.
The budget made some of those schemes more attractive and, hopefully, Esops will be adopted to meet expected extra demand.
Third, an Esop can be used to buy back shares from existing employee shareholders.
For example, a large family shareholding which, if sold, might render a family company vulnerable to takeover, could instead be sold to an Esop.
This would provide incentives to employees and a degree of continuity for the business.
NIGEL HEALEY
Feeble empire
Times are hard for British business — ask anyone.
Demand is sluggish.
Costs are spiralling.
Company insolvencies climb daily.
But think how much worse it could be.
Imagine working with plant that was obsolete even before it was installed in the 1940s.
Or dealing with suppliers that ignore requests for raw materials.
Or trying to motivate a workforce that has seen inflation halve the buying power of its wages.
Such is the lot of Soviet managers.
While the rest of eastern Europe rushes to embrace capitalism, Moscow dithers at the crossroads.
The Soviet Union has the potential to be one of the richest nations on earth.
But after decades of economic mismanagement,perestroika has unleashed only popular discontent and regional separatism, rather than the surge in output its architects intended.
British business has a vested interest in the Soviet Union's economic renaissance.
Until the 1917 revolution, Anglo-Russian trade boomed; the City financed the country's early industrialisation.
The re-emergence of the Soviet Union from its self-imposed isolation offers British companies an alternative to the saturated consumer markets and cartelised suppliers of western Europe.
But not until perestroika is ditched in favour of Soviet-style Thatcherism.
At present, Mikhail Gorbachev's reforms merely provide a case study in how to wreck an economy.
Reliable statistics on the Soviet economy are as hard to find as bread in the Moscow shops.
But, significantly, all tell the same awful story (see chart).
Output this year could be down by as much as 20 per cent.
Capital investment could shrink by half.
Inflation is probably running at 150 per cent a year.
The fundamental problem facing the Soviet Union is that the discipline which once held the centrally planned system together, however imperfectly, has collapsed before markets have had time to develop.
Factory managers, particularly in more rebellious republics, routinely ignore directives from Moscow, responding instead to the demands of local leaders.
Direct goods-for-goods swaps are inefficient, but are now the only way to secure supplies.
Not surprisingly, managers pathologically stockpile raw materials to guard against future shortages, so tying up scarce resources.
To the extent that functioning markets have emerged — notably in the car parks of every big city — they do little more than recycle the small supply of consumer goods.
With controlled prices ensuring excess demand for almost every item in state shops, products can be resold on the black market for huge profits.
Many goods no longer even reach high street shelves as retailers sell merchandise direct to the black market.
Such arbitrage fails to set in motion the competitive forces that normally close such openings in a market economy.
Because enterprises receive the official, rather than the higher, black market, price, there is no incentive for them to increase production.
Instead, black market activities inspire further controls.
There is no shortage of suggestions for reform.
But too much debate focuses on measures to treat the symptoms of the malaise, rather than tackling the cause.
To awake from its economic nightmare, the Soviet Union needs to create the three planks on which all successful capitalist nations are founded: a stable macroeconomic environment, private ownership of capital and competitive markets undistorted by government controls.
Current macroeconomic policy is a shambles.
The budget deficit is running at 10 per cent of GDP, reflecting the Gorbachev administration's inability to resist the demands of special interest groups.
In the absence of developed capital markets, the yawning gulf between state expenditure and revenues has been plugged — in banana republic style — by printing currency.
In 1990, the money supply grew by 70 per cent.
With little to buy in the shops, the result has been the build-up of a huge ‘monetary overhang’.
Despite the government's arbitrary confiscation of high denomination notes in January, the outstanding stock of cash still dwarfs the annual value of retail sails.
Removing price controls now would end queues at state shops but ignite hyper-inflation.
Stabilisation based on fiscal balance and monetary control is thus the sine qua non of a return to economic sanity.
The second step in recreating a market economy is to restore private ownership of capital.
Not until higher prices translate into higher profits for private owners will enterprises respond appropriately to the bidding of the invisible hand.
At present, managerial decisions are guided by the quest for economic security.
In the never-never land of unreal prices, widespread subsidies and easy bank loans, using resources efficiently to make profits comes a long way down the list of priorities.
Finally, only when the other two planks have become established can the freeing of prices work its magic on the economy, by dragging supply and demand into line and injecting commercial rationality into production processes.
If such a three-pronged assault on the ailing Soviet economy has a familiar ring to it, that is hardly surprising.
A similar package of stabilisation, privatisation and deregulation policies was pioneered by Margaret Thatcher.
The deep recession that followed shows how painful true perestroika can be.
For the Soviet economy, the transitional pain will be far greater.
Yet unless Gorbachev, or his successor, recognises that there is no middle way between central planning and capitalism, and designs recovery programmes accordingly, the Soviet Union faces only economic chaos and civil war.
And as long as the Kremlin remains paralysed, British business there will look for nothing but confirmation that things at home are not, perhaps, so bad after all..
More chaos awaits the Soviet Union unless it ditches perestroika for a Thatcherite purge of its economy
ADWATCH
CHARLES HENNESSY
Know your place
Since I was pipped at the post for the Periodical Publishers' Association Columnist of the Year award by Maureen Lipman, star of stage and commercial, I thought I'd better look up her column in She magazine to see how I might bring my stuff up to state-of-the-art standard.
Lipman's column in the May issue was fetchingly entitled: ‘I found myself weeping over an economy-sized box of tampons’.
Well, true, I've never had a grabber like that (maybe the fault lies with the subs).
The copy began no less engagingly: ‘The doctor said I might as well have it done’, said I, over meatballs and rice around the family table.’
(Economical scene-setting; interesting inversion of subject and verb.)
‘Have what done?’ asked the child who'd been listening.
‘Fibroids, love’.’
Racy and instructive as this was, my eye was caught by a Gordon's Gin ad on the opposite page.
Distracted from my course in self-improvement, I mixed myself a brutal martini and fell to pondering such juxtapositions.
So I turned from what we pros call ‘the back of the book’ to the front to see what else I could learn.
She is bought each month by almost 250,000 women (and about 40,000 men), median age 34.
What interested me was how the editorial approach to these readers compared with the neighbouring ad: ‘A weak Gordon's & Tonic (please do not adjust your magazine)’, it said, wetly.
Agencies too easily assume that the competition for the brands and services they advertise comes from other advertisers.
On the shelves, this may be so.
But She readers have already bought a product: the editorial content of their magazine.
The editor and her senior staff must live or die by satisfying the consumer with the product they have to sell — one monthly mag — in order to ensure repeat sales.
By cover presentation on the shelves, and by promotion and word of mouth, they must also increase circulation, thus improving the advertisers' platform and, of course, profitability for both parties.
You would think, therefore, that it would pay agencies to study assiduously not only the editorial content of the pages which are designed to appeal to their potential customers, but also the verbal and visual techniques employed to attract and keep them.
Clearly, from a look at She , most of them have done no such thing.
The editorial is notably clean, crisp, unfussy, the typefaces an intelligent mix of the classical and modern, the text black on white for maximum clarity, the copy uncondescending.
By comparison, the ad pages, with notable exceptions, are a mess.
One that isn't is the corporate-disguised-as-consumer Sainsbury's double-page, part of the admirable national campaign, printed in She without adaptation.
Compare its treatment of an Italian theme with that of Nescafé on the same territory.
Here, a photo of a cup of cappuccino is superimposed on a picture of the Grand Canal in Venice over the headline ‘Nescafé Cappuccino.
Creamy Cappuccino in an instant’— straight from the account executive's brief.
The Sainsbury's ad, by contrast, consists of an engaging headline, a reportage-type photo combining believable appetite appeal and human appeal, and easy-to-read text.
In  other words, its techniques are purely editorial: the reader does not have to adjust her mental or emotional state.
Take also the double-page introduction to the food pages and the adjoining Batchelors Super Noodles advertisement.
The first is lively, clear, appetising; the second an embarrassingly contrived hostage to some copywriter's self-indulgent gag.
‘Become the mother of invention’ fatuously invokes a picture of noodles on knitting needles.
So that's what mothers do.
Or compare the magazine's Work Space double-page with, say, a double-page ad for Roche's vitamins.
In the first, the reader can identify immediately with the woman on the page, and the headline and sub-head add humour to humanity: ‘Get motivated — get yourself a kick-start and find the drive you need to succeed at work and at home’.
Then turn to the Roche effort.
Half the space is taken up by a picture of a violin — ah yes, but one with a broken string .
Now all good editors and creative agencies know that to attract men you show men, and to attract women you show women.
Violins, one presumes, attract violins.
The too-long text is set in hard-to-read sanserif and the clincher headline reads: ‘Honestly.
Are you always as fit as you say you are?’
Fiddle-faddle.
My advice to agencies: send someone out with a quid or so to buy a magazine before you advertise in it; or better still, have those editorial folk over for a Gordon's & Tonic....
Agencies that dream up advertisements to go in magazines could do worse than read the publications first
Pasta imperfect: Batchelors' knitting noodles patronise female readers; while Sainsbury's Italian job serves up a healthy portion of human appeal, wit and authenticity
Wrong chord: Roche's image will have little resonance with buyers of She
MICHAEL DIXON
Doing it for kicks
It is a truth universally acknowledged that readers of Business have a wide range of abilities.
But, however many skills we possess, not all are of the same value to us.
In particular, while some things we can do give us great satisfaction, other tasks leave us cold.
Whatever we may put into them, it is certainly not our hearts.
The difference between the buzz-giving skills — our motivated abilities — and the other sort is vitally important, says American management consultant Arthur Miller.
His studies of more than 10,000 executives in the past three decades persuade him that, unless our line of work calls fundamentally on our buzzgiving skills, we are unlikely to shine at it — even though we may muddle through on quasi-automatic dexterity alone.
The trouble is that few of us have a clear idea of what our motivated abilities are.
It is a long-established custom to assume that the way to go about making a career is to fit ourselves into ready-made jobs.
The idea of proceeding the other way round — discovering what we do well, and whole-heartedly, and contriving to make a living by it — seldom occurs.
Even so, Miller maintains that the clues to our abilities lie in our past, and can be brought to light by his System for Identifying Motivated Abilities.
‘The principle is that once we find we can do something that makes us feel good, we repeat it,’ he explains.
‘So we build up individual patterns of preferred activities which an interviewer, trained to look for them, can detect.’
Interviewees are first asked to outline briefly personal achievements they have found satisfying.
As long as they are remembered as such, it does not matter whether anyone else thought them worthwhile.
One must be from childhood — mine was making a model Beaufighter aircraft in balsa-wood, complete with retracting undercarriage.
A second must be five to 10 years later, and so on until fairly recently.
The interviewer takes each achievement in turn, starting with the earliest, and enquires in fine detail what it was interviewees did and how.
They are not asked why.
‘We're looking for things people remember for certain,’ Miller says, ‘and they often don't recall why they did them.’
The conversation is recorded and transcribed, then minutely examined for recurring clues.
Tell-tale themes — which emerge in repeated use of phrases such as, in the case of a motivated talent for management, ‘I took care of…organised…got people together’— can be added up to reveal the interviewee's motivational pattern.
That pattern has five elements, the nub being a particular aim or ‘thrust’ which directs all the person's efforts.
Examples are an urge to acquire or possess, to take  command, to build, to improve, to be best, to win a response from other people, to attract attention, to pass tests, to surmount difficulties, to master or perfect, to pioneer, to serve or help, to shape or influence.
The second element consists of certain ways of relating to other people.
They include working as an individual, joining in group efforts, leading teams while remaining involved in the action, directing from afar what is to be done and how, coordinating, coaching and harnessing others' talents to specified ends.
Third, each of us will tend to use a set of five to seven particular skills.
Among them are administering, analysing, communicating, controlling, designing, entertaining, experimenting, harmonising, implementing, innovating, making friends, nurturing, observing, organising, persuading, planning, studying, teaching and theorising.
Fourth, we show a preference for working with certain types of subject matter, whether concepts, schedules, detailed data, visual material, technical mechanisms, money, other people's skills, physical structures or systems based on symbols such as languages and mathematics.
Last, there will be a tendency to be ‘turned on’ by particular circumstances, by, for example, competition, deadlines, tension, novelty, detailed plans, problems, opportunities, orderly working conditions, appealing causes and people's needs.
Miller finds that patterns are almost always well defined at an early age, consist of between 20 and 25 distinct preferred activities, and are thereafter extremely difficult to change.
‘We don't say it's impossible for anybody to add new motivated abilities in later life,’ he says, ‘but in all our research we've never yet seen a completely new direction emerge.’
For instance, if people haven't exhibited management ability in what they think are the worthwhile things they've done over the past 30 years or so, the chance of them ever being good managers is remote.
‘But you have to look at the pattern as a whole,’ he points out.
‘The most obvious thing in mine may be that I like to work with numbers, but if I've an urge to be an innovator too, I probably won't make a successful auditor.
On the other hand, there'll be a range of different things I could become committed to and do well.
The important thing is to avoid mistaken career moves, no matter how much your employer wants — or will pay you — to make them.’..
It's obvious: unless work gives us a buzz, we won't give our best.
But it's not so obvious which skills deliver the buzz
We are used to fitting into ready-made jobs; the idea of finding out what we do well, and aiming to make a living by it, rarely occurs
IN BRIEF Can Arthur become king where St Michael rules?
Two watch-worthy Frenchmen, Jean-Noel Pariente, 30, and Lionel Fainfray, 29, whose Arthur brand of men's underpants sells 800,000 pairs in France after only a couple of years in existence, are preparing a charge into the UK market.
The one-product company's sales this year are forecast at £8.5 million, net profits at £500,000.
Tough-talking Deryck Maughan (above), the former British Treasury official who made Salomon Brothers the most profitable foreign brokerage in Tokyo, has been made vice-chairman at the firm's New York HQ.
Maughan, 43, led the development of arbitrage trading in Tokyo.
William Thompson, his 45-year-old successor as head of Salomon Bros Asia, will find his record hard to match: Japanese houses have now trained their own arbitrageurs.
Fresh from lifting US profits by 40 per cent at mustard-to-shoe polish conglomerate Reckitt & Colman, Vernon Sankey, 42, has been rewarded with the top job.
He takes over from John St Lawrence as chief executive at the start of next year.
Monty August, 46, who succeeded Tom Wilding, 61, as chief executive of UK Paper in May, has a hard act to follow.
Wilding led the 1986 buy-out of the business from Bowater, for £38 million.
Three years later he sold it to Fletcher Challenge for £299 million — an eightfold increase.
To do as well, August will have to boost UK Paper's value to £3 billion by 1994.
UNILEVER
Power grooming
Unilever main board directors are usually reasonably well known before they are appointed.
But 44-year-old Antony Burgmans (below) has appeared as if from nowhere to take charge of the group's star personal products division.
A Dutchman with the added merit of an MBA from Lancaster, he is a marketing specialist who has spent much of his 19-year career with the company immersed in detergents.
Now he takes charge of a division with turnover approaching £3 billion and a product portfolio ranging from toothpaste to Calvin Klein perfumes.
Succeeding Mike Perry, the director behind the quick-fire acquisitions programme which first put the group into direct competition with world cosmetics leader L'Oréal, and later prompted old rival Procter & Gamble to join the chase, he is a marked man.
Unilever has high expectations of its booming cosmetics business, and if Burgmans delivers the goods, he should be in line for one of the coveted jobs on the so-called chief executive committee which governs the Anglo-Dutch enterprise.
The ruling troika currently comprises Sir Michael Angus, Floris Maljers and Perry.
In traditional Unilever style, Burgmans has been put through the international mill.
His ascent began 10 years ago when he was made marketing director of Lever in the Netherlands.
A similar job in Germany followed.
Then, in March 1988, he disappeared into distant exile as chairman of Unilever Indonesia.
ALLIED DUNBAR
Life expectancy
Expect the cream of Allied Dunbar's life assurance business to be attacked soon — by the three men who built its assets to £7.5 billion.
Former chairman Sir Mark Weinberg (above) plans to go head-to-head with the company he resigned from last October.
Remarkably, his near-certain backer will be Jacob Rothschild, who, as part of the Hoylake consortium, placed Weinberg in a dilemma during the consortium's break-up bid for BAT, Allied Dunbar's parent company, in 1989.
(Weinberg is also a director of J. Rothschild Group.)
From Rothschild offices in London's St James's Place, Weinberg tells Business : ‘We have been in talks which could result in Rothschild backing a new life company.’
He left Allied Dunbar last October, at the same time as chief executive Mike Wilson , 47, a 20-year cohort who was viewed as his successor, and sales director Keith Carby .
Consultancy agreements tying Wilson and Carby to Allied Dunbar expire by the end of this month.
Weinberg, who will be non-executive chairman, has already hired a consultant of his own:Paul Bradshaw , a stalwart of Abbey Life (which Weinberg founded in the 1960s) and former managing director of Skandia Life.
Could the new venture, which will trade under the name of Wilson Sumner, see a return to the sales techniques which earned Allied Dunbar the nickname ‘Allied Crowbar’?
‘On the contrary,’ Weinberg says.
‘We would target high net worth individuals.
It is important to have carefully selected, professional salesmen.’
Allied Dunbar is being brave-faced: ‘With 200 life companies, there is a lot of competition, and opportunity,’ a spokesman says.
‘It's a tough time to launch something new.’
BUSINESS PEOPLE
YOUNG DIRECTORS
Something by 30
Do you dream of making it to the top of the corporate tree whilst still short of the tooth and long in ideas?
The boards of 15 quoted companies — listed in Hemmington Scott's Corporate Register* — have been energised by the appointment of a director below the age of 30.
Business asked the 10 youngest: ‘How did you make it to the top so quickly?’
Ben Habib, 26 .
Corporate finance director of Lloyd's reinsurance broker PWS.
‘I was a friend of [PWS chairman]Lord Pearson's daughter at Cambridge.
I did my homework on PWS before going round to dinner.
We tended to talk about business,’Responsibilities .
‘I'm a sort of on-site investment banker.
It was difficult to get good, affordable advice when the company was having problems.’
Qualifications .
Former business analyst at a merchant bank.
Head boy at Rugby.
Toni Shasha, 26 .
Director of jewellery retailer Owen & Robinson, run by entrepreneur Maurice Dwek.
‘There is a distant family connection.’
Responsibilities .
‘I negotiate the disposal of loss-makers and I find new sites.’
Qualifications .
LSE graduate with a masters degree in law.
Formerly assistant vice-president in a US bank.
Frederik Hsu, 28 .
Director of Property Trust.
‘I put together a syndicate of investors with my friends the Cheng family from Hong Kong, who took control.
We plan to build it into a key player in the property market.’
Responsibilities .
‘I act as the Cheng family's eyes and ears in London.
We have developed a luxury block of flats in Regent's Park — probably the best block in London.’
Qualifications .
London-based scion of a prominent Hong Kong business family.
‘I have inherited a hunger for doing deals.
I orchestrated the takeover of Pittencrief Petroleum for a group of investors.
We put in a new management team and floated the company at £27 million.’
David Cramer, 28 .
Finance director of property investor Stewart & Wight.
‘One of the other directors, an old school friend, recommended me.’
Responsibilities .
‘I bring expertise on general financial and technical matters.’
Qualifications .
Partner in Blinkhorn's chartered accountancy firm.
Pankaj Shah, 28 .
Finance director of Leicester-based Hoskins Brewery.
‘I got the job through an agency.
We are a small outfit.
We cannot afford highly paid or experienced staff.’
Responsibilities .
Manages accounting, finance and cash-flow projections.
Qualifications .
Trained as a chartered accountant with Price Waterhouse, then specialised in taxation at Touche Ross.
Julian Pollock, 28 .
Managing director of Tonypandy-based Apollo Watch Products, which employs 230 people.
‘I joined the family business in 1984.
My father was the last managing director.
It was pure nepotism.’
Responsibilities .
‘We introduced new management.
I had the balls to do it because I didn't know any better.
Watch straps were like a cottage industry, so we adopted the marketing techniques of a baked beans company.
We floated in 1988.’
Qualifications .
‘A management science degree from Manchester University and holiday jobs.
I wasn't exactly green.’
Philip Millward, 28 .
Operations director of £19 million turnover Allied Leisure.
‘My initial job was washing up.
I gave up thoughts of university when I was offered a trainee manager post.’
Responsibilities .
‘Marketing the 10-pin bowling and theme restaurants.’
Qualifications .
‘I began when I left school.’
Gail Parkin, 29 .
House sales director of Doncaster-based Moorfield Estates.
‘I was the first employee.
There was one site and a small office.
It was backed by my father, Anthony Phillips, and three of his friends.’
Responsibilities .
‘I have a target of 82 units this year.
We have eight sites running.’
Qualifications .
‘A foundation course in accountancy at Sheffield Polytechnic.
I never had a formal training, but I have a lot of energy.’
Steven Lipman, 29 .
Director of property trader Safeland.
‘My father and eldest brother established an estate agency and I joined them at the age of 17.
The group was floated in 1990.’
Responsibilities .
‘To the firm's shareholders.’
Qualifications .
‘Other than having worked in property since my teens, nothing.’
Ian Currie, 29 .
Finance director of recruitment agency ASB Barnett Kinnings.
‘I was approached last year by Lawrence Barnett [chairman]to sort things out.
I had letters after my name so I was called finance director.’
Responsibilities .
‘The first thing I did was close down half the company.
Now I get involved in acquisitions.’
Qualifications .
Qualified top of his year in England and Wales in accountancy exams.
Moved to a Manchester based stockbroker and established a reputation in the north for deal-making.
One young director has already found out how competitive things can be.
William Nash, 29, succeeded his father as a director of car-maker Reliant, which went into receivership shortly afterwards.
‘I resigned that position last year,’ he says.
The Corporate Register is published by Hemmington Scott, City Innovation Centre, 26–31 Whiskin Street, London EC1R 0BP.
Tel. 071 278 7769.
Price £135.
IN BRIEF No sooner had Franz Pfeffer returned home to Germany after a stint as his country's ambassador to France, than he was sent back again.
His new job, persuading French industry to invest in eastern Germany, will probably test his diplomatic skills to the limits.
Larry Speakes, former Reagan spokesman, is speaking officially again, this time as communications vice-president for Canada's Northern Telecom.
‘If somebody needs a technical briefing today on switching systems, I'd have to pass,’ says Speakes, 51.
‘But ask again in six months.’
Politics taught him the arts of learning quickly, bluffing and knowing when to shut up.
So how much does he make?
‘I'd rather not comment on that,’ he says.
‘When my friends asked me why I left the ministry, I told them the focus was too narrow.
Now I'm working to save the earth,’ says Mitsu Kimata, who is at the sharp end of Body Shop's thrust into Japan.
Kimata gave up her 29-year career at the Ministry of Labour to take charge of Aeon Forest, Body Shop's leading franchise in Japan.
Musical chairs in the small world of corporate finance.
Bay Green, who spent 17 years with Kleinwort Benson before defecting to Hill Samuel merchant bank as head of corporate finance, is back with Kleinwort, this time with a seat on the board.
His replacement is 42-year-old Richard Heley (above), who has himself come home to roost.
Heley joined Hill Samuel in 1974, then worked at BZW and Citicorp.
No messing about: Ben Habib (left) has fought to become a finance director at 26.
INSIDE BUSINESS
FAST FOOD
Health push at Kentucky
Kentucky Fried Chicken, the fastfood chain with almost 300 outlets in the UK, is considering changing its name to KFC in response to health concerns over fried food.
The move has been initiated in the US, where for some years customers have been removing the skin (the fattiest part) from the chicken before eating it.
In February it launched a skinless, marinated product called Light and Crispy.
So far the product is on sale in 2,000 of the chain's 5,000 US outlets (which had total sales of $3.2 billion last year).
Whether it will be launched in the UK has yet to be decided.
A re-designed logo features the letters KFC — and gives more prominence on signs to the beaming visage of Colonel Harland D. Sanders, the southern gentleman who founded the company in the 1930s as a sideline to his petrol station in Corbin, Kentucky.
‘For many of our customers, Colonel Sanders is Kentucky Fried Chicken,’ says public affairs director Dick Detwiler.
The new image is already on some packaging and signs in the US.
The company will not confirm that signs in the UK will be abbreviated.
According to KFC in the US the removal of the word ‘Fried’ from the name will give the company more flexibility to offer customers non-fried food.
Nigel Cope ..
Before: emphasis on the ‘Fried’
After: flexibility to offer healthier food
MOTOR INDUSTRY
Ford diversifies to fight car slump
Ford is trying to recoup losses on car sales in the UK with new business ventures in finance and car phones.
It is offering rates on hire purchase deals for new cars that make independent finance houses wince — and grabbing greatly increased market share as a result.
It is also about to start offering Four-badged cellular phones to Ford car buyers.
Its year-only contracts look certain to cut the throats of mobile phone dealers — who need to tie in new subscribers for up to four years to make the arrangement pay — but should, Ford believes, give it a £200 million business by 1995.
Though Ford UK lost £274 million in the UK in 1990 — its first taxable loss since 1972 — Ford Credit, its finance and leasing arm, made pre-tax profits of £56 million, up 37 per cent on the previous year, confirming its position among the top 10 UK finance houses.
Last year it advanced £5 million a day to customers.
While sales of Ford cars fell 17 per cent, Ford Credit upped its contracts by 15 per cent from 539,000 to 620,000, and financed 318,000 new sales — equivalent to nine of every 20 new Fords sold in the UK in 1990.
It also tightened its grip on dealers: the number using it rose by a quarter to 304, more than 75 per cent of all Ford main dealers.
But that apparent growth may not be long-lived.
John Hartland, marketing director of the Ford vehicle leasing arm of Forward Trust, Midland Bank's finance house, says: ‘Ford, as a manufacturer, is using subsidised interest rates to Ford Credit in a big way, to combat its decline in overall market share.
It pays interest subsidies only to Ford Credit, not other finance houses.
That tends to drive business to Ford.’
Another rival, National Westminster's Lombard North Central, says: ‘We cannot compete with Ford's terms head-on.’
Industry sources suggest Ford may soon extend the same favourable terms to contract hire firms.
‘It is defensive marketing,’ Hartland says.
That does not worry dealers.
Anchor Ford, which has 18 dealerships and is part of the nationwide Reg Varney group, was among the 61 dealers that signed up with Ford Credit last year.
Karl Hamer, Anchor Ford divisional director, with three dealerships in the midlands, says: ‘I earn more money because Ford's package is better than any other — and better too for the buyer.’.
Making waves: Ford uses dummies to test the quality of mobile phones
Meanwhile, the credit arm is shifting to plc status, as a full Ford subsidiary, to give it access to a wider choice of borrowing sources and ‘to offer more competitive interest rates’, says Chairman Alec Murray.
While its finance arm is advancing strongly, Ford's plans in the mobile phone market are even more ambitious — it intends to clean up.
It has joined forces with Motorola, one of the world's leading producers of mobile phones, to specify a range of products offering, it claims, considerably better quality and features than those of most rivals.
The phones are being made in Hertfordshire and Connecticut and are badged Ford.
Ford is investing £20 million over five years in a market plagued by complaints about the service given by existing providers.
It offers a one-year contract, with a one-month notice period, compared with the four-year deal — and swingeing charges for early cancellation — required by some rivals.
Ford's call charges are the same as its competitors', but it adds the benefit of half-minute billing; some companies still charge by the minute.
Installation charges are also cheaper on the whole.
The company claims to have solved many of the problems of poor reception suffered by mobile phone users.
Company engineers have carried out field trials and reported areas of bad reception to Racal Vodafone and Cellnet, which provide the services.
Cellnet is said to be spending £3 million a week improving the cellular phone network, and until recently Racal was spending £2 million a week.
‘We think we have solved any quality problems,’ says Racal Vodafone managing director Chris Gent.
Ford expects handsome profits from its phone business.
It estimates turnover this year of £20 million, rising to £200 million in 1995.
Its initial investment includes finance for the new Ford Cellular Airtime Operations Centre in Swindon.
It is also providing Motorola with systems engineers to design future communications for all Ford vehicles.
By 2000, Ford expects to build top-range cars with phones as standard.
‘This is not a one-night stand,’ says Jim Wynalek, director of the company's electronics division.
‘We want a long-term relationship.’
Charles Arthur and Tony Bosworth 
IN BRIEF UK exports to Asean nations — Singapore, Malaysia, Thailand, Indonesia, the Philippines and Brunei — have been booming: up by an annual compound 13.6 per cent, to £2.6 billion since 1985.
The bad news, shown by the lower line on the chart, is that the overall visible trade balance has fallen into the red, by £353 million in 1990.
‘When the yen soared in the 1980s, Japanese companies invested in manufacturing in Asean to stay competitive,’ says Iain Dale, chief executive of Dale Electric International and outgoing business adviser to the UK government on south-east Asian export policy.
‘Surrogate Japanese exports — and some US ones too — are using Asean as a springboard.
Vietnam will be the next low-wage economy to come in.’
UK EXPORTS AND TRADE BALANCE
By probing companies' PAYE and Schedule E tax compliance, the Inland Revenue raked in an extra £230 million last year.
Leslie Ferrar, a tax partner at KPMG Peat Marwick Mc Lintock, says most companies can expect at least one visit every five years, and has compiled a top 10 hit list of areas currently fascinating the Revenue's sleuths: self-employed consultants, casual labour, uniforms, ‘senior management’ lunches, home phone bills, evening working meals, large allowances in round figures, conferences, staff entertainment and subcontractors.
IN BRIEF British electronics manufacturers are the most acquisitive in Europe, a fact borne out by last month's £230 million purchase by ICL of Finnish computer company Nokia Data.
According to Brussels-based research firm Expertronics, of 340 disclosed acquisitions involving European companies in the past three years, 135 were by UK-based companies.
France and Germany lagged with 66 and 35 buys apiece.
Only 27 acquisitions cost $100 million or more, and only five of those involved non-Europeans.
Details from Expertronics, Brussels.
Fax: 32 2 332 25 07.
This year's Better Environment Awards for Industry include a new category: for companies with bright ideas on recovering waste.
The main problem with such projects is economics rather than technology, according to scheme director Helen Holdaway.
‘The successful applicants must show their projects are economically viable,’ she says.
The scheme, sponsored by the Department of the Environment, Shell, the CBI and the Financial Times , is run by the Royal Society.
Entry details for the awards, which also cover technology, products, management and technology transfer, are available from Frances Maggs, RSA, 8 John Adam Street, London WC2N 6EZ.
Tel. 071 930 5115.
WHISKY
Gibson lands Scotch label
The £1.5 billion-a-year Scotch whisky industry has a significant new player in Glasgow-based Gibson International, a buy-out company backed by 3i.
Gibson has just made its third acquisition, the Bladnoch single malt brand bought from Guinness's whisky subsidiary United Distillers.
The purchase increases its distilling capacity by a third, to 3.5 million litres a year.
‘We don't see any advantage in staying small,’ managing director Ian Lockwood says.
‘Our aim is to create an international wine and spirits company.’
Bladnoch, based in Wigtownshire, is Scotland's southern-most malt distillery.
Neither side has disclosed how much Gibson paid, but United confirms that it invited no other bids.
‘It does not like to be seen to be auctioning things off,’ says Alan Gray, an analyst with Glasgow stockbrokers Campbell Neill.
The company has a presence in the wine market through its Colman's Wine Box brand — it imports and distributes 1.5 million cases of wine in the UK a year.
It has made its way into the whisky business in the past three years by re-opening the Littlemill and Glen Scotia malt distilleries in Bowling and Campbeltown.
More acquisitions are likely.
Gibson was bought by its management from Argyll Group in 1986.
Two years later 51 per cent was sold to Shenley Canada, which in turn was bought by Guinness last year.
The shares were sold on to Canadian pension funds, but in February Lockwood retrieved them with backing from 3i, in return for a 30 per cent stake.
Last year Gibson turned over £12 million.
‘One reason we went with 3i is that we get access to additional funding,’ Lockwood says.
If that is the plan, there are distilleries to buy.
United, according to Gray, has a number in mothballs awaiting either revival or sale, and there are still independents which may decide to sell up.
‘There is space in the industry for another significant player,’ Gray says.
Matthew Lynn .
Bottling clout: Ian Lockwood (left) and finance director Bob Murdoch
RAISING CAPITAL
Debt and equity on equal terms
Rights issues are all the rage, but are they being pushed by pessimists?
Many City pundits believe that new debt to equity ratios indicate how confident companies are about investments.
Investors demand high returns to compensate for possible failure, making share issues an expensive way to raise cash.
Thus, they reckon, a director who weighs up the burden of meeting interest charges, and still opts for a big loan, has got to feel assured of success.
Are the pundits right?
From Extel Financial's MicroEXSTAT database we took the £100 million-plus companies which increased their capital base most last year: allegedly, six huge optimists and four dire pessimists.
What difference did that make to their share prices?
Not a jot.
John Lowry and Michael Barron 
AVIATION
Airships back in business
Airships are making a commercial comeback less than a year after Australian businessman Alan Bond's Airship Industries crashed to earth with debts of £50 million.
Isle of Man-based Advanced Airship Corporation expects to complete its first prototype in August.
AAC's helium-filled machine is a 200-foot long, 90 mph, allweather vehicle, capable of accommodating 28 passengers and a crew of three.
The idea is eventually to build four or five of the airships a year, costing £3.5 million each.
Peter Austin, former Middle East salesman for GEC Marconi, heads a group of private investors that has raised £12 million for the project.
Half the money is Austin's.
Much of the remaining capital has been secured from a group of what AAC describes as ‘high net worth’ Saudi Arabian businessmen.
A large number of the company's 100 employees are also shareholders.
Nigel Cope .
Oil and gas: Saudi cash is helping AAC revive the commercial airship
HOME ENTERTAINMENT
British base for Canon hi-fi arm
Canon, the Japanese consumer electronics giant, has entered the ferociously competitive audio market as part of a 10-year strategy to get into the world's living rooms as well as its offices.
Last year it derived three-quarters of its turnover from photocopiers and cameras.
Canon Audio, a new division which is entirely UK-based, has total responsibility for research and development, manufacturing and marketing.
The selection of Britain as the venture's base is a matter of prestige, says managing director Andy Szeliga, 36 ‘In hi-fi, UK companies have a worldwide reputation.
We will make our products here for export to the Continent — the fastest-growing audio leisure market — and eventually even to Japan.’
Within three years the company could have a complete range of hi-fi goods, based on its own radical designs, Szeliga says.
Its first product, a pair of loudspeakers for £350, was unveiled in June after more than four years of experimentation at Canon's R&D centre in the University of Surrey Research Park — also the base for Canon Audio.
‘The speakers look like giant mushrooms,’ according to John Bamford, editor of Hi-Fi Choice .
‘But they produce one of the widest stereo sounds that I have ever heard.
The potential is fascinating.’
At present they are manufactured for Canon under licence by Sussex-based Audio Electronics, but eventually they may be made in the UK by Canon itself.
Szeliga has a promotional budget of £1 million this year to carve a slice of the UK market for loudspeakers, which he estimates to be worth £50 million, and an R&D budget of up to £20 million over five years to develop amplifiers, compactdisc players and cassette decks, a sector estimated to be worth £1 billion a year in Britain.
Sony is the hi-fi market leader, with a 20 per cent share, followed by Pioneer, JVC and Aiwa.
But, Szeliga says: ‘We are not coming in to buy market share; we aim to promote ourselves at the quality and mid-priced end of the market.
An extra £5 million of sales will not make a big difference to Canon; what matters is expanding and enhancing our name globally.’
Charles Arthur .
Mushrooming market: Canon's Andy Szeliga is targeting the Continent
IN BRIEF TV Quick , the German interloper in the British TV listings market, has got off to a flying start.
The 10p terror is selling two million a week, and during its first month knocked Radio Times and TV Times into second and third places.
According to Radio Times, TV Times has been hardest hit by the duopoly's bust-up (see chart), and it reckons Bauer,TV Quick's publisher, will keep the price low and continue aggressive promotion until ‘a significant proportion of readers have taken root in the brand’.
City rents are falling in absolute terms for the first time in 25 years.
Alan Winter, deputy managing director of Legal & General's property arm, says market balance in the Square Mile cannot be expected before 1994–95.
Even then, he says, older, poorer-quality space may still be empty — which gives cause to wonder about all the spare capacity in Docklands.
IN BRIEF Even in today's market, industrial building land at 6p a square foot seems attractive.
Moreover, companies taking it up will get £3,500 from the local authority for every job created.
The catch?
The land is in Morcenx-Arjuzanx, near Bordeaux.
More specifically, it is the site of a redundant Electricité de France (coal-powered) power station, which will be decommissioned by mid-1992.
Warm recommendations and details from Peter Prowse Associates on 0372 363386.
An 8 per cent increase in bankruptcies in Japan last year sounds like big trouble.
But that's the trouble with percentages.
The total was 7,157, according to the Teikoku Data Bank.
The worst-hit sector was property, with almost 500 businesses going bust.
The main difficulty there is a severe case of market constipation, but it is hardly surprising that no one is moving: no one can afford to.
Government figures show the average dwelling costs about £360,000.
Average in Tokyo is a cool $1 million.
The most recent marketing gimmick is three-dimensional printing.
Restaurant chain TGI Friday's is using it for its first UK ad campaign, launched this month.
A set of 3-D viewing glasses will be bound into magazines, so that readers can look at a waiter who appears to be offering them a tray of cocktails.
Dallas-based TGI Friday's is operated in the UK by Whitbread.
COMPANY ACCOUNTS
BASF listing refused in US
BASF: conservative practices.
The world's biggest chemical company is being refused a quotation on the New York Stock Exchange — because its accounting practices are too conservative.
BASF (1990 sales, Dm46.6 billion) is apparently one of several big German companies queueing for a Wall Street listing.
Their applications have been stalled by the Securities and Exchange Commission's demand that they re-run their accounts in accordance with principles used in the US.
The SEC's case, according to BASF finance director Max Dietrich Kley, is that the chemical giant's figures understate profits, making it difficult for investors to compare them with those of other concerns.
The SEC declines to comment.
‘I believe the SEC's argument is false,’ Kley says.
‘We can see in the American financial world where you end up when risks are underestimated, or not taken account of quickly enough in the results.’
BASF's approach, he adds, reflects the German mentality, which is to prepare for every possible risk.
The company is cautious even by German standards.
Kley points out that conservative accounting represented an added charge of more than Dm400 million to the 1990 figures.
More than Dm300 million was set aside for future environmental protection measures, and stocks were valued according to the ‘last in, first out’ principle, which cuts out paper profit (and thus reduces taxable profit) when prices rise.
Such practices have ‘few imitators in German industry’, Kley notes.
Under no circumstances is BASF prepared to issue an alternative set of accounts.
It is only two years since the SEC proposed a ‘multijurisdictional system’, whereby member states would recognise one another 's disclosure, accounting and auditing rules.
The New York exchange, which has only 100 non-US companies listed, and no German ones, would itself like the SEC's stringent rules to be relaxed.
Chairman and chief executive William Donaldson says: ‘Not all the quality companies in the world are US companies, nor are all US accounting standards and practices necessarily the only way of approaching disclosure.’
The SEC's requirements are designed to protect US investors, but they buy foreign securities anyway.
‘They go directly to Frankfurt, Tokyo or London,’ Donaldson says.
Alan Purkiss 
INTERNATIONAL SUMMARY
Industrial production slows
Growth in industrial production has slowed in all the world's leading economies, with the UK and the US worst hit.
More people are losing their jobs, though Japan remains largely unaffected.
UK SUMMARY
Prices pegged
Smokers came off worst from budget price rises: the cost of tobacco rose by 12 per cent in April, the month's RPI figures reveal.
Alcoholic drinks went up by 6 per cent.
But the government shielded consumers from the worst excesses of inflation by reducing the community charge burden, and businesses kept their price rises down to one of the lowest levels for 24 years.
Only one in seven companies plan to raise domestic prices in the next four months, according to the CBI's latest survey.
Meanwhile exporters are feeling the chill.
Sales to the US fell 9 per cent in the latest three months.
COVER STORY
TATE & LYLE'S SLIM PICKINGS
Shareholders of sugar group Tate & Lyle should soon be piling on the pounds, and to hell with the calories.
Two new products promise to make it the world's leading supplier to the diet food industry.
Jim Levi reports.
Dan Rizzo is a self-confessed cheesecake freak and has the generous proportions to prove it.
But a new, slim-line Rizzo could be about to emerge because the company he works for, Staley, of Decatur, Illinois, has developed a cheesecake that, to purloin a phrase, can be part of a calorie-controlled diet.
And not just cheesecake: Staley's fat substitute could revolutionise the world diet food market.
That is sweet news for Tate & Lyle, the UK sugar giant which bought Staley, a leading corn syrup refiner, in 1988 for $1.2 billion.
The deal has already transformed its corporate profile (Staley now contributes a third of group profits) and made the group the largest sweetener manufacturer in the world, with a raw material base in corn as well as in cane and beet sugar.
Now another transformation is under way at T&L — much of it Staley-inspired — and it is likely to prove even more dramatic than the last.
When Neil Shaw, T&L's shrewd Canadian chairman, bid for Staley three years ago he was well aware of the company's track record in identifying new food ingredients at its Decatur research laboratories.
With its high fructose corn syrup (HFCS) sweetener, Staley had already shown that it could develop products capable of transforming whole sectors of the food industry.
The company developed HFCS in the 1970s; now soft drinks giants such as Coca-Cola and Pepsi use it instead of sugar to sweeten almost all their non-diet brands and it has 30 per cent of the North American sweetener market.
He also knew about Ruby, codename for a project to develop a fat substitute based on corn syrup.
He realised that sucralose, the super-sweet sugar substitute T&L discovered in 1970, could combine with Ruby and other new Staley products to make the group the dominant supplier of key ingredients for the booming diet food and drinks market..’
‘All the big industry names have tried sucralose,’ says Shaw (above).
‘There are, quite simply, no negatives on it
Sucralose, developed over 20 years by T&L and its US partner Johnson & Johnson — the pharmaceuticals company best known for Band Aid and baby powder — is expected to be cleared for use by the US Food & Drug Administration this autumn.
It has cost T&L at least £50 million to develop, J&J even more.
When FDA clearance comes through the final product in a portfolio of basic food ingredients will be in place — promising the transformation of what has long been regarded as one of Britain's most boring businesses into a world beater.
The T&L empire grew out of the merger in the 1920s of East End sugar refineries owned by Henry Tate and Abram Lyle, and expanded by fattening up the nation with calories.
In the 1980s, the families stepped aside in favour of Shaw, who took square old Mr Cube on an acquisitions binge, bloating its gearing levels to 230 per cent at one point, but setting the business on course to exploit the booming market for low-calorie diet foods.
Now it has emerged lean, fit and hungry to take on the best.
Since Shaw and his team took over profits have recorded a sevenfold increase to £218 million — two-thirds of it emanating from the rich North American market.
The potential pay-off from sucralose is likely to be rapid and larger than many sceptical City food analysts believe possible.
‘We would not have stayed with this product so long if we did not believe there was potential to make at least £20 million annual profit from it,’ Shaw says.
‘We are already producing sucralose for stock and have customers lined up who will be using it very, very quickly.
All the big names in the industry have tried it.
There are, quite simply, no negatives on sucralose.’
‘Look at the US sweet beverage market alone,’ Rizzo, Staley's new products director, adds.
‘This is a $15 billion industry and already 30 per cent of it is accounted for by diet drinks.’
Fat, he believes, is about to follow the same trend.
It makes up about 38 per cent of the typical American diet — 8 per cent too much, according to nutrition experts.
The premise for the development of Ruby — which was launched in the US last month under the brand name Stellar (the name may not be used outside America)— was simple enough.
Carbohydrates contain 3.75 calories per gram whereas fat contains about nine calories.
Find a carbohydrate that possesses the properties of a fat and it can be used as a low-calorie/low-fat — or even fat-free — product.
‘The market for Ruby could be staggering,’ Rizzo says.
‘Some 16 billion lb of fat is consumed by Americans in an average year.
We'd be happy to take 10 per cent of that.
We reckon lowfat ingredients and fat replacer products such as Ruby will be a $600 million-a-year wholesale market in the US alone by 1993.
That's a retail value of several billion dollars.’
Similar potential can be anticipated for sucralose in the £500 million-a-year world market for diet sugar substitutes, known in the industry as high-intensity sweeteners, or HIS.
The market is growing by 5 per cent a year in the US and by 15 per cent in Europe.
HIS products have increased their share of the total US market for sweeteners from 6 to 13.6 per cent in the past decade, mainly because of demand for diet drinks.
The US still dominates the world HIS market, hence the importance of T&L's joint venture with Johnson & Johnson, which has the marketing muscle in its home market to make a serious impact.
Three-quarters of all HIS products are sold in the US.
One product, aspartame — better known by its Nutrasweet brand name — dominates, with four-fifths of the world market.
Coca-Cola and Pepsi use it in their diet soft drinks.
But the picture is about to change.
Patents for aspartame are running out and the Nutrasweet company, part of the Monsanto chemicals group, faces tough competition from the Holland Sweetener Company, an independent Dutch manufacturer of aspartame.
Nutrasweet has already suffered an anti-dumping levy from the European Commission in Brussels as the sweetener war hots up.
The arrival of sucralose could herald the mother of commercial battles.
‘We think we are going to catch up with aspartame very quickly,’ Shaw says.
Peter Eatherley, head of T&L's speciality sweeteners division, admits that food and drinks customers are not going to switch from aspartame to sucralose overnight.
‘But they recognise that we have a superior product,’ he says.
‘They are likely to phase in sucralose and will enjoy having the choice to help them keep the price under control.
Our aim is to ensure that products using sucralose will be premium products.’
Sucralose has significant advantages over its big rival.
Gram for gram it is up to 200 times sweeter than sugar and on average three times sweeter than aspartame.
Minute amounts are needed to sweeten a can of Coke and its chemistry is such that what little is consumed passes through the body; it does not produce energising or potentially fattening calories as sugar does.
Unlike all other HIS products, sucralose is derived from sugar — so it tastes more like sugar than any other sweetener.
‘If you take sugar as having 100 per cent the right taste, then I would say sucralose is in the range of 70 to 75 per cent, with aspartame a little behind it,’ Shaw says.
‘Not far behind, but definitely behind.’
It also remains stable when cooked, which opens up the possibility of combining it with Ruby and other new products in the Staley portfolio to create diet markets in areas aspartame is unable to enter — jam, baked beans, canned fruit and vegetables, soft drinks concentrates, desserts and cakes.
‘For the first time,’ Eatherley says, ‘the food industry feels it will be able to cook with a diet sweetener.’
Further, sucralose maintains better acid stability than aspartame, which means a longer shelf life for products that use it.
This is particularly important for citrus-based soft drinks and could enable Coca-Cola, for example, to market diet drinks in hot countries.
Drinks sweetened with aspartame deteriorate rapidly in hot weather.
‘Currently, Coke and Pepsi don't sell diet drinks in the Middle East because of the heat,’ Shaw says.
‘In areas of the US such as Arizona they spend a lot of money making sure the product is moved off the shelf within three to five days or brought back.’
Tate & Lyle will also clash heads with Nutrasweet in the fat substitute sector.
Nutrasweet markets a dairy protein-based fat substitute called Simpless, though Shaw is confident Ruby will outshine it and is installing production capacity apace.
A pilot plant at Staley's Decatur headquarters already produces Ruby and a small ‘semi-works’ plant capable of delivering one million lb of it a year will be up and running soon.
By next March a full production plant, with initial capacity of 12 million lb, will be on-stream at another Staley facility in London, Tennessee.
Other fat replacers, based on cellulose, are also seeking a share of the market and Procter & Gamble is seeking approval from the US Food and Drug Administration for Olestra, a synthetic product based on sugar alcohol.
(Ruby does not need FDA clearance because it is based on products that occur naturally.)
‘We have maybe two years to establish Ruby,’ says Bob Schanefelt, Staley's head of research.
In the meantime, a leading US food manufacturer is pressing for an exclusive deal with Staley to help it challenge rivals which already product diet cakes and desserts based on Simpless and other formulations.
Trish Richmond, Staley's director of food ingredient research and development, claims Staley researchers have cracked ‘the hard things’, such as a Danish pastry that is 95 per cent fat-free and has two-thirds the usual number of calories.
‘We can produce a fat-free French dressing or a mayonnaise which is 85 per cent fat-free,’ she says.
‘Ruby also works well as a low-fat spread cutting the fat content by up to 75 per cent.’
Rizzo's much favoured cheesecake delivers a 60 per cent reduction in the calorie count by replacing cream cheese with Ruby, and he is confident that specialist food manufacturers can improve further on what Staley has achieved.
Richmond stresses the opportunities for Ruby to complement Staley's low-fat poly-dextrose bulking agent, codenamed Topaz.
There is a clear role too for other new products in the T&L portfolio, including Krystar, a sweetener refined from corn syrup into a crystalline fructose, which may one day be interchangeable with table sugar.
About 20 per cent sweeter than sugar and with flavour-enhancing qualities, Krystar has already found acceptance in the soft drinks industry and among cereal, cake and sweet makers.
John Doxsie, head of Staley's sweetener division, says that in the three years since its launch, Krystar has accounted for 100 million lb of the annual five billion lb market for all sweeteners.
Cameron Ferguson, the engineer whose team conquered the problems of manufacturing Ruby, is convinced the new Ruby production plant can deliver ‘many more really good spin-offs’ from its sophisticated use of separation technology and its knowledge of the corn syrup process.
Schanefelt has an even wider vision.
Recognising that food is one of the most innovative industries, he has forced strong links with companies such as Du Pont, ICI and Pioneer — it has 56 per cent of the US seeds market — to pursue opportunities in plant biotechnology.
A company such as T&L, he says, cannot afford to miss out on significant discoveries these large organisations make.
‘We can be like a flea on their backs, but we have to be ready when they turn over.
Otherwise we'll be a squashed flea.’
It is hard to know how all these developments will translate into profits for T&L.
Crucial to the sucralose picture is the precise nature of the joint venture agreement with Johnson&Johnson.
Details have never been disclosed — stockbroker Henderson Crosthwaite describes it as ‘a state secret’.
Shaw says simply that the two sides have an ‘excellent’ deal.
John Campbell, food analyst at County NatWest WoodMac, suggests that sucralose's contribution will reach £14 million by the mid-1990s and perhaps double that figure by 1998.
Set against T&L's current pre-tax earnings of £220 million it is clearly not going to transform the company's profits profile.
Ruby, entirely a T&L product, could prove a much bigger money spinner, however.
Whatever the outcome, T&L has no wish to be perceived as depending heavily on one product, having spent the past decade, in Shaw's words, ‘building a broader base’.
And it certainly doesn't want people to stop taking sugar.
Sucralose, Ruby, Topaz and Krystar may all prove as profitable as high fructose corn syrup, yet for Shaw, at least, the basic business of refining cane, beet and cereals retains its solid attraction.
‘Sugar is still a growth market and we expect it to grow by roughly 2 per cent a year for the next 25 years,’ he says.
‘That 2 per cent may not sound much, but it is 2 per cent of 120 million tonnes, or the equivalent of the UK's total sugar consumption every year.
Very few people have no sugar in their diet, and in many parts of the world they are not looking for slimming aids.
They take the sugar for basic energy.’
Shaw is already preparing the next generation of managers to handle T&L's ever-widening geographical and product spread.
Stephen Brown has just been head-hunted from Alcan as new managing director and ‘heir apparent’.
He joins the group at an intriguing juncture.
According to Shaw: ‘If we do what we say we are going to do for investors they will put up the money for T&L if it has a good acquisition opportunity.
We have won the City's support to raise the money, as we did for Staley and our other North American acquisitions — and as we would have done if we had been allowed to buy British Sugar.’
The UK government prevented T&L doing that — but Ruby and sucralose may soon help Shaw to forget the disappointment.
His eyes sparkle at the prospect of retiring three years hence having established Ruby in particular as possibly a bigger money spinner even than Staley's high fructose corn syrup.
‘I would be delighted,’ he declares, ‘to go out on that cloud.’..
‘We have cracked the hard things,’ says Trish Richmond.
Now, Bob Schanefelt has forged ties with Du Pont and ICI
In three years, Krystar has taken 2 per cent of the market for all sweeteners, says John Doxsie
SWEETNESS, THEN LIGHT
Sucralose might never have been discovered had it not been for two Tate & Lyle scientists who deployed a basic research technique — they tasted it.
Until then the compound had been gathering dust on the shelves of the company's research laboratories on the campus at Reading University.
Tate & Lyle's then head of research, A.J. ‘Chuck’ Vlitos, recalls one of the scientists, Riaz Khan, coming to his office in 1970 to tell him that compound number 7702 was ‘very sweet’.
Vlitos mumbled that ‘it's probably got residual sugar in it’.
Khan persisted: ‘We've already established that it's 65 times sweeter than sugar.’
Further dilution established the compound to be 200 times as sweet as sugar.
Two years earlier, Vlitos had persuaded T&L to investigate artificial sweeteners, and to spend £250,000 collecting katemfe berries grown in Ghana to extract the protein which gave them their intense sweetness.
‘Our research budget was only about £150,000,’ Vlitos says.
‘But out of the research came the notion of using sugar as a raw material for all kinds of products — for making alcohol, plastics, pesticides and detergents.’
Professor Leslie Hough of King's College, London, was commissioned to make many different derivatives of sugar, including a family of chlorinated sugars.
The compounds remained on the research laboratory shelves until T&L main board director Saxon Tate visited Vlitos one day and suggested that they be screened (Tate and fellow board director Colin Lyle were charged with overseeing research.)
With compound 7702 the company struck gold.
Hough had discovered the chemistry of sucralose by selectively replacing three of the six hydroxyl ions in the natural sugar molecule (sucrose) with three chlorine atoms.
‘He discovered the chemistry and Tate & Lyle discovered the sweetness,’ Vlitos says.
But the company did not know what to do with its discovery: Lyle and other directors feared that developing sucralose would create a powerful competitor for the real thing.
It would also be expensive.
Wally Steinberg, vice-president of Johnson & Johnson Development, the development arm of the US pharmaceutical company, clarified their minds.
In 1972 he telephoned Vlitos, having read a scientific paper by Khan and Hough about the chlorinated sugars.
‘He asked me if we would like to license these compounds because they were keen to develop them,’ Vlitos says.
He was despatched to Newark, New Jersey, to see what Steinberg had to offer.
‘It turned out we both went to the same school,’ Vlitos says, ‘so things got very friendly.’
Over a beer, Steinberg offered $8 million.
Lyle's reaction was to take the money, but he called in Neil Shaw to conduct final negotiations.
Discussions went on for a year and cost T&L about £500,000 in legal fees and other expenses, Vlitos says, ‘but they came up with a strong agreement which protected T&L — a pygmy next to a corporate giant like J&J’.
Sucralose is one of the few products to come out of the Reading research labs that T&L felt it had the resources to develop through to the market.
Other products and processes pioneered by Vlitos and his team — including the process of turning sugar into alcohol, now widely used in Brazil to power cars, and in Mauritius and Honolulu to light the streets — were sold or given away while T&L persisted with sucralose.
Johnson & Johnson, used to developing pharmaceuticals over periods of up to 20- years, had the culture to cope with sucralose.
With J&J money up-front, T&L's research budget rose from £175,000 in 1977 to £2.5 million in 1980 as sucralose proceeded.
Its team of scientists grew from 30 to 100 and development specialists, marketing experts and number crunchers were brought in.
Once the scientists were sure sucralose was safe, a petition to allow its commercial use was presented to the US Food and Drug Administration in 1987.
It ran to more than 25,000 pages.
FDA approval is expected this autumn.
CORPORATE STRATEGY
Trailer-blazer
Robert Montague (right) hit a winning streak in the 1980s — and it's carrying right on into the 1990s.
His trailer leasing combine is the company for which the boom never ended.
Report by Matthew Lynn.
Robert Montague was staying at a friend's house in Cornwall one long, wet weekend in early December when he realised the moment had come to strike.
Flicking through a newspaper, he tracked down the share price of TIP Europe, number two in the trailer rental market to his own company, Tiphook.
With the price hovering just about 30p — after peaking at more than 200p earlier that year — the company looked vulnerable.
Late that Friday afternoon, Montague called his deputy chairman, Eric Goodwin, at his headquarters in London's West End.
‘Start buying,’ he told him.
By Monday, he was back at head office orchestrating the move.
An early-morning meeting with Goodwin, finance director Rodger Braidwood, Lazard's — the company's bank — and stockbroker Carr Kitcat & Aitken had confirmed the chief's Friday night order.
The next morning, the plan was ready to roll; Tiphook began snapping up all the TIP stock in sight.
By the end of the day the raid was complete; Tiphook had paid £7.7 million for a 9.9 per cent slice of its main competitor.
Abruptly, the buying stopped.
It was, on the face of it, a bizarre move.
Tiphook has 40 per cent of the trailer rental market, TIP Europe 20 per cent.
There was no prospect of the Monopolies and Mergers Commission permitting a takeover, as Montague knew.
So did TIP.
‘It was meant to be a supportive stake,’ its chairman Jim Davies says.
‘At least, that's what he told me.’
Montague had other ideas.
‘If there was going to be a bid, I wanted to make sure we would have a place at the negotiating table,’ he says.
His plan was audacious, and could have come only from a man combining cunning with iron determination.
Both are characteristics the Tiphook chairman has in abundance.
The company's 1991 figures, to be announced this month, are likely to confirm him as one of the few 1980s entrepreneurs to have come through the recession unscathed.
Indeed, they are likely to win him a new reputation as a man for whom the boom never ended.
Though other companies have grown faster, some, like Corton Beach, have gone bust.
In the 13 years since Montague broke away from Cables Montague, his father's trucking company, he has taken Tiphook to pole position in the European container leasing business — a complementary, and vastly bigger, business than trailer leasing — and to second place in the world market behind General Electric subsidiary Genstar.
This year analysts predict turnover of at least £300 million, nearly double last year's figure.
Profits should more than double as well, to about £75 million.
Montague has built a company valued at close on £500 million, stacked up a personal fortune of more than £18 million, and left some of the toughest deal-makers in the transport business looking on open-mouthed.
Yet in 1978, Montague was going nowhere fast.
At the age of 30, he had spent nine years working in the family haulage business.
‘I thought to myself, what have I done, what am I going to do?’ he says.
His answer was to take the company wholesale into leasing containers, the big metal boxes which transport goods from the factory to their destination via ships and trucks.
(About half the world's three million boxes are rented, and the rest owned by shipping lines.)
‘I suggested we sold everything to go into it,’ he says.
‘But it wasn't the sort of business the family company had grown up with, and it wasn't the direction it wanted to go.
It was a tense time.
I was left with the option of forgetting it, or running with the idea myself.’
Montague ran, and has been running ever since.
‘I regarded it as inevitable,’ his father Robert recalls.
‘He always had this burning ambition to start his own business.’
With him went Goodwin, then finance director at Cables Montague.
‘It was a family company and I couldn't see any future for me as far as equity was concerned,’ Goodwin says.
At Tiphook he has 1.3 million shares, worth about £5 million.
In the first year, the pair picked up backing from Gresham Trust.
From 1981, Friends Provident also pumped money into the business, bankrolling its expansion until it was floated in 1985.
There was plenty of expansion to bankroll.
By the time Tiphook arrived on the stock market, it already had impressive turnover and profits for a company only seven years off the starting blocks; the following year it made £2.4 million profit on sales of £25 million.
Between 1986 and 1990, it exploded.
Last year, turnover was £174 million and profits £33 million, a compound profit growth rate of 82 per cent(making it Britain's 93rd-best profit performer over the period).
Somewhere along the line Montague had learned a valuable lesson: that money can fall off the back of a lorry.
‘The principle of our business is that an asset can be financed and paid for, including interest and capital, in the first half of its working life,’ he says.
‘After that, cash basically falls off the thing.’
The doubling this year of sales and profits will be thanks to Montague's increasingly astute deal-making.
He has acquired two UK trailer rental businesses: Central Trailer Rental in 1982 and Rentco International in 1988.
However, the turning point came in 1989, with a phone call from New York.
Peter Wood, a banker at J.P.
Morgan, had been hired by family-controlled Swedish shipping line Stena to find a partner for its bid to buy James Sherwood's Sea Containers.
Stena's chief executive, Dan Sten Olsson, had set his sights on Sea Containers' empire — which included Sealink ferries and a fleet of 200,000 containers.
Olsson wanted a partner to buy the boxes, ‘someone fairly aggressive’, Wood says.
Any search for someone aggressive in the container business — apart from Sherwood — was bound to lead to Tiphook.
Montague jumped.
‘It was the chance of a lifetime,’ he says.
The mechanics of the deal looked simple enough.
Tiphook would buy Sea Containers' fleet, equivalent in size to its own.
Since the new boxes could be locked quickly into its computer and management system, operating costs would rise only by about 20 per cent.
The remaining turnover from them would be pure profit.
There was one snag: Sherwood didn't want to know.
The bid had to be hostile, and Tiphook, since it needed a rights issue to pay for its part of the deal, had to become a joint-bidder.
‘It was amazingly difficult to put together,’ recalls Richard Tolkien of Morgan Grenfell, which advised Tiphook.
‘The only other joint bid to have succeeded was GEC's and Siemen's bid for Plessey; this one was technically harder.’
The difficulties arose from the complex international structure of the deal: a UK-listed company and a private Swedish company bidding for a business listed in New York, domiciled in Bermuda and headquartered in London.
Tiphook and Stena launched their raid, offering $824 million, in March 1989; Tiphook's share was $426 million, financed largely by a £235 million rights issue.
Sherwood rejected the price and fought the bid through the Bermuda courts.
‘For Sea Containers, the important thing was to crack the co-operation between Tiphook and Stena,’ Olsson says (though, Sherwood recalls, ‘there was never any appearance of a division’).
There were, however, rumours of a split — reportedly over Montague's desire to strike an asset deal between the three companies and Olsson's determination to press ahead with a full bid.
The wrangle was finally resolved in January last year.
Montague bought Sherwood's boxes for $537 million, Olsson took Sealink Ferries for $430 million and Sherwood kept the rest, including Hoverspeed, Sealink's Isle of Wight ferry service, a refrigerated container business and 42 per cent of Orient-Express hotels.
Largely as a result of the disposals, Sherwood has prospered — latest results show profits of $343 million on turnover of $397 million (even excluding disposals, profit was $53.5 million).
Stena, in contrast, has come off badly; profits of Skr107 million ($17.9 million) are 60 per cent down on 1989, a result, it claims, of restructuring costs arising from the bid.
Even so, the figures are well below Stena's earlier prediction of Skr392 million profit.
Montague, meanwhile, who was only a party to the takeover, appears to have come off better than the man who masterminded it.
The episode illustrates how hard he is prepared to play to win his hand.
‘Tiphook doesn't hesitate to use all the tricks permitted it,’ Sherwood says.
‘When it bought my container fleet it put goodwill on the balance sheet to reduce the unit cost; because the company is not depreciating the goodwill, it increases profits.
Tiphook ends up with a lot of goodwill on the balance sheet, which can be a risky position to be in, but Montague is skilled at that sort of move.’
He is also skilled in the art of persuasion.
‘He has great charm,’ on acquaintance says.
‘It's a tactic.
He turns it up when he wants something.’
According to another, he is ‘immensely vain’.
‘He goes through an act of not wanting publicity.
But it is a way of stimulating more interest in himself.’
Vanity, charm, energy and a stack of cash can be formidable — and dangerous — qualities in business.
Montague owns up to few mistakes.
When pressed, he cites a small diversification into an in-house public relations agency, Tiphook Communications, set up to handle the company's account and to win outside business — which it never got.
It was sold to its management for £300,000 last year.
‘With hindsight, perhaps we shouldn't have gone into a peripheral business,’ he concedes.
But, he adds defensively, ‘we were learning’.
Where is the man who thrived and survived in the 1980s heading in the 1990s?
It is easier to go from small to big, than from big to mega-big.
That is Montague's immediate challenge.
In the world container leasing league he has only two rivals: Genstar has one million boxes, Tiphook 400,000 and third-ranking Trans-American 380,000 (see graph).
There are no big fish left to angle for.
But it does not seem to worry Montague.
‘The idea that we want to be deal-makers all the time is something I wouldn't subscribe to,’ he says, then adds, ‘but we are only just starting’.
He believes he can double Tiphook's size almost by standing still.
‘The number of containers in the world is going to double,’ he predicts.
‘If we maintain our market share, the container business is going to be a strong cash and profit generator.’
To retire with?
Unlikely.
The single European market will provide opportunities, not in containers, but in trailer rental.
At present, truckers can take a load from one country to another but face obstacles, as do airlines, in picking up a second load to take on to a third country.
Montague believes the unravelling of red tape means the EC market for rented trailers will come to resemble the US one, where 20 per cent of trailers are rented, compared with 7 per cent in Europe.
For Montague, that shows the scope for growth on the Continent — and the potential for Tiphook.
The company now has the muscle to dominate its industry, without having to look over its shoulder at anti-cartel officials in Brussels.
Only TIP Europe — the subject of Montague's weekend raid — comes anywhere near.
TIP chairman Davies views his rival's shareholding as ‘a perfectly amicable arrangement’.
Others, however, see it differently.
‘Montague’, an associate says, ‘felt that if you are going to have a competitor, it might as well be a weak one.’.
Thanks to Montague and deputy chairman Goodwin (left), Tiphook has only two rivals in world container leasing
MANAGEMENT
THE ASCENT OF WOMAN
How does a female boss handle striking workers?
As confidently as a man, show psychometric tests conducted among top managers by the Vocational Guidance Association.
John Lawless reports on the rise of execs equality.
LIZ RAYNER Head of senior remuneration and benefits at Shell International.
Aged 44, married, one son
VGA's verdict
Is in the top 5 per cent of UK managers, but hasn't the faintest idea how good she is.
Shell is stretching her executive capabilities, and she's loving it.
Her pleasant manner wins her commitment and loyalty from friends and colleagues.
She has a calmness which makes others bring their work and personal troubles to her.
But she never uses her personality to gain a career advantage.
Management critique
Such an exceptional manager, she would not have seen the arrival of her son, Christopher, five years ago, as an interruption to her career.
A dynamic leader and negotiator, her conceptual attitude is backed by all-round intellectual functioning, but focuses on superior numerical reasoning skills.
Will always analyse data and challenge assumptions before making decisions.
Highly competitive, but (perhaps by choice) gives personal ambition a lower priority.
GORDON MACDONALD.
Director of remuneration and personnel systems, Safeway.
Aged 34, married, two children.
VGA's verdict
Radiates ‘I'm OK’.
Amazing combination: an executive who is tougher than titanium, has highly focused ambitions, yet is laid back.
‘The most honest person I have ever met,’ Bloch says.
‘Test results show he is totally open with nothing to fear, and incredibly charismatic.
Normally we find such dynamic people cunning and streetwise.’
Management style
Approach to work is theoretical, but superior numerical reasoning and verbal critical reasoning assure objective analysis of facts, assumptions and data.
MacDonald delegates administration, budgeting and planning.
‘He is dreadful at day-to-day organisation,’ Bloch says.
‘How does he get up in the morning?
He probably puts on one green sock, one red.
‘But with his ability to cope with stress by always being forthright, decisive, honest, just, optimistic, assertive and enthusiastic, and aiming to win by insisting on getting things done, and fast, who needs socks?’
MORAG MACDONALD Company secretary at the Post Office, where she has worked for 22 years.
Aged 43, married (to Girobank's director of strategic planning), one daughter.
VGA's verdict
Highly ambitious, but not a high achiever, Modesty and a lack of confidence have kept her at the Post Office ‘instead of earning twice as much as Lord Hanson’.
She studied law, was called to the Bar in 1974, and — falling within the top 5 per cent of all people who have ever been psychometrically tested for verbal critical reasoning skills — would have made a marvellous lawyer.
Jumping two Post Office grades to get her job was an unexpectedly large career leap.
She knows she could have gone much further but would not dream of stabbing anyone in the back to get on, even if they deserved it.
Tends to think ‘I did not make it happen’.
Management critique
Highly responsible, she moves only when feeling secure and operates within conventional lines.
A pleasant and sympathetic executive, she makes a good team player.
Superb numerical skills are the foundation of her business acumen, blended with well-structured organisational and time management techniques.
DEBBIE TREBILCO European manager in the commercial section of ICI Chemicals and Polymers.
Aged 37, married, no children.
VGA's verdict
So ambitious it hurts, but she has an intense need for recognition.
Pleasant looking, medium-sized, with short brown hair, you would never pick her out in a crowd.
But she is confident and daring, friendly and jovial, and tends to assume huge responsibilities and make many decisions — fast.
Immodest, she will brag about pressures she faces.
Egocentric, and rightly so.
Some people have average abilities, but are so driven that they get their way.
But she is very bright.
All her abilities are superior.
She is a ‘devastating person for the future’.
Management critique
She thrives in dynamic and volatile situations, taking charge and dealing with people in an authoritative and independent manner.
Genuinely considerate and sympathetic to others, she is rather disorganised in her day-to-day functioning but has learned to delegate attention to detail and accuracy while she focuses on broader, long-term objectives.
PATRICIA SCOTT Director of taxation and treasury at Thorn EMI, responsible for the group's worldwide banking and general funding.
Aged 36, married, one son.
VGA's verdict
An ex-Portsmouth Polytechnic student who was told by her economics tutor that ‘all girls who get through are going on to do shorthand and typing in the evening’.
So she left.
Nevertheless, she still owes much to a male mentor who, in a previous job, told her: ‘You can do it.
You can do it.’
And now she can.
Transformed into an extremely confident manager, she can push herself easily.
Her abilities might suit her to a top job in the Civil Service, but she gets such a buzz from being in the private sector, she would hate the very idea.
So persuasive she could consider diverting into management consultancy.
Has plenty of time to do so.
Management critique
She combines excellent all-round aptitudes with powerful and dynamic leadership skills.
Though her style is commanding, decisive and responsible, she does not possess driving ambition and is a little surprised to have got so far.
She prefers to operate in a conceptual manner, delegating planning, organisation and administration among her 40-strong team in order to focus on creativity and initiative.
Copes reasonably well when stressed, but can be rather sensitive at times.
PAUL NEWMAN Director of personnel policy, British Telecom.
Was ‘acquired’ when BT bought International Aeradio in 1986, to be head of personnel of BT (UK).
Age 44, married, two daughters.
VGA's verdict
Has survived his tallness (six feet five inches) and his angularity.
‘Stand out at school by being fat, tall or tiny,’ Hamilton-Phillips says, ‘and you get persecuted.
If you are tall you are expected to be more ‘adult’ and have more duties put upon you.
You either crumble, or minimise the impact by having a sense of humour, by being conscious that certain responsibilities have come your way early, and by having the intelligence to cope.’
Newman is a caring softie whose presence is domineering, in the nicest sense.
He may not look it, but he is a smooth operator.
Superior verbal critical reasoning, healthy enthusiasm, ambition and competitiveness have assisted his career climb.
He also applies good numerical reasoning skills to data, and analyses information critically before he makes decisions.
Management style
He will not take a decision on his own that his team does not respect, so colleagues find him caring and tolerant.
Always prepared to bring in an expert.
A good forward planner, he delegates detailed and routine tasks.
A conventional outlook dominates his approach, but he still thrives on variety.
Sometimes volatile.
SARA MORRISON A director of GEC and a non-executive director of Abbey Life.
Once worked in local government and voluntary sector.
Aged 56, divorced, one son, one daughter, six grandchildren.
VGA's verdict
Though traditional in her approach to work, she thrives in an atmosphere of variety.
An ability to accept change singles her out as a leader.
Self-confident, yet cautious, she tends to be a loner.
Highly ambitious and competitive, she takes on responsibilities and makes decisions in a conceptual and intellectual manner.
Management critique
In a business world where ‘democracy’ is in vogue, she is a caring autocrat.
She gains commitment from her team by sympathising with their problems, but prefers an authoritative, rather than a consultative and participative management style.
Comfortable when taking charge of situations and people, she skilfully uses her own enthusiasm and initiative to motivate others.
PETER WILLATS Has worked for Arthur D. Little, McKinsey, GKN Automotive and GKN (Japan).
Is now managing director of the Kaizen Institute of Europe.
Aged 36, married, two children.
VGA's verdict
Supremely happy not to be one of life's ‘practical men’.
‘He would hate the thought of getting on a chair to change a lightbulb, and would knock down a wall while trying to hang a picture,’ Hamilton-Phillips says.
‘But he could fact-find all about it.’
Most people, when closely questioned about their career paths, have difficulty looking back dispassionately and logically.
Willats, however, uses the soundest possible arguments.
‘He parcels his defences extremely well,’ Hamilton-Phillips says.
A graduate in politics, philosophy and economics from Oxford and the Sorbonne, he never allows his natural optimism to put his acute political and economic antenna out of action — he predicted the recession long before others did.
Management critique
An ideas man who, not surprisingly, uses predominantly ‘consulting’ methods to convince colleagues and subordinates, and sound reasoning and a sympathetic manner to motivate and communicate.
Has enthusiasm, energy and a need to achieve, always applied positively.
GEORGE BAIN Principal of the London Business School.
Aged 52, twice married, one son, one daughter.
VGA's verdict
Ex-University of Manitoba, ex-Nuffield College, Oxford, and now immersed in corporate UK, Bain is exceptional.
‘If the LBS has tried to get away from the British ‘crumpled suit’ image with him,’Bloch says, ‘then, boy, has it succeeded.
He is calm, confident, well-groomed, has charm, style and the confidence British executives are often reluctant to display.
‘He might not stand out so much in North America, where even the garbage collector appears on TV and talks with confidence, but in Britain this is something different.’
In fact Canadian-born, he came to the UK more than 20 years ago.
He is highly ambitious and career-centred.
Beneath the calm optimism, there is dynamism, and he has used all those qualities to make the LBS into a centre of discreet corporate influence.
Management critique
Moves fast, takes decisions quickly, but ensures that loose ends are well tied.
Average in verbal critical reasoning and numeracy skills, but copes well in most situations, deals positively with people and manages them well.
‘The caring may not be true caring,’ Bloch explains, ‘but it is in the right measure and it gets results.’
DETTA O'CATHAIN Former head of the Milk Marketing Board, now managing director of the Barbican Centre.
Aged 53, married, no children.
Made a baroness on June 21.
VGA's verdict
A spectacular lady, convincing and dynamic.
Leadership and confidence radiate from her in a forthright and direct manner.
Ambitious and competitive, yet sensitive and caring.
Upfront and honest, she is concerned about rights and wrongs and would rather die shouting for a cause than hide behind a corporate banner.
(Did an Edwina Currie when at the MMB, by speaking out against cows being injected with a hormone that can increase yields but which, she feared, would cause consumers to feel milk was not ‘natural’.
The hormone remains unlicensed.)
Management critique
Must know exactly what is happening.
An underlying reluctance to accept change or try out new activities is so well hidden and overcome that she is extremely optimistic and positive when taking decisions and initiating projects.
Is awe-inspiring in her ability to evaluate verbal communications and numerical data.
But it is not unusual for her to show her feelings and lose her temper.
If she feels something is terribly important and others do not show similar concern, she tends to see their response as stupidity.
SUSANNA TODD Merchant banker and corporate finance specialist.
Director at English Trust, previously director at Shearson Lehman Hutton International.
Aged 31, married, no children.
VGA's verdict
Socially, extremely confident.
She presents well, has charm, charisma and vitality, but comes across as severely intellectual on both arts and sciences.
You have to penetrate the hardness to get to the softness.
Once you're there she is delightful.
Management critique
A fact and figure analyser, who approaches issues in a theoretical and intellectual way.
She dislikes monotony, and switches off quickly when general administration goes into overload.
She enjoys trying out new ways of doing things, though she doesn't necessarily devise them herself.
Quite sparky, she copes well under pressure, but it is not unknown for her to lose her temper.
Her seriousness will lead her to issue sharp reminders, such as‘This is not trivial’.
NIGEL PANTLING Director, Schroder Wagg merchant bank.
Aged 40, divorced, two children.
VGA's verdict
Looks like a small boy, sometimes a little lost.
But looks were never more deceptive.
He is in exactly the right job: streets ahead of most others in the UK in his number-crunching agility —‘in the country's top 5 per cent, at least ’, Bloch says — and ‘unbelievably good’ at critical reasoning, with a score of 90.
A formidable profile is supplemented by an amazing mechanical ability in a power game where hands and minds do not usually work together, and by a talent for dissecting what others say.
But being able to mend the lift does not get you to the top in merchant banking.
‘He is covert,’ Bloch says.
‘He knows the value of information, a commodity he doesn't surrender easily, except, one assumes, in favour of his clients.’
Has charm, but worries too much — the sort of person who locks the back door and then goes back three times to check.
Gets tense, but rarely reveals his feelings.
Management critique
Friendly and considerate, he invariably consults before taking decisions.
Still prefers to work by himself — a trait of which he is aware, but one that could make him retreat into a bubble when he most needs help.
PAUL DRAYSON Acquired a PhD in robotics at Aston University.
Worked for Trebor, then did a management buy-out as Lambourn Food Company's managing director.
Aged 31, single.
VGA's verdict
A brave risk-taker, who is young enough to have a big future.
But if you are not already watching him, you are way behind the pack.
A powerful all-rounder, he conveys confidence, optimism and charisma.
His leadership characteristics include ingenuity and determination not only to unearth agents of change, but to see that they are profitably applied: he took robotic ideas from Austin Rover into food manufacturing.
So many graduates appear to be good ideas people, but he relates exceptionally well.
Would make an excellent international manager.
Management critique
A bit more autocratic than he would like to believe, stemming from a conviction that he is right.
Not inclined to consult others but has a pleasant, friendly manner, which helps colleagues and middle managers to accept his fundamental ideas, arguments and methods.
His conceptual approach to problems and decision-making is supported, mostly positively, by a superior general intellect.
Keep watching.
SALLY CLARKE Restaurateur, tipped by the Sunday Times as a British business leader in the making.
Aged 37, single.
VGA's verdict
The testers, used to assessing corporate managers, were unnerved by the odd readings they got from an entrepreneur.
She is shockingly different.
Pessimism is her distinguishing trait: she worries about many aspects of her work.
Accepts no quarter in her professionalism.
Demands exceptional standards of herself, knowing that her staff will be able to go anywhere and say ‘I have worked with Sally Clarke’.
Not, however, personally ambitious or competitive.
Would die working in a big corporation.
Management critique
Hates repetitiveness; focuses on the main objectives, rather than on getting details of individual tasks right.
Operates with authority, directing and ordering in a well-defined manner.
Decisive and moves forward fast.
Deals with problems as they arise, believing that planning and preparation may inhibit spontaneity.
Wakes up each day demanding ‘What is fresh in the market?’, buys only the best, and creates a superb, no-choice menu — reaffirming her customers' belief in her quality every day.
LINDA HART Was, when tested, manager of petroleum engineering at Texaco UK.
Recently promoted and transferred to New Oreleans as assistant division manager of assets for Texaco's Gulf of Mexico operations.
Aged 43, married, no children.
VGA's verdict
Meet her and you would think she ran a garden centre, not a London-based team of 29 men (and one other woman, a geologist).
She graduated from the University of Wyoming, the only woman (then and, probably, since) to take a degree in petroleum engineering.
In a business still dominated by male managers, her management strengths are not obvious, but none the less stunningly effective.
Management critique
Hart is ambitious but not ruthless in achieving personal aims.
A caring and participative management style dominates her philosophy; colleagues and subordinates enjoy working with and for her.
Moderate and lenient, her superior aptitude in verbal reasoning skills has earned her respect and a classy reputation.
Chooses untraditional ways of working, but bases her decisions on assessing and measuring facts, and on good numerical reasoning skills.
Copes well under stress, but can lose her cool from time to time.
The first controlled experiment into women's ability to act as senior business executive shows that the best of British women are, without doubt, world class.
In lengthy career-assessment trials — of the type commonly used by leading companies worldwide to select executives and vet candidates for promotion independently — nine top female executives showed themselves to be as tough-minded, independent and decisive as male counterparts.
And, in the other key quality commonly ascribed to top bosses, women measurably enjoyed the feeling of ‘being in control’ as much as men.
The series of tests was commissioned by Business but independently conducted by the Vocational Guidance Association, the UK's oldest psychometric assessment consultancy.
By chance, they were carried out by two of the VGA's female managers, chief executive Siobhan Hamilton-Phillips and executive director Susan Bloch.
Business chose women who had already got to the top in their careers, or were high-calibre middle managers still on their way up.
A good mix of companies and jobs was required.
Among the most senior managers who participated were two of the UK's best-known female executives: Sara Morrison, a board director at GEC (and a non-executive director of Abbey National) and Detta O'Cathain (Baroness O'Cathain since June 21), former managing director of the Milk Marketing Board, now managing director of London's Barbican Centre and a non-executive director of Midland Bank, Tesco and Sears.
They were joined by Patricia Scott, Thorn EMI's director of taxation and treasury operations, Liz Rayner, Shell International's manager of senior remuneration and benefits, and Morag Macdonald, company secretary at the Post Office.
Among those still getting their hands dirty were Debbie Trebilco, European manager with ICI Chemicals and Polymers, and Linda Hart, manager of petroleum engineering at Texaco (then in charge of 29 men, now back in the US as assets manager in the Gulf of Mexico).
From the City came English Trust's Susanna Todd, one of the few women directors of a merchant bank.
The managerial ‘wild card’ of the entrepreneur was played by one of Britain's premier chefs, Sally Clarke, owner of Clarke's restaurant in London's Kensington.
Six male managers in comparable positions also took part: Peter Willats, at the time of the tests assistant managing director of GKN Automotive, now running a Japanese company, the Kaizen Institute of Europe, which specialises in business training; George Bain, principal of the London Business School; Paul Newman, BT's director of personnel policy; Gordon MacDonald, director of remuneration at the Safeway supermarket group; Nigel Pantling, director at merchant bank Schroder Wagg and — as Sally Clarke's entrepreneurial opposite number — Paul Drayson, managing director of Lambourn Food Company.
Psychometric tests were carried out over six months.
Lasting up to four hours, they were used to determine individual characteristics (see page 68) and were followed by intensive interviews.
Assurances were given that the tests were not designed to show that men or women are in some way ‘better’ than each other, but to trace and display managerial traits and aptitudes.
Business had aimed to complete much sooner, and wanted an equal number of men to take part.
Yet widespread trawling of Britain's blue-chip corporations yielded only six men with the courage to take part.
‘We are just entering our busy season, preparing for our end-of-year results,’ the finance director of one Business Top 1000 company informed us.
‘All of our directors’ time is taken up.’
Two of Britain's best-known bosses — each famed for aggressive business-building tactics, one also renowned for his sporty exploits — agreed to take part, then cried off.
Offered an any time, any place rescheduling of the tests over the following three months (Business even offered to fly Hamilton-Phillips on a trip to the Far East with one), they still declined to change their minds.
Some of Britain's biggest companies were more direct.
‘I have asked a cross-section of our senior managers if they would like to participate,’ replied the personnel manager of one.
‘The response was more vociferously negative than I expected.
I have therefore given up looking for someone.’
And one top 10 company chairman wrote cheerily: ‘Sorry to join the ‘timid’.
Good luck with the project.’
When the responses to almost 20,000 questions had been put through VGA's computer, they revealed that men and women executives have more talents in common than most people imagine — and some considerable managerial differences too.
Women pay more attention to detail, but are less democratic; men relish change and are more competitive and ambitious.
Women, it is widely believed, are turned down for jobs by men who fear that, without warning, they will take time off to have children.
But the study shows that those dedicated to breaking through the ‘glass ceiling’ on their careers are prepared to sacrifice having a family; the nine women tested had only five children between them; the six men had 10.
(‘The woman at my stage of her career probably doesn't have children,’ adds merchant banker Susanna Todd, 31.
‘But I and others would not rule out the possibility, though I suspect we would all say ‘no nanny, no baby’.’)
With severe skills shortages looming, UK companies must promote more women to the most senior positions if they are to stand any chance of competing globally in the next century.
Yet the study suggests that women themselves may be hindering their progress.
Of the reasons why females so often fail to make it to the very top, two are basic: some of the best women managers do not achieve their full potential in business because they do not know how exceptional they are, and others fail to get a boardroom seat because they lack the confidence.
Hamilton-Phillips says that most women carry a burden from their kindergarten days: ‘Boys dominated the playground, girls sat around the side.
It is a British thing to say ‘it's not nice’ for girls to be confident, and ‘not ladylike’to express an opinion.’
An upbringing in the US, however, brings a different perspective.
‘My colleagues have always ‘used’ me to put forward new ideas because I am perceived as one who will take risks in my career,’says Linda Hart, the one US-born female manager who took part, now working back in New Orleans.
‘Perhaps this is because I am American and because of the strong equal opportunities laws in the US, which protect women and encourage companies to promote women to executive positions.’
The female executive's cause has a sympathetic supporter in up-and-coming industrialist Dryson.
‘In my experience,’ he says, ‘women bring to business a set of values, a level of commitment and a willingness to act on intuition which today's businesses need.
And they do this in an atmosphere which is often biased against them, and which requires sacrifices that are not expected of men.
Their courage should be recognised and supported.’
The VGA findings are defined under 30 headings (see bar chart on page 69) ranging from ‘persuasiveness’, ‘modesty’ and ‘enjoys analysing people’to ‘emotional control’, ‘challenges assumptions’and ‘ambition’.
One other, called ‘non-conformity of replies’, measures the accuracy of all the others.
Its extremely low rating suggests that the answers given were open, honest and highly reliable.
Four crucial aptitudes were also judged: verbal critical reasoning, applied numerical skills, spatial reasoning and diagrammatic reasoning (general reasoning skills based on symbolic information).
Common characteristics and differences between men and women are grouped under eight headings:
Leadership qualities
Similarities .
When it comes to emulating Sir John Harvey-Jones, the men and women tested match each other stride for stride — and are far in front of the average manager.
Both direct and organise with ease and are prepared to take charge of situations.
They are independent and let their opinions be known, even if they are unpopular.
Both are comfortable in most situation, even unusual ones (such as, Hamilton-Phillips says, having to address a meeting of striking workers, give a press conference, or talk about the state of the company to institutional investors).
Both groups aim for commitment and loyalty and, at least intellectually, tolerate different views and ways of life.
Men and women alike listen to others' ideas and sympathise with their problems.
Differences .
Men are more high-powered and enjoy selling, persuading and changing other people's opinions.
They influence the outcome of discussions and persuade others of their point of view more than women do.
They also appear slightly more confident and enjoy leading groups, giving speeches and presentations.
They like being the centre of attention, are more narcissistic, and more likely to hold forth about their achievements.
Women are often prepared to make decisions on their own.
This ability to act, without feeling a need to consult others, is in marked contrast to men, who feel obliged to favour the group decision.
Examining facts and figures
Similarities .
Again, both groups are above average in logical thinking, preferring to make decisions based on facts.
Thus, those at the top, or on their way, naturally head for jobs where they can challenge assumptions, old and new.
Women can move as fast as men in weighing up situations rapidly.
Differences .
Women are less likely to examine data, whereas analysing somebody else's balance sheet and profit and loss account is better than a good whodunit as far as top businessmen are concerned.
‘Almost every successful woman the VGA interviews says she was ‘no good at maths’,’ Hamilton-Phillips adds.
‘Most woman are astounded to find that their numeracy skills are so good, and this group was no exception.
Again it is a British cultural thing of 20 years ago: even when girls failed a maths exam at school, they were still considered ‘clever’ if they were good at writing essays.
But things have changed.
If we do the same tests in 10 years' time, we almost certainly will not get the same set of results.’
Men are also more likely to take risks than women.
‘They have greater confidence,’ Hamilton-Phillips says, ‘so they move forward faster.
The study shows, though, that women are as able to take tough decisions — but will weigh up each of the factors carefully.’
People orientation
Differences .
Men tend to spend more time analysing their own thoughts and motives, and reflecting on others' behaviour.
‘This group's score is way above average compared with other senior managers,’ VGA consultant Bloch says.
Women are less inclined to observe human nature.
Approaches to issues
Similarities .
Both groups enjoy approaching problems in a theoretical and intellectual manner, but the buzz comes when they face complex issues.
Stimulated and challenged, they then bring sharpest focus to bear.
Approach to work
Differences .
Women tend to uphold social traditions and conventions and are more comfortable with stability.
Men are more pioneering.
‘They just are,’ says Hamilton-Phillips.
‘They are happier with change and try to introduce it wherever possible.’
This expands into a tendency for men to seek variety, to be adventurous and restless, and to prefer novelty in their daily lives.
Dealing with stress
Similarities .
When the going gets tough, the women can get as tough as the men.
Neither sex cracks under the stress of competition.
‘It does not make them nervous,’ Bloch says.
‘Both groups tend to be calm and function well under pressure.
They usually do not let things get to them.’
Differences .
But if things finally do get to them, the women succumb first.
‘Men’, Bloch adds, ‘showed better emotional control.
Women appear to find it difficult, at times, to control their moods and may be subject to emotional outbursts or lose their tempers more frequently.’
Why?
‘I don't know,’ Hamilton-Phillips says.
‘Maybe women are more subject to hormonal changes than men.
I thought Margaret Thatcher had broken the mould.
She did not do much for the female stereotype, but she did do away with the idea that you cannot have a woman as boss.
Maybe it goes back to it being OK for a woman to show feelings, but not for a man.
You sometimes see a woman executive in tears.
I have never seen a male manager in tears.
Men don't cry in public.
End of story.’
Attention to detail
Similarities .
Both groups dislike repetitive tasks and have learned to delegate to others.
They focus on general directives and priorities, set targets and leave detailed planning and administration to subordinates.
General philosophy
Similarities .
Top men and women managers tend to be optimistic, though men more so than women.
Does that mean that, to be successful, you have to be more optimistic?
‘Yes’, says Hamilton-Phillips.
‘If you are an Anita Roddick, totally assured about your business's purpose, you have branches all over town.’
It is not just women who are faced with the dilemma of choosing between jobs, families and social commitments.
Men are equally clear about putting careers ahead of children and friends.
‘Both put a great deal of time into their jobs,’ Bloch says, ‘and prefer rapid promotion to security and congenial work.
They are highly motivated and rarely compromise.
Winning is the imperative for both sexes.’
VETTING TO KNOW YOU
How would you like to install electrical wiring in an aircraft, design an underwater tunnel, or research new methods of weaving textiles?
And what do the answers to those questions say about your ability to be your company's next marketing director, finance director or even chief executive?
Psychometric testers have no doubt that they can construct a profile of your personality and aptitudes by asking 1,000 questions during a four-hour session, and by following them with an intensive two-hour interview with an occupational psychologist.
The tests scare the pants off many managers.
They see their careers threatened by academics who ask job candidates whether, for example, they feel a deep-down urge to teach adult evening classes.
Does it really matter, they ask, whether they are switched on or off by the idea of selling goods in a shop?
And who gives them the right to fire off questions such as‘Would you like to make canned food more nutritious?’.
More and more these days, their bosses do.
Increasingly, chief executives are being persuaded — by a sales pitch which asserts that the most expensive mistake a company can make is to promote the wrong executive to a key job — to hire psychometric testers to analyse their management options.
The key requirement is to vet people for the most senior positions.
‘Even by collective choice, it is easy to make a bad appointment,’ says Siobhan Hamilton-Phillips, chief executive of the Vocational Guidance Association, which ranks many blue-chip corporations among its regular clients.
‘It can take years to peel away the layers of the onion.
In the meantime, weak management might cost a company dearly.
Psychometric testing, at a stroke, chops the onion in half.’
Growing companies are among those most at risk, she claims, when going down the old-fashioned selection route.
‘The most crucial time is when they begin expanding.
Qualities such as leadership, enthusiasm, loyalty and fair-mindedness are not easy to measure.
Who can say whether the ambitious executive, brimming with ideas today, will be a suitable candidate for management tomorrow — or likely to remain just a great ideas person?’
The skills shortage that will hit Britain in the late 1990s means that companies must maximise human resources, and could lead them to make regular testing a routine part of office and shopfloor life.
The VGA is Britain's oldest careers development company, founded as a charity in 1954 by Cambridge psychologist Cedric Pyle, who spent eight years developing techniques pioneered by the US military.
Early funding came from companies such as F. W. Woolworth and Estée Lauder.
‘The big surprise was to discover that people were good at things they had no idea about,’ says Hamilton-Phillips, who converted the VGA into a limited company when she took over as chief executive in 1984.
It has spent most of its 37 years counselling university graduates about where they should look for their first jobs.
But in the 1980s career-swaps became the fastgrowth area, fuelled, VGA executive director Susan Bloch says, by ‘people who trained as engineers, lawyers or dentists — perhaps because their parents or teachers wanted them to — and loathed it’.
In an extreme case, she guided one middle manager who was going through mid-life swerve into working at a zoo.
Another had always wanted to work in landscape gardening, not manufacturing.
He became a horticulturalist at the White House in Washington, ‘among the Bushes’, Bloch remarks.
Suddenly, though, trading one career for another is no longer just a way to obtain release from a boring job.
Companies are also commissioning the testers to guide managers who are fired or made redundant into fresh employment.
Almost 2,000 people a year take the tests at the VGA's headquarters in London's Upper Harley Street.
‘The number of business managers and City executives among them has soared,’ Hamilton-Phillips explains.
With headhunters charging up to 60 per cent of annual salary to fill a top job, many more companies are psychometrically testing senior executives.
Even recruitment agencies are prepared to pay £600 a time to vet management staff, and £225 to check out a secretary, before placing them.
But, the VGA stresses, psychometric testing is not there to glean the wheat and discard the chaff.
‘The outcome’, Hamilton-Phillips says, ‘is always positive.
Revealing hidden strengths and weaknesses does not denote success or failure, but enables us to offer more precise guidelines for executives to achieve their maximum potential.’
There is no need, she insists, to fear the tests.
‘Our appraisals are wholly objective.
We may even look at a team of, say, eight people to establish a ‘norm’ for a company — a bit like having to be five feet eight inches tall to get into the police.’
Bloch adds: ‘You expose strengths and weaknesses, so that the next job is filled according to the team's need, not necessarily by adding a good player of the same type.
Bosses are often unnerved, but they learn so much about themselves, when tested, that they see the relevance to their staff's development.’
Middle managers making promotion recommendations about colleagues might allow personal feelings to intrude, she adds.
‘If you don't like somebody, you're liable to mark them down, whereas the person who brings you tea every morning gets extra points.
It is perfectly natural, but it may not be efficient.’
Executive also-rans may have most to gain from going beyond traditional set-piece job interviews, at which, Hamilton-Phillips says, ‘people who can talk well get jobs time and time again’.
Test packages are designed according to job specifications.
‘I would not test a business journalist for mechanical comprehension,’ Hamilton-Phillips says.
The VGA uses different sets of tests, each containing hundreds of questions, to reveal characteristics such as self-presentation, decision making, ambition, attention to detail, leadership and team styles, and to compile an intellectual profile of applied numerical, critical and analytical thinking skills.
They are by no means confined to obscure areas like tunnel digging, aircraft wiring and food enhancing.
Plenty of questions are obviously relevant, though not necessarily answered without pain: do other people make you nervous?
Do you always leave the office on time?
Can you take criticism?
These questions — which have to be answered rapid-fire on ticksheets, often by selecting a level of enthusiasm or indifference on a scale of one to five — contain several which aim to identify a particular management capability or personality trait.
It is almost impossible, the VGA says, to present a false image.
The battery of questions is seeded with a selection which catch out those who try to guess the ‘right’ answer.
‘All good tests have a ‘lie scale’,’ Hamilton-Phillips says, ‘because people will say what they think sounds good.’
Psyche readers: Siobhan Hamilton-Phillips (left) and Susan Bloch trawl for hidden skills.
The UK average, based on established test norms, is the line down the middle of the scale.
Business fed the results from its chosen group into a computer and stacked the combined scores in 30 categories: women's highest at the top, the lowest at the bottom, followed in each case by similar scores for the men.
The group achieved its highest scores on the qualities crucial for top executives: they relish control and are fiercely independent; they analyse people, but are caring; they are relaxed, extrovert and confident, and their optimism matches their need for action.
Only in desire for change is there a significant difference; while the women score high, the men get almost full marks.
The lowest joint score: on inconsistency of replies.
ENGINEERING
Great bore of today
Contractors working on Thames Water's ring main are smashing tunnelling records — and their own profit margins — as they go.
John Lowry reports on Britain's second-biggest infrastructure project.
Building London's ring water main is not a job for the fainthearted.
Each shift, miners cut away several metres of earth at a rate that the fittest athlete could not match.
But when Colin Mackenzie, regional director of Fairclough Civil Engineering, a main contractor on the project, talks about a ‘hard-nosed bunch’ he is not referring to his men.
He is talking about senior managers at Thames Water.
Toughness has been a hallmark of Thames Water's management style since it was privatised in December 1989.
Under chairman Roy Watts and chief executive Mike Hoffman, cost control has assumed unprecedented importance, hence its plan for a new water distribution system which could save hundreds of millions of pounds in pumping costs over its 150-year lifespan.
Thames's prowess in driving a hard bargain on the scheme, Britain's second-biggest infrastructure project after the Channel Tunnel, has placed severe financial pressure on suppliers.
It has exploited a slack time — the hiatus between the end of tunnelling work on the Channel link and the start of London's Jubilee Line Underground extension — to demand that contractors work to tighter margins: between 3 and 7 per cent, compared with the 15 per cent allowed by North West Water, for example , on its contracts.
The efficiency drive may sit uneasily with contractors, yet even Mackenzie concedes Thames has ‘taken all the right commercial decisions’.
The ring main will cut electricity bills by £5 million a year and reduce reservoir capacity requirements by a quarter.
The concept of a ring main is not new.
A deep, circular tunnel to supplement conventional trunk mains was first mooted 34 years ago, but shelved for want of money.
The idea was revived in 1984 by a Thames planning department report, which forecast that water consumption in its area would rise by 15 per cent between 1988 and 2006.
Construction of the main began in 1987, but under government control, Thames was unable to plan ahead, never sure how much money it would receive the following year.
‘We couldn't put in high-productivity systems without committing ourselves long term,’ says Roger Remington, the company's principal project manager.
Now, though, it is easier to implement efficiencies.
The purchase of four tunnelling machines for instance— for about £1 million each — makes the equipment a long-term asset rather than a one-off item on the contractor's bill.
The ring main, due to be completed in 1996, is the largest item in Thames's £4 billion capital expenditure programme for the coming decade.
Its budget, which will cover modernisation of treatment works and construction of new pump shafts, is £250 million at 1989 prices, ‘give or take a shilling’, Watts says.
‘But’, Remington adds, ‘we think we've got a bargain.’
Because the 40 metre-deep main is pressurised by gravity it does away with the need to pump vast quantities of water — at great expense — across London from the Thames 10 miles west of the city.
Its 80-kilometre, elliptical layout is designed to carry water for six million Londoners to strategically placed pump shafts, from which it can be drawn off into the local network.
Thames is not saying exactly how much the system will save it, but it will cut electricity bills alone by about £5 million a year and reduce reservoir capacity requirements by a quarter.
Rationalisation — four treatment works are to close — will free for development large sites at Stoke Newington, Surbiton and Hornsey.
For Remington, a tunnelling operation is like a factory production line: the aim is to maximise the amount of tunnel dug during each shift by reducing the job cycle time.
The ring main has already broken several productivity records: Fairclough dug about 38 metres of tunnel in one 12-hour shift, setting a world record for wedgeblock tunnelling (whereby the ground is supported with a ring of pre-cast concrete segments expanded by a concrete block).
But it is also the riskiest form of land-based contracting.
Boreholes and geological surveys may provide clues to ground conditions, but the only way to investigate a site thoroughly is to dig a tunnel.
One night, miners hit a 60-metre lens of water beneath London's Pimlico, an unlucky strike which added eight months to the operation.
In another incident, workers became caught up in a forest of 50 metre-deep piles supporting a fourstorey office block in Park Lane.
In late 1988, Fairclough came up against some of the worst tunnelling conditions its engineers had ever encountered, in sandy ground beneath Tooting Bec Common, south London.
The tunnel suddenly flooded.
Sensors behind the sealed bulkheads measured the water pressure at up to four bars, equivalent to a water depth of 40 metres.
Tunnellers have worked under comparable pressure before, but never in such unstable ground conditions.
‘If we had lost a single segment everyone could have been killed,’ Mackenzie says.
‘There was no blaspheming in that tunnel.’
Unable to pump in compressed air to equalise the water pressure — the air pressure required would have exceeded legal limits — Fairclough and Thames had to find a machine that could operate under such conditions.
Their search took them to six countries, with the contract finally going to Toronto-based Lovat.
The delay knocked work back two years and swallowed about 4 per cent of the total project budget.
Other unforeseen difficulties have taken a further 4 per cent, but Remington is confident the contingency reserve will cover it.
Meanwhile, cost efficiency remains a priority.
One of Thames's latest money-saving schemes involves making sweeping changes to contract terms.
It has switched to the ‘cost reimbursable form’, whereby the client bears the brunt of risks but has more say in how things are done.
Thames exercised the clause by hiring one piece of plant for £40,000 less than the contractor had paid — and found that it eased tensions between them.
In the past, according to Mackenzie, they used to sit at opposite ends of the site firing off hostile letters to each other.
‘You can judge the change from the reduction in volume and the tenor of the correspondence,’ he says.
However, the fact that contractors have allowed Thames to bore a hole in their earnings reveals the true nature of the relationship.
They have been quick to protest at having their profits squeezed, but, Mackenzie concedes, ‘it's all the work we can get in the present market’.
Cement is piped to a mixer below the ring main's entrance (right) on London's Rosebery Avenue.
Chief executive Hoffman stresses cost control.
Checking the alignment of casing and wall.
Tunnellers try to get a pump working faster.
Chairman Watts heads a ‘hard-nosed’ team.
Aces with spades
One Thames engineer asphyxiated, along with a Davy ATC worker who tried to rescue him; one contractor killed when he fell from a train that runs between the face and the construction shaft; a young Glaswegian electrocuted beneath Park Lane.
This grim balance sheet is testimony to the dangers which confront construction teams on the ring main project.
Yet, surprisingly, none of the deaths was the result of the riskiest operation of all: tunnelling.
Tunnellers traditionally came from tight-knit Irish families who travelled from job to job as a unit.
Today, a growing number are from the Bristol region and the north.
They are a superhuman breed, working four times faster than other construction workers.
Their pasty faces — the result of long periods underground — belie their extraordinary strength and tenacity.
Doctors examining miners working under compressed air conditions remark on their fitness.
A miner's resting heart rate can be between 40 and 60 beats a minute, compared with about 70 for a typical male.
Much of the work is done by hand.
A miner can cut away several metres of earth each shift with an air spade — a smaller, but extremely heavy, version of a pneumatic drill.
An Australian lifeguard who tried using the air spade on a recent contract for London Underground gave up in tears after two hours.
Despite the arduous conditions, the men are committed to getting the job done; they will clean up sites at the end of each shift to give the incoming team a flying start, and shifts often work on into changeover and maintenance time.
Such willingness by workers to prolong their exposure to the daily discomforts and dangers of their jobs does not, of course, spring from suicidal loyalty to the task in hand.
Large bonuses encourage teams to work faster and longer to meet targets, and top professionals earn a minimum of £1,000 a week — for five shifts of up to 12 hours each.
SMALL BUSINESSES
CANDLE IN THE WIND
Richard Simpson (left) traded his bright prospects in the City for the waning fortunes of Britain's oldest candle manufacturer.
Report by Nigel Cope.
Five months ago, 32-year-old Richard Simpson was a corporate financier with merchant bank Morgan Grenfell.
He had a hefty salary and a company Jaguar XJS.
Then he jacked it all in.
He took a 40 per cent pay cut, swapped the corporate splendour for a mushroom-coloured Portakabin by the Thames, and installed himself as chairman of a company which makes candles.
What happened?
What happened was that he fell in love.
In February, the greysuited banker paid Shell ‘several millions’ for the object of his affections: Price's Patent Candle Company, Britain's oldest candle manufacturer, which has been knocking out candles at its Victorian factory in Wandsworth, south London, since 1831.
His, honourable, intention was to make a slice of slumbering British industry profitable.
He has his work cut out.
Last year Price's made profits of just £250,000 on sales of £5 million.
The factory is inefficient, its working practices and much of its machinery dated.
In Britain's candle market — worth about £20 million a year — it vies with imports from Holland, Belgium and Germany, and with cheap products from China.
If he is to succeed, Simpson might have to rely heavily on his father, Gordon Simpson, a former finance director of Shell who has come on board as deputy chairman.
Simpson senior plays the cautious, conservative counterpoint to his son's bolder strokes.
‘He's my sounding board,’ Simpson junior says.
He has also stumped up some of the cash (together they contributed 30 per cent of the total package, the rest was provided by banks).
Whether the Simpsons can reverse the slide of a company which once employed 2,000 along the banks of the Thames (it now employs 140) is open to question.
But Richard Simpson is optimistic.
‘I'm confident that it's a good business,’ he says.
‘There are problems and we have a lot to do.
But it was such a great opportunity, I couldn't resist it.’
You can't blame him.
Price's has a rich history, told in the company's centenary year book,Still the Candle Burns .
Founded by merchants William Wilson and Benjamin Lancaster, it was named after one of Lancaster's aunts (industry was deemed too demeaning for merchants to lend their names to).
It once owned 1,000 acres in what was then Ceylon, where it created plantations to process palm oil (at that time the main raw material in candles), and it built an entire village, Bromborough Pool on Merseyside, for employees.
As well as candles, the company provided stoves and lanterns for troops in the Crimean war, Rangoon oil for lubricating rifles, and the Motorine oil which Rolls-Royce used when it won the Isle of Man TT race in 1906.
Captain Scott, who took Price's candles with him on his trip to the South Pole in 1911, praised their fortitude.
‘You will be interested to learn,’ he wrote back, ‘that they burn satisfactorily at 70 degrees below zero.’
Evans, his second-in-command, ate them in a desperate moment.
Simpson's passion for Price's started way back, when his father used to take its candles home at Christmas.
When he moved to Battersea his route to work took him past the factory every day.
He acquired a stake in a small lighting business which bought candles from the Wandsworth factory.
Then, one day in 1989, unable to contain his curiosity any longer, he dropped into the factory to ask the managing director to show him round.
‘It was wonderful,’ he recalls.
‘The place had this history, this tradition and all this wonderful old packaging that it wasn't using.
And these fabulous candles, many of which were still made by hand.
I was so overcome that I approached Shell and offered to buy it.’
For 18 months, his overtures were rejected.
Then John Collins replaced Sir Bob Reid as chairman of Shell, with a mission to sell the piffling subsidiaries and concentrate on the core business of oil refining (of which wax is a by-product).
Simpson saw his chance.
He signed the deal in February, persuaded Morgan Grenfell to let him buy the company Jag and left the City to become a mini-captain of industry.
Simpson recalls his first visit to Price's.
‘It had this history, this tradition and all this wonderful old packaging that it wasn't using,’ he says.
‘I was so overcome, I offered to buy it.’
What did his banking colleagues think of his decision?
‘Some of them were envious,’ he says.
‘Others thought I was being stupid.
But most were pleased and thought it was all quite exciting.’
The business Simpson acquired was charming, but a financial shambles; as late as 1986 it had lost £1 million on sales of £3 million.
It owns three subsidiaries: Charles Farris, which makes enormous church candles that sell for about £35 each; Aidee International, which manufactures pottery Beatrix Potter soap dishes in Devon; and Candle Flare, a Colchester-based maker of Christmas decorations.
None makes much money.
At the factory, men make many candles by hand, dipping a wick in wax over and over again — work performed by machines in most rival companies.
As one Shell executive remembers of his visits: ‘It was like stepping back in time.
I'd never seen anything like it.’
Retailers had begun to despair.
‘So many people were willing to give the company a chance,’ one shop-owner says.
‘I like to buy British, but the candle colours became uneven, delivery was unreliable and they were expensive.
[A pack of 10 eight-inch candles from Norway costs about £3; Price's cost 69p each.]
I started to stock imported brands instead.’
Is Price's ripe for rationalisation or a candidate for closure?
Simpson does not see the acquisition as an exercise in corporate break-up.
‘I've got a commitment to the staff and to the business,’ he insists.
Which is just as well, because there are few assets to sell.
The factory site was sold to Broadwell Land — now in administration — before Simpson arrived and many older machines (which were made by Price's, hence ‘Patent’ in the company name) would be of interest only to museums.
What Simpson bought was essentially a name, some stock and a client list.
But he has big plans.
He is moving the factory to Doncaster (though he will keep an office in London) and looking for voluntary redundancies.
More important, he wants to ‘re-position the company and take it into more up-market areas which will generate higher returns’.
This means that, as well as selling to the catering and hotel markets, in which Price's is strong, it will target gift shops and department stores.
The subsidiaries will not be sold but developed, and synergies such as gift packs — pottery with candles and Christmas candle decorations, for instance— will be exploited.
The old Victorian packaging, long since discarded, will be dusted down and revamped.
‘We've got these big leather-bound volumes full of old illustrations,’ Simpson says.
‘Our marketing department [to be expanded]is looking at them.’
Exports are another potentially rich vein.
Currently 5 per cent of output is exported, but Simpson aims to hoist that to 25 per cent, with the US, Japan and Australia the main targets.
The board has been restructured to include former factory manager Richard Wood, 30, as operations director.
He will make sure that the Simpsons' ideas are workable at factory floor level.
Industry observers and rival candle manufacturers are withholding judgement on whether the new management will transform Price's into a viable company, or end up on their faces in a puddle of waxy goo.
Louise Tyson, sales director of the rival Colony Corporation in Lindal-in-Furness, Cumbria, says it will not be easy.
‘Though the market is growing it is also becoming more competitive.
Small craft companies are coming in.’
Clive Harper, sales director of Bolsius Candles, the UK subsidiary of the large Dutch manufacturer (which was once interested in buying Price's itself), is sceptical.
‘I think it's a strange acquisition for the Simpsons to make,’ he says.
‘These companies need experienced management.’
But had they — or someone else — not come in, Price's would have been sold to a foreign buyer (an option Shell considered), broken up and merged with a rival, or worse, have disappeared altogether, taking 160 years of manufacturing history with it.
And no one, not retailers, not customers — not even competitors — wants to see it snuffed out.
Diary of a recession
PATCH-UP PROGRAMME
Software house Softwright Systems is fiercely optimistic: in April, staff helped buy out a 54 per cent stake.
Yet computer cuts in the services sector mean that, for now, it can do little more than mark time.
Part four in a series.
Recession is biting at Softwright Systems, but Nick Durrant has no time to brood over it.
He is too busy, as demand mounts for his variety of mend-and-make-do work.
His bosses, the directors, say they look forward to next year, when they expect new business to increase.
But that simply draws a weary smile from Durrant, 27, because he is head of the 10-strong team providing software support to existing clients.
People phone him and demand help.
‘Some businesses that planned to shelve their old computer systems have stuck with them instead,’ he says.
‘They are spending £20,000 or £30,000 updating the software, rather than £250,000 renewing the whole thing.
It has certainly meant more work for my team.
I know a couple of places using stuff that should have been declared dead long ago.’
Based in Langley, half an hour west of Paddington, Softwright is a typical small software company.
Its site, a business park one stop shy of Slough, puts it smack in the M4 corridor, with its honour guard of high-tech companies.
The office is tidily modern, and resounds with the metronomic clicking of keyboards and the buzzing of dot matrix printers.
The company has been owned by its employees and venture capitalists since a buy-out in April from former 54 per cent owner, software house Microfocus; its directors are almost fiercely optimistic about the future.
But it has been buffeted by the recession on two counts: it is in the south-east and in the services sector.
Moreover, according to a report by consultancy Price Waterhouse, in 1990 finance and retail companies slowed computer spending more than firms in any other sector; the vast majority of Softwright's business comes from these two areas, and long-established clients account for two-thirds of its turnover.
To win a significant amount of new business would require a big cultural change at the company.
Furthermore, because projects can last for up to four months, an upturn could take time to emerge.
For many staff, whose average age is below 30, the slump is a new experience.
Some were still at school during the early 1980s when British manufacturing industry was being decimated and the service industries' star began to rise.
This year, they see other M4-corridor companies, such as computer giant Digital Equipment and Philips, laying off staff.
For many programmers, this is their first taste of trying to sell houses in a buyers' market, of static wages and of finding that demand for their skills no longer outstrips supply.
Most of the directors have longer memories.
They were already acting to cut costs in June 1990, moving the company from four locations to one; last year's small pre-tax loss arose mainly from the costs of relocating employees who wanted to move house with the unification.
Staff have noticed the difference since then.
‘The company has shrunk a bit since the move,’ says Phil Longden, 33, an applications programmer with the company since 1986.
‘It is partly the recession, and partly that extra costs affected what the company could afford in-house.
For example, the training department was cut back; now it has gone.’
That work is now contracted out to the person who used to do it.
External belt-tightening has been effected quietly.
Debtor days have been reduced from more than 40 to less than 30 over the past two months.
‘We always try to be cash-positive,’ chief executive Jane Tozer says.
‘It is not that we don't like banks, just, well, I've never even had a personal overdraft.’
Tozer ranks the importance to the business of cash, profit and turnover as ‘cash, cash, and cash.
Profit comes a distant second.
Turnover growth is nothing to pursue for itself.
It would be nice if profits increased while turnover went down’.
As she talks, the computer screen behind her bleeps regularly as pieces of electronic mail arrive; she gets up to 40 messages a day.
One of those is from the company accountant, relaying the daily bank balance to all the directors.
Internally, money is spent only where it is needed.
Sue Moss, a founder director, says that when it comes to supplying staff with computers, ‘the software writers get the gleaming new equipment, and the managers — who don't need amazing processors — get the old stuff’.
Which is why she has a bulky grey, barely portable Compaq PC (vintage circa 1983) and sales and marketing director Jeremy Rivers has an equally grey IBM PC (circa 1984).
Rivers is unusual among Softwright's staff — at 54, he is older than most.
He took early retirement in 1990 after 25 years at IBM and joined Softwright a couple of months later.
‘It is more hands-on here,’ he says.
‘Software developers meet the customers.
At IBM, sales staff were not allowed to meet developers — they were not allowed to learn about products in development.
Things here are much more instant than at IBM.’
Tozer, too, is ex-IBM, having worked there for 13 years.
She is a classic product of the company, able to see a platinum lining in the worst cyclone.
As one person who has worked with her comments: ‘With Jane, there are no problems, only opportunities — even if some opportunities are insurmountable.’
To Tozer, the news that IBM UK, the industry's barometer, has this year frozen pay and is reshuffling its employees to cut numbers must have a good side: ‘If it means it becomes more responsive to the market and customers, I think we will benefit,’ she says.
‘They will want more of our software.’
Applications programmer Longden is less effusive.
He is working on a joint development with IBM, but says planned enhancements are stacking up.
‘There is no extra money available because IBM has not yet got a client for the product,’ he says.
‘Until it has, we have agreed to take some of the risk.
In effect, we are doing some of the work unpaid, with a view to getting more of the benefits when the product sells.’
Durrant calls it ‘putting skin into the system’— with the attendant echoes of The Merchant of Venice .
In the absence of growth in conventional new business, necessity is proving a fertile mother of invention.
To Tozer's surprise, two clients — one of them a new customer — have asked Softwright to sort out their own wayward personal computer-based projects.
‘It is profitable, but not that profitable,’ she says.
‘Actually, maybe it is.
Maybe we are getting the business because of the recession: rather than doing new things, people want to sort out what is wrong with the old ones.’
SOFTWRIGHT SYSTEMS
Latest turnover £3.2 million (year-end December 1990)
Latest profit £7,000 loss pre-tax
Employees 90
Office Langley, Berkshire
Activity Writing and selling PC software for commercial applications  
Order levels show spending to income ratio (order book value divided by monthly budgeted spend).
Feeling the pinch: chief executive Jane Tozer (left) and marketing manager Jill Warren (right) expect potential clients to hold off for some time.
Despite its unlikely new role producing computer-oriented clones of Sir John Harvey-Jones, Softwright is clearly marking time, waiting for customers to start moving again.
The forward order book has moved up since last month, but lags its long-term average (3.0 months' work).
Three months into the financial year — for which the directors were forecasting 25 per cent growth in turnover, to £4 million — Tozer admits sales are ‘a bit down on the plans to date’.
Independently, she and the other directors do not expect potential clients to start making firm decisions before the end of the year.
When that comes, Tozer says, ‘it will be the log-jam breaking’.
Chairman Martin Anderson, 43, expects customers to leapfrog into New World, a new form of software that Softwright is developing with IBM.
Relying on visual depictions of files and increasingly powerful databases, it will, he says, eliminate the ‘maintenance backlog’— the snowballing set of improvements required for existing programmes.
Getting rid of that backlog is the Holy Grail of programming; not surprisingly, New World is occupying more of Softwright's time.
‘We think it will suddenly take off,’ Anderson says.
‘We will switch into a phase where it will be difficult to meet demand.
In the medium term, we will have to hire staff.’
But in the short term, the struggle continues.
‘It's odd,’ Anderson says.
‘Everyone in the industry is working harder than ever before, just to win the same amount of business.
You pedal harder to stay in the same place.’
He sees the slump as an opportunity for natural selection — and corporate evolution — rather than as a problem with the economy.
‘There may be a recession, but life has not stopped.
You still have to queue in supermarkets.
What is recession, except a test of the strength of the companies going through it?’
Charles Arthur 
‘With Jane,’ a one-time colleague says, ‘there are no problems, only opportunities — even if some opportunities are insurmountable.’
HADEN MACLELLAN
Latest turnover — £354 million (year-end December 1990)
Latest profit £23.6 million pre-tax
Employees 5,418 (March 1991)
Head Office Egham, Surrey
Activity Conglomerate — divisions include manufacturing, distribution and automated manufacturing systems
Richard Taylor, who runs Haden Mac Lellan's automated manufacturing systems division, left for the Far East in mid-April in good spirits, believing the recession had bottomed out.
When he returned in May his hopes were shattered.
‘Things seemed to be moving down again,’ he says.
‘That was the impression I got from suppliers and customers.’
Worse still, the rest of Europe appeared to be following Britain's slide.
‘It is catching up with our recession,’ Taylor says.
His division is a big supplier of factory painting machinery, particularly to car manufacturers, German customers — including Volkswagen, GM/Opel and Ford — have slowed investment; managers there say their heavy involvement in eastern Europe is draining funds.
As a result, European customers are talking down machinery prices.
‘But,’ Taylor says, ‘we filled our order book at reasonable prices a year ago.
And we have been able to get better prices from suppliers, so margins have increased.’
That, however, is only a temporary lift; orders and prices are both down and, if the recession lasts as long as Taylor now thinks likely, margins will soon start to narrow as well.
Matthew Lynn 
Number of employees provides a reliable indicator of a company's performance over the short term.
AIRTOURS
Latest turnover £183 million (year-end September 1990)
Latest profit £6.3 million pre-tax
Employees 750
Head Office Rossendale, Lancashire
Activity Tour operator
Political unrest in Yugoslavia could have spelt bad news for Airtours, which planned to send 7,000 sunseekers there this summer.
‘Fortunately,’ managing director Hugh Collinson says, ‘our season did not start until the third week in May, so we did not have any holidaymakers there when trouble flared up.’
Airtours had by then already cut its Yugoslavian programme by a quarter, and offered customers refunds.
‘So far, only about 20 people have taken the money,’ Collinson says.
Cyprus and Tunisia, affected earlier in the year by Gulf war nerves, have also held up well.
‘It is amazing how short memories are,’ he says.
More important is the wider summer market, which should have been fully booked by mid-May; it was not.
‘Overall, it is down, because of the Gulf,’ Collinson explains.
‘According to our information, people have not booked in the UK either.
They are just not travelling.’
Airtours, however, kept moving, at least in the City.
The day after flying 300 City folk to France, the share price jumped 44p to 443p — not because of the free champagne, Collinson says, but because of the share placing ‘which took our market capitalisation over the £100 million mark’.
Nigel Cope 
Monthly summer holiday bookings compared with bookings for same month last year.
KWIK-FIT
Latest turnover £229.4 million (year-end February 1991)
Latest profit £24.5 million pre-tax
Employees 3,500
Head Office Murrayfield, Edinburgh
Depots 586 (UK 443, Benelux 117, France 9, Eire 17)
Activity Selling and fitting of replacement car parts
Kwik-Fit chairman Tom Farmer believes in promoting his company out of the downturn.
In May, he spent about £150,000 on new livery for 10 outlets he bought in April.
The relaunch expenses paid off, doubling sales at many outlets, according to marketing director Peter Holmes.
The high-profile tactic was repeated on a corporate level in May with a seatbelt campaign developed with the DTI in preparation for rear seatbelt legislation.
But Farmer's strategy is not only about promotion.
In June he issued new shares worth £9.6 million to fund the acquisition of Swanton, a property company set up on Kwik-Fit's behalf to develop 15 depots.
The deal increased Kwik-Fit's asset base and cut gearing to 20 per cent.
The car industry's poor health is not rubbing off on Kwik-Fit.
‘Manufacturers are struggling, but our sales are buoyant as people hold on to old cars,’ Holmes says.
It may have something to do with discount offers, advertised heavily in The Sun and in local papers — though the offer of £1 off tyres costing between £30 and £60 at one London depot seemed a little ungenerous.
Staff, however, say they are prepared to negotiate prices.
Sally Hamilton 
Percentages show quarterly sales growth compared with growth in the corresponding period of 1990.
PA CONSULTING
Latest turnover £172 million (year-end December 1990)
Latest profit £2.1 million pre-tax
Employees 1,830 (1990)
Head Office Victoria, London
Activity Management consultancy
In May, PA chief executive John Foden spent a week decorating his cottage in Cornwall.
‘It's a good way to take your mind off work,’ he says.
There are plenty of worries to leave behind.
Australia has been his main concern recently.
‘We were saying the recession there was the worst since the second world war,’ he comments.
‘Now we are saying it is the worst since the 1930s.’
Even so, there are glimmers amid the gloom.
‘The Australian market has collapsed, but I think our market share has increased dramatically.
It's cold comfort, of course, when there isn't much of a market to have a share of.
But when we come out of it, things will be great.’
Meanwhile, PA has put back its forecast of recovery to early 1992.
At the turn of the year, clients dithered about signing up for consultancy projects.
But £2.5 million of extra work booked in May — with no dithering — gives Foden the sense that, now the initial shock of the slump has worn off, business is returning to its normal rhythms, albeit in a lower key.
He admits, however, to being torn over the interest rate argument; part of him wants to see rates held to stabilise the economy, but he also wants to see quick cuts to boost business.
Matthew Lynn 
Employee remuneration levels, actual and budgeted, shown as a percentage of company income.
SETTLING OLD DEBTS
Pete di Nero, our recession fighter, soldiers on.
This month, the Inland Revenue moves swiftly to begin proceedings.
I have two files on my desk.
The first, Suppliers' Invoices Not Yet Paid, is a hefty pile of paper from creditors.
Every month or so I look inside and close it again.
I'm rarely motivated to take time to pass any on for payment.
After all, as managing director, I'm quite busy.
The letters and statements that other businesses send chasing money don't go in this file.
They get thrown away.
We respond only to invoices from small suppliers and individuals, and to threats of withdrawal of service.
The others get paid, if they are patient, when we can afford it.
Don't think I'm joking.
The threat of withdrawal of service, for example, doesn't lead to automatic payment.
We are just as likely to sack the supplier and look for a nicer one.
There are, however, two groups of people we don't keep waiting: the Inland Revenue and Customs & Excise.
They bill us for PAYE and VAT, and they don't hang around.
These two put more companies out of business than banks.
And the payments must have been planned into your cash flow, or you'll go down.
Here's an example of the Revenue's tactics: ‘Warning — we have not received payment for the period ended January 5.
I am referring the matter to your local collector of taxes for consideration of recovery proceedings.
If you wish to avoid them, send payment by return of post.’
This notice is dated February 1.
The money is only 26 days late and they're already nervous.
Here's the next letter, from our local office: ‘The papers in this case have been passed to us to begin proceedings.
No action will be taken if payment is sent by return of post.’
This letter is dated February 6.
The other file contains a debtor list.
This, unlike the first one, makes interesting reading, and is referred to continually.
We've always used one method of debt collection, and it works, through good times and bad.
We don't send out computer statements following the invoice, but keep talking to clients; someone does this full time.
Instead of letting the accounts department handle it, we've given the job to someone who enjoys dealing with people.
It works because companies would sooner pay a nice person they know than a computer.
We use the same principle for getting money out of companies as we do getting products into them.
They are both efficient sales operations.
Next month: how to go out of business in one week.
FINANCIAL SERVICES
The 1986 Financial Services Act spawned a fast-growing breed among life insurance companies — agents tempted into fraud.
Now watchdog Lautro is clamping down and wants firms to pay for investors' losses.
By Matthew Lynn.
LAUTRO'S LIFE SENTENCES
On February 1 Stephen Wright, an Equity & Law tied agent, stood in the dock of Gloucester Crown Court.
The charges against him were read out: three counts of obtaining money — a total of £172,000 — from an elderly widow, Angela Minett, and four counts of forgery.
Wright pleaded guilty to all charges, and also admitted obtaining £207,000 from the Halifax Building Society by deception when he applied for a mortgage claiming, falsely, that he did not have one.
A brief exchange between the barristers followed.
Martin Steen, prosecuting, described how 27-year-old Wright, then managing director of Wright Financial Services in Tewkesbury, Gloucestershire, had been approached by Minett on her solicitor's recommendation.
She wanted to put some money in trust for her children, so she followed Wright's advice to invest in Equity & Law bonds.
But after the investment was made Wright forged letters to cash in the bonds, to a total of £172,000 and paid the money into his own account.
He then asked her for another £46,500, claiming he needed the money to secure the bonds, and paid that, too, into his account.
The defence barrister, David Lane, then stood up to offer some brief remarks in mitigation.
He described how Wright — a hustler to the end — had recently got a job with Staybrite Windows and was one of its star salesmen.
That, however, did not impress Judge Gabriel Hutton, who, at the end of the 45-minute hearing, sentenced Wright to three years in jail.
As scams go, it was not particularly smart, nor well executed.
Wright's sting was picked up by officials at Equity & Law when they noticed a sudden change in his lifestyle.
Account executives at the insurer, who monitor its agents, had Wright marked down as a man with constant cash flow problems — he was always hassling them for his commission.
Then, all at once, he seemed to be in the money; he had a new BMW and a boat.
They checked his file; there was no marked increase in his sales and, as the company was his main source of income, nothing to explain his new-found wealth.
Their suspicions aroused, they went back to the files and studied the signatures; there appeared to be discrepancies.
They got in touch with the police.
Wright's case is typical of the trouble life insurance companies have encountered with two of their most important distribution channels, the tied agent (a firm of sales people) and the appointed representative (an individual self-employed sales person).
Throughout the UK there are 20,000 agents, engaged in a type of business created by the 1986 Financial Services Act.
Before the act they were just insurance brokers flogging life policies.
After the act, brokers either had to be independent, offering impartial advice on the spectrum of financial products, or tied, selling the products of one company.
If they became tied agents they were authorised to do business through the life office which took them on; the life office, in turn, was responsible for their conduct.
The legislation placed two groups in a fix.
Many old brokers were unable to become independent advisers because they lacked the expertise and resources to win authorisation.
Instead some became tied agents.
The life offices, for their part, saw the brokers, their traditional distribution agents, vanishing.
Fearful that sources of business were drying up, they rushed to do deals with tied agents — 20,000 firms materialised almost overnight.
The life companies had to learn to be distributors of their own products.
But, as they have discovered over the past year, tied agents can be expensive and difficult groups of people to do business with.
A series of disasters has underscored the point.
In February 1990, a firm called Garston Amhurst, a tied agent of Target, the life company sold by TSB to Equity & Law in January at a substantial loss, was shut down by the Securities and Investments Board after £2 million of investors' money went missing.
Other companies have had similar troubles: Clerical Medical had to rid itself of an agent which was writing unauthorised business; a Legal & General agent.
Homes Assured, went bust owing £10 million, and is being investigated by the Serious Fraud Office; a Friends Provident agent was caught using the FP logo on documents offering unsecured commercial loans, and is being investigated by fraud squad detectives; and last December a Guardian Royal Exchange agent, Charmworth Properties, collapsed.
Later it was revealed that its founder had completed a three-year prison sentence only six months before becoming a GRE agent.
For the Life Assurance and Unit Trust Regulatory Organisation (Lautro), the regulator charged with supervising life offices and their agents, one or two mishaps might have been regarded as the inevitable teething troubles of a new system.
Yet during 1990, the trail of crooked agents turned into a bustling queue.
In its annual report, published in November, Lautro weighed into the life offices, complaining that the unexpectedly high costs of policing their activities had dented its finances, and beefing that members had not taken the task of compliance seriously.
It was time for the regulators to get heavy.
Several cases have revealed gaping holes in the regulation system.
Wright, for example, traded on the fact that he was the agent of a well-known insurance company.
Without that mask he would probably not have been able to complete his con.
In that instance, the insurer was legally liable for the loss; Equity & Law repaid Minett the £172,000 plus the £46,500 that Wright had tricked from her.
‘We were 100 per cent responsible for that investment, legally and morally,’ says Equity & Law marketing manager Brian Taylor.
The company is hoping to recover some of the money from Wright, but admits much of it has already been spent, making his appointment an expensive mistake.
Life companies have stepped into an area with which they are ill-equipped to deal, and have come unstuck, believes Lautro's chief enforcement officer Mike Abrahams.
‘They have no expertise in managing their own staff,’ he says.
In other incidents the legal situation has been less clear.
In one case, which has still to come to trial, it is not clear which hat the salesman was wearing when he made his deals: his own or the life company's.
If he is found guilty, but was clearly not acting for the company, it would escape liability.
All the same, the insurer has so far agreed to pay £8 million in compensation to investors, a significant pile of money even for a major company, and a nasty hit to take for one slip in its monitoring system.
Unless, of course, it was an accident waiting to happen.
That insurer has 1,500 appointed representatives and another 1,000 tied agents pushing its policies.
It claims to have tight controls.
‘There is internal and external monitoring,’ says a spokesman.
‘When sales staff are recruited, they are put through a training process, at the end of which there are exams.
Once they pass they are given accreditation for the products they are allowed to sell, and that accreditation is available for the customer to see.’
On top of that internal auditors make regular checks on branches, sales staff have to complete a four-page form after each sales visit, and Lautro makes spot checks.
All of which sounds impressive.
But, for Lautro at least, it is not enough.
In February it publicly reprimanded the insurer for failing to be tough enough with its agents.
It, however, prefers to shift blame on to the customer.
‘With self-employed guys you are never able to give a 100 per cent guarantee,’ the spokesman admits.
‘You have to rely on customers to be sufficiently street-wise to act as rational individuals.
Unfortunately, with clients you are dealing with a mixture of gullibility and greed.’
Gullibility and greed are charges that can just as well be flung back at the life companies.
Mike Abrahams, chief enforcement officer at Lautro and the man most involved in regulating tied agents, is dismayed by life companies' attitudes.
‘The public doesn't know much about investment, and why should it?’ he counters.
‘These people tend to take advantage of the trust they have built up with their official hat on.
Typically they sell to neighbours and relatives — they abuse the trust.’
In Abraham's opinion, the life companies have stepped into an area with which they are ill-equipped to deal, and have come unstuck.
‘They have no expertise in managing their own sales staff,’ he comments.
‘But now they are responsible for the whole distribution process and they have no experience of how to deal with it.’
At the same time, he suspects, life offices did not realise how tough regulation would be.
‘There has been a perception problem,’ he says.
‘We have regularly said what we think the trouble is, but it has not been solved.’
And the trouble, at least in the regulators' view, is the companies' casual attitude towards fraud.
‘There is a tussle between compliance and marketing departments,’ he says.
Typically, marketing people will push for anyone with a good sales technique to be hired, overriding objections to the individual's character from the compliance staff.
Invariably, marketing people are more senior, and win the argument.
As a result, rogues are hired.
Naturally, life offices disagree.
‘As far as we are concerned I would refute that charge;’ says Michael Auld, spokesman for Guardian Royal Exchange, which has had its share of problems with tied agents.
Even so, there is no immediate prospect of the rogues cleaning up their acts.
‘The reason we have had so many problems of late is that the fizz has gone out of the market,’ Abrahams says.
Staple products — pensions and mortgages — have been in decline and costs have risen.
The financial squeeze has tempted many more to dabble in fraud.
Lautro has two solutions to the mess.
One is to tighten the screws by making life offices liable for losses suffered by investors on financial dealings with their agents.
‘It should make them even more careful about their monitoring,’ Abrahams says.
The second measure is to beef up its own enforcement staff; the number of people working for Abrahams has risen to 30 this year, more than twice as many as he started with.
But the regulators already have tough powers, as one tied agent of Norwich Union discovered last year.
Because of connections between the agent and an individual arrested for fraud, Lautro swooped, ordering Norwich Union to stop taking business from the firm.
For the life office it was an embarrassing incident.
‘We had looked at the agent in March and it seemed OK,’ spokesman John Garner says.
‘But we have 300 representatives and we cannot look at them all simultaneously.’
For the agent, however, Lautro's order was fatal.
‘Appointed representatives have no right of appeal.
There is no code of conduct and no standardised method of operation,’ its managing director complains.
‘The way Lautro operates virtually puts people out of business.
It is more like extermination than regulation.’
True.
In the weeks before Christmas, the agent was starting to sack staff, some of whom had joined only a week before the order was issued.
The story shows Lautro to be an unsentimental regulator with the power and will to crack down hard.
But despite those powers, fraud is still on the increase.
Lautro's proposed rules, by increasing the financial penalties on life offices, may have some effect in improving standards.
It is unlikely, however.
At Equity & Law, marketing manager Taylor says that the references and character checks carried out on Stephen Wright gave no hint of what was to come.
‘If the references are OK then there is not a lot you can do to stop things like this happening,’ he says.
‘It would appear to be just part of the cost of doing business.’
Families can again stroll through the Brandenburg Gate, once closed to all except communist border guards.
But boom in the west and bust in the east are creating tensions that could wreck Berlin's efforts to grow back together.
The city is a microcosm of Germany, in unity as in division.
Report by Alan Purkiss.
Photographs by Philip Sayer.
THE BUSINESS GUIDE
BERLIN
When Reinhard Pischel was a young man, his daily journey to work took him from east to west Berlin.
He was in the buying department at Schering, the chemical company based a few hundred yards from the sector border in the district of Wedding.
But the building of the Berlin wall in 1961 cut Pischel off from his livelihood.
He found a new job at the ‘people's own’ Narva light-bulb factory in Friedrichshain.
Schering lost contact with its former employee but continued, throughout the decades of Berlin's division, to pay a token Dm12 a month into a bank account for him.
‘When the wall was breached in November 1989,’ Pischel says, ‘I went to the company to say thank you, and asked whether they would take me back.’
They did.
He rejoined Schering a few months ago, after a break of more than 29 years.
Now 54, he earns double what he was getting at Narva, and is helping to develop business with east German companies.
Pischel is one of the lucky ones.
But for many east Germans, the jubilation of unity night last October has given way to frustration and fear of unemployment.
Some speak resentfully of a takeover by the Wessis , with themselves marked out for the role of second-class citizens.
West Germans, on the other hand, who face stiff tax increases, are starting to grasp the horrendous cost of mending the run-down economy and infrastructure of the five new eastern Länder (states).
They grumble about the Ossis' exaggerated expectations and leisurely working habits.
Nowhere are such tensions more evident than in Berlin.
The wall, the watchtowers and the border guards have gone, leaving behind a desolate scar of mud and concrete fragments, zig-zagging for miles through the heart of the city.
But it will take time to put Berlin together again.
Without doubt, however, the fall of the barriers between 2.1 million west Berliners, 1.3 million east Berliners and almost another million people in the surrounding area of Brandenburg has recreated a metropolis with immense economic pulling power.
Berlin was always more densely textured than other European capitals, with industry, offices and homes jumbled up together even in the inner city, and, in spite of being a free-market island in a sea of socialism, west Berlin was the country's biggest industrial centre.
Almost 50 companies employ more than 500 people each there; Siemens, the biggest of them, has 24,700.
Add to that whatever can be salvaged of the 18 state monopoly combines that were based in east Berlin, and you have a concentration of industry without equal in Europe.
Until Hitler's war, Berlin was a turntable between the peoples of eastern and western Europe, and that role is reasserting itself.
From its stations it is as easy to take a train to Warsaw as to Brussels or Paris.
‘What are Berliners?’ asks Schering vice-chairman Professor Klaus Pohle.
‘They are Huguenots from France, people from Silesia, people from Poland.’
Berlin's newly recovered potential as the economic hub of north-central Europe has not been lost on business.
In the 18 months since the demise of the communist regime in east Germany, prices of land, offices and shops have exploded.
According to property consultancy Jones Lang Wootton, which opened a west Berlin branch in April last year, first-class office space in locations such as Kurfürstendamm, the luxury shopping and pleasure boulevard, are fetching monthly rents of up to Dm70 a square metre, double the top figure in 1989.
In east Berlin, where there is an extreme shortage of modern offices, rents in Unter den Linden and Friedrichstrasse have soared above Dm100 for short-term contracts.
Several companies that were quick off the mark — Barclays Bank, Salomon Brothers and Sotheby's among them — have found princely quarters in the Palais am Festungsgraben, a baroque palace that formerly housed the German-Soviet Friendship Society.
The accelerating property boom is likely, before long, to create a new downtown in the area around Potsdamer Platz and Leipziger Platz — once Berlin's busiest traffic junction and in recent decades its ugliest wound, a grey no man's land between two barrier walls.
A year ago, Daimler-Benz snapped up 62,000 square metres of land there for only Dm93 million.
The company plans to build a Dm500 million office, showroom and service centre and create several thousand jobs.
The low price paid for the site has prompted the European Commission to demand a revaluation, but the Senate (city government) is confident that the project will go ahead.
Until last year, west Berlin could be served only by the airlines of the three western occupying powers.
Now 32 carriers are flying into Tegel Airport, foremost among them Lufthansa, which was founded in Berlin in 1926.
Tegel was designed for 5.8 million passengers a year; in 1990, it handled a million more than that and the result was chaos.
There is a crash programme to enlarge the terminal, but Tegel is in the urban area, and its capacity is never likely to exceed nine million.
At Schönefeld, east Berlin's airport, on the fringe of the city, the plan is to raise annual capacity of 2.5 million passengers to 5.5 million next year, at a cost of Dm300 million.
The biggest challenge facing the city is to create a dynamic economy in the ex-socialist eastern districts, where unemployment is exploding, and where pay levels are at best 60 per cent of those in the west — sometimes little more than a third.
Failure could create a social time-bomb of disillusionment and despair, and the political forces that would exploit them are awaiting their chance.
East Berlin, as the capital of the communist state, was a stronghold of party officialdom and privilege.
In the Bundestag elections last December, the Party of Democratic Socialism, as the communists now call themselves, won almost 25 per cent of the vote in the five east Berlin constituencies.
East Berlin's industry was plunged into crisis by the overnight arrival of the deutschmark a year ago.
Faced by collapsing markets at home and in the moribund Comecon area, they began a desperate struggle to shed labour, improve products and find western partners ready to invest.
Unemployment in the eastern districts was 11.1 per cent by April and looks set to go on rising until the end of the year; by that time, a fifth or more of the labour force could be without jobs.
Not surprisingly, people get work in west Berlin when they can.
The Senate recently estimated the number commuting daily into the west from east Berlin and nearby districts of Brandenburg at 50,000 to 60,000.
Among the biggest obstacles to western investment in the east are hundreds of thousands of property claims by former owners.
‘There is no problem about financing,’ says Dietrich Beier, Berliner Bank's chief economist, ‘but there must be legal security.’
The telephone system bequeathed by the socialist regime is another dampener: being cut off from the outside world is bad for business.
A year ago, there were only 72 lines from east to west Berlin, and 460 from west to east; the figures are now 622 and 1,033.
To date, the banks have been among the pacesetters in western capital's Drang nach dem Osten .
Berliner Bank has taken over the Berliner Stadtbank, which emerged from the break-up of the former east German state bank.
Deutsche Bank aims for 30 east Berlin branches by the end of the year.
But it has jibbed at some of the rents demanded.
‘There will be a Deutsche Bank branch in Unter den Linden one day,’ says Bernd von Arnim, of the bank's Berlin management board, ‘but not this year.’
For the moment, buying almost anything in east Germany apart from the groceries involves talking to the Treuhandanstalt, the trust body charged with privatising the territory's 8,000 enterprises.
The Treuhand has 2,000 staff, divided between Berlin and 15 regional offices.
It recently moved into a huge building on Leipzigerstrasse that once housed Hermann Göring's air ministry.
Most of its executives are western managers.
(Its first president, Detlef Rohwedder, was murdered by terrorists at Easter.)
With privatisation proceeding only slowly, the Treuhand decided in March to decant some of its work to outside agencies.
More than 50 international banks and management consultancies have been allocated packets of about 10 companies each, and are charged with preparing sales memos and finding buyers.
Almost 1,300 manufacturing enterprises have been sold to date, along with most department stores and restaurants and half of the hotels and chemist's shops.
Non-German buyers have been relatively few.
Gerhard Baumgard, Salomon Brothers' Berlin director, points out: ‘East German conditions are a mystery to most non-Germans, so a west German subsidiary is almost essential for foreign takeovers here.’
One of the biggest UK moves in east Germany to date, the acquisition by building materials group RMC of the Rüdersdorf cement works on Berlin's eastern fringe, was organised through the company's subsidiary in Ratingen Nordrhein-Westfalen.
The first foreigner to work for the Treuhand is Barry Hylton Davies, a project manager with British construction company John Mowlem.
He has been seconded for a year, and his beat is construction, property and hotels.
‘The better the companies are going quite fast,’ he says.
Some east Berlin enterprises, though grotesquely overmanned under the old regime, have good technology and promising futures.
One such is Bergmann-Borsig, a power-station maker wedged in an angle of the old communist border wall.
The company has been bought by ABB Kraftwerke, of Mannheim, for a sum believed to be around Dm100 million.
ABB has put in a new management and introduced its characteristic ‘flat’ organisational structure.
The workforce, 4,300 before the revolution, is down to just over 3,000 (including 1,000 employees on short-time); the final figure is likely to be about 2,000.
The LEW locomotive works at Hennigsdorf, another ‘borderland’ plant on Berlin's north-west fringe, belonged to AEG before it was nationalised, and to AEG it is returning.
The new parent wants to concentrate on rail traction vehicles for railways, industry and mining, which account for 90 per cent of LEW's sales.
The workforce of 8,000 before the revolution has been cut to 5,800 through early retirement and natural wastage; even so, hundreds are on short-time, and sackings are inevitable.
Machine-tools are one of the few industries in east Germany that come close to matching world standards, and Niles Werkzeugmaschinen, based in the district of Weissensee, was the core enterprise of the defunct 7 Oktober engineering combine.
Its products — computer-controlled grinding machines for making cylindrical tooth systems — are generally considered excellent.
Managing director Peter Klopsch hopes for a turnover of Dm50 million this year, but production is way below the 1989 level.
The Soviet Union used to account for a substantial slice of the factory's exports.
‘In 1991’, Klopsch says, ‘there is no sign that sales there will be more than nil.’
But he hopes to take advantage of the credits recently negotiated with Moscow by economy minister Jürgen Möllemann to secure Soviet orders next year.
Niles, too, is undergoing painful restructuring.
The 2,250 people employed two years ago have been cut to about 1,000, of whom 300 are on ‘short-time working with nil hours’; the workforce will be down to 600 by December.
The company has found a potential buyer, a west German measuring equipment concern, and has submitted a sale plan to the Treuhand.
For some east German companies, flotations on the Berlin stock exchange could be an alternative to being bought.
Until the second world war, the Berlin exchange was the most important on the Continent; national division reduced it to the status of a small regional market.
Now it is selling itself as the natural arena for developing companies in the new Länder .
The survival of slimmed-down companies is small comfort for people made redundant.
Economic strategists hope the thousands of new small businesses being registered will soak up the unemployed.
Many of these are small, one- or two-person outfits, snack kiosks and the like.
But there are signs of blossoming entrepreneurial spirit.
Forty-year-old Thomas Schielicke took over the family building company in Beelitz, south-west of Berlin, in 1982.
As long as the communists held power, he was not allowed to employ more than 12 people.
Immediately after east Germany's first free elections in March last year, he borrowed Dm1 million from the Deutsche Bank to buy new vehicles and equipment.
Already his labour force is 30-strong, and he plans to take on five more craftsmen.
Turnover in 1990 was Dm4.5 million, and he expects much more this year.
Lutz Gattnar was in charge of computer projects at the 7 Oktober combine until the revolution.
Using his old department as a basis, he has woven a web of companies across Europe, including one in the UK.
Grouped in a holding called System-Kontakt, they will set up deals between east and west.
Many opportunities in the Soviet Union have been missed, Gattnar argues, because western companies have not had the contacts, local knowledge and language skills his outfit will provide.
In west Berlin, suddenly presented with armies of new customers by the disappearance of the border, business has never been better.
Manufacturing companies there boosted output by 8 per cent last year, and staff by 3.5 per cent— almost 20,000 jobs.
Retail turnover was up 28 per cent, and in some branches, such as vehicles and electrical goods, by more than half.
The spending spree in the west was mirrored by falling shop sales in east Berlin: almost 20 per cent compared with 1989.
Shops there got off to a bad start in the weeks after currency union, many demanding cut-throat prices.
Nils Busch-Petersen, general manager of the Berlin Retailers' Association, suspects there was an element of sabotage by communist functionaries in the Handelsorganisation, the old state retailing body.
One, he recalls, told him: ‘This is what people wanted — now let them get on with it.’
(Busch-Petersen, a lawyer by profession and still in his twenties, was mayor in his home district of Pankow for a few months after the revolution, before being asked to head the east Berlin retailers' association.
An offer of the top job with the all-Berlin body followed.)
Not even the threat of their own unemployment was enough to persuade Ossi consumers to buy ‘home-grown’ products for a minute longer than they had to.
In one market, though, western companies have been denied the walk-over they expected: newspapers.
None of the western papers has made big inroads in east Berlin and Brandenburg.
The former communist daily,Berliner Zeitung , has transformed itself into a newsy, left-of-centre paper with a reputation for investigative reporting.
Now owned by Robert Maxwell and the west German publisher Gruner & Jahr, it sells about 300,000 copies.
The Senate's main headache at the moment is money.
West Berlin was always a social security case, getting massive cash injections from Bonn.
In 1990, these amounted to more than half of its Dm25.9 billion budget.
Now the government would like to turn off the tap, but the run-down state of east Berlin means the city needs more aid, not less.
This spring, the Christian Democrat-led coalition Senate that emerged from last December's elections announced the first budget for the whole of Berlin since the 1940s — Dm40.1 billion, including Dm12.3 billion specifically for the eastern districts.
The Senate will increase its borrowing from Dm1.4 billion to Dm3.9 billion this year.
It is prepared ‘to go to the limits of the possible’ to nurture unity, mayor Eberhard Diepgen declares.
Apart from propping up the Senate, Bonn has for decades provided lavish incentives for business and individuals to stay in, or move to, west Berlin.
Income tax there has been 30 per cent lower than in the old, western Länder , corporation tax 22.5 per cent lower, turnover tax 30 per cent lower.
But the government's bounty attracted industry that would probably not have come to Berlin otherwise, and might not stay without it.
Several companies, including IBM and Standard Elektrik Lorenz, have made clear that jobs will be shed.
Two key decisions, still to be taken, could make the difference between bust and boom for Berlin.
Those are: whether it will get the 2000 Olympics; and whether it will become again the seat of government.
Berliner Bank calculates that a successful Olympic bid could generate Dm6 billion in extra social product and tens of thousands of new jobs.
‘If we get the Olympics,’ says economist Beier, ‘Berlin will roar ahead, development will be sensational.’
Berliners are of one mind in pressing their claim to get the government back, knowing that a shift of the ministries from Bonn would attract to the city businesses of all kinds, eager to be close to the centres of decision-making.
But Bonn's bureaucrats like their idyll on the Rhine, and several west German Land governments oppose a move.
In April, however, Chancellor Helmut Kohl spoke out for Berlin.
Max Streibl, prime minister of Bavaria, recently pointed out that reinstalling the parliament in the old Reichstag would put it within range of Kreuzberg (an area of west Berlin with a reputation for left-wing street mobbery).
But Hans Heuer, head of the Berlin department of the German Institute of Economic Research, speaks for many when he says that would be an advantage.
‘People in government should feel the way social processes are moving early,’ he says, ‘and that is possible only in a metropolis.
They should travel on the Underground, walk through run-down areas like Prenzlauer Berg, see the rowdies we have here, the Romanian  beggars .
Here, politicians would feel social problems close up.’
Power-plant maker Bergmann-Borsig (above) has found a western buyer.
Dereliction (top right) and pollution (left) are frequent in east Berlin.
LEW locomotive works (above) has gone back to its pre-war owner.
Top right: Ossi yuppie Busch-Petersen.
Left: the Palais am Festungsgraben.
Von Arnim (above) of Deutsche Bank and (right) Pohle of Schering, a stalwart Berlin company.
PRUSSIA, WITH LOVE
Whether you seek culture (above, the church of St Matthäus in west Berlin) or good food (top right, a restaurant in east Berlin's Grand Hotel), reunited Berlin will not disappoint
Those unfamiliar with Berlin are, for the moment, at no disadvantage compared with the natives.
Wessis and Ossis are like brothers who last met decades ago and hardly know each other any more.
Easterners taking the S-Bahn from Friedrichstrasse to Zoologischer Garten, for shopping trips to the Europa Center or the KaDeWe department store, still speak of drüben (over there).
And westerners, though many enjoy east Berlin's theatres and museums, seldom feel inclined to take a stroll across the concrete acres of Alexanderplatz.
Yet the central district of east Berlin is the heart of the old imperial capital, and all Germans are re-discovering its history.
There is even talk of rebuilding the Kaiser's Schloss , damaged in the war and blown up by the communists in 1950.
Unter den Linden has the crisp, classical Deutsche Staatsoper by Georg Wenzeslaus von Knobelsdorff and the baroque splendour of the Zeughaus (now the museum of German history) opposite.
Platz der Akademie — surely it will get back its old name, Gendarmenmarkt — is graced by Karl Friedrich Schinkel's Schauspielhaus, flanked by two cathedrals.
These are among the treasures of old Prussia.
They stand out in a city that seems, until one discovers its finer corners, architecturally roughhewn.
The Berliners themselves are a bit rough-hewn.
Their offhandedness is legendary.
This quality is reflected in an accent that has a blunt and acerbic ring to it, especially in east Berlin, which was always more plebeian than most western districts.
Where to stay
Berlin has a string of first-class hotels, and not a lot in the middling class.
The Bristol-Kempinski (west number: 884340), on the Ku'damm, attracts ‘the cream of culture and politics’.
It is a great name, though some say the atmosphere at the ‘Kempi’ is not what it used to be.
Single rooms are Dm380–430.
The Inter-Continental (26020 w), in Budapester Strasse, is in the same price class.
At the Steigenberger (21080 w), on Los Angeles Platz, single rooms cost Dm290–420.
The Meineke (882811 w) offers single rooms at Dm104–135, and describes itself as ‘superior middle-class’.
East Berlin has four excellent establishments, all created as hard currency traps by the communists.
The Grand (east number: 20923253; 2511198 w), on the corner of Unter den Linden and Friedrichstrasse, charges Dm350–400 for single rooms.
Guests have included the Rolling Stones (‘strenuous’ is how a hotel spokesman describes their stay).
The Palasthotel (2410 e; 2139119 w), where single rooms are Dm230–280, stands on the site of the pre-war stock exchange, destroyed in 1944.
The Metropol (203070 e; no west number yet), situated opposite the International Trade Centre, is in a similar price class.
The newest of the four is the Dom Hotel (20980 e; 3926668 w), where a single room is Dm215–295.
Getting about
Public transport in the two halves of the city grew apart in the years of division.
West Berlin concentrated on buses and the Underground, east Berlin on trams.
Not all S-Bahn lines in west Berlin are running yet.
They were managed by the east German railway (Deutsche Reichsbahn) until the mid-1980s; west Berliners would not use them, and the Reichsbahn would not invest.
When the (west Berlin) Senate took them over, it had to close some because they were so run-down.
Refurbishment is a top priority, but for the moment the only S-Bahn link between the two halves of the city is at Friedrichstrasse, where dozens of western companies have offices.
Taxi drivers in west and east Berlin have been obliged since unity day last October to drive passengers anywhere they want to go, but each group knows its own patch best.
For journeys outside the central area, it is still wise to follow the rule: east is east and west is west.
Where to eat
Gourmets tip Rockendorfs Restaurant (4023099 w), run since 1981 by Siegfried and Ingeborg Rockendorf in an art nouveau villa in Waidmannslust, in the north of the city.
The Rockendorfs have abolished the conventional menu, offering three set meals at lunchtime and two later on.
You will not get away with less than Dm300 for two in the evening, with wine on top.
It is essential to book in advance.
Those who prefer to stay in the centre could try Benedens (3235374 w), in the Waitzstrasse.
If you are on the hop, there is an excellent selection of beers.
Van Loon (6926293 w) is in an old Dutch freight sailboat moored on the Landwehrkanal in Kreuzberg, and offers a small but excellent evening menu.
The Alter Dorfkrug (4027174 w), in the rural idyll of Lübars, on the city's northern fringe, offers wholesome, homely food and deutsche Gemütlichkeit at its best.
Plain food and good beer are to be had in Berlin's oldest tavern,Zur Letzten Instanz (2125528 e), in the Waisenstrasse, which goes back at least to 1621.
Diners have included Napoleon, Charlie Chaplin and Mikhail Gorbachev.
Bistro 1900 (4494052 e), in Prenzlauer Berg, is a favourite meeting place for east Berlin's smart set.
It is a private restaurant opened a couple of years before the revolution by Christian and Marina Stolzenburg.
Time off
Both west and east Berlin were cultural centres in their own right.
Now, the united city has two or three of everything.
West of the Brandenburg Gate is the Deutsche Oper , east of it the Deutsche Staatsoper and the Komische Oper .
West is the Philharmonie , home of the Berliner Philharmoniker, east is the superbly restored Schauspielhaus .
West Berlin's theatres are often avant-garde and experimental; those in the east have tended towards more classical interpretations.
If you have a weekend free, you can do what many west Berliners are now able to do for the first time since 1952 — simple drive into the country and enjoy the landscape of Brandenburg.
A favourite trip is to the woodland estate in the Bernauer Forest , north of the city, where the old communist politbureaucrats lived in pampered seclusion.
Once closely guarded, it is now open to any passer-by.
An enterprising type at the gate sells photocopied plans of the place for a mark apiece.
CITY HISTORY
THE MEMORY BANK
City Lives, part of the British Library's National Sound Archive, is an oral treasury of the Square Mile's recent history.
Pamela Johnson listens in.
Dundas Hamilton, former deputy chairman of the Stock Exchange, was once in the Brownies.
Sir Kenneth Kleinwort's grandfather refused an invitation to join the Court of the Bank of England and, according to one former Lloyd's underwriter, some members today are not always as honourable as their predecessors.
This is not idle City gossip, but a sample of the detail to emerge from City Lives, an oral history of the City and part of the National Life Story Collection (NLSC) at the British Library's National Sound Archive (NSA).
‘Until recently the NSA was concerned only with music and wildlife,’ explains pioneering oral historian and NLSC director Paul Thompson.
But now, at its home in South Kensington, the archive is also preserving the voice of the people.
Thompson believes individual life stories are the raw material of history.
‘They are as much a part of our heritage as buildings and landscape,’ he says.
The founding of the NLSC in the mid-1980s coincided with dramatic changes in the City.
Distinguished historian and NLSC chairman Lord Briggs explains the thinking behind City Lives: ‘When the NLSC came into existence, changes were taking place in the City that were of national importance,’ he says.
‘We wanted to measure their effect on people's lives.’
The nation's bankers and brokers are not, it seems, a literary group.
Few autobiographies have emerged from the City compared with other walks of life.
City Lives helps redress the balance.
So far, about 50 interviews have been completed, with a further 50 still to do.
Each interview — some last up to 11 hours — is a recorded autobiography.
Robert Perks, deputy director of the NLSC and the nation's first curator of oral history at the NSA, says that though the City is well documented in company records, City Lives places it in a human context by showing how individuals and institutions interact.
All the interviews begin with recollections of childhood which make compulsive listening and reading (transcripts are available).
In the 1920s, Dundas Hamilton's father, Arthur Hamilton, used to go off to the Stock Exchange each day with a bag containing socks and shoes.
‘From nine till 3.30 he was on his feet the entire time,’ Hamilton recalls.
‘He always carried a spare pair of socks and a pair of more comfortable slippers to put on in the office.’
It led young Dundas to form an unusual view of the institution over which he was later to preside.
‘I thought the Stock Exchange was a place called the Stockings Changed,’ he explains.
‘I imagined my father sitting in this enormous building doing nothing but taking off his socks and putting them on again.
I found it incredible that he could make money doing that.
When I was a bit older, I thought he was probably a thief and that the bag he carried was for the loot.’
Sir Kenneth Kleinwort, director of the Kleinwort Benson Group, remembers as a child in the 1940s being taken to what was then the family bank.
‘I was taken to see the vaults and was fascinated to try to lift a gold bar,’ he says.
‘I remember also going to the Bank of England vaults to see whole rooms piled to the ceilings with gold bars.’
Kleinwort and Hamilton led privileged lives: they grew up in large family houses with staff, attended public school and were assured by their family connections of places in the City.
‘There was a butler, a cook, a pantry maid, a nanny for my sister and me and one or two dailies,’ Kleinwort says of his childhood in Sussex.
But Perks has been surprised how varied City backgrounds are.
Leonard Toomey, successful Lloyd's underwriter, now retired, had a very different early view of the City: his father, a stonesmason who lived in Battersea, south London, helped build the Bank of England.
Toomey's childhood was dominated by ‘constant worry about money’, but it spurred him on.
‘I knew I had to make money,’ he says.
‘The fear of poverty, the abject poverty of my youth, was the only motivation I've ever had.
Working as a pageboy in a club in St James's in the 1930s, he mentioned to a member that he was looking for a better-paid job.
‘He told me he knew of a firm at Lloyd's that was looking for an office boy.
Well, I'd never heard of Lloyd's.’
He went there, however, and was impressed.
‘You wouldn't believe the power the old-time underwriters had when I was a boy.
They were masters of Lloyd's.
Not any longer; the people who run Lloyd's now are the brokers.’
Toomey set his sights on becoming a member.
‘In the 1950s you didn't need an enormous sum to become one if you worked at Lloyd's’ he says.
He remembers the day he was elected as ‘the greatest moment of my life’.
In the serious-money 1980s, however, entrants to the City came via Oxbridge.
Asa Briggs, who is also Provost of Worcester College, Oxford, says the new recruits did not always find what they wanted but are nevertheless important to City Lives.
‘Their reactions ought to be recorded,’ he believes, ‘even if they get out of the City.’
Anne Brown (not her real name) lasted seven years.
A 30-yearold ex-stockbroker, she was recruited from Oxford by a merchant bank in the early 1980s, but soon realised the City was not the place it had been.
‘For people like my father the City was a lovely environment where you could meet for a drink, or have lunch and be with friends.
Now, because of fierce competition, people have to be at their desks and sober.’
Though there is money to be made, she found the stress inhuman.
‘The price you pay is a tremendous amount of stress, and a ragged social and home life; what for?’ she asks.
Brown describes her first year as ‘completely mad’, surrounded by ‘warring men, all stabbing each other in the back’.
She says: ‘I worked for the maddest of them all, a man who had given his secretary and his assistant ulcers.
I felt I was in a prisoner-of-war camp.’
Older hands such as Kleinwort and Toomey echo her view.
‘In the dealing rooms the mental stress is unbelievable,’ Kleinwort says.
‘You can get a dealer who is busted flush at 30.’
Toomey also sees the decline in human terms: ‘If you'd have said to me 20 years ago that there would be no trading floor at the Stock Exchange, I wouldn't have believed it,’ he says.
‘Now they're all sitting in offices peering at screens from seven in the morning — dreadful.
They're all unhappy.’
Since the second world war, public ownership has largely replaced the City's family firms, and new technology has widened the scope of City trading.
The pace is fast.
Gone are the days of the one-to-one gentleman's agreement; handsets have replaced handshakes.
‘Selling is about getting on the telephone,’ Brown says, ‘and using a variety of techniques involving charm, bullying and whatever else you can muster.
In that competitive environment, anything was fair play.
A lot of girls compromised themselves a great deal more than I did.’
Kleinwort recalls the values his grandfather's generation espoused.
‘In those days, balance sheets and profit and loss accounts didn't mean all that much,’ he explains.
‘You were trying to assess a guy's character, whether he was clean and straight, and not going to double-cross you.’
The expansion of City business means greater complexity and specialisation.
But the changes have not all happened in the past decade.
Kleinwort recalls the ‘aluminium war’ of the late 1950s.
‘I think that's when American methods started to be applied and the whole atmosphere became less smooth, less gentlemanly; a wave of toughness started to hit the City.
‘I regret some of the changes, but I think you've got to accept them and move with the times, however unfortunate that may be.’
Toomey is less sanguine.
‘It's soulless now,’ he says.
‘In the early days the underwriters were God, particularly the mariners.
They were arrogant but, by and large, they were decent, honest people.
In the old days, everyone paid up.
The unlimited liability aspect of Lloyd's is impressed upon every name, so for a name to say after the event that they didn't know about it is a load of cobblers.’
Older historians may still question the validity of oral data; but, Briggs argues, ‘you've got to be critical of all forms of historical evidence; they all have their pitfalls, but oral evidence is especially useful for recovering attitudes’— a point amply borne out by City Lives.
It also provides a wealth of information on daily living and a real sense of office conditions pre-fax, photocopiers, word processors — and even central heating.
‘There were gas fires,’ one contributor recalls.
‘The lift worked by hydraulics.’
There are tantalising descriptions of buildings now demolished —‘a wonderful high ceiling in the banking hall going up the equivalent of two storeys’— plus accounts of lunchtimes and commuting.
In the early 1950s, according to Dundas Hamilton, there was no question of traffic being held up.
‘I drove up and parked outside the office door.
I never locked the car.
Occasionally City police would leave a little note saying, ‘People have been stealing rugs out of cars, I think you ought to lock yours’.’
Cathy Courtney, City Lives project manager, carried out many of the interviews.
‘There is an initial wariness,’ she says.
‘People tend at first to treat you as if you're a journalist looking for Guinness connections.’
There is also initial reluctance to spare more than an hour, though experience shows that interviewees will find time for three or four more sessions.
‘I'm very grateful that people have been honest,’ Courtney says.
‘They are giving us something incredibly precious.’
No one is forced to answer questions.
‘We're not trying to trap people,’ she insists.
Participants may read the transcript and, if they are unhappy, can veto release for a time.
The NLSC has no core funding, which means all projects must raise sponsorship.
So far, City Lives has been funded largely by its interviewees, but, Courtney says, ‘we have not interviewed anyone we didn't want’.
Now though, deputy director Perks is keen to develop the project.
‘We want this to be an archive that makes sense of the City of London.
We need to interview clerks, cleaners, caterers, the police, even spouses, if a fully rounded picture is to emerge.’
But, with costs of up to £1,000 per interview, the project must find new cash; about £50,000 is needed.
NLSC director Thompson makes comparisons with attitudes in the US, where oral history is valued and funds are more forthcoming.
In Britain, he says, ‘despite our dependence on electronic media, only 5 per cent of output is preserved, whereas the British Library still keeps one copy of every newspaper published’.
City Lives may eventually generate income as material is published — a book based on the interviews is already in the pipeline.
‘The City up to now has been anonymous,’ Thompson says.
‘This book will be a revelation.’
Further information from: Cathy Courtney, NLSC, National Sound Archive, 29 Exhibition Road, London SW7 2AS.
BUSINESS AND THE COMMUNITY
CASHING IN ON GOOD WORKS
Corporate giving to community projects doesn't have to involve money.
As recession forces companies to cut costs, fundraisers are emphasising the equal value to charities of sparing time and expertise.
Reports by Sally Hamilton.
The charity world is getting twitchy.
As the recession cuts into company budgets, from expense accounts and salaries to training and research and development, donations to good causes are also being reappraised.
‘The fundraisers are finding it tough out there,’ says Fiona Fountain of the Charities Aid Foundation.
‘There are a lot of people chasing a lot less money.’
There are 172,000 registered charities in the UK, all hoping for a slice of the £175 million donated by business each year.
Though individuals are giving less — on average, £1.27 a person per month, down almost 75 per cent on 1989 levels, according to the foundation — corporate giving appeared to be ‘holding up’ until the end of last year.
The government's Gift Aid scheme, introduced last October, helped.
This provides tax relief of 30 per cent on large donations, an added benefit that goes directly to charities.
So far, it has raised £28 million, £18 million from business.
But companies can stop giving at any time; under the traditional system of covenants, they were committed to giving an annual donation for four years.
‘At the moment the big givers appear to have been giving more and the smaller ones less,’ Fountain says.
‘But there is no guarantee that that will continue.’
Some of the biggest givers at present are recently privatised companies, says Mike Norton of the Directory of Social Change, a national charity that monitors charitable trends.
British Telecom's contributions rose from £750,000 to £3 million between 1988 and 1990 and those of British Gas leapt from £234,000 to £1.6 million.
Norton believes privatisation of electricity and water companies means more funds will come on stream.
Their new life in the private sector, he says, ‘adds about 20 profitable companies to the ranks of corporate donors, several of which have appointed community directors’.
Among other UK companies, Gerald Ronson's Heron International dug deeper for charity than most to give £2.2 million in 1990, compared with £306,898 in 1988.
The Body Shop, well known for its environmental concerns, increased its giving sevenfold to £240,000 between 1987 and 1990.
So far the company has avoided the recession.
‘The positive image has been good for business,’ Norton says.
‘But if the company hit a crisis, who knows what might happen?’
The impact of recession is likely to feature at this month's annual meeting of Business in the Community, a charitable body that promotes links between the private sector, government and the community.
Born out of the 1981 recession, and buoyed by the boom that followed, BITC, with 500 members, now has to reassess its role in the downswing and how it should direct the evolution of community involvement through the 1990s.
Tate & Lyle chairman Neil Shaw will emphasise the role of secondment when he becomes BITC chairman this month.
‘We don't want members to spend lots of money.’
he says.
‘We want them to spend time.’
‘Businesses have to look at all their costs during a recession,’ says David Grayson, BITC's managing director of operations.
‘The more they can see business reasons for what they do, the more likely they are to continue their support.
What should become apparent is that, while companies do make substantial financial contributions, a more important contribution they can make is expertise and management skills.’
But money is still central.
Each year, industry spends at least £125 million on charitable activities over and above straightforward donations.
Of that, £50 million goes on sponsorship, £15 million on support for enterprise agencies (which encourage the start-up and growth of small companies), £20 million on non-commercial advertising and £15 million on joint promotions.
Joint promotions include the recent appearance of ‘affinity’ credit cards, whereby banks and building societies give a donation to a particular charity for each new cardholder.
The Leeds Permanent Building Society, for example, pays £5 to one of three charities for each customer who signs up for a Leeds Visa affinity card.
It has been good for both business and charity: since its launch in late 1988, more than 300,000 cardholders have been recruited, and an estimated £2 million has been donated to the Imperial Cancer Research Fund, the British Heart Foundation and Mencap.
A ‘significant number’ of people took out a card because of the affinity connection, the society says.
An increasingly popular form of business support for charity is through the secondment of staff to charitable or industry-supported organisations.
Some observers suggest secondment could be used to soften the blow of redundancy among staff.
However, Brian Carr, head of community services at Barclays Bank, says the bank expects to make 15,000 staff redundant over the next three years, and seconds at most 100 people at any one time.
Only 1,000 people work on long-term — usually one-to two-year — secondments in the UK at present, many of them arranged by London-based secondment broker the Action Resource Centre.
Many more take short-term assignments, a cheaper, less disruptive form of support that can be combined with company management training programmes.
The annual cost to industry of secondment is about £25 million, according to the Directory of Social Change.
Neil Shaw, chairman of sugar group Tate & Lyle, will emphasise the role of secondment and employee involvement in the community when he begins his term as chairman of BITC this month.
‘We don't want members to spend a lot of money,’ he says.
‘We want them to spend time.
Employees change for the better when they work in the community.
They see the market from the community's viewpoint.’
Secondment also helps Shaw identify employees who can and can't get things done.
‘I wouldn't kick out anyone who didn't perform, but when they came back I would make sure I put them in a safe place,’ he says.
‘And if I wanted to promote someone, I would choose the person who had worked well in the community.’
He practises what he preaches, having spent the past two years actively involved in the East London Partnership, a programme which aims to regenerate the boroughs of Tower Hamlets, Hackney and Newham (where Tate & Lyle has its headquarters).
Education is another plank of the company's community programme, and one that Shaw will promote in the wider context of BITC.
In a report produced last year by public relations consultancy Burson-Marsteller, the chief executives of top UK and US companies said education and training were their main community concerns for the 1990s.
Many companies are addressing the issue through government-sponsored compacts with schools, Business Education Partnerships and involvement in their local Training and Education Councils, which match training to local employer needs.
‘Purists say education is the government's job,’ Shaw says.
‘That's rubbish.’
Tate & Lyle encourages staff to take governorships of schools and the company offers grants for A-level study to 100 gifted pupils at schools in Newham.
The Directory of Social Change, though, doubts charity is the reason for industry's involvement in education.
Its Guide to Company Giving says that ‘this cannot really be considered a mainstream charitable expenditure, but more a self-interested expenditure by companies’.
It does not, therefore, put a cash value on such support.
Pressure on companies to commit their resources to less obviously self-interested causes comes not just from organisations like BITC and the myriad charities, but also from within their own ranks.
The Per Cent Club is a group of about 300 UK companies committed to spending 0.5 per cent of their profits on community causes.
But, as profits tumble during the recession, so do contributions.
The group is now trying to encourage members to increase their commitment to 1 per cent(which still pales in comparison with the US, where there are 2, 5 and 10 per cent clubs).
‘They have picked the wrong time to ask,’ one member says.
Some companies, such as retail group Kingfisher, refuse to join, even though it meets the 0.5 per cent target.
‘We do not test our investment by the money put in, but by the outcome of a project,’ says company secretary Tim Clement-Jones, who oversees community affairs.
Some companies believe any corporate involvement in community projects is beyond the private sector's brief.
‘Leaving it to business takes away personal involvement,’ says Brian Duffy, chairman and managing director of London-based building group Brown & Jackson.
He gives nothing on a corporate basis, believing shareholders should decide what to do with their dividends.
But in recent years he has spent £50,000 of his own money and much time on charitable causes.
He believes this makes the commitment more meaningful.
Other companies are happy to invest, with the proviso that the government does not neglect its duty.
Northern Foods chairman Chris Haskins says in a recent annual report: ‘We are involved in various community projects concerning job creation, education, retraining and the alleviation of social problems.
I believe our participation in these areas makes excellent business sense.
The private sector, however, must supplement rather than replace state involvement.’
But the government's message is clear: businesses must become more involved.
Fiscal incentives, such as tax relief on secondment and charitable donations, as well as expectations of support for privately-sponsored City Technology Colleges and Training Enterprise Councils, hammer that home.
The pressures are becoming harder to ignore.
No issue has confirmed this more than the environment, where public as well as legislative pressure has helped produce a surge in environmental programmes across industries, particularly in the US.
Fast-food chain McDonald's should benefit from recent publicity for its plan to cut 80 per cent of waste from its 11,000 US restaurants and distribution depots by using less (and recycled) packaging and by encouraging outlets to use compost heaps.
The action followed an independent environmental audit by US group the Environmental Defense Fund, and is likely to filter through to UK operations.
BITC's environmental group, Business in the Environment, has developed a cross-industry awareness programme in the UK and published a best-practice guide for chief executives.
Consumer concerns are gradually spreading beyond the environment to other issues, including corporate attitudes to women's advancement, equal opportunities, animal testing and the third world.
Last year a Mori poll revealed that 71 per cent of adults would be more inclined to buy products from a company that supports the community and society than one that does not.
Some 85 per cent of respondents also reckoned such companies would be good to work for.
Public interest research group New Consumer added more pressure in March when it launched Changing Corporate Values, a revealing survey of 128 UK suppliers of consumer goods and services.
One controversial conclusion is that ‘corporate community charitable involvement remains very much a peripheral activity for most companies, even for those with fairly sophisticated programmes.’
Gerry Wade is public affairs manager at IBM and chairman of the Corporate Responsibility Group, an organisation representing community affairs managers at 30 companies.
He says that a lack of communication between the private sector and voluntary organisations has been an obstacle to the smooth development of community strategy in the UK.
‘They have different ways of doing things.
The priority for the 1990s will be agreeing in advance how to measure the results of a project.
But it is clear that companies should have a strategic approach to the issue just as they would with R&D.
With R&D they are looking for new products; with community programmes they are looking to develop an environment that is good for business.’
LOCAL INITIATIVES
NORTHERN PROMISE
In Newcastle, 145 companies have acted on concerns over education by forming a compact with local schools.
By helping teachers to set real-life problems for pupils, employers get a better class of recruit.
The north-east of England is battling to overcome its share of the social problems that beset the UK.
The region suffers high unemployment, rural as well as urban deprivation, and in many areas schools struggle to keep children on beyond the age of 16.
On the bright side, the area is attracting sizeable foreign investment, particularly from Japanese and Korean companies, and has a strong core of business and local government leaders fighting to pull it up by its bootstraps.
But, as everywhere in the UK, raising funds for community investment is becoming more difficult.
‘We have a few big employers who are always asked for money, but they are suffering from donor fatigue,’ says Paul Johnson, regional director for Business in the Community.
Northern Electric, British Telecom, Northern Rock Building Society, Scottish & Newcastle Breweries and Barclays Bank are among the regulars which help to finance local community projects.
But the brokers between the private sector and the community, such as BITC, say these sources may dry up in the recession.
‘It's the local guy made good who we are now trying to get to,’ says Ian Sharpe, a Barclays secondee working on the Newcastle Initiative (NI), a task force set up in 1988 to promote the city's renaissance.
‘Up to now, many of these people have been looking after themselves.
We want them to put something back into the community that has helped them grow.’
At present the same old names continue to back projects such as those underpinning the NI, which aims to promote the physical regeneration of Grey Street (Newcastle's high street), improve links with the 42 Japanese companies in the area, back publicity for the region and attack inner city problems.
Inner city .
The NI team, led by John Ward (also a Barclays secondee) and marketed by Sharpe, has targeted the Cruddas Park housing estate, which suffers some of the worst forms of inner city deprivation.
In 1988, 70 per cent of the estate's adults were unemployed and 49 per cent of the jobless had criminal records.
Break-ins were a daily occurrence.
Thirty per cent of the 1,500 residents moved out each year.
With government grants and private sector donations of £100,000, much of it from paper and plastics group Bunzl, NI set up a series of programmes to clean the estate and create more jobs.
Physical improvements and security measures such as controlled entry into each block of flats helped cut break-ins by a quarter and reduced resident turnover.
More than 100 jobs have also been found through a community employment and enterprise centre set up in the shopping centre and through a residents-run job club.
Last summer, six local women were encouraged to open a launderette on the estate and it is expected to make a profit of £1,500 in its first year.
Such advances are helping to chip away local employer prejudice against recruiting from the estate; Northern Electric and carbody manufacturer Vickers Pressings have taken on people recently.
Compacts .
Many companies are now acting on top executives' concern over education by forging closer ties with schools through compacts, which link performance at school to job or training opportunities.
Conceived in the US, they were pioneered in the UK by the London Enterprise Agency.
There are now more than 60 UK compacts in place, six in the north-east.
Sheelagh Clement-Jones, head teacher at Rutherford secondary school in Newcastle, welcomes the Newcastle compact.
‘Of course, we have to make sure they are not just using us for cannon fodder,’ she says.
‘But working with the private sector has enriched the curriculum and given pupils a look at real-life problems.’
In return for the offer of jobs, or training leading to jobs, pupils must meet performance targets in six areas including attendance, punctuality, homework and attitude.
‘There may be high unemployment in this area, but we still suffer from a skills shortage,’ says John Coltman, personnel director of Royal Mail Letters, a leading sponsor of the Newcastle compact.
‘Obviously the return we get is good in public relations terms, but what I'm searching for is a better quality of recruit.’
His part of the bargain is to devise, with teachers, methods of teaching subjects such as physics, geography or mathematics in the context of the Royal Mail's work.
One physics task involves pupils examining which laws of physics apply to packages dropping down a parcels  chute .
In geography, pupils are told that there are 21 Newcastles in the UK.
‘You need to know where they all are if you work for the Royal Mail,’ Coltman says.
The Newcastle compact has brought together 145 companies and two schools; two more schools will join the scheme in September.
It was launched with private sector backing, received its first government funding in April, and has already achieved results.
‘Of the 250 youngsters in the fifth year, we hope about 100 will come back in September to do A-levels or a one-year course,’ Clement-Jones says.
‘That's double last year's figure.’
For employers, such as the Royal Mail and British Telecom (whose secondee, Jim Moore, is the compact's director), the quality of new employees is improving.
‘Now we get recruits who are at least partly trained,’ Coltman says.
Enterprise .
In the late 1980s, Sir Ralph Halpern, then head of the Burton Group, decided to develop a community policy that reflected the interests and image of the design-led retailing group.
The result was the transformation of a derelict Burton distribution warehouse on the outskirts of Newcastle into a modern centre dedicated to small design businesses.
Burton, which added £500,000 to the £600,000 given in public sector grants, plus two secondees, also encouraged its suppliers to give help in kind.
Despite the present decline in the design sector, the centre, home to 25 companies from landscape architects to specialists in computer-aided design, manages to attract start-ups.
Many are run by design graduates from Newcastle Polytechnic, who in the past might have been forced to move to the south-east to find a career in design.
The companies share each other 's services.
‘The close proximity of the other design companies has opened up business opportunities for us,’ says Rita Brophy, marketing manager of graphic design company Stylehaus.
The centre itself, run by fulltime general manager Peter Rodger, turns over £4.5 million a year, based on income from work-space rental and training, conference and exhibition facilities.
Housebound workers .
Tyne Thames Technology (T3) was set up in early 1989 with funding from computer company North Tyneside Brass Tacks, BITC's city action team and the Telethon Trust, and a secondee from Northumbria Water, to develop home- and remote-working opportunities for people confined to the house.
It offers database management, desktop publishing and direct mail services and numbers IBM, Bowater, First Leisure and the Northumbria Tourist Board among its customers.
It has already trained six disabled people, generates £10,000 of sales a month and is hoping to extend training to single-parent families.
Environment .
By-products from the manufacturing processes of KP Foods and British Steel are key ingredients of a project pioneering environmental awareness in the north-east.
Starch from potatoes and acidic slag from steel-making — waste that used to end up in rivers or land-fill sites — are being combined to form a fertilizer rich in nitrogen.
The scheme is run by a team of environmentalists led by Jeff Morton at the two-year-old Botanic Centre in Middlesborough, set up with funding from ICI, British Steel, the Department of the Environment and Middlesborough Council, and also backed by Northern Electric and the Tioxide Group.
‘The environment is a marketing and new-products issue for companies,’ Morton says.
‘It creates good publicity for them as well as being good for the community.’
The centre also runs an environmental education centre offering courses in horticulture for the unemployed and schoolchildren, and develops awareness programmes for schools.
In June it ran the Dustbin Derby, a competition in which children had to identify and classify 100 different items of packaging found in an average dustbin.
‘It is important in such an industrialised area as Cleveland,’ Morton says.
INTERNATIONAL AWARENESS
WORLD SOLUTIONS
Compulsory rural work for graduate trainees at Unilever's Indian subsidiary is one example of corporate social responsibility going global.
BITC is helping the process with a series of international forums.
Why does Guinness sink money into an elephant reserve in Kenya and J. Sainsbury splash out on a dolphin patrol in the Far East?
Simple: Kenya is a market for Guinness products and Sainsbury needs to stop dolphins getting caught in the nets used to catch the tuna it sells in its supermarkets.
As companies become more global, their policies towards corporate social responsibility are going global too.
Mike Norton of the Directory of Social Change says UK-based international companies will find it harder to justify investing their community budgets exclusively at home.
‘If they make more money in Germany, say, than they do at home, they will need to reinvest more there,’ he says.
Robert Davies, chief executive of Business in the Community International (BITCI), set up in February 1990 under the auspices of the Prince of Wales to promote good community practice internationally, already perceives a ‘sea change in attitude’.
‘Chief executives of international companies want to spend more personal time on stakeholder issues,’ he says.
By ‘stakeholder’ Davies means staff and the local community, as well as shareholders.
‘Previously they were more interested in the charitable side.
But now look at corporate advertising.
Most big companies advertise their response to environmental issues.’
An important influence over this change has come from the US, where shareholders have stepped up the pressure to conform to good community practice.
‘In the past five years quoted companies in America have been questioned increasingly about equal opportunities, policies towards South Africa, purification of water supplies, product liability in overseas markets and so on,’ Davies says.
‘They have had to react to that.
Another impetus is the acquisition of US companies by UK businesses.
Grand Met's purchase of Pillsbury in 1988 was helped by its record in community affairs and its commitment to continuing Pillsbury's programmes.’
A BITCI survey last year revealed that business leaders, despite their good intentions, often lack the local know-how to tackle problems in specific countries.
To overcome this, and to encourage the heads of indigenous companies to establish community policies as well, BITCI has run forums for business leaders in Czechoslovakia, Hungary, India, Japan and Brazil.
In May 1990, in Hungary, the forum focused on bringing the enterprise culture to the evolving free market economy.
‘The Hungarian government has been asking us what questions it should put to companies wanting to invest there,’ Davies says.
British Petroleum is taking a lead in advising Hungarian (and Czech) industry on what to do about large-scale redundancies in a country where unemployment has been limited by law to little more than 5 per cent.
BP has considerable experience of rationalisation; along with much of the rest of UK manufacturing industry it reshaped itself during the early and mid-1980s.
‘Ten years ago we had four refineries.
Now we have one and a half,’ says John Cox, the BP manager charged with advising Hungarian industry.
Staff numbers at the refinery at Llandarcy in Wales, for example, were cut from 1,500 to 500 in the 1980s.
To help absorb the effects, BP set up a company called D'Arcy Developments, which aimed to help the unemployed set up in business.
Through the development of disused buildings on the refinery site and a £500,000 loan fund, 170 small businesses have been set up in the area, employing 1,200 local people.
Ironically, only a handful of the workers are redundant BP staff.
Though BP joined the Business Leaders' Forum (the international network of chief executives organised by BITCI) after a call from the Prince of Wales, it admits its support is not purely philanthropic.
‘All the oil companies want to expand their markets,’ Cox says.
‘And, of course, BP has commercial aspirations.’
In May, it opened a new petrol station in Hungary, to add to the 15 set up there in the early 1970s.
At the Japanese forum in November, the prince urged local companies to contribute towards making international business ‘world friendly’, a message regarded by some commentators as a veiled attack on Japanese corporations' environmental record.
But he praised their management techniques, which he urged them to share with the world's business community.
As a result, leaders of young Japanese companies agreed to take part in pilot projects to help young entrepreneurs in eastern Europe.
In India, local business leaders committed themselves to rural community projects following a BITCI forum held there in February.
Hindustan Lever, Unilever's Indian subsidiary, introduced compulsory rural work for graduate trainees as part of their induction programme.
And at the Brazilian forum in April, local business leaders debated the environment, crime, urban development and illiteracy.
‘They recognise that all these problems will become a drag on the development of Brazilian business,’ Davies says.
IBM is pioneering 90 community projects in Brazil, based on its own internal ‘quality circle’ programmes.
One team of employees applied quality management techniques in a São Paulo hospital, cutting the cross-infection rate between patients by a quarter.
Shell is also working on projects to help find training and work experience for some of Brazil's 13 million street children.
‘They are trying to match their interests with community needs,’ Davies says.
‘Brazilian business is aware of its reputation for destroying rainforests and for social injustice.
We want it to show it is interested in addressing that.’
Cynics believe that the forums have come about merely because royal patronage has made them a fashionable activity for business leaders seeking a knighthood.
But whatever the motive, international business is at least waking up to the fact that a social conscience can be good for business.
SAINSBURY'S STRATEGIES
MARKET FORCE
It has a former Friends of the Earth director as a policy adviser and it donates a penny to charity for every returned plastic carrier bag — two ways in which J. Sainsbury is setting out its stall as a leader on environmental issues.
J. Sainsbury's community investment manager, Eric Nicholls, knows about enlightened self-interest.
‘We feel it is our duty to put back something into the community,’ he says.
The supermarket group gave £1.3 million to community causes in 1990.
Education .
Sainsbury knows that young people planning their careers rarely put working in a supermarket at the top of their list.
This fact, and the implications of the coming shortage of teenagers, has led the company to make education the centrepiece of its community strategy.
Its Link schools programme aims to build relationships between each branch and three local schools.
‘That might involve talking to pupils about the history of shopping, lecturing them on the siting of a supermarket or having an environmental open day in a store,’ education manager Lesley Shanahan says.
Sainsbury refuses to give cash to education or to the NHS.
‘That is the government's responsibility,’ it says.
Environment .
Sainsbury won much publicity when it appointed former Friends of the Earth director Jonathan Porritt to be its environmental policy adviser.
He provides guidance to the company's environmental affairs committee, for example, in recommending environmental consultants.
‘It's more of an educational role,’ says Mike Samuel, Sainsbury's environment affairs manager.
‘We don't want him to be compromised.’
The company also sponsors the Blue Peter Green Book , a children's guide to the environment produced by the BBC TV programme.
In addition, it has provided £100,000 for a national environmental projects competition and backed dozens of local schemes.
Sainsbury is now encouraging customers to return plastic carrier bags for recycling, and pays a penny to charity for each one brought in.
Its target is to reduce bag use by 50 million a year and to donate £500,000 to charity.
‘The larger schemes do have a commercial benefit,’ Samuel says.
‘They get publicity and help sales.
They also help position Sainsbury as an environmental leader.’
Regeneration .
In 1987, in partnership with the London borough of Haringey, Sainsbury converted a redundant supermarket in Tottenham (the scene of riots in 1985) into a centre for small businesses.
Since then, 110 enterprises have set up in the centre's offices, retail outlets and workshops.