

SIMPLY THE BEST IN CLASSICAL MUSIC
The enormous range of music available on compact disc at considerably less than premium price is breathtaking and, as our current survey demonstrates again and again, there is no longer any direct relation between the cost of a CD and its quality or desirability.
Even those who insist on a modern digital recording, as distinct from digitally remastered analogue sound, will find a remarkably wide choice.
This is partly because of the great competition brought about by the flood of new records over the past two years which has prompted the major record companies to reissue at mid-price (and sometimes in the bargain range) many of the first generation of digital records made in the early 1980s.
The oldest and truest adage of the recording world is that newer is not necessarily better.
Many of the greatest and most rewarding performances belong to the analogue stereo LP era, and these records can offer an illusion of realism to compare with almost anything achieved more recently…
If we venture back further to the days of mono LPs and shellac 78-r.p.m. discs, the standard of music-making can be very special indeed and the sound often much better than we could possibly have expected.
Names of conductors such as conjure up the image of a very special kind of music-making, while instrumental soloists such as, bring memorable charismatic musical insights.
First recordings, too, can offer a freshness of discovery that is unique; one thinks here of an unforgettable record by Heifetz of the Glazunov Violin concerto , made while the composer was still alive, that has never been surpassed since.
Preserving the sound of the human voice has been a role of the phonographic/gramophone from its very earliest days, and many famous singers and outstanding performances are available on CD within the lower price ranges.
One of the joys of the Saga catalogue has been the reappearance of the earliest song recitals of Dame Janet Baker (as treasurable as the recorded presence of the late Kathleen Ferrier on Decca), whilst the vocal art of  is generously represented on the major labels.
There are stars galore in the operatic firmament, with , alongside  to say nothing of the many famous names featured in the historical anthologies.
Cassette alternatives are still available for a great many lower-priced recordings.
They are very economical and remain a viable buy because of their extreme portability, especially for use in the car, where CDs — with their wider dynamic range — have little advantage.
Moreover, just at the time when the tape medium is losing its prime hold on the marketplace, the manufacturing technology has been vastly improved so that the best cassettes can now give aural satisfaction, even on the most demanding domestic equipment.
However, the sheer convenience of the compact disc, and its ease of access, has established it as the prime carrier for prerecorded music in the foreseeable future.
‘Within the space of a few years THE PENGUIN GUIDE has become something of an institution, its status earned largely through a cheerful, informative ‘plain speaking’ style, copious entries, and attractive reader-friendly presentation’—Classic CD 
‘The author's scope and zeal are stunning, their standards of judgement and accuracy high’—Sunday Times 
MORE MUSIC FOR LESS NOTES — £10.99  
CONTENTS MAY
COVER STORY: Top pianist Alfred Brendel talks to JH in a revealing and musicologically fascinating interview (see page 18)
PHOTO: PHILIPS CLASSICS/DE ANDRADE
OPENERS
The Editorial Pages.
FOYER
Back to basics: agreement and disagreement in fundamental issues of reviewing recordings.
One criticism which is often levelled at record reviewers is their frequent inability to reach even a mild degree of consensus regarding ‘best’ versions.
Collectors can hardly have failed to notice the appearances back in March not only of Volume 1 of our survey of recommended mid- and budget priced recordings, but also a more selective ‘Top 100’ in two other publications.
The disparity between the various recommendations was by any standards extraordinary, with very few overlaps.
What on earth is the collector supposed to make of all this, and who should he or she believe?
Well, CD REVIEW of course— that goes without saying!
But, taking that for granted for one moment, just what standards do we apply when making such strong pleas on behalf of a recorded performance?
Surely a ‘top’ recommendation should satisfy as many critical parameters as is possible simultaneously?
Are we simply too soft on recordings generally?
Do we allow rose-tinted spectacles to distort our critical judgement when comparing an old personal favourite with the latest ‘pretender to the throne’?
Alternatively are we too quickly blinded by the sophistication of some new releases into dismissing older recordings on the basis of their ‘primitive’ technology?
A FEW MONTHS AGO I GAVE MY IMPRESSIONS of the sort of thing a typical record critic tends to look for in putting together a review.
Referring back to that list of priorities led me to address this thorny issue once more, only this time less from the point of view of a recording being merely compared with other recordings (or some mean recorded standard), than the level of execution which the scores themselves would appear to invite.
We too easily sit back and accept recordings as though they should be viewed inside a critical vacuum which is inhabited only by other recordings or recollections of ‘live’ performances.
What happens if we go back to the core, and have a really close look at what should be going on?
I am not suggesting that one should even form an interpretative overview, merely that details of notation, phrasing and articulation, tempo, dynamics and so on are considered alongside balance, texture, and even acoustical implications.
In other words, concentrating on the objective rather than the subjective.
Music is quite unlike any other art form.
Painting, architecture (as its most pure), and literature have a definitive form or text, and although the same can be said of drama whilst it remains on the printed page, its conversion to the performing medium allows a great deal more flexibility than music ever can.
If hamlet (or rather the actor playing him), catches a frog in his throat during a soliloquy, since one is experiencing a human drama this needn't be in the least distracting — indeed the element of human fallibility and frailty thus introduced could even enhance the impact of the performance (admittedly it could also be unintentionally quite hilarious)!
Music is very different altogether.
The score is sacrosanct (yes, even early scores where performers were left to improvise at will, since the original performing tradition is now lost to us), and except in relatively extreme cases normally gives a clear indication of exactly which notes should be played and when.
Even when the notation of early scores is open to interpretative prejudice, one must still ultimately work from a prepared text.
THEN IT'S OVER TO THE PERFORMER(S), AND it is here (at least in the Western Classical music tradition), that the point of contract for the great majority of music lovers occurs: not with the original text (as with paintings, architecture, novels, poetry, often even drama), but with the interpreter .
The trouble is that whereas actors move and speak as nature would have most of us do (only rather better), in the performance of music we are using tools (with the exception of the human voice) which are in some way external; they have to be mastered from without rather than from within — and things do go wrong.
Unlike our example of the coughing Hamlet (an unavoidable extension of natural human behaviour), performers who play wrong notes, chords, rhythms etc., or milder distortions of any of these, are quite simply wrong !
Now, in the context of a ‘live’ performance (a very good one, at least), this need not matter unduly if the spirit of the music has been captured successfully; but is this really enough for a recording?
For those of us lucky enough to be able to read and play music, it certainly can be, fore the mind can then override textual aberrations of this kind (providing they are not too excessive).
But what of those listeners whose only experience of the score is through performance by others?
Surely a recording for posterity (as opposed to a one-off ‘live’ experience), should not merely satisfy the performer's ego (my ‘Eroica’,my Heldenleben), but also the composer's intentions s far as they can be reliably gathered from the original score.
How many reviewers or (horrid word) critics actually listen to a recording from this point of view?
Do we ask: ‘How does this match up to Beethoven's original intentions?’ or ‘How does this compare to Philharmonia/Klemperer, BPO/Karajan etc.?’
The answer is probably somewhere in-between, with a  subconscious bias towards the latter; but even then we instinctively adjust our standards to a mean recording norm —‘One can only expect so much!’
But surely, if people feel they can produce something which will stand up to repeated inspection, one should expect only the very best.
Yet in the whole of recorded history, how many recordings truly satisfy all the major parameters, and do so consistently.
I CAN IMAGINE THE INDIGNANT HOWLS OF protest as collectors all over the country now run to their shelves to gather together a clutch of beloved performances.
But let's go back to our musical score for argument's sake orchestral, since most popular classical music involves the use of a large instrumental ensemble of some form or another.
How many orchestral recordings do you own of, say, a typical Romantic Symphony, where the orchestral playing is truly watertight of ensemble, where there's not a single moment when any one player or section is audibly ‘out of sync’ with the main ensemble?
Add to this the ensemble as a whole (unanimous though it may be) should delineate rhythms accurately, and execute pulse and tempo with uniformity.
Add to this that everyone should technical be able to get around all the notes (as well as together and in tune with everyone else)!
I realise that there are those who swear by recordings  which are distinguished by wrong notes, unstable rhythm, poor engineering, audience noise, and so on but which apparently realise the ‘meaning behind the notes’ like no other version.
One readily accepts this interpretative excellent, but what is the cost?
That's rather like having a King Lear spiritually emoting with an insight which may transcend any previous realisation, whilst unfortunately playing havoc with the syntax, changing and/or forgetting words, and mumbling so that certain words inaudible to the unaware onlooker can be understood only by the expert who knows the text!
Record reviewers criticise from the standpoint of their own knowledge and experience, which is at once a strength, but carries with it inherent weaknesses.
Should we criticise for those who read our work, or merely for ourselves?
The main dangers for the well-versed record critic are threefold.
On the one hand the sheer weight of new product can actually wear away at one's critical faculties so that any performance which maintains a reasonable degree of well engineered accuracy gets a thumbs-up.
Or, as a result of having heard most pieces played from just about every angle (backwards, sideways, upside-down), one can no longer endure certain pieces given with any degree of imprecision.
Or (as cited above), one might hold a particular performance as a ‘reference’, which gradually exerts such an influence that any newcomer simply doesn't  stand a chance .
In other words, a particular recording has defined the standard, rather than the work itself!
This may go some way towards explaining the difference of opinion in the various ‘recommended’ lists; it all depends from what point of view (or various shades thereof) one is approaching the task, and for whose benefit?
FOR EXAMPLE, LAST WEEK I WAS LISTENING to my favourite recorded of Paganini's First Violin Concerto , which I have treasured for many years, largely due to the soloists extraordinary playing.
Quite frankly, the accompaniment to Paganini Concertos is never likely to take a particularly high priority in any basic recommendation; but for the first time ever, I found myself listening almost exclusively to the accompaniment — I honestly wish I hadn't!
It soon became evident that the orchestra was fractionally behind on several entries — not enough to unsettle the soloist-aware listener, but after a while I was just waiting for it to happen.
Throughout the entire work, the accompaniment only picks up absolutely precisely on three occasions, and by the end I was all set metaphorically to murder the conductor!
Now this doesn't alter for one moment my recommendation of this as a superb performance, but I can well imagine a non-violinist, with less understanding of the extraordinary soloistic skill involved, homing in on and lambasting the accompaniment, giving only an average rating as a result.
Yet I know that if I were discussing a performance of, say, the ‘Eroica ’Symphony , I would come down like a ton of bricks on imprecise ensemble, where others would readily accept the fault if the interpretation was up to it!
In the context of the Paganini, I would argue that minor imprecisions do little to interfere (much as I would dearly do without them) with the focal point of the work — it's raison d'être, ie fabulous solo fiddle playing.
However, the ‘Eroica ’ is a far more complex beast, which I would argue is almost mortally wounded by such problems — harmonic progression, tempo control, articulation and rhythmic definition etc. (the very life blood of this particular work) all suffer as a result.
The critic's skill is to identify for each and every work just what the various priorities are, and apply those criteria  uniformly to every version.
It is the failure to do so which leads to critical anomalies.
It is interesting that when critics get together and discuss differences of opinion regarding certain recordings, these are almost certainly derived not so much from pure bias, as illfocused thinking.
I guarantee that if one were to sit down, go back to basics, and argue through the parameters as suggested exclusively by the score, and not from one's aural knowledge of the record catalogue (and that hoary old chestnut, a ‘classic’ version), one would encounter a far greater consensus of opinion than would appear initially to be the case.
Needless to say, CD REVIEW's contributors (including myself) all agree with one another one hundred per cent…
Happy listening to all our readers everywhere!
[Julian Haylock]
Julian Haylock [JH]: After eleven years of teaching music, and regular contributions to CDR since June 1990, now full-time Editor.
Studied at Trinity College of Music, London and won a First in Music at Newton Park (Bath).
Other musical diversions include conducting, leading and playing in a large number of amateur and semi-professional orchestras/chamber ensembles and writing 200+ sleeve notes for major classical record labels,.
Pastimes include listening to his vast record collection, cooking, photography and snooker.
Afire with interpretation?
What about the score?
The latest new from classical music scene.
PREVIEW
People and places, who's in the studio and who's releasing what with whom (the latter now revised and reverting to the end of this section).
PEOPLE IN THE NEWS — Chandos has announced two important signings —Richard Hickox (an announced in brief in a previous issue), and the BBC PO and new Principal Conductor Yan Pascal Tortelier; Hickox's contract is for a minimum of 27 releases (nine per year) including both choral and orchestral recordings.
Hickox will cover mainly English music (see our new release listings for details of the first Alwyn project ) and will include work with the Bournemouth SO, LSO City of London Sinfonia, early music ensemble Collegium Musicum '90 and Opera North.
First fruits of the BBC PO/Tortelier's three-year contract (also see below ) will be an all-Hindemith programme; the contract also allows for the BBC PO to record under the baton of Sir Edward Downes (plans are for Glière and Respighi recordings —see too our new release listings ).
The Lindsay Quartet are to perform the world première of Sir Michael Tippett's 5th String Quartet on the opening night of the Sheffield Chamber Music Festival (May 9th–23rd) at the Crucible Studio Theatre, the central venue for this year's Festival.
The US première will be given in Chicago in October.
The 1992 Festival's theme is English music, ranging from Byrd and Purcell to Britten and Tippett.
Other Festival highlights include a new children's opera by Christopher Brown entitled The Tow Lockets , and guest artists at the Festival include Peter Frankl, the Domus Piano Trio and The Nash Ensemble.
(Tickets and information:.
Conductor Odaline de la Martinez, who was responsible for founding the European Women's Orchestra, has launched a new label,Lontano Records , which is intended as a vehicle for the 20th century music ensemble, Lontano.
The label's début release will be Volume 1 of an anthology devoted to the work of British women composers, including the music of Dame Elizabeth Maconchy; the second Lontano disc will comprise the works of Villa-Lobos and is due for launch in July.
Lontano Records is distributed by New Note.
Bohuslav Martinů is  the subject of an hour-long film, ‘The Mystery of Bohuslav Martinů’, directed by Ken Russell.
It is to be screened by BBC 2 in May; Russell's film (part of a specially commissioned series entitled ‘Commissions and Collaborations’) takes the form of a detective story which examines the inspiration and work of the Czech composer.
The series begins on Sunday May 17th.
Those celebrating Rossini's ‘50th’(he was born in a leap year!) include Philips Classics, whose 1992 sextet of new Rossini releases will include in the spring:
1992 is however not just ‘Rossini Year’: also celebrating significant anniversaries are composers .
Pickwick has announced a series of IMP Masters recordings with the Solomon Trio (Rodney Friend [violin], Tim Hugh [cello]and Yonty Solomon [piano]); the trio's first two recordings are piano trios by Ravel, Debussy and Fauré (out April) and Beethoven's  (out May).
The Solomon Trio recorded their first disc in the acoustically ‘authentic’ music room of the 17th century mansion Highnam Court, near Gloucester.
[SB]
On the 29th of this month,Yan-Pascal Tortelier will be giving his farewell concert as Music Director of the Ulster Orchestra in the Usher Hall, before officially moving on to the BBC Philharmonic (see above ).
The programme is an all-Ravel affair consisting of the  (with Mikhail Rudy), and most interestingly of all, Yan Pascal's own orchestration of the Piano Trio .
This will then be recorded over the following three days alongside Debussy's La Mer and Printemps for the tenth and final volume in his highly successful Ravel/Debussy series for Chandos.
I rang Yan Pacal to find out how the orchestration had come about.
He explained that when he used to play the Ravel Trio with his family, they would often remark on the fullness of texture (particularly in the piano part) which almost cried out for orchestral treatment.
It was with his father Paul's encouragement that Pascal eventually set to work on the project, which has been ‘something of a labour of love over the last few years’.
The arrangement is dedicated to Pascal's mother and father and there is one further happy family connection: Feuillard, Paul's first important cello teacher, was the cellist at the Trio's première.
[JH].
IN THE STUDIO — Ronald Smith, Moray Welsh and James Clark are to record Alkan chamber music for Nimbus.
Melvyn Tan is recording Beethoven Piano Sonatas for EMI at Forde Abbey as part of the Beethoven Broadwood fortepiano project.
Gidon Kremer's first Teldec recording is the Beethoven Violin Concerto at the Stefaniensaal in July.
The RAF Central Band is recording a  programme for Classics for Pleasure which includes Bliss's .
Mariss Jansons has two May sessions for EMI with the Oslo PO:.
Andrew Davis and the BBC SO with Dame  Janet Baker are recording Elgar's 2nd Symphony, Sea Pictures for Teldec at Blackheath Concert Hall.
PHOTO; CHANDOS/CURZON
Hickox: exclusive Chandos signing with English music aim.
Martinů: Ken Russell biography on BBC 2 in May.
PHOTO: J. D. SCOTT
Yoel Levi belatedly receives our ‘CD of the Month’ award for his Atlanta SO Shostakovich 10 on Telarc (left to right: Levi, Conifer's Ricky Wenn and our own Steve Bobling).
Readers write to CD REVIEW.
If you would like to air a view, share knowledge or an opinion, write to: ‘DISCOURSE’,.
We regret that no personal correspondence can be entered into without a stamped-addressed envelope.
DISCOURSE
This month: breaking barriers (multi-culture meets singlemindedness), authenticism and information, the perfect ‘Swan’ and more.
Prize winner for this month's BEST LETTER goes to Robert Watson's ‘TV DISCOURTESY’(see below); why are music lovers, hooked by anonymous music accompanying a TV programme or film, kept in the dark?
Who can they turn to?
Robert will receive Hyperion's three-CD set of Shostakovich 24 Preludes & Fuges performed by Tatiana Nikolayeva (winner of this month's ‘CD of the Month’ for her Well-tempered Clavier) in the near future.
Next month's BEST LETTER will be receiving another top quality three-CD set, courtesy of Hyperion Records: Mendelssohn's 12 String symphonies, as performed by the London Festival Orchestra/Ross Pople ().
So get your fingers tapping or your pens flowing and grace these pages with your opinions!
TV DISCOURTESY?
I began to develop an interest in music in the early sixties, by a more or less accidental association: French film directors like Godard and Louis Malle used classical pieces evocatively and, sometimes, innovatively, and instead of confirming my extensive prejudices against anything beyond rock, blues and jazz, this exposure made music of the past appear unexpectedly fresh.
Quite properly the film credits would give precise details of the recordings used, with a separate credit for music composed specifically for that particular film.
It's a frequent irritation however that British television companies aren't obliged to give the credit that is so manifestly due, especially since, in the last few years, the quality and range of recorded music for dramas and documentaries has become as almost diverse as that used in European cinema over the last few decades.
I just caught the last few minutes of a Yorkshire TV documentary, ‘England's Last Wilderness’, with David Bellamy burbling about the Pennines.
Over this was a beautiful aria, probably well-known, though not to me.
A composer was credited for ‘Music’, but clearly he was not the composer of that extract, and yet I'm sure that even some of the people who wanted half an hour with the matey biologist would have welcomed the recording details.
If television companies have no legal obligation to acknowledge recorded music adequately, could one at least appeal to their collective conscience by mounting a modest campaign?
Do other viewers get frustrated too?
Maybe CD REVIEW'S readers are already sufficiently knowledgeable, but then there remains a principle, and a matter of courtesy.
ROBERT WATSON, EMLEY, HUDDERSFIELD
BARRIERS TOO
I get very annoyed when I read of selfish people trying to persuade you to change an excellent classical music review into a jazz magazine.
Why should jazz get preferential treatment?
Folk music has a long association with classical music, why not include that?
Lennon and McCartney have been favourably compared with Schubert; why not include pop music?
Progressive and New Age music are both considered serious music by their advocates, surely these deserve inclusion in a new-look CD REVIEW?
These types of music also have the advantage of a much wider appeal than jazz, a mainly middle-aged, middle-class interest.
Yes, let's break down the barriers completely and have a magazine that appeals to everybody, and read by nobody.
D. CUNLIFFE, ROCHDALE, LANCS.
No-one's suggesting the magazine returns to its dilute if all-encompassing format of several years ago; what we will be doing however, at certain times of the year, is responding to our reader's main requests and interests.
See my jazz feature in this issue for an example of what I mean; it hasn't meant less coverage of Classical Music but it will mean we're acting upon a good number of our readers' wishes .
[SB]
BOXED SETS TOO
There isn't much to add to what Mr. Kennedy wrote in your March issue except to agree with him.
To issue a number of discs of a set separately and then issue those discs in a boxed set with other discs not separately issued is simply dishonest.
Either issue all the discs separately before offering them in a boxed set, or issue the boxed set first and then issue the discs separately: that is the only fair and honest way of marketing complete sets.
But I am not all that keen on boxed sets anyway.
I am a collector who lives in a flat, and boxed sets take up much more space than separate discs.
This is why, wherever possible, I buy sets of works as separate CDs rather than in boxes.
Of course it is different with complete operas, but even then, there are elaborate boxes containing the discs and booklet ‘jewel cases’ complete with booklet and no outer box.
This is a much more sensible way of packaging operate and booklet from the point of view of the space-conscious collector.
I now come to a very controversial point on which I may be in a minority, but I think there is far too much written material with classical CDs.
I think all you need is a libretto translation in the case of opera and translations of Lieder, and brief biographical details in the case of the artists performing on the discs.
In reviewing some Scriabin discs in your March issue, RM wrote that ‘in some respects, of course, Scriabin acted as his own worst enemy by surrounding his works with a  pseudo-philosophical aura of largely incomprehensible mysticism’.
But isn't that exactly what these learned scholars do in every didactic essay that accompanies any CD of classical music?
The other day I bought the enchanting ASV CD of clarinet Concertos by  played by Emma Johnson and read the notes only as an afterthought this morning, having already listened to the disc several times.
My delighted reaction to this CD is exactly the same after reading the notes as before: this music — like any really worthwhile music — explains itself without the assistance of mundane words.
Even though I may be in a minority, I feel quite strongly that the job of the record companies is to issue recordings of music at prices the music loving public can afford — not to enhance that price by paying for learned disquisitions seeking to explain what ought to need no explanation.
If music lovers want to educate themselves, they can do so by learning about music from courses specifically designed for that purpose and from studying musical scores and books about music.
It is the job of the record issuing companies to make and issue good recordings of music to the public who want those records: it is  not the job of these companies to try to educate the public be delivering expensive and often long-winded lectures with their recordings.
These companies are in the business of selling, not in the business of education.
KEITH FAGAN, BECKENHAM, KENT.
STRAUSS-BASHING?
I refer to Mr. Andrew Kemp's review of the recording of Richard Strauss's Die Ägyptische Helena on pages 83–84 of the February issue of ‘CD Review’.
Mr. Kemp is entitled to his opinions but why he chooses to express them in such flippant and dismissive manner is puzzling.
He does himself little service, and your magazine even less, when he indulges in such unprofound, personal and wry comments.
Has Die Ägyptische Helena indeed ‘always been one of the least known of Richard Strauss's operas’?
And not content with berating Strauss he must move on to Hofmannsthal-bashing — an all too familiar exercise by those who read no German and are unable to find themselves moved by this sensitive poet's imaginings.
Was strauss really so ineffectual in five years'  correspondence with Hofmannsthal about the opera?
Does Mr. Kemp not recollect Hofmannsthal pointing out to Strauss that the more light-heartedly he could handle the composition, the better it would be?
Or Strauss requesting a chorus of elves?
Or Strauss congratulating the two of them on ‘this piece of poetry which is quite exceptionally suited to music’?
Or Hofmannsthal telling Strauss how ‘delighted and moved he was by the music’?
Or Strauss expressing his fears of the ‘Philistine, the obtuse vindictive critic’?
The plot may not be the simplest and most direct piece of story-telling that Hofmannsthal gave to strauss — but look below the surface and investigate the symbols.
Try reading the Greek legends.
Or even the Niebelungenlied if he prefers magic potions and omniscience from a colder climate?
Perhaps he would settle for the Magic Flute ?
I am delighted to share his wish for a modern recording of Die Liebe der Danae but is it ‘musically much superior’?
Does he not recall the trouble that Clemens Krauss had with the last act at the at the 1944 dress rehearsal?
But let's not make comparisons.
Let's discover the secrets in the libretti and scores.
R. J. SHELTON, HON.SECRETARY, RICHARD STRAUSS SOCIETY
DISC JUNKIES
Since getting the equipment two years ago, I've become an avid collector of compact discs — to a point little short of addiction.
Several pieces published nationally in recent months have commented on the ‘discjunkie’ /‘discophile’/‘recordophile’and hopefully I have some of their characteristics: ‘respectable’/‘intelligent’/‘almost always male’/‘almost always over 30’/‘looks like a solid member of the professional classes’/‘knows a thing or two about wine’/‘videos obscure foreign films on Channel 4’etc.
Moreover, disc junkies are said to spend hours happily bending over and going through the layers of CDs, are always hunting for a bargain and collectable item, and seldom believe in paying the full listed price.
However, my addiction goes further.
Apart from my regular CD collection, I can't resist promotional and sampler discs.
I have to have any magazine that displays a free disc (and I will even pay the full price for the magazine!).
This is how I came to know and subscribe to CD REVIEW whose cover-mounted CDs have been excellent.
Apart from the monthly element of surprise and the sheer enjoyment of listening, I wonder about the uses of a sampler.
Taking the latest — the Sennheiser ‘Great Classics’, for instance…
…one's musical horizon is continually being expanded: who is FINZI? this Clarinet Concerto is good and Finzi and his music will have to be sought out.
And VERDI, known only for the Operas and the Requiem : how much non-operatic music did he write?
More research needed and more discoveries ahead…
…always a keen fan of the great Hollywood musicals in their MGM heyday, I particularly liked ‘Slaughter on 10th Avenue’ but never intended to buy the piece — now I have this interesting and enjoyable version…
…the Mussorgsky and the Mozart are popular on freebies.
At this rate, I shall one day be able to put together a complete Pictures and Requiem …
…
Last Winter, queuing in New York early one Saturday morning for the next week's standing tickets at the Met (a tremendous set of experiences: to queue, to stand, to hear Opera at the Metropolitan), a young Yale Student commended me to COPLAND's 3rd Symphony .
I took this good advice and got the disc.
Now I have a new version of the 4th Movement to make a comparison…
And so-on.
To summarise: samplers are wonderful to collect, for increasing knowledge, adding gems to a collection, for making comparisons, for sampling before disc-junketing…
This is one addiction it's not so terrible to have.
JOHN BOARD GREAT YARMOUTH
THE PERFECT ‘SWAN’
Unused as I am to public scribbling, and tardy to boot(I've just read your December/January issue), I felt I had to thank you for saving me time and trouble (not to mention hard-won shekels), in a search for something which obviously does not exist.
I refer to IJ's review of the Tilson Thomas recording of Tchaikovsky's Swan Lake , in which he confirms the conclusion I was rapidly coming to — namely that the definitive version has not yet hatched!
I have been looking for a recording (with some difficulty), since not many shops are prepared to let me listen to different interpretations), indeed I purchased the Royal Opera House, Covent Garden/Marc Ermler offering only to be disappointed, all because I wanted CD sound quality to replace a home-made cassette of a live Radio 3 broadcast (should I be telling you this?)
I made from a proms concert ‘sometime in the '70s’— featuring the BBC Symphony Orchestra/Bernard Haitink (just the usual orchestral Suite).
I don't think that I was in a minority of one in finding this performance, particularly the absolutely shattering playing of the Finale, incredibly moving — the thunderous howl of approval that greeted the final chord bears that out.
If auntie Beeb has a decent tape of the performance I know of at least one customer for the CD transfer!
I haven't been brave enough to write to a publication of any sort before, but it is one of my favourite pieces of music, and this is the greatest performance I've ever heard (and I mean of anything ), so thanks for the opportunity.
AYLAND SPURR, HELENSBURGH, SCOTLAND
[Editor's Note: the opinions expressed in these pages are the opinions of the readers who write to CD REVIEW.
The magazine is not bound to agree with the opinions expressed .]
IMPRESSIONS
IN AT THE DEEP END
Julian Haylock chats with operatic bass Ferruccio Furlanette in Salzburg; thrown in ‘at the deep end’ with Karajan at the very beginning of his career, he is now in great demand.
WITHIN A RELATIVELY short period of time, Ferruccio Furlanetto has established himself as one of the most sought after of all operatic basses, recording for no less than five out of the world's six leading recording organisations.
Furlanetto highlights so far include Don Alfonso in  and an extraordinary  ‘double’— as the Count for Sir Colin Davis (BMG/RAC ), and Figaro for James Levine (DG ).
Both were recorded within only a week of each other!
I caught up with him at his villa just outside Salzburg, which overlooks a small  vineyard , set against an imposing mountainous backdrop.
Clearly success has brought furlanetto considerable financial rewards, yet he retains an unaffected, relaxed manner.
He positively brims with charm, suggesting that, like the proverbial Don, he has the enviable ability to turn it on at just the right moment.
HOWEVER, HIS SINGING CAREER STARTED in, of all places, the pop charts: ‘I was sixteen years old at the time, and at the end of the sixties it seemed just the thing to do.
I was playing guitar in a group which I ran for a while, and then had some success with a couple of singles.
However, I did not find the professional ambience all that conducive, but I knew I had to do something with my voice.
It was then, with my other's encouragement, that I started having lessons, and in 1975 I made my professional début.
‘After a couple of years singing one-liners and bit-parts, things really began to take off for me.
I made my La Scala début in 1979, then the ‘Met’ in ‘80, and then came my big break — my audition with von Karajan in ‘81.
I remember I was due at one in the afternoon, but he was so busy that he didn't manage to get me till nine in the evening, but which time all my nerves had thankfully evaporated, and I guess I sang pretty well as a result.
He rang me the next day, was very enthusiastic, but apologised that for the following two years he was only doing German opera — but that he would remember me!
‘Much to my surprise and delight, sure enough in ‘84 he contacted me and asked me to take part in the Mozart ‘Coronation’ Mass to be performed in front of the Pope the following year.
I also sang in  for him, but of course time was by then sadly running out.
Perhaps most memorable was a  which left me feeling as no other opera performance had ever done before.
As the curtain came down, I had to be physically shaken by a member of the cast in order to bring me down, so engrossed was I in my role, something which was almost entirely due to Karajan's extraordinary sympathy and understanding!
‘I can tell you, I never lose sight of just how lucky I have been.
But nevertheless, at that stage in your career, the tendency is to be in so much of a hurry, that if the opportunities present themselves, it all seems quite logical in a way.
Of course, when I look back at it all now, the thought terrifies me!
I guess the only really risky one was the ‘Met’ début — to arrive at such a  comparatively young age, and sing the Grand Inquisitor…!
But I was so lucky that with one exception, everything seemed to fall into place at exactly the right time.’
Had Furlanetto done his homework on the great singers of the past, simply in order to try and absorb something of the tradition in double-quick time?
Not a bit of it!
‘You know, it's funny but I've never really been asked this question before.
On reflection, there were certain singers of whom I was aware, but the extraordinary thing is that it all seemed to take its course quite naturally.
I was never aware of  consciously emulating anyone in particular at any point in my career.’
FURLANETTO PRIDES HIMSELF ON THE range of work which he chooses to undertake, particularly recently when he recorded the ‘other’Don Giovanni by Gazzaniga (see ‘Opera Reviews’ in this issue ).
‘It's a lovely piece, not on the same level as Mozart's, of course, but it's certainly instructive to hear even a lesser composer's point of view!
We decided to omit the recitatives because, quite frankly, they are not very interesting.
But the rest is certainly of sufficient interest to warrant a recording.
Leporello (under a different name), is the central character, and Don Giovanni is a tenor!
‘Mind you, I'd rather that than one production of Mozart's Don Giovanni which I'd really prefer to forget!
The producer had the idea that I should appear in a simply ludicrous costume: a German trench coat, knee-length open boots, a black leotard with the upper part of the thighs naked, and hair like Marlene Dietrich!
I refused point blank, but I'm afraid the reserve Giovanni had no choice but to go through with it!
Can you imagine what it was like?
We still have the photographs somewhere!
‘On the other side of the coin, there is so much to learn from the producers and conductors I now have the greatest privilege to work with.
Recently I've been working a lot under Muti, who is marvellous, particularly in Verdi and Mozart.
Abbado is also a joy, and Barenboim I would now count as a personal friend.
It was quite humbling to work with Karajan, and then of course I have such fond memories of Sinopoli in London, and Levine in New York.
When you are working alongside people of this sort of calibre, one has no excuse but to produce of one's very best!’
‘THEN THERE ARE MY COLLEAGUES IN THE ‘bass’ world.
My family is very friendly with both Leo Nucci, and Sam Ramey, who is my partner in everything — golf, cooking (and eating!), and goodness knows what else!
But it is a strange life when one sees one's friends for perhaps one month in the year, and then we all go our separate ways until we can grasp another opportunity — sometimes between flights at airports!
‘Not that I'm really complaining!
I'm lucky enough to have a diary full of opera engagements, and my recording schedule for the next couple of years is particularly exciting:Così with Mehta [See our interview in the next issue !— Ed.], a disc of Mozart arias, and a Magic Flute (all for Sony), a Don Carlos with Levine, a Verdi Requiem , all the Schubert Masses, a Verdi recital, some Russian bass/baritone duets, and a recital of Mussorgsky and Rachmaninov songs with Alexis Weissenberg!’
INTERVIEW
SLAVERY SERVICE?
Which role, with respect to the composer, does Alfred Brendell  fulfil ?
Julian Haylock talks to the distinguished pianist.
ALFRED BRENDEL IS WITHOUT doubt one of the most distinguished pianists of his generation.
Renowned for interpretations which balance intellectual control and musical spontaneity to perfection, he is also the author of two unusually illuminating book, and a recognised authority on the piano works of Schubert.
He is also quite charming, with an attractive dry sense of humour, as I soon discovered over a beautifully prepared meal at his spacious London home.
I began with the observation that there is an area of the repertoire (principally the First Viennese School) for which Brendel displays an obvious affinity, even to the exclusion of such major pianist/composers as Chopin and Rachmaninov.
AB:Well it was always fairly straightforward for me as far as the repertoire goes.
Of course I did study quite a bit of Chopin in my early years, and there was a brief ‘middle period’ during which I played one recital in Vienna consisting entirely of Chopin Polonaises and Liszt Rhapsodies!
But chopin is not my domain, although I do admire some of his works enormously.
When I was in my early twenties, it was my impression that there were basically two types of important player: the one that covered the central European repertoire, and the Chopin specialist, whose domain lay to a large extent outside the German tradition.
Now the situation has changed: Chopin has been gradually incorporated into the mainstream.
I heard Cortot play several concerts after the war, and these made me more aware than ever how important it is to give every ounce of yourself to Chopin if you want to play him well!
That specialisation means that you develop a highly idiosyncratic playing style — it's a bit like an exotic bird in the musical landscape of piano music.
Chopin was the only important composer who thought entirely in terms of the piano, whereas it was always essential for me to perceive piano music as a receptacle for all music possibilities — orchestral, vocal, you name it — and not something that is geared towards a certain vintage of a certain instrument.
There are very few exceptions among composers, of which Chopin is the shining example.
I should also mention the young Schumann, but then I have immediately to qualify: in his Symphonic Etudes,he consciously seeks an orchestral sonority.
I have tried to build up a repertoire that incorporates only pieces I can live with throughout an entire lifetime.
I have discovered those which for various reasons I did not feel comfortable with; on the other hand, there have been a few works which I could as my personal luxury!
In this way practising is hardly a burden, but something that gives a feedback of energy.
JH: In your first book (Musical Thoughts and Afterthoughts of 1976) you expressed the view that all modern day performances of the Classical repertoire should be considered as some form of arrangement.
Has the present interest in the ‘authentic’ school changed your attitude in any way?
AB:My first book was written very much under the influence of Busoni's aesthetics.
But I think it still holds true that many things on a modern piano sound and respond differently.
There are of course, certain similarities: one of them is the sustaining pedal which already works very well on a Mozart piano, although you have to use your knees on the earlier ones.
However, the basic thing for me is that most piano music is far more than something which is tailor-made for a certain instrument.
I feel that although on the modern piano we may lose a few colours, we ultimately gain more: a wider expressive range, increased dynamics, the possibility to suggest a full orchestra, and much greater ability to permit cantabile in the higher region of the instrument .
JH: Do you feel when listening to ‘authentic’ orchestral performances that there is an inevitable tendency for the musician to have at the root of his interpretation a whole series of experiences and influences which must at least  sub-consciously be drawn from the post-Wagnerian school?
AB:I agree with you that when listening to, say, Haydn's Symphonies Nos. 101 and 103 as conducted, for example, by Frans Brüggen, I feel grateful to hear finally what the music wanted to express, not just because of the orchestra, but also because of Mr. Brüggen, who seems to combine a profound knowledge of old instruments with the gift of characterisation, of modifying a tempo, of making transitions — let's say a whiff of Furtwängler's virtues.
Yet there are certain advantages with the modern orchestra; the violin section, for example, which often fails in an ‘authentic’ set-up to do justice to the importance of what the first violins, in particular , have to say.
I grew up with the balance and sound of the Vienna Philharmonic in the Grosse Musikvereinsaal, and I must say, listening to some of Furtwängler's performances recorded there, it still sounds good to me.
As for structural continuity, I am still very much in favour of the presently-maligned ‘long line’.
I have always been interested in musical declamation.
But I am not too keen on performances which concentrate entirely on rhetorical expression, and thereby lose both the singing quality, and the logic of the ‘long line’.
The urge to be rhetorical can result in a great deal of mannerism.
For instance, two-note groups being constantly played with a heavy first note and a curtained second one, or the first note under each slur produced with an accent.
This can be of value sometimes, but becomes misleading as a principle.
To give a counter-example: in a long line consisting of two-note groups, you may need to do the opposite and emphasise each second note.
To ‘sigh’ two-note groups seem to me appropriate only when the music really expresses a sigh!
JH: Something that Frans Brüggen mentioned when I met him recently [see JH's interview, CDR 9/91 — Ed. ]was the still prevalent post-Paganini reversal of performing interest, whereby the difficult appears effortless, and the facile of monumental significance.
Do you feel a certain sympathy with this point of view?
AB:I can certainly see his point, but I just wonder whether this is too much of a generalisation.
Take Scarlatti, for example; there are some very tricky sonatas which should not sound tricky at all .
The question is whether a certain complex passage should convey a struggle or not.
There are some very difficult passages which have to sound easy, and if they don't, then the performer has missed the point.
The performer's responsibility is to unfold the structure of a piece — to show why it hangs together — whilst simultaneously characterising the interplay of various contrasted musical elements.
Listening should be made to appear facile.
And of course there is music that remains rugged forever — for example Beethoven's Gross Fuge,of some of Busoni's late music.
It is sometimes very hard to define where music starts or ceases to be, complicated.
I think that Mozart's ‘Sonata Facile’, for example, is one of the hardest pieces in the repertoire, as any player of a certain age who is self-critical knows .
JH: I suppose the ideal must be that you drive headlong, for example, into the opening bars of the ‘Hammerklavier ’, or the opening piano cadenza of Brahms's B flat Concerto , you convey a musical imperativeness, but not technical frailty; that fine dividing line between suggesting the physical challenge without sounding as thought your technique is being pushed to the limits?
AB:Yes.
The first big solo of the Brahms B flat should give the impression, hopefully, of surmounted effort, but later on there are passages of the greatest intricacy that should emerge light as a feather.
If you make the double-note passages of the last movement sound laboured, you do Brahms no service at all.
Unlike the First Concerto,which in terms of its piano writing is completely honest, and where only the first movement's double trills need to be re-arranged to become audible, the Second Concerto requires some adjustments in order to serve Brahms's purpose, and not merely to make life easier for the pianist !
In the case of the B flat Concerto (and this is the only major piano work of this type that comes to mind), Brahms sometimes simply wrote down too many notes — unrestrained by the practicality of what you can actually play.
Yet the effect of what you can play should be that you hear what Brahms wrote down, even if you don't follow his notation absolutely to the dot.
As a matter of principle I always approach a piece from the purely musical side.
The music will tell you what to do, so you have to look for new technical solutions all the time.
That's why one's technique never stops developing.
There are many things that I can do now, but couldn't do as a young man, which contradicts the notion that in order to be a good instrumentalist you have to acquire a comprehensive technique i your teens.
JH: When launching, say, into Beethoven's Op. 2 No. 3 C major Sonata (for example), do you still find yourself thinking very much of ‘Beethoven the young lion’ announcing himself to the world?
AB:Indeed.
In some of these early Sonatas I even find the fortepiano to be of advantage, particularly in the first movement of Op. 7 where quick passages should come down like hail: the action is lighter, and the incisiveness of fast forte notes much bigger .
Ideally, one would need at least two instruments of different types for the Beethoven Sonatas.
Some like Op. 22 No. 3, Op. 7 or the ‘Waldstein’,demand a very brilliant piano, whereas others call for a deeper, more lyrical sound.
I want to re-study all of Beethoven's Sonatas carefully, and play only two programmes, or perhaps three, in one season starting next spring.
Incidentally, I listen for my own information and education to the early recordings of the Busch quartet to get the measure of what can be achieved, and what pianissimo and dolce really mean .
JH: Moving on to another great love of yours, Franz Schubert; I have always felt that he was in many ways cut short in his prime, almost as thought he was on the verge of finding himself creatively.
AB:The achievement of his later works is staggering, of course, but he could have gone on and developed who knows where.
Even as a dramatic composer, maybe something might have happened with the help of better libretti, considering how intuitively dramatic some of his Sonatas are.
As you know, I do not agree with those who see Schubert as a permanent lyricist.
Schubert's unfinished C major Sonata is in a sense a piano score of an orchestral work, but then of course, as with the ‘Wanderer’ Fantasy in the same key, the point is to turn the piano into an orchestra, with the help of longer pedals and a wider dynamic range.
Perhaps the last three Sonatas verge more on the side of a string quintet, after all they were roughly contemporaneous with the great C major String Quintet?
Remember also that the ‘Great’ C major Symphony was not composed, as had been assumed, in 1828, and that most of the writing was contemporary with the earlier D major Sonata,whose textures are so unmistakably orchestral in outline .
JH: It is notable that most of the music that you feel closest to responds (perhaps not all that surprisingly) particularly well to Schenkerian analysis.
Do you feel that Schenker has a lot to offer?
AB:I would be a fool if I didn't say Schenker was one of the few analysts we can rate seriously.
But although I am very interested in analysing, there are priorities.
I did some composing in my early years, so I have gained some modest experience of how a piece should hang together, and how it should be carried from the first note to the last.
It is always interesting to find reasons why a masterpiece is better than a merely ‘good’ piece.
One of the fields that interests me in particular is that of motivic connections.
Insights within this discipline do not usually have a direct bearing on my performances.
As for harmonic connections, I would not want to produce these too consciously.
If there is a change of harmonic outlook in a piece, I prefer to feel, rather than to know whether it might arrive as a surprise, whether it should be prepared and how, and whether it ought to be pointed out at all!
JH: Listening on how your interpretations have refined over the years, one almost gets the impression that you are striving towards a finite solution.
When you come to make a recording, do you treat this as an opportunity to synthesise all your learning and experience into the melting pot at one go, or do you still find yourself spontaneously adjusting even in the studio?
AB:It is really a bit of both.
My producers will tel you that I take much less time over my recordings than some wellknown colleagues.
I arrive well prepared, and know what I want.
this is not to suggest that I function like a computer (which would be anathema to me), for there is always something to react to, something new to learn, or to improve.
It is important to know what you want to get, and how far you want to go.
But, of course, it doesn't always work; I was listening to my second recording of the Liszt Sonata about a year ago, and found things there that did not satisfy me.
So I did record it again; let's see how far it has gone this time!
I see myself as a voluntary servant of the composer, not as his slave.
In dealing with compositions, it's like meeting a person; the person has certain characteristics, maybe he is kind, perhaps there are certain possibilities within him — unexplored potential — but he only functions within certain confinements.
It is the same with a piece of music.
You have to understand its confines, and to me a psychological understanding of this kind is essential.
JH: What are you working on at present, and are there any particular musical Everests left to climb?
AB:Most recently I have been playing Brahms's 2nd Concerto a great deal after a break of several years.
That started a whole new chain of experiences, both sorting out the piece from scratch all over again, and finding out how to cope with such a monumental work technically without ruining my physique (I am not quite as young as I was)!
It gave me great pleasure to play it with Abbado and the Berlin Philharmonic at the Proms, and in Salzburg, Lucerne, Berlin, and Japan.
The CD should be out any day!
For my return to the Beethoven sonatas, I have devised a new playing order which keeps together groups of pieces that are under one opus number or adjacent.
To give you some examples, the first programme will consist of the three Sonatas Op. 10 and the ‘Hammerklavier’,the second of the three Sonatas Op. 31 with Op. 101.
The last programme will have Op. 109, 110, & 111.
Then there is still one desirable goal — to play Bach's ‘Goldberg’ Variations.
Whether I reach it remains to be seen !
IMPRESSIONS
PRODUCTION STANDARD
Peter Brown talks to producer Andrew Keener, self-styled ‘worried goldfish’ and artist's safety net.
ANDREW KEENER IS MUCH IN demand as one of the leading freelance record producers in the business.
One time music journalist and stop-gap producer for Radio 3, he started in the industry after a B. Mus. at Edinburgh and a spell of teaching, by asking for a job at the sadly missed EMG, then in Soho Square.
‘Very much the gentleman's record shop,’ says Keener, ‘chaps used to come in and say ‘could you send these records through the diplomatic bag’?’
That shop was a springboard for many people: Janet Osborn of CBS and Chandos; Quita Chavez of Gramophone ; Ted Perry, founder of Hyperion, and many others.’
Gradually, through Keener's experience at the BBC and his writing activities, came opportunities to visit recording studios to interview artists.
This planted the seed in his mind that perhaps the work of a record producer could be interesting.
‘I was working in the shop one day in 1979 when Ted Perry came in and announced ‘I'm starting a new label’.
Without hesitation I said, ‘That's nice, do you want a record producer?’
It was a case of being 24 and not knowing what I know now.’
Keener's first record for Hyperion was 1980's ‘The Virtuoso Mandolin’ with Keith Harris and pianist Leslie Howard.
His journalism continued for a while until the mid '80s when he decided to concentrate purely on recording.
Keener has little technical background, but was always a record nut, having started collecting at the age of five or six.
He still remembers the first record he bought — Frank Philips narrating Peter and the Wolf on Ace of Clubs with Britten's Young Person's Guide (LPO/Concertgebouw/van Beinum).
Keener feels that his lack of technical background is a distinct advantage; it also means that he sets a large amount of trust in the engineers he is working with.
‘Chris Bishop of EMI once said ‘without a good engineer, a producer is los’.
That's absolutely true as far as I am concerned.
There are producers who have a far greater knowledge of microphone techniques, and characteristics; but if I have a good engineer who is musically intelligent as well as technically adept, then I have a very direct input into the kind of sound I want.
I look upon myself as the kind of producer who is more of a musical supervisor, someone who is responsible for the artistic liaison between the artist and the nature of the finished product.
A kind of midwife if you like.’
Are record producers really necessary given the presence of artists and engineers?
Steven Isserlis has said that he needs ‘a safety net not to have to worry whether I've ever played this or that bar properly during the session and also someone who knows the kind of musical personality I am and whether I have covered a particular stretch of music the way I would want.
This means someone who knows what makes an artist tick and what he would like — a father confessor or counsellor if you like’.
Some people might say that's interventionist.
Andrew Keener believes one of the biggest interventionist producers of all time was Walter Legge.
‘He could afford to be.
He owned the orchestra and was married to Elisabeth Schwarzkopf, one of the greatest sopranos in the last half century.
He had the kind of hutzpah and powerful personality combined with a musical and intelligence that one could either resent strongly or admire and take on board.’
Keener believes the producer ‘should serve the artist but not be subservient — there is a distinction!
The producer should know the score, not in the same way as a conductor, but perhaps in the manner of a good driver who does not know what goes on underneath the bonnet but who can handle a car very well and one who knows exactly what to do if the car breaks down.
I can conduct in front of the mirror, but if I was conducting an orchestra and something went wrong I could not put it back on the rails again.’
Keener's own musical tastes are pretty catholic, but he especially admires late 19th and 20th century British music.
‘I could not live without the Elgar and Vaughan Williams Symphonies.’
Beethoven and Brahms also loom large, as does Mendelssohn.
His blind spots tend to be Bartók and Stravinsky —‘especially when he is in what I call his ‘wrong note’ mode, like in the ‘Pulcinella’Gavotte where he is deliberately a bar out with his ‘Alberti bass’.
My enthusiasm can be aroused very easily, however.
If I am in a studio and initially feel slightly lukewarm towards a particular piece I find it does not last very long because I soon get caught up with the work of a strong artist.
I love music passionately.
‘Among the classics, Mozart, Haydn and of course Bach, are very close to my heart.
Earlier than that I have a problem and it is my problem; if you look at the 500 or so records I have produced there is quite a small percentage either on original instruments or of pre-Classical music.
This is probably because I have a romantic disposition.
Let's be frank, there are other producers who have studied this area in more depth than I and they do it far better.
This said, I have recorded Poppea on original instruments for Virgin and enjoyed it immensely.’
Kenner is a strong believer in digital recording techniques, although he thinks the greatest danger with hi-fi purism is that one starts splitting hairs.
‘The differences between various digital formats are far less than between microphone placings.
The difference between a DAT machine working within specification and a master recording on a PCM 1630 are infinitely smaller than the differences occasioned by how well the microphones had been set up.’
Keener looks for the right sound rather than dictating where microphones should be.
He has not done a lot of opera but thinks that it is just the way things worked out.
‘The Opera London production of A Midsummer Night's Dream gave me great pleasure,Noye's Fludde too.’
After a dozen years in the business Keener looks with particular affection on the recordings he has done with Leonard Slatkin, especially the Elgar and Vaughan Williams Symphonies.
‘He knows what makes this music tick and is passionate about it.
He is one of the finest non-Brit conductors of British music I know.
Both Previn and Slatkin are what I call ‘session-wise’.
When I come away from working with Slatkin I always feel more mentally alert than when I started.
He has a very good knowledge and superb technique which enable him to sue every second of studio time.
We talk very freely, always using the talkback, never the phone.
There is no artist with whom I am more frank, because I admire the man tremendously and need not by sycophantic.
I hope this comes through in the recordings.
‘I also feel very close to Steven Isserlis and the group Domus ever since I did the Fauré Piano Quartets for Hyperion.
Actually I like most of the artists I work with.
I am a great admirer of Vernon Handley too, especially his Vaughan Williams Fifth Symphony , the Guildhall String Ensemble in Stravinksy's Apollo , Rachmaninov Symphony No. 2 by Andrew Litton (who is wonderful to work with), and also my work with Sir Charles Mackerras.
Very special for me too is the recording of Brahms's Violin Sonatas for Hyperion with Krysia Osostowicz and Susan Tomes.’
Keener has looked after all Nigel Kennedy's recordings except the first (the Elgar Sonata for Chandos) including the recent Brahms Violin Concerto for EMI.
‘I am especially fond of the Walton Concertos disc; it has a marvellous Waltonian conductor in André Previn and shows a side of Nigel that has perhaps been overlooked amid the hype and publicity.
He is playing Concertos that are not in the popular mainstream, and in the case of the Viola Concerto , not on his first instrument.
Both show him to be fundamentally a very serious musician.
The thing about Kennedy is that every time I hear he has done something outrageous I think ‘Oh God!’, but then I spend a few hours working with him and leave thinking what a good heart he has and how serious he is as a musician.
Whether there are better or less good violinists is irrelevant: Nigel is his won man in both personality and musicianship.
‘Steven Isserlis is different again.
He has a wonderful, whimsical sense of humour and a very good line in insults.
He calls me the ‘worried goldfish’.’
(A view prompted by the sight of Keener in the control box at Abbey Road).
Keener recalls few disappointments or disagreements in his career.
‘Part of the art of doing this job well is the ability to know when, if you press too hard, you will get a negative or hostile response.
You have to sense that coming a little while in advance and if you think someone is going to throw a tantrum, you hold back.
It only comes with experience and instinct for the personalities involved.’
Looking into the future, Keener wonders whether a new music carrier will be required to take the industry forward.
‘A major question lies over laserdisc and whether it is going to take off.
It is fascinating to see Toscanini, Rubinstein, Heifetz etc., and I don't feel the same excitement about watching today's musicians, our descendants will probably feel differently.
Perhaps too the medium is taking over from the message.
It's significant that when I get home at night and want to listen to a record for pleasure I usually choose a disc made over 30 years ago — the message survives the medium to an astonishing extent in the best old records.
We can become too obsessive about the medium and too many performances are recorded nowadays anyway.’
Keener particularly enjoys working with contemporary composers and talks warmly of his sessions with Sir Michael Tippett, Robert Saxton, Robert Simpson and John Tavener.
‘So far as working with composers is concerned, providing you do not alienate them, they become more relaxed and their advice is more balanced because there is no hierarchy.
If as frequently happens there is a dialogue between a composer and performer, I see no reason why there should not be a similar relationship between a composer and a record producer.’
REVIEW
REVIEWS INDEX
FEATURE
FEATURE REVIEWS
SULLIVAN SCORES 150
Define a Sullivan fan?
Easy — someone for whom the composer's name does not always come after the words ‘Gilbert and’.
After all, it was not the operettas but the Symphony , choral works and other ‘serious’ compositions which won Arthur Sullivan and knighthood.
yet the revival of his ‘non-Gilbert’ works has hardly caught fire in time to mark the 150th anniversary of his birth in London on May 13th 1842.
No company seized the opportunity to record Sir Charles Mackerras's fine performance in 1986 of The Golden Legend , the last and best of the major choral works.
Sullivan's one grand opera,Ivanhoe , issued by Pearl () under the sponsorship of the Sir Arthur Sullivan Society, suffered from cost-cutting, both musically and technically.
What is more, the ‘lost’Cello Concerto , reconstructed by Mackerras and David Mackie for Julian Lloyd Webber's recording on EMI in 1986, proved a weak work and does not survive into the current catalogue.
But the D'Oyly Carte Opera Company marches on, doughty purveyors of traditional G & S. Its cessation of activities in 1981 looked final, but the company underwent a rebirth four years ago and is once again currently on a national tour with The Mikado and The Yeomen of the Guard .
Simultaneously, from That's Entertainment Records (TER), a lifeline for lovers of classical operetta, come D'Oyly Carte recordings of The Gondoliers () and Iolanthe ().
For anyone not already familiar with these works, the presentation is unhelpful.
Spoken dialogue being omitted, synopses are provided which make it absolutely impossible to tell where the musical numbers occur and what they have to do with the plot.
Potential buyers who do know the works well are likely to find these performances (under the company's new Music Director, John Pryce-Jones) decent but unremarkable, though enhanced by the brightly appealing sound.
The sole outstanding feature comes in Richard Suart's scintillating interpretation of the two chief comic roles.
As the lord Chancellor in Ioanthe , he delivers the famous ‘Nightmare Song’ with a combination of verve, musical richness and verbal clarify which I doubt has ever been surpassed.
With equal relish he portrays the Duke of Plaza-Toro in the Gondoliers (who ‘led his regiment from behind’).
The company also parades a fine bass, John Rath, respectively as Private Willis and the Grand Inquisitor.
Curiously enough, special interest is provided by music which is on the discs, but not mentioned on the front of the boxes!
The Iolanthe set provides what is called a ‘bonus track’(actually five tracks) of orchestral dance-numbers which have been recently identified as coming from Gilbert and Sullivan's very first collaboration,Thespis (Gaiety Theatre, 1871), of which no complete score survives.
Though lasting only some eight minutes, these unpretentious, vivacious pieces are welcome as a first-ever recording.
The Gondoliers likewise provides a bonus — the best of all Sullivan's orchestral pieces, called by him Overtura di Ballo (though here, as usual, the bogus-Italian overtura has taken on its conventional form).
The work has had several recordings: I would love a re-issue of Sir Charles Grove's together with Sullivan's Symphony ().
Unfortunately here Pryce-Jones chooses gratuitously to restore a section of the work which the composer (wisely) cut before publication.
Another example, I'm afraid, of the impertinence of conductors in supposing that composers who had second thoughts were necessarily hankering after their first versions all the time.
[Arthur Jacobs]
[Arthur  Jacobs'  book Arthur Sullivan: A Victorian Composer,from Solar Press, appears in a new edition this month, at £35.00 — Ed.]
STOP PRESS: As we went to press, EMI announced a series of re-issue CDs in celebration of Arthur Sullivan and his work with W.S. Gilbert.
The G&S operettas will be released in September, coupled with (c/w) with the following Sullivan works:Patience (c/w the ‘Irish Symphony in E : Pirates of Penzance (c/w the overtures The  Sorcerer , Princess Ida, Cox and Box and the Overture in C ‘In Memoriam’); Ruddigore (c/w incidental music to The Tempest and The Merchant of Venice Suite); Iolanthe (c/w Overtura di Ballo); The Mikado; The Gondoliers; HMS Pinafore; The Yeomen of the Guard ; ‘Gilbert and Sullivan Gala’.
All the operettas are cond.
Sargent, and the ‘Gala’ CD by Richard Hickox.
All are at mid-price.
And then there's also the imminent release of the ‘all-star’ Mackerras Mikado on Telarc (see review in a forthcoming issue).
[SB]
WOOLIES' CLASSICAL ASPECTS
While making no claim to be a specialist retailer of classical CDs, in recent years Woolworths performed a great service to collectors as the exclusive distributors of the much-acclaimed Naxos label.
That particular arrangement is now, of course, at an end, but Entertainment UK in conjunction with Conifer have produced two new labels — the budget-priced ‘Aspects’ and the mid-priced ‘Classics’— which feature recordings described as ‘selected from a wide range of lively independent record labels’, and which will be sold solely through Woolworths stores.
The first ‘Aspects’ discs to come my way encompass a wide musical spectrum.
First there is the Franz Liszt CO under the direction of Janos Rolla in an all- Mozart programme (): the Divertimentos in D major K.136 and B flat major K.137, the Serenata Notturna K.239 , the C minor Adagio and Fugue K.546 , and the ubiquitous Eine kleine Nachtmusik K.525 .
Other recordings in this repertoire by these particular artists on the Hungaroton label have garnered much praise, and that can only be echoed in this case too.
Performances are idiomatic, with well sprung rhythms and sensibly chosen tempi, and benefit from a generally cool and restrained approach.
This would, in fact, make  an  ideal introduction to the works, were it not for the fact that the packaging completely misleads the purchaser as to the playing order of the music: it is listed as (in order)— but the disc actually plays , so that there's not a single track which corresponds with the one listed in the sleeve note!
In a series ‘designed to open the door to classical music’, it would help if the door led into the right house!
More Mozart appears on something of a rag-bag disc (), whose only common thread is the conductor Geoffrey Simon.
Mozart's Clarinet Concerto K622 receives a straightforward and competent — if somewhat literal and earthbound — performance from both the (inexcusably unnamed) soloist and the English Chamber Orchestra, and Sibelius's Swan of Tuonela (played by the Philharmonia on a rather congested and opaque recording) similarly lacks sufficient grace and poetry.
Rimsky-Korsakov's Capriccio Espagnol provides an opportunity for the LSO to display its glittering virtuosity in one of the great orchestral showpieces — although there's not enough hot Spanish sun here for my taste — and they then round the disc off with Grieg's Two Elegaic [sic]Melodies , which are well enough played, but add little to the overall attractiveness of the disc.
Jean-Philippe Collard: to class Fauré performances on ‘Rouge et Noire’(see page 30).
Rimsky-Korsakov's ever-popular symphonic suite Sheherazade is coupled with Mussorgsky's Pictures at an Exhibition in the usual orchestration by Ravel ().
The Rimsky comes in a performance by the Monte-Carlo PO under Lawrence Foster, while our guide to Victor Hartmann's paintings (which, could never, I'm sure, live up to the music they inspired), is Alain Lombard, who directs the Strasbourg PO.
These are both recommendable performances: the Monte-Carlo orchestra, in particular, is on top form, and plays this familiar music for all its worth, so that it comes up as fresh as it must have sounded in St. Petersburg a century ago.
Lombard's Pictures may lack the last degree of individual characterisation, but at budget price this version can be given a warm welcome.
Unfortunately, the packaging of the music is once again deficient:Sheherazade gets only two separate bands rather than four, while the individual sections of Pictures aren't divided into separate tracks.
To cap it all, the sleeve reports that the Mussorgsky occupies track one, and the Rimsky tracks two and three: in reality Sheherazade gets tracks one and two, while track three is the one allocated to Pictures !
Two more Russian favourites now:Tchaikovsky's ‘Pathétique’ Symphony, and Mussorgsky's Night on the Bare Mountain .
Given that the conductor is Rudolf Barshai, this was a disc of which I had high expectations, and the musicians of the Vancouver SO play the score with an admirable combination of restraint and accuracy which provides, in the end, a rather more affecting experience than some of the more histrionic versions one could name.
There may be more sheerly exciting accounts of the ‘Pathétique’ in the catalogue, but as a sound choice at bargain price — perhaps for a newcomer to the music — this would be a hard one to beat.
That great orchestral war-horse, Mussorgsky's Night on a Bare Mountain , comes off equally well, the orchestra playing with a winning combination of sheer gusto and precision.
We are, though, left with the question of exactly which orchestra we have had the pleasure of listening to: while the back cover of the jewel case states that both works have been played by the Canadians under Barshai, the inner notes suggest (unbelievably) that one of them may have been performed by the Bournemouth Sinfonietta under Norman Del Mar!
Another Canadian orchestra — the Toronto SO conducted by Andrew Davis — pops up on the all- Beethoven programme , consisting of the ‘Emperor’ Concerto, the Fantasia for Piano, Chorus and Orchestra , and the King Stephen Overture , and the King Stephen Overture .
Anton Kuerti provides a vibrant and characterful solo contribution in the Concerto (though the slow movement is distinctly short on poetry), and the orchestra rises to the occasion well.
The far less frequently heard (and recorded)Fantasia goes with a swing — the members of the Toronto Mendelssohn Choir adding their contribution with not only enthusiasm but also some subtlety — and the Overture rounds off a generally recommendable disc.
The ‘Aspects’‘Baroque Sampler’(), with the Toronto SO again under Andrew Davis, is a collection of such favourites as Pachelbel's Canon , Albinoni's Adagio , and Jeremiah Clarke's Trumpet Voluntary .
Purists may not be too keen on the ‘big band’ approach, but these are nonetheless vital and energetic performances which convey much enthusiasm, and would probably serve as a more palatable introduction to seventeenth and eighteenth century music for the newcomer than some of the odder products of the ‘authentic’movement.
Oddly enough, great claims of ‘authenticity’(‘First recordings of the original…
Scores’) are made on a disc of the original music of George Gershwin ().
Alicia Zizzo is the soloist in the Rhapsody in Blue and the Piano Concerto in F , and also plays the original 1919 piano version of the Lullaby ; she is accompanied by the George Gershwin Festival Orchestra under Michael Charry, and they contribute the Cuban Overture of 1932 as well.
The latter is certainly played with great energy although even such a generally obvious piece such as this would have benefitted from heightened sensitivity: Gershwin was, after all, influenced not just by the vibrant colours of the tropics but by their warmth as well.
Zizzo plays the Concerto well enough, capturing the atmosphere of Broadway effectively, while still relating the work to its classical roots (natural son of Rachmaninov in places), and the orchestra, clearly happier in this idiom than int he Overture , provides fine support.
The Rhapsody in Blue brings the most effective performances on the disc, but even at this price level the competition is so intense (Gwenneth Pryor on Pickwick ; Jerome Lowenthal on Vanguard ; CfP's Daniel Blumenthal) that only a general recommendation can be given.
The Scott Joplin revival of the '60s and '70s — with the complete piano works on an RCA boxed set, and the naive but worthy opera Treemonisha on DG no less!— seems to have run its course.
But John Arpin's well recorded selection of fourteen piano rags, waltzes and dances () can still be welcomed.
The opening Maple Leaf Rag is an unfortunately hard-driven introduction to the set, but matters improve thereafter with more subtlety and refinement in the less fraught pieces.
For really top class Joplin you need pay only a little more for a selection from Dick Hyman's complete survey mentioned above, but at less than a fiver, Arpin's disc will do very nicely for a representative sample of Joplin — which is really all I can take in a single sitting!
The remaining two discs in my ‘Aspects’ batch are both based on the musical theatre:‘Broadway Favourites!(), features the Winnipeg SO under Erich Kunzel in a very well played selection of numbers from My Fair Lady, Lady Be Good, Annie Get Your Gun, The Fantasticks, Man of La Mancha, Guys and Dolls, Cats and a suite of waltzes based on the music of Richard Rodgers.
All very ‘Friday Night is Music Night’ and, as listening figures show, there's clearly nothing wrong with that!
The talented baritone is left scandalously anonymous.
The artists on the disc entitled ‘Films and Shows’(), are, on the other hand, far from anonymous and include Sarah Brightman no less.
There are selections from Oliver!,
Snoopy, The Wizard of Oz,, and The Nightingale — all sung, in general, with commitment and enthusiasm.
The boys of King's College School (not King's college, as listed on the cover) perform with appropriate gusto in the Lionel Bart numbers, and there are strong contributions from the adult professionals and the National So under John Owen Edwards.
The songs from Snoopy and The Nightingale are not so immediately appealing to anyone who doesn't know the shows, but the casts are strong and put the numbers across with confidence and verve.
The music of The Wizard of Oz is, of course, more familiar to most people, and it's performed well here: Gillian Beven's Dorothy, very much in the Judy Garland mould, is featured in every strong, providing sound foundation for each, and my only real grouch was that the children's chorus was far less easy on the ear than that used in Oliver .
If ‘Aspects’ is a bargain priced label, then the other new exclusive Woolworths series ‘The Classics’is in the middle range (currently £7.99 per disc).
Our first taste  features the clarinetist James Campbell and the National Arts Centre Orchestra of Canada conducted by Franz-Paul Decker:Mozart's Clarinet Concerto K622 is coupled with the big one by Copland, and the Weber's Concertino for clarinet and orchestra.
The opening of the Mozart reveals an excellent orchestral ensemble, and the soloist's contribution is individual and well-characterised, making this a very desirable version indeed.
Copland's lovely, lyrical work, with a strong element of jazz in the final section, receives another excellent performance — although it fails to dislodge the uniquely  authoritative account recorded by Benny Goodman (who commissioned the work) and the composer — and Decker is equally masterly and convincing in the very different requirements of Weber's lighthearted Concertino .
An impressive set of performances, then, though at a total playing time of less than 57 minutes it should surely have been possible to fit in another item.
An all- Tchaikovsky programme by the Dallas SO conducted by Eduardo Mata () includes a lively Cossack Dance from Mazeppa is followed by the 1883 Coronation March for Tsar Alexander III (with the references to the Imperial national anthem — so often excised in Soviet recordings — all intact),Romeo and Juliet, Marche Slave and the 1812 Overture .
All are given relatively straight interpretations, and remain resolutely unexciting and, indeed, uninteresting.
Even the 1812's ‘digitally recorded canons [sic][!]’, due to which we are cautioned to ‘use extreme care in selecting playback volume’, fail to get the adrenalin flowing.
We're back off north again to Canada on, with pianist Arthur Ozolins, accompanied by the Toronto SO under Mario Bernardi, offering Rachmaninov's First Concerto ,Dohnáyi's substantial yet witty Variations on a Nursery Song , and the famous Scherzo from Litolff's Concerto Symphonique No. 4 ().
Ozoloins has a strong musical personality as well as the necessary technique for these works, and together they make up an attractive package if once again(at less than 59 minutes in total) a somewhat short-weight one.
The Dohnányi comes off particularly with the Toronto Orchestra revelling in their tongue-in-cheek opening tutti, and Ozolins successfully keeping a straight face in the solo part: an enjoyable alternative to the classic recording by the composer and Sir Adrian Boult (on EMI and mid-price).
It's good, too to welcome a performance of the Litolff which may well have been over-played in the past but which still deserves an occasional outing.
Much over-played these days, on the other hand, is the Rodrigo Concierto de Aranjuez which turns up along with the Five Preludes for solo guitar by Villa-Lobos , and his lyrical Concerto for guitar and small orchestra (.
The soloist throughout is the estimable Norbert Kraft, and this label's predilection for Canadian ensembles introduces us this time to the Winnipeg SO under Kazuhiro Koizumi.
With an appropriately warmer acoustic than some of the other recordings in this series, these are sound and generally idiomatic performances which can hold their own with their rivals in this price range.
I might have wished for a little less detachment in the Rodrigo (the adagio in particular is rather cool), but the Villa-Lobos offerings suit Kraft down to the ground.
Unfortunately, RCA's mid-priced issue  issues exactly the same works played incomparably by Julian Bream and the LSO under Previn — and that remains musically the better buy.
The label's ‘Shostakovich Film Festival’() is music from The Gadfly, Five Days and Five Nights, Hamlet — and, more dubiously, the Tahiti Trot (which Shostakovich simply orchestrated for a wager after hearing a gramophone record of it — there's no evidence  he ever saw the son, better known as Tea for Two , performed on film or intended that his own version of it should be), and the First Piano Concerto (some of the themes of which were recycled for a Soviet cartoon in 1933!).
The ‘Romance’ from The Gadfly became, of course, a popular favourite a few years ago when it was used as the theme for the TV series Reilly: Ace of Spies , but as played here by the Chicago Sinfonietta under Paul Freeman it's altogether drier ad more reticent — no comparison at all with the recording by the USSR Cinema SO under Emin Khachaturian on CfP which glows with warmth and stylish authenticity.
The rest of the Freeman disc tends equally towards the sombre and undemonstrative in both performance and recording, but this is frequently, let it be said, no bad things and suits much of the music.
The soloists in the Concerto (Derek Han [piano]and John Henes [trumpet]) play their parts well enough, but do nothing to make this rather lack-lustre disc into anything out of the ordinary.
Copland's Fanfare for the Common Man and Appalachian Spring are coupled with Bernstein's Candide Overture and highlights from West Side Story (.
Summit Brass knock out the fanfare dramatically enough, but the St. Paul Chamber Orchestra under Dennis Russell Davies excel themselves in a completely idiomatic and superbly recorded performance of Copland's Ballet Suite — for which they won a Grammy award on its original release.
Erich Kunzel and the Rochester Pops Orchestra makes a good job of Candide , but then disaster strikes: over 28 minutes (out of a total playing time of less than 62) is devoted to a certain ‘Promenade Orchestra’, conducted by Alfred Gehardt, in some of the naffest arrangements of five numbers from West End Story that you're ever likely to hear.
They're the sort of thing that you'll find used as backing music for the test card — and when you hear them you begin to have some sympathy for those who refuse to pay for a TV licence.
Someone at Head Office needs to do a quick bit of thinking here: to couple an outstanding Appalachian Spring with this twaddle is not only an insult to Dennis Russell Davies and his superb musicians, but also to the prospective purchaser of this disc.
Sloppy presentation returns on ‘Great Choral Works’(), a disc which takes us back to Canada in the company of the Toronto Mendelssohn Choir and — depending on whether you choose to believe the inner front cover of the disc or its back cover — either the Roy Thomson Hall Orchestra under Elmer Iseler (with the Toronto SO under Andrew Davis contributing just one of the thirteen tracks) or else the TSO/Davis throughout the whole disc.
Having listened in the past to some of their recordings, I suspect that it's the RTH/Iseler combination that we have here but, which ever it is, the Toronto Choir sing with gutsy tone in items such as Haydn's ‘The Heavens are Telling’(from The Creation ) and with some finesse sensitivity in more contemplative music by, for instance, Fauré and Vaughan Williams.
Beethoven's Choral Fantasia is recycled (see above) to take up over a quarter of the disc, but overall this provides an imaginatively chosen and well produced kaleidoscope of choral favourites which will give a great deal of pleasure.
‘The Pearl Fishers’(), presents us not only with that particular duet, but also thirteen other romantic opera arias sung by the tenor Mark Dubois, accompanied by the (magnificent name!)
Kitchener-Waterloo Symphony Orchestra or Canada conducted by Raffi Armenian.
Dubois does not have the most winning of voices — there's a suggestion of a whining edge which becomes apparent at times of stress — but he sings with some intelligence and sensitivity to the words and music.
The not always obvious selection ranges from Gluck to Giordano, taking in en route Handel, Mozart, Boieldieu, Rossini, Donizetti, Thomas, Flotow, Verdi, Goldmark (a particularly enjoyable version of ‘Magische Tone’ from The Queen of Sheba ) and Bizet.
With the current boom in interest in opera, though, this disc enters a very competitive field indeed and so, once again, can only be given a general recommendation.
Now to the world of Gilbert and Sullivan ().
The D'Oyly Carte Opera Company and Orchestra, conducted by John Pryce-Jones, are on hand with the Overture to The Yeoman of the Guard and selections of favourite numbers from The Mikado, The Pirates of Penzance, Iolanthe and The Gondoliers : and the New Sadler's Wells Opera Orchestra with soloists and chorus give us items from Ruddigore and HMS Pinafore .
Characterisations are first class throughout the disc, and the singers are clearly at home in their roles.
The whole enterprise is carried through with panache and — apart from the fact that it clocks in at a rather miserly total of only 52 minutes — the disc can be thoroughly recommended to anyone who wants a well-chosen selection of G&S numbers.
My final disc,‘Golden Operetta’(), is more of a mixed bag, containing, as it does, items from sources as varied as Kismet, Orpheus in the Underworld, Candide, Bittersweet, The Merry Widow, The Count of Luxembourg and Countess Maritza .
Among the soloists, Marilyn Hill Smith is featured in five tracks and, for my money, steals the disc with her ‘Glitter and be Gay’ from Candide .
The equally dependable Valerie Masterson has a couple of tracks too, and the orchestras involved are the Philharmonia under John Owen Edwards, the English National Opera Orchestra conducted by Mark Elder, the Scottish Opera Orchestra under Justin Brown, and the New Sadler's Wells Opera Orchestra under Barry Wordsworth.
Anyone who enjoys this repertoire is likely to find this an attractive disc — not perhaps, as gemütlich as one would like in the Viennese numbers, but certainly possessing a certain straightforward charm of its own, even if at only 50 minutes it's somewhat underfilled.
[Rob Maynard]
REWARDING ROUGE et NOIR
This series of re-issues from EMI France comes attractively packaged in two-CD sets, all of which are extremely generously filled and very reasonably priced.
The emphasis is on French repertoire and the general standard of both performance and recording is extraordinarily high: disappointments are few and far between, and come mainly in non-French music.
Some of these sets have been available through specialist dealers before, others are new.
Now EMI is making the whole series available to the UK and at budget price (ie. two CDs for the price of one full-price CD!): a very shrewd decision.
Reviewing these discs was an unusually rewarding and enjoyable experience.
Paul Tortelier was a great cellist and it is good to hear his 1960 recordings of the six solo Bach Suites .
These are intense, dramatic readings which lack nothing in conviction, though I imagine some listeners will prefer a less overtly ‘expressive’ approach to the music.
The prelude of Suite No. 3 is a characteristic example, full of dynamic contrasts and bold gestures which work well in their own terms but will not be to everyone's liking.
There are very occasional technical lapses but nothing distressing.
The sound is perfectly acceptable throughout.()
Carlo Maria Giulini's Beethoven is a taste I have never really acquired, but a package which accommodates both the Missa Solemnis and the Mass in C on two discs is clearly worth investigating.
Unfortunately in Giulini's hands, Beethoven's heavenly vision has more of the quality of a ‘Missa Somnambulis’: the Italian conductor smooths every rough edge, rounds every corner and seems as a consequence to sap the life from the work.
The soloists are good and the chorus sing powerfully but the interpretation is ultimately soggy and dull.
the Mass in C is a more successful performance, much less soporific, though again I am occasionally bothered by what sounds like rather a rudderless account.
Despite the intelligent coupling, this set cannot be recommended except to those who respond more positively than I do to Giulini's rather limp direction ()
Gabriel Fauré's chamber music constitutes one of the glories of French music, and virtually every note of it appears on two ‘Rouge et Noire’ sets in superb performances by Jean-Hilippe Collard, in company with artists such as Augustin Dumay, Frédéric Lodéon, and the Parrenin Quartet.
So often Collard and his colleagues achieve the elusive blend of intensity and elegance which all really great performances of Fauré's music possess.
A good example is the first movement of the D minor Cello Sonata (Vol. 1, Disc 2, track 4), which has seldom been better done, except perhaps by Tortelier and Jean Hubeau on an old Erato disc which surfaced in the UK on a World Record Club LP about 25 years ago, as well as in Erato's fine box of Fauré chamber music.
I hope this set may yet surface on CD, though it has to be admitted that it is largely eclipsed by the more complete EMI anthology.
I have searched in vain for a weak performance in these ‘Rouge et Noir’ sets.
All the smaller pieces are delightfully done, and the large-scale works such as the two Piano Quartets and two Piano Quintets are powerfully projected.
And so it goes on.
This really is vintage material and would be worth the strongest recommendation at any price.
As it is, six full-price LPs have been accommodated onto four very modestly priced CDs.
They constitute a positively irresistible bargain.
The works for piano and one instrument and the Piano Trio are on Volume 1.
The Piano Quartets,String Quartet and Piano Quintets are all on Volume 2.()
Collard is no less impressive in a fine set of Fauré piano music.
This includes the Barcarolles, Impromptus, Valses-Caprices, 8 Pièces brèves, Mazurak Op. 32 and 3 Romances sans Paroles .
In addition we have his recordings of Dolly and the uproarious Fauré and Messager/Wagner concoction,Souvenir de Bayreuth , in which Collard is ably partnered by Brune Rigutto.
Collard has a natural feel for Fauré's piano style and his playing is captivating.
I wish the same could be said for the piano he uses: it is clearly in need of a tune in the first of the Valses-Caprices .
Happily this is not a serious drawback and the set is strongly recommended, containing as it does some of the most sensitive and intelligent Fauré playing on CD.()
Liszt's Années de Pèlerinage come in performances from Aldo Ciccolini, comprising all three ‘Années ’ and the supplement (Venezia e Napoli ).
The piano  sound is warm and full throughout, and Ciccolini plays magnificently.
What an underrated pianist he is over here!
The ‘Dante’ Sonata (Disc 2, track 1) is typical of the intelligent virtuosity which informs the whole set.
Ciccolini is not a brainstorming piano tiger, though his playing is never less than exciting and this series makes an excellent bargain, particularly as the competition is far from extensive.()
This series restores to the catalogue a number of outstanding performances by the pianist Michel Béroff.
The first of these is his complete set of Messiaen's Vingt Regards sur l'enfant Jésus , recorded in 1969 and now coupled with Béroff's 1978 recording of the early Préludes .
Béroff's Vingt Regards was the set I first came to know well (I vividly remember receiving it as a Christmas present the year it was first released) and it has always struck me as the finest of all the recorded versions.
Béroff plays the more spectacular pieces (such as the ‘Regard de l'espirit de joie’) with rhythmic energy and sheer bravura which few others have even approached.
By contrast he is equally adept at setting a tone of meditative rapture in the slower movements.
The addition of the earlier and far from negligible Préludes is a very welcome bonus.
The sound is excellent throughout.
A superb bargain, urgently recommended.
I have played parts of this set several times over, long into the night…()
Francis Poulenc's orchestral, chamber and piano music receives extensive treatment on three ‘Rouge et Noir’ sets.
First, a set of orchestral works all conducted by George Prêtre who always seems to be at his best in Poulenc's music.
This contains his complete Les Biches (not just the familiar Suite) with the Philharmonia Orchestra and Ambrosian Singers, the Suite Françise, Sinfonietta and the scandalously neglected Suite from Les animaux modèles , a ravishing piece.
In addition there are several small pieces including the remarkable Deux marches et un intermède as well as two Concertos, the Concert champêtre for harpsichord in the famous account by Aimée van de Wiele, and the Concerto for Two Pianos played by the composer and Jacques Février.
This adds up to a very substantial collection, and I hope before too long we may find another set with the Organ and Piano Concertos , along with Prêtre's recordings of the Gloria and Stabat Mater (the earlier one with Régine Crespin) and the almost unknown Sept Responses des Ténèbres , a simply glorious choral and orchestral piece with Prêtre recorded in 1983 and which appeared on a Pathé Marconi LP in 1984.
As it is, we have a generous set here which deserves an enthusiastic recommendation.()
Poulenc's chamber music is brilliantly served by Jacques Février with Menuhin, Fournier (superlative in the Cello Sonata ), Michel Debost, Alan Civil and several other fine players all very well recorded.
This set contains definitive accounts of the Sonatas for Cello, Flue, Oboe, Clarinet & Violin (provided you don't mind the occasional rough edge from |Menuhin), as well as a spirited and supremely Gallic performance of the Trio for Piano, Oboe and Bassoon (a splendid very French-sounding beast on this recording), the Piano and Wind Sextet and much else besides.
As with the two Fauré chamber music sets reviewed above, it is hard to imagine finer performances of most of these pieces.
Mightily impressive.()
Gabriel Tacchino's recordings of Poulenc's solo piano music originally appeared on three LPs and here resurface on two CDs.
The sound varies from very good to slightly rough, but Tacchino maintains high artistic and technical standards throughout, never sounding jaded even in the most familiar pieces.
He often succeeds in making his playing sound almost improvisatory, just as Poulenc himself did, but unlike the composer on a bad day, Tacchino is also scrupulously accurate.()
More Béroff, this time with the five Prokofiev Piano Concertos , recorded with the Leipzig Gewandhaus Orchestra under Kurt Masur.
This is a consistently impressive partnership, well captured by the engineers.
The opening of the First Concerto gives a good indication of Béroff's approach: direct, rhythmical and bright-toned.
Even the lushest pages of the Third Concerto are comparatively peppery in this version.
This seems to me to suit Prokofiev's idiom very well and Béroff's intelligent  virtuosity is a constant source of delight, as is Masur's accompaniment, fully committed but also notable for careful attention to detail.
In addition EMI has given us the engagingly silly Overture on Hebrew Themes (Béroff with Michel Portal and the Parrenin Quartet) and Béroff's 1981 recording of the Visions fugitives .
Yet again, a clear three stars.()
André Cluytens recorded Ravel's orchestral works in the early 1960s and most of them, apart from his complete Daphnis et Chloë , have been packaged in an attractive set.
Listeners must decide for themselves whether the Paris Conservatorie Orchestra is ideal in this music or not.
Personally I find the authentic sound of a French orchestra irresistible, although I would advise listening to Disc 2, track 1 (the Pavane pour une infante défunte ).
If you enjoy this performance (I adore it) then the set is for you.
Cluytens is a bewitching Ravel conductor with a fine ear for the subtlest of orchestral colouring, and an ability to judge speeds to perfection.
Vintage stuff then, in the great tradition of Désormière and Inghelbrecht.
(I wonder when EMI and others might get round to restoring some of Inghelbrecht's wonderful Ravel recordings to the catalogue, or his incomparable Debussy for that matter…
). This excellent Cluytens set includes the inevitable Boléro along with La Valse , the Rapsodie espagnole, Valses nobles, Menuet antique, Pavane, La Tombeau de Couperin, Ma Mère l'oye (the complete ballet),Alborado del gracioso and Une barque sur l'océan .
The more I heard this set, the more I love it.
The CD transfers are sumptuous.
()[Bravo!
It's still my principal recommendation for orchestral Ravel; see survey CDR 6/91 — Ed.]
Jean Martinon's complete cycle of Saint-Saëns symphonies is one of the most pleasant re-encounters in this series.
His ‘Organ’ Symphony , recorded in Les Invalides, never sounded particularly impressive on LP given rather cloudy sound which took the edge off what was obviously a fine performance, but CD remastering has done wonders for the engineering and the results are most exciting.
In this very clean transfer the orchestral and organ sound has real power, and I am particularly impressed by some mighty timpani playing in the Finale, with good hard sticks.
All the way through the Symphony rhythms are (for once) articulated with real clarity and precision, and Martinon clearly relishes the elephantine glories of the Finale (don't we all!).
The organ here is a fine instrument, well played by Bernard Gavoty, and this account takes its place at or near the top of a very long list.
Martinon's performances of the four earlier Symphonies are if anything even better: wholly persuasive readings of works which are very little-known but certainly deserve to be heard.
Saint-Saëns' earliest Symphony (in A), composed in 1850, is unnumbered and was written when the composer was fifteen years old.
It is a work of real charm, as is the so-called ‘No. 1 ’, composed three years later.
His Third (and again unnumbered)Symphony is subtitled ‘Urbs Roma ’ and was his winning entry for a competition in Bordeaux in 1856.
No. 2 (in reality ‘No. 4’) is another work which both surprises and delights.
With such a fine account of the most famous of the five and similarly committed ones of the others, this is a superb package.
()[More nods of approval — Ed.]
More Saint-Saëns in the form of the five Piano Concertos , played by Aldo Ciccolini with the Orchestre de Paris under Serge Baudo.
These were recorded in the Salle Wagram, paris, in 1970 and, as with the Symphonies above, have come up sounding splendid in their new transfers.
Ciccolini is in competition here with Pascal Rogé (wonderfully poetic on Decca, but at full price) and Philippe Entremont on Sony Classical.
If I had to choose one set it would either be Rogé or this EMI issue.
Ciccolini plays with great flair and is very ably accompanied by Baudo and the Paris Orchestra, who really seem to relish their moments of glory.
These performances have a compelling sweep and élan and the delights are many.
Why do we so seldom hear any of them apart from No. 2 in the concert hall?()
Erik Satie is still thought by many people as something of a curiosity, albeit an important and influential one, in the history of French music.
Of course the daft names of so many of his pieces feed the myth as do his occasional forays into what can seem like a kind of proto-minimalism.
A set called ‘Les inspirations insolites d'Erik Satie’ is a fascinating anthology.
None of the solo piano music is here (see below for that), but one of the ballets,Les Aventures de Mercure (usually better known simply as ‘Mercure ’) along with pieces such as Geneviève de Brabant and the curious Le Piège de Médusa make for absorbing and very entertaining listening.
the set also includes Debussy's famous orchestrations of the First and Third Gymnopèdies , two short pieces (Les Pantins dansent and Chooses vues à droite et à gauche [sans lunettes], the latter his only pieces for violin and piano) and the reasonably well-known Scorate , whose last movement can be heard either as 22 minutes of timeless, hypnotic beauty or the nearest Satie came to a musical sleeping draught.
It depends on your point of view.
At any rate it is very well done here by Pierre Dervaux and excellent French singers.
Dervaux conducts much of the set and does so well.
But the real discovery for me has been the final item on Disc 1, the Messe des Pauvres , composed, incredibly, in 1895.
The work has voices in the first two movements, but is essentially for solo organ, dazzlingly played by Gaston Litaize, who clearly enjoys himself of the magnificent beast which lives in the church of St. Francois-Xavier in Paris.
This work has had me taking this set off the shelf again and again.
The last movement has some harmonic progressions which are thoroughly reminiscent of early Messiaen and the whole marvellous piece is one which I am genuinely excited to have encountered.()
Aldo Ciccolini made six LPs of Satie piano music and about half of these recordings have been re-issued on a ‘Rouge et Noir’ set.
Ciccolini is capable of very stylish virtuosity and shows this to great effect in the more extrovert pieces to which he also brings genuine humour (as opposed to the archness which spoils so many performances of Satie's music).
Where I find him occasionally  disappointing is in the dreamier world of the Gymnopédies and the more intriguing Sonneries de la Rose Croix (one of the composer's Rosicrucian  works).
His playing is never less than very good, but he does occasionally tend to be a trifle straight-laced in the more contemplative works.
This is only a minor reservation.
Incidentally Ciccolini also plays several works for piano 4 hands, partnering himself by re-recording!
I have to confess that I would, in principle, prefer to hear two real ‘live’ pianists playing Satie's splendid duets, but Ciccolini makes a very decent job of all four hands.()
Igor Markevitch's recording of Le Sacre du printemps has long been cherished as one of the really stunning accounts on disc.
Markevitch generates a staggering amount of energy and draws brilliant playing from the Philharmonia.
A gramophone classic which has come up sounding very fine on an interesting set of Markevitch Stravinsky and Prokofiev performances from the '50s.
Other highlights include a superb Pulcinella Suite and a delicious Love of Three Oranges Suite , both with the French Radio Orchestra.
In addition the set includes the Fairy's Kiss Divertimento, a substantial Petrushka Suite with just about the only really convincing performance I have ever heard of Stravinsky's concert ending, and Prokofiev's Scythian Suite and Le Pas d'Acier .
Not to be missed by admirers of this conductor at his best.
Sadly in his last years Markevitch was not the same man.
I wish I could forget two London concerts he gave shortly before he died, but I prefer to remember him through performances as brilliant, powerful and exciting as we have on this set.()
The piano works of Igor Stravinsky are not well represented on CD, so the re-issue of Michel Béroff's recordings is to be welcomed with open arms.
This includes the early F sharp minor Sonata the Etudes Op. 7, Le cinq doigts , the 1924 Sonata , the Serenade in A, Piano Rag-Music, Tango and Three Movements from Petrushka .
In addition there are the three works for piano and orchestra and two amazing rarities: the bathetic Souvenir d'une marche boche composed in 1915, and the remarkable little Valse pour les enfants , published in the daily newspaper ‘Le Figaro’ in May 1922.
I have enjoyed playing this miniature ever since finding the reproduction of it on page 248 of Eric Walter White's Stravinsky catalogue (2nd edition, London, 1979 ), but it is delightful to hear it played by a pianist of Béroff's stature.
The piano and orchestra works, especially the Concerto for Piano and Wind Instruments receive outstanding performances from Béroff and the Orchestra de Paris under an alert Seiji Ozawa.
Béroff's tone throughout the set is appropriately crisp and brilliant and set earns a most enthusiastic recommendation.()
André Previn's 1970s recordings of the complete Tchaikovsky ballets were some of the happiest collaborations with the LSO, and ‘Rouge et Noir’ puts together nearly 150 minutes of well-chosen extracts from Swan Lake, Sleeping Beauty and Nutcracker .
Incredibly, the fine 1972 Nutcracker has yet to appear complete on CD (Previn's RPO remake is a bitter disappointment by comparison) so the generous selection here (including the ‘Snowflakes Waltz’ and the Finale as well as the pieces from the Suite and some other movements) is all we have from a fine set.
It is every bit as good as I remember and so are the other two ballets.
Previn conducts the big numbers with a real swagger and the shorter dances are well characterised and beautifully played.
The recording is never less than good.
An attractive proposition for anyone seeking substantial highlights at a very reasonable price.()
Finally, an anthology of French orchestral music played by the Orchestre de Paris recorded in 1968–9.
Barbirolli's famously self-indulgent late Debussy recordings,La Mer and the Nocturnes , really don't show the great man at his best, though there is no denying the conviction and enormous affection which sir John brings to these pieces.
The rest of the programme is conducted by Serge Baudo.
It includes Ravel's Ma mére l'oye , a very fine performance of the Second Suite from Roussel's Bacchus et Ariane , Messiaen's Les Offrandes oubliées and Fauré's Dolly orchestrated by Rabaud),Masques et Bergamasques and Pelléas et Mélisande .
All are well done, though for once EMI's generosity causes momentary irritation having to change discs half way through Dolly feels rather like a throwback to 78s!
This is an enjoyable collection, even if it does seem to lack the careful planning so evident in the rest of this outstanding series.()
[Nigel Simeone]
OLYMPIA'S FASCINATING FEAST
Olympia has perhaps done more than any other company to stimulate interest in the highways and byways of russian music, as is typified by six of their most recent releases.
With such relatively unfamiliar names such as Smolsky, Glebov, and Kapustin adorning the liner booklets, this is clearly a feast for the inquisitive.
(All the discs here are £10.99, as re all Olympia CDs).
Olympia's new ‘Belorussian Series’ gets off to a cracking start with a pair of discs, one featuring the music of Dmitry Smolsky (), the other, Yevgeni Glebov ().
Smolsky has composed in most of the major genres, although the Olympia selection concentrates solely on his orchestral output.
Opening with a breezy Kabalevskian Overture , Smolsky's self-avowed folk origins come to the fore in the highly distinctive First Dulcimer Concerto , composed in a broadly neo-classical style (typically spiced with an occasional dash of bi-tonality), but imbued with an expressive force which transcends the often impersonal stance that such an approach can result in.
The solo dulcimer player, Eugene Gladkov, is clearly a virtuoso of the first order.
The ghost of Shostakovich hangs heavily over the Cello Concerto , although the Sixth Symphony , with its barrenpointed landscapes clearly points more in the direction of Kancheli.
The ten minute Violin Concerto , and expertly structured work in one single, continuous movement, relies heavily on the frequent repetition of concise thematic fragments.
Performances are authoritative and committed, the recordings largely satisfactory (bar the strangely muffled sound in the Sixth Symphony ), and the left and right channels appear to have been reversed (as in the Glebov below).
Nonetheless, the music demands attention, and those in search of something rewarding but well off the beaten track and need not hesitate unduly.
Multi-faceted influences have also clearly been poured into the Glebov melting pot, although he appears to have assimilated these with rather greater surety than Smolsky, who is very much the stylistic chameleon in comparison.
Glebov's Fifth Symphony opens with  an introduction featuring a solo tuba, low in its register, winding a motto theme over the distant rumbling of a bass drum.
The wild, rhythmic drive of the first subject owes much to Shostakovich, yet the second subject would not sound out of place in a Star Trek film score, and its pseudo-oriental counter-theme is pure Hollywood.
yet somehow the whole thing proceeds as though all this were the most natural thing in the world.
It is only upon reflection that the latent expressive paradoxes became obvious, such is the potency of Glebov's compositional sleight of hand.
The Five Fantastic Dances and Little Prince Ballet Suite which fill out this disc also clearly demonstrate Glebov's enviable abilities as a colourful orchestrator, and composer of indelible miniature sweetmeats.
Performances once again breathe the unmistakable air of authority (despite a strange jolt in dynamic about 2:20 into the Suite ), and the music (particularly the Symphony ) certainly repays investigation.
Volume 3 of the ‘Belorussian’ series () concentrates on the music of Vladimir Soltan (born 1953).
Shostakovich may provide the melodic/harmonic starting point for the Second Symphony , although the fugally overlapping textures of the opening clearly hark back to Bartók's Music for Strings, Percussion and Celeste .
Even if a certain amount of the succeeding material unmistakeably evokes the spirits of Soltan's immediate Soviet musical forbears, his endlessly resourceful and distinctive orchestration ensures that passing resemblances are never unduly pronounced.
The ‘Symphonic Poem ’(no illustrative title) demonstrates a stylistic  identity largely absent from the Symphony , presumably due to the freedom provided by the somewhat balletic, patchwork structure.
Soltan himself (cello) performs his Melody and Chorale for Cello and Piano (Valentina Vavlova), a strange amalgamation of Shostakovichian Sturm und Drang , and Fauréan neo-modal sensibility.
The Cello Concerto (soloist Eugene Ksaveriyev), is by some distance the most personally felt and individual work in this particular programme (indeed the only one that fully avoids playing the stylistic ‘magpie’).
The overall mood is decidedly downbeat, but (thank God!) without recourse to the anti-Soviet ‘protest’ mode, and constantly enlivened by stark (though never exaggerated) contrasts between lyrical and energetic musical material.
The Belorussian State TV and Radio Orchestra under Boris Raisky play with great passion and understanding throughout, if not always with the greatest of precision.
A new recital from Nikolai Petrov is quite overwhelming a tour de force of breathtaking virtuoso pianism ().
Clearly Prokoviev's Sixth Sonata and Stravinsky's Sonata holds no terrors for him; indeed he positively relishes every textural contrast, and change of articulation and dynamic.
Erwin Schulhoff's neo-Ravel/Poulencian Third Sonata is also an absolute charmer in five movements, but it is Nicolai Kapustin's jazz-inflected Second Sonata which left the most lasting impression, its perpetueum mobile Finale bordering on the insane in its executant demands, and I am sure that Petrov's blinding performance is destined to become a classic of recorded piano music.
Had this been a studio ‘take’ it would have been phenomenal, but the fact that it is ‘live’has one bordering on disbelief.
No wonder the audience go absolutely wild at the end!
Finally a coupling of Prokofiev's two Violin Sonatas with Janàček's Sonata of 1914, played in fine style by the American violinist Andrew Hardy, accompanied by Luc Devos (who is incidentally the pianist in the Amati Trio:).
The recording is perhaps a shade too close, but is nevertheless warm and involving, and Hardy's playing easily survives such scrutiny.
Indeed he makes a most ravishing, alluring sound on his ‘Mackenzie’ Stradivarius (believe me, a Strad in the wrong [even experienced]hands can be absolutely appalling), plays with commendably secure intonation, and communicates an evident enthusiasm for the music in hand, well matched by the sensitive support he receives from Devos.
Whether Hardy's slightly impulsive way with phrasing is quite what this music demands (all three works are in their different ways Classical in behaviour) will be a matter of personal taste, but, given the highly personalised response, I found it a most pleasingly seductive recital.
[Julian Haylock]
KLEMPERER OK!
Although I am not in possession of a comprehensive discography, I would surmise that with this latest batch of releases from the ‘Klemperer Edition’, EMI must have transferred to CD practically all the recordings this great conductor made with the Philharmonia and New Philharmonia Orchestra between 1955 and 1970.
Without doubt, it is a legacy of almost unrivalled importance, and we must remain eternally grateful to EMI for making these performances available to the public at such a reasonable (mid-) price.
The CD transfers I have head (all ADD) almost always represent a considerable improvement on the LP originals.
There is a greater breadth and depth of sound in the later recordings produced by Peter Andry, whilst the earlier Walter Legge sessions reveal an enhanced clarity of texture that fully accords with the monumental objectivity of Klemperer's conducting.
It is perhaps a tribute to Klemperer's stature that all the recordings featured here continue to stimulate well after the CDs are returned to their place on my shelves.
This simply confirms the fact that to the very end of his life, Klemperer remained a controversial musical figure, stamping his own individual authority on any music he conducted.
In some cases, of course, his penchant for doggedness, which seems to have become more pronounced towards the end of his career, appears to be at odds with the spirit of the music.
Take for example his 1962 recording of Stravinsky's Symphony in Three Movements , which is coupled with the Pulcinella Suite ,Kurt Weill's Kleine Dreigroschenmusik , and, most incongruously of all, Johann Strauss's Wiener Blut Waltz ().
By any standards, no performance could be further removed in character from the composer's own barn-storming account (Sony ); speeds are much more deliberate, the rhythmic tension generated by those insistent ostinati sounds underpowered, and the orchestra seem ill at ease with the score.
Yet first impressions may be illusory, for Klemperer brings different, though equally valid, dimensions to the music; where the composer offers balletic dynamism, Klemperer's almost obsessive emphasis on heavy articulation and dark colouring serves to accentuate the Symphony's documentary connection with World War II.
Not surprisingly, few interpreters rival Klemperer in the section in the Finale which (purportedly) depicts goose-stepping German soldiers.
While the Symphony in Three Movements can survive the Klemperer treatment, it would be difficult to defend his 1963 Pulcinella , which is far too poker-faced for music of such lightness and grace.
But the disc is probably worth purchasing for the Weill alone, a work which Klemperer commissioned from the composer after attending and enjoying performances of the Dreigroschenoper in Berlin in 1929.
Klemperer recorded excerpts from the Suite with members of the Berlin Staatskapelle in 1931 (available on Koch ‘Legacy ’ 370532), and comparison with the later performance (presenting, surprisingly, only seven out of the eight movements) reveals much greater polish in the Philharmonia's playing.
It is interesting to note however that while Klemperer's speeds thirty years are on far more deliberate, the rawness of Weill's idiom remains intact.
Unlike many recent versions, Klemperer is admirable in avoiding concessions to easy sentimentality.
There are no concessions to sentimentality either in the 1966 performance of Franck's D minor Symphony which is coupled with Schumann's Piano Concerto featuring Annie Fischer as soloist ().
As in his recordings of the last three Tchaikovsky Symphonies, Klemperer reveals a temperamental antipathy towards excessive emotionalism in Romantic repertoire.
Consequently, his Franck does not subscribe to the stop/go school of interpretation favoured by some conductors.
Yet the work's structural coherence is immeasurably strengthened by this approach to instrumental balance helps to lighten Franck's over-ripe orchestration.
There are moments when the performance appears to lack urgency — the opening of the finale is rather sedate, and the middle section of the Allegretto does not quite capture the ‘will o’ the wisp’character intended by the composer.
But this is still a reading of great insight which I shall often return to, for it offers much food for thought.
The Schumann, recorded in 1960 and 1962, is interesting too, but for different reasons.
Klemperer made few records as an orchestral accompanist, and whilst listening to this performance, I was intrigued to know as to how far his towering musical personality affected Fischer's own interpretation.
Sometimes, it appears to be a partnership of opposites, with Fischer's marvellous impetuosity and expressiveness balanced by Klemperer's stoicism.
Yet the Finale, taken at a rather leisurely speed, has tremendous swagger, and my only complaint is an occasional element of heaviness which is at odds with Schumann's more playful writing.
The recording balance too leaves something to be desired with the clarinet melody in the recapitulation of the first movement being pretty well obliterated by the piano's arpeggios.
Annie Fischer's version of the Schumann was originally coupled with Liszt's First Piano Concerto , and this recording is now re-issued with Johann Strauss's Die Fledermaus Overture and the classic 1960 account of the Overture and Incidental Music to A Midsummer Night's Dream by Mendelssohn (), to make what amounts to a delightfully planned orchestral concert.
Of course, Liszt makes somewhat different demands on soloist and orchestra than Schumann, but there is no lack of extrovert virtuosity in the present performance.
Klemperer's contribution again serves to strengthen the Concerto's cohesion and sense of direction, but it's a pity that ensemble is not absolutely unanimous in the animato of the final movement.
As to the rest of the disc, it's perhaps fair to state that Klemperer's Johann Strauss will not please those who favour a relaxed ‘Wienerisch ’ approach to such music, but there can surely be few complaints about the Mendelssohn.
Certainly, the Scherzo sounds measured in comparison with, say, Toscanini, but the rhythmic precision and clarity of instrumental texture are well-night miraculous.
The winds are placed admirably forward in the Overture, revealing an instrumental balance that anticipates some recent performances on period instruments.
Perhaps Klemperer's ‘fairies’(the otherwise admirable Philaharmonia Chorus) remain somewhat earthbound, but the orchestral climaxes have great solidity and conviction.
If the Strauss/Liszt/Mendelssohn disc preserves some kind of logic in its programming, another release featuring miscellaneous items () unfortunately has the appearance of being cobbled together, and as such may only be of real interest to the avid Klemperer fan.
The highlight here is undoubtedly the 1955 Brahms Haydn Variations , one of his earliest (mono) recordings with the Philharmonia, which reveals the conductor in an extremely dynamic mood, shaping each Variation with incisiveness and great breadth of characterisation.
At the opposite end of the scale is the 1956 Handel Concerto Grosso Op. 6 No. 4 performed with a full-bodied string section that will surely appear heavy-handed for present-day tastes.
A similar approach affects the Mozart ‘Serenata Notturna’(also from 1956), but somehow Klemperer's gruffness works better in this work.
The rest of the disc offers more Strauss; first Johann in the Emperor Waltz , and then Richard in Till Eulenspiegel .
In the latter performance, recorded in 1960, Kelmperer presents a rather detached impression of the score.
Clearly, this is not a reading which will appeal to those who relish the physical excitement and theatrical extravagance of Strauss's music.
For me, however, the performance is a revelation, unearthing a vast amount of inner detail that is usually glossed over in other recordings.
As I said before, Klemperer's conducting invariably fuelled controversy, and I cannot imagine a more controversial performance than his 1968 recording of Mahler's Seventh Symphony , which comes in a boxed set with the appropriate coupling of Klemperer's own Second Symphony and his Seventh String Quartet , the latter performed by the Philharmonia Quartet ().
Klemperer was actually present at the rehearsals and the first performance of the Mahler in Prague in 1908, and thus his interpretation can lay claim to some element of authenticity.
At the same time, I cannot help but wonder whether his performance would have sounded very different had it been recorded somewhat earlier in his career?
The main bone of contention is undoubtedly Klemperer's predilection for extremely slow tempi throughout the work, stretching the Symphony's duration to well over a hundred minutes!
There are of course passages where Klemperer's gravitas is amazingly powerful, as in the first movement, but the first ‘Nachtmusik’ requires greater momentum if it is not to appear diffuse.
As to the Finale, hardly Mahler's most inspired movement, listeners ought to be rewarded with an endurance medal if they can survive the 24 minutes of unrelieved turgidity.
In answer to those who might claim that the perverse approach to this particular movement illustrates that the conductor had lost his grip on the orchestra by the time of this recording, I can only say that the playing of the New Philharmonia is magnificent.
Indeed, it could be argued that Klemperer's steadfastness serves to underline the grotesque nature of Mahler's invention, but this is not a performance that I can easily live with.
Neither do I warm to the two works by Klemperer which were originally issued to commemorate the conductor's 85th birthday.
The Symphony may reveal an individual approach to instrumentation, but the melodic writing remains four-square, and some of the movements seem to run out of steam before the material has been fully explored.
In comparison, the Quartet is more compelling, the musical idiom providing a fascinating amalgam of Mahler and Bartók.
[Erik Levi]
EDIBLE CLASSICS
Over the years I've encountered a fair number of weird and wonderful marketing ideas, but perhaps none more eye-catching than Sony's new mid-price ‘Dinner Classics’ series.
Each volume contains a different menu by TV gourmet Keith Floyd, illustrated by six of the most appetising front covers imaginable.
Good enough to eat of course, and the performances, all culled from existing digital and analogue Sony (née CBS) masters, deserve a blanket  rating, with one or two highlights along the way.
‘The French Album’() features an intelligently planned programme featuring some of the most delectable miniatures ever penned.
When the first tracks consist of Debussy's First Arabesque , and Girl with the Flaxen Hair , Ravel's ravishing Tombeau de Couperin Menuet, the ‘Fileuse’ from Fauré's Pelléas et Mélisande , and Ravel's Pavane pour une Infante défunte , Francophiles can hardly go wrong!
The remainder features more Fauré and Debussy, Satie (yes, the First and Third Gymnopédies!),
Delibes, Gounod, Berlioz and Offenbach.
All the music is featured either in orchestral arrangements or in its original orchestral guise, is well transferred, mostly emanates from Philadelphia during the Orchestra's peak period, and (depending upon one's attitude towards transatlantic timbres in French music, and the then-CBS's typically close-up sixties recording technology), gives virtually unalloyed pleasure.
‘The Italian Album’is infinitely more varied in its contents (although I'm note quite sure that Gabrieli's Canzon Septimi Toni No. 2 is quite the thing for a candle-lit dinner.
There's a fair amount of operatics involved (again orchestra only), mostly courtesy of André Kostelanetz (who was quite inimitable at this sort of thing), and his Orchestra, with contributions from Ormandy, Patané, Andrew Davis, Perlman/Williams (Paganini), and Zukerman (Vivaldi) along the way.
If ‘French Classics’ is definitely for intimate couples at home, this one's more suitable for a lively dinner party!()
If you enjoy a meal where the wine and beer flows freely, then Austrian Classics’is just the thing for you, with its combination of champagne high spirits and Biergarten frolics.
The Strauss family are well represented, alongside Mozart (mostly in arrangements), Beethoven (ditto), Schubert and Haydn, all at their most jovial, with the exception of the slow movement from Mozart's K467 Piano Concerto , which forms a meditative central interlude.
Performers range from Ormandy, Casadesus, and Szell to Gosman, Snashall, and Asazuma, with the addition of some delightful rarities from the Alexander Schneider Quintet in chamber versions of Johann Strauss II's Vienna Blood, Blue Danube and his father's Radetzsky March ().
What next?
Russian, English, Scandinavia, American, Czech?
No —Japanese ()!
Somehow I must have missed the original LPs (or perhaps they were never released this side of the Atlantic), but here are Jean-Pierre Rampal, Isaac Stern, Yo-Yo Ma mixing it up with Japanese instrumentalists, playing traditional oriental music alongside pieces by Yamada, Miyagi, and Yoshizawa, amongst others.
Musical ethnologists will no doubt pull their hair out at eh mere thought of such cross-cultural impurity, but the results sound pretty good to my untrained ears.
For more exotic dinner parties this one, or at least for those of a highly sophisticated and refined palette!
When I saw the title of the next album —‘The Sunday Brunch’— I immediately assumed this must be the ‘American’ one ().
Foiled again!
It turned out to be a programme of popular Baroquerie, in thoroughly ‘inauthentic’ performances (just imagine the Philadelphia Orchestra, with strings in vibrato overdrive, playing ‘Sheep May Safely Graze’!),which nevertheless once again reflects careful programming, and as a well-upholstered background to a meal of similar (pro) portions and dimensions, should satisfy even the healthiest appetite.
Finally,‘Dinner for Two’().
I'd happily part with my money just to hear the sensational Philadelphia/Ormandy Rachmaninov Vocalise (‘Never mind the meal, just turn down the lights!’).
However, if you and your partner can bear to tear yourselves away from this opening track(I'd just hit the repeat button, and get on with it!), there's always the Adagio from Rachmaninov's Second Symphony (track 7), perhaps the greatest musical panacea for those out of love.
The remaining arrangements of music by Borodin, Chopin, Rimsky, Liszt and Tchaikovsky hardly maintain this level of emotional charge, but if you want to stand any chance of getting to the end of your meal, that's probably just as well!
[Julian Haylock]
MORE PRECIOUS ‘EMERALDS’
Whilst it is always desirable to have the central repertoire available in the lower price ranges, it seems to me that ‘bargain’ labels really come into their own by offering less familiar fayre.
Erato has clearly borne this in mind with the latest batch of eight mid-price ‘Emeraudes’, and thankfully without having to resort to second-rate orchestras, conductors, and engineering (all are DDD recordings).
First off two discs of Gregorian Chant from the Paris Gregorian Choir under their director Francois Polgar, one devoted to the Holy Week Liturgy (), the other the Liturgy for Good Friday ().
Together they form a superb introduction to this sadly neglected are of the repertoire.
Both are beautifully sung, meticulously directed, and atmospherically recorded, although the ‘good Friday’ recital offers the more consistently varied and stimulating programme.
The mid-Baroque master Marc-Antoine Charpentier (1634–1704) was until comparatively recently a sadly neglected figure.
Now, as a brief glance at the current catalogue will show, he is one of the most recorded composers of his  generation.
Five Leçons de Ténèbre () feature the ‘period’ instrument Musica Polyphonica under their regular director Louis Devos, and eminently reliable soloists, including Howard Crook (counter-tenor), Jan Caals (tenor) and Michel Verschaeve (bass).
Fine playing, singing, recording and (of course) music, which nevertheless just falls short of true memorability and distinction.
Another disc from the same team (slightly augmented) highlights the short-lived composer,Joseph Fiocco (1704–1741), born in the year of Charpentier's death, yet inhabiting an entirely different sound world, derived mainly from the Fabrielis, and barely anticipating the high-Baroque style of, say, Vivaldi.
Incidentally, he is principally remembered nowadays by aspiring violinists for his brilliant sounding, but technically eminently playable,Allegro in G. couples together his five-section Missa Solemnis and Lamentation Secunda in well-recorded performances, which make all the right gestures, but obstinately refuse to catch fire.
However,Ferdinando Bertoni (1725–1813) is given the full ‘technicolour’ treatment by Claudio Scimone and his modern instrumental I Solisti Veneti, and soloists Patricia Schuman (soprano) and mezzo-soprano Margarita Zimmermann ().
Bertoni's Veni creator, Miserere , and Beatus vir fairly rip off the page via infectiously enthusiastic, if not quite immaculately played performances, which ultimately sound rather overblown to my ears.
If one could only graft the best aspects of Scimone and Devos onto one another, the roof would really lift off!
Armin Jordan is still somewhat under-rated in this country, yet has always struck me as one of the most intuitively musical conductors around.
There is nothing remotely jet-settish about his interpretations, which therefore rest somewhat uncomfortably beside those which are currently modish.
Instinctively, I find performances of Schubert (in this case the E flat major Mass D950 ) on the ‘grand’ scale anathema, yet Jordan's loving care over phrasing and careful balancing of his large forces, recorded in a fairly generous (though never cloudy) acoustic, completely win me over.
The Suisse Romande Orchestra may still not occupy a position among the top rank of world orchestras, but at least they sound as thought they care deeply about what they are doing, as do the combined Lausanne and Chambre Romand Choirs.()
When is a musical world really going to wake up to Schumann ?
Most people would readily concede (at least on paper) that he was unquestionably one of the most important composers of the last century, yet the number of influential figures who take up his cause are really very few and far between, and even then the results are not often particularly gratifying.
I father that he does not sell very well in this country (nor does Brahms for that matter!), yet apparently we cannot get enough of the ‘Four Seasons ’, and second-rate opera arias!
Thank goodness, therefore, for a release which couples together two almost totally neglected choral works, the Requiem für Mignon , and the C minor Mass , in loving performances from the Gulbenkian Foundation Orchestra and Choir under Michel Corboz ().
I have to say that neither piece is vintage Schumann, but when the old magic really starts to work (as in the ‘Gloria’ and ‘Agnus Dei’of the Requiem ), one is left in no doubt that Schumann's was a creative mind of the very first order.
Finally, a composer whose day appears to have finally ‘arrived’:Franz Liszt .
After a period of relative neglect, recordings of his piano works are once again filling the shelves, and a reassessment of this highly-variable, though enormously gifted musician is well under way.
Good timing then for a new coupling (though recorded in 1986) of the Missa choralis and Via crucis from the Ensemble Vocal Audite Nova de Paris, under their director Jean Sourisse, with no less a figure than Marie-Claire Alain at the organ of the Eglise Saint-Antione in Paris ().
Having not heard either work for some years, I was pleasantly surprised to be reminded what a delightfully unaffected piece the Missa choralis , in particular, really is.
Anyone whose experience of Liszt doesn't extend much beyond the odd Hungarian Rhapsody, paraphrase, Liebesträum, and les Prèludes will, I imagine, be somewhat taken aback by the relative harmonic conservatism, and unadorned purity of style.
The Via crucis (composed some thirteen years later in 1878) was clearly intended as a far more imposing artistic statement, and listened to on that level it undoubtedly succeeds.
Yet, for all its ingenuity, the freshness and spontaneity of the Missa choralis remains uniquely compelling.
Fine performances and recording.
[Julian Haylock]
ON BROADWAY
In response to the recent craze for luxurious presented (and sometimes performed) musicals, Sony has launched the full price ‘Sony Broadway’ label, which features some rarer items coming up in ‘original cast’recordings.
The Sony packaging is handsome; well illustrated booklets with excellent notes by Ken Mandelbaum.
Don't, by the way, be fooled by stickers which say ‘Complete song texts included’, or anything similar — this was a packaging error which Sony has corrected, but some are bound to have slipped the net.
All the recordings are sharp and lively, even if in some cases forty years old.
The book of A Tree in Broooklyn () bears strong resemblances to Carousel , which does it no favours whatsoever, as the Arthur Schwartz score is not a patch on Richard Rodger's superb one.
The sentimental side, although well presented by a fine ballad like ‘Make the Man Love Me’, is both overshadowed and made more sugary by the comic element of Cisssie, the heroine's sister, with her string of ‘husbands’ all called Harry and her rosy outlook.
Shirley Booth played this role, and although her squeaky voice is a bit of a shock at first, she still dominates the recording, with only Johnny Johnston's warm baritone making any real impact alongside her.
Loesser's The Most Happy Fella () is the only (nearly) complete recording of this batch; there is one scene missing which was apparently judged too visual to record, but this is a vivid performance, visual enough through the interpretations of Robert Weede as the winegrowing Tony, longing for happiness, and Jo Sullivan as his confused ‘mail-order’ bride Amy/Rosabella.
Band singer Art Lund sings the part of the footloose Joe, good in ‘Joey, Joey, Joey’ and in ‘Don't Cry’, but less satisfactory elsewhere, as Susan Johnson is splendid as Amy's friend Cleo.
But it is Weede who really makes this worth hearing, keeping his balance with ease between sympathy and schmaltz.
Wonderful Town () is not precisely an ‘original cast’ recording; it's a recording of the television version made in 1958, five years after the show was first staged, but only Jacquelyn McKeever (excellent as Eileen) and lead man Sydney Chaplin were not in the stage version.
Wonderful Town was the work of the Bernstein/Comden/Green team responsible for On The Town , and although Wonderful Town is a little patchy in recording,(which does not give a particularly strong idea of the show as a whole), there are plenty of excellent numbers, and their variety is refreshing from the barber-shop style ‘My Darlin' Eileen’ to the bluesy ‘Ballet at the Village Vortex’, passing through the remarkable ‘Swing’, which defies description.
So too does Rosalind Russell; perhaps she sounds a little old for the part, but her dry tones give her numbers a splendidly acerbic edge.
Some twenty years later, Comden and Green were also behind On the Twentieth Century (), whose book is not really in the same class as Wonderful Town , but which is quite magnificently preposterous.
As someone who likes musical comedies to be comedies, the frivolity of this piece proved irresistible.
The tale is slight; a voyage on a luxury train during which a down-on-his-luck-but-permanently optimistic producer attempts to regain the services and the affections of the famous actress he helped become a star.
He is surrounded by a cast of variously eccentric characters, from her beefcake boyfriend (I can well imagine that Kevin Kline stole the show in that part) to his secretly fanatic prospective sponsor (Imogene Coca, relishing every word of ‘Repent’).
Although the piece is set in the ‘Roaring ‘20's’, Cy Coleman's music rarely goes into period style, but instead exploits a cod-operatic vein, going from Puccini to Piaf, with winks and nods in all directions, and superbly served by Madeline Kahn, who has the voice of a sarcastic diva and a vocal presence so strong that I felt I could see her.
It's not as good a show, musically or dramatically, as Wonderful Town or The Most Happy Fella most definitely are, but so much depends on what you want from a musical, and this is the one that I will return to repeatedly, just for the sheer fun of it.
[Kate Lang]
Rosalind Russell and Sydney Chaplin in ‘Wonderful Town’
CD OF THE MONTH
BACH TATIANA NIKOLAYEVA
The Well-Tempered Clavier (Books 1 & 2) NIKOLAYEVA (piano)
Mezhdunarodnaya Kniga 
Tatiana Nikolayeva needs no introduction as a Bach interpreter, for her achievements in this repertoire have been universally praised.
She is the successor of the great russian musician Samuel Feinberg, the first Soviet pianist to perform all of the Well-Tempered Clavier in concert, and Nikolayeva's conception of work is pure, simple, lucid yet varied, romantic and at times highly individual.
This is a Well-Tempered Clavier of universal appeal that seems to paradoxically embrace the romantic Russian school of Feinberg and Goldenweiser,(Nikolayeva's teacher), as well as the demands of our own age for authenticity and clarity.
At all times one is aware that the artist is also a composer — the conviction with which she untangles some of the more complicated, almost obscure pieces, has an unquestionable authority (the enormous B flat minor Fugue from Book Two instantly comes to mind in this connection), whilst the famous pieces are often presented in a totally different manner — the A minor Prelude and Fugue (Book One ) will surprise many as the Prelude is fearful and serious (rather than light with the usual staccato touches), whilst the Fugue has clipped articulation at the end of each subject entry.
The result is that the piece seems to become more polyphonic as the listener can more easily hear the lines.
Nikolayeva adopts an orchestral approach in some pieces,(eg. the C sharp minor Fugue [Book Two ], where the intensity and unyielding rhythm make a strong impression), but her tonal range also suggests the organ (E flat minor Prelude,Book One ), a choir (B flat minor Prelude,Book One ), a trumpet (D major Prelude,Book Two ), and a violin (B flat minor Prelude,Book One ).
The characterisation of the Fugues is incredibly varied — Nikolayev runs the whole gamut from the leisurely, almost lazy polyphony of the D major Fugue (Book Two ) through the scherzando humour of the E flat and B flat Fugues in Book One , the simplicity of the C major Fugue (Book One ), the sheer beauty of tone of the F sharp minor fugue,Book Two , the granite-like strength of purpose and sound in the B flat minor Fugue ,(Book Two ).
Perhaps most impressively of all, the visionary glow of the C sharp minor Fugue in Book One makes for a transcendental and deeply telling interpretation that silences all criticism.
One must simply accept these performances at face value and forget about problems of piano versus harpsichord versus clavichord.
Musicianship of this quality is rarely encountered, and is quite exceptional from anyone's standpoint.
Overall there can be no doubt that this a major issue for all lovers of great music.
Shunning the sensational electricity of Glenn Gould (Sony ), the academic care of Robert Riefling (Simax ), and the post-clavichord wistfulness of András Schiff (Decca ), Tatiana Nikolayeva goes her own authoritative and purposeful way towards the musical truth as she conceives it to be.
Listening to these performances, often taken at relatively modest speeds (eg. the D major and G major Fugues,Book One , the thought that too much velocity and technical facility can be harmful comes to mind.
Nikolayeva certainly does not have the Horowitzian panache generally associated with Russian virtuosos — it is her mind and ears which are transcendental rather than her fingers — but that ‘handicap’ is actually a positive attribute since it makes for painstaking care and originality in all of her interpretations.
[MM]
Designed by Daryl Latham for CD Review magazine
CLASSICAL REVIEW
Maurizio Pollini: at his most inspired in Beethoven Sonatas (see page 43).
ARCADELT
Madrigals
CONSORT OF MUSICKE/ROOLEY
(Deutsche Harmonia Mundi RD77162 )
In terms of his popularity and renown during his lifetime, Jacobus Arcadelt was certainly held in the highest esteem.
Arcadelt's madrigals coincide with the upswing of interest in the expressive, lyric poetry of Petrarch, which attracted something of a cult following in Rome during the early decades of the 16th century.
The quality of texts set by Arcadelt range from the uninspired, to such passionate outpourings as Lorenzino De'Medici's  and Petrach's .
Anthony Rooley's selection of Arcadelt madrigals is judicious and demonstrates the expressive power of his music.
(track 10), played here in two instrumental versions and  (track 2) provide excellent examples of Arcadelt's refined melodic gift: simple and without mannerism, but highly charged.
Evelyn Tubb's delivery of  (track 3), accompanied by three viols, and later of  (track 18) is marked by her attention to textual nuance, at  times singing of love as if merely a narrator, and at others with the passion of somebody overtaken by emotion.
With instruments and voices carefully mixed and contrasted, the overall programme is richly varied.
A delightful issue, well performed and recorded.
[AS]
ARENSKY
Trio in D minor: RIMSKY-KORSAKOV: Quintet (1876) for Flute, Clarinet, Horn, Bassoon and Piano
NASH ENSEMBLE
With one or two notable exceptions, among them Tchaikovsky's First String Quartet and Piano Trio , and Borodin's two quarters, 19th century Russian chamber music has a pretty thin time of it.
Which is a pity, since Arensky's beautifully-crafted Piano Trio deserves to be better-known.
Although not quite as memorable as Tchaikovsky's Arensky's D minor Trio is an extremely attractive work with some memorable tunes in it.
The present performance certainly makes a splendid case for the piece, and I can't imagine anyone hearing it without great pleasure.
Rimsky is, of course, a much better-known composer — albeit for his orchestral music (specifically the Symphonic Suite Scheherazade ) rather than chamber works — and his Quintet is an attractive piece with a lively, cheerful, rather Schumannesque first movement.
From a knowledge of Rimsky's glittering high-powered orchestral works, I doubt if many would attribute to him this amiable Piano and Wind Quintet , but it's a thoroughly engaging and enjoyable work, and well worth hearing.
The analogue recording is clean, smooth, and well-balanced, but benefits from being given a little extra playback volume to help bring the instruments into focus; fortunately tape hiss levels are as low as you'd expect on a good digital recording.
Recommended to those looking for something attractive, that's a little off the beaten track!
[JMH]
CPE BACH
MARTINPELTO, PREGARDIEN, HARVEY, COLLEGIUM VOCALE CHOIR, AGE OF ENLIGHTENMENT ORCH. /HERREWEGHE
CPE Bach's most popular piece of choral music by far is the Magnificat Wq125 , based, like his father's Magnificat , in the festive key of D major (incidentally both works are coupled together on an outstanding Decca mid-price release;).
Anyone familiar with CPE Bach's exhilarating setting will no doubt have noticed its indebtedness not only to J S Bach, but also to Telemann, and other representatives of a definable Rococco school of German composition.
His work typically blends Baroque contrapuntalism with a pre-Classical clarity of texture, intermingling reminders of the recent past with musical devices premonitary of the near-future.
It would be as well to remember that CPE died (1786) only five years before Mozart, by which time Bach's musical style had already been overtaken by the Classicists.
The cantata The Resurrection and Ascension of Jesus was composed in 174, the same year as Gluck's opera Iphigénie en Aulide , Mozart's Symphonies Nos. 28–30 and Bassoon Concerto , and Haydn's Symphonies Nos. 54–57 .
Yet despite a modulatory and harmonic palette occasionally redolent of mid-Classicism, his employment of formal procedures unmistakably harks back to the bygone era (much the same could be said of Mozart's church music).
What is equally undeniable is Die Auferstehung's status as a masterwork (Mozart conducted it three times in 1788, expressing no small amount of enthusiasm), and this recording's fine presentation of the piece, worthy to stand beside Hermann Max's [see my review of JS Bach's Magnificat below —Ed.]splendid Capriccio recording (coupled with .
Interestingly, both versions feature that talented Baroque specialist tenor Christoph Pregardien, superb in both, although if pressed I would have to say that he sounds in fresher voice on Capriccio.
The soprano Hillevi Martinpelto manages her tricky  with an enticingly light tone, fine diction and intonation, although I personally find Barbara Schlick on Capriccio even more seductive, and she imbues the text with a greater sense of what the words actually mean.
However, I prefer the bass Peter Harvey on Virgin, if only for the simply gorgeous noise he makes, sounding rather like a lyric tenor down half an octave.
the Capriccio recording is fractionally the more detailed if not quite as atmospheric as the new Virgin, which lends a warmer sound to the instrumental support that many listeners may well prefer.
Also Virgin squeezes the Oratorio onto a single disc, although the Capriccio carries with it a welcome if hardly generous bonus in the shape of the Easter Cantata Wq244 .
Excellent notes by Nicholas Anderson.
[JH]
JC BACH
Symphonies —
CONCERTO ARMONICO
There is a sturdy aspect to these performances which is most attractive and which suits the music.
The recording has what might be called an honest directness — it is clear and bright, if a little too closely miked, but in both performance and recording I miss truly elegant characterisations of these particular scores.
However, this is a proficient and worthwhile CD which contains some highly inventive music.
[RMW]
JS BACH
Complete Toccatas & Fugues
SCHRADER (organ of Salem Lutheran Church, Wausau, Wisconsin)
The particularly uncompromising, raw sound of the Jaeckel organ at the Salem Lutheran Church in Wausau may take some getting used to.
It is built along the lines of the most severe late-Seventeenth Century North German instruments, and with its acerbic Kirnberger III tuning, the most innocuous harmonic passages take on a distinctly tangy flavour.
Proudly proclaiming that this recording contains for the first time on one CD all of Bach's Toccatas and Fugues (including the Prelude and Fugue in E minor BWV548 ), it is indeed a well-stocked programme.
The flexible winding of the organ allows the music to sing and  breathe in a way that it is not possible with conventional bellows, and Schrader's performances, like the instrument, are bold and bracing.
The only thing I would take issue with is the insertion of a cadenza towards the end of the Toccata in C , BWV564.
Schrader refers to the short,written out cadenza-like flourish just before the final cadences of the Prelude in F minor BWV534 as a precedent, but this does not seem justification enough, particularly as the cadenza he provides in this case is much more than merely a brief manual flourish.
No doubt evidence for such a procedure will one day come to light!
[JB]
Magnificat; Sanctus in C: Sanctus in D: CALDARA: Magnificat in C: KUHNAU: Magnificat in C; ANON (attrib.
KUHNAU): Magnificat in D
There are already five major contenders for the ‘authentic’ Bach Magnificat crown, although I harbour mild reservations concerning them all.
Herreweghe (Harmonia Mundi ) takes a broadly naturalistic view, allowing the text to unfold without resorting to the jet-propulsion treatment of so many Baroque choral recordings nowadays.
Bach's ear-catching sonorities are savoured to the full, although much of the score's inner vitality and extraordinary sense of forward momentum is sacrificed in the process.
Hickox (Chandos )being traditional performance values to bear upon period instrument techniques, which will give most pleasure to those making their initial foray into the ‘authentic’ scene, even if the instrumental playing (trumpets in particular) consistently fails to match the incisiveness of the choir.
Harnoncourt (), on the other hand, is let down by the unpredictability of his choral forces, and Gardiner () is all sheen and polish, but misses the sense of the ceremonial which lies at the heart of his this most perfect of all choral masterpieces.
Kuijken (), as ever, puts musical values first, and in this he reminds me very much of a firstgeneration ‘authentic’ recording made by the Collegium Aureum under Schmidt-Garden (not yet available on CD), which similarly involved one textually in a way which few versions can match, even if one is left with the impression that many of the musical solutions may have registered almost as comfortably on modern instruments.
Two things immediately strike me about Hermann Max's superb new version from WDR/EMI: the immaculate   recording quality, and the amazing singing of the Rheinische Kantorei, whose technical command is apparently flawless.
Balance, blend, and intonation are impeccable, enunciation is clear without resorting to tiresome sibilant/hard-consonant spitting, and everything emerges with an inner vitality which has the notes positively leaping off the page.
When I tell you that the solo and instrumental contribution hardly lags behind in any of these respects, you will no doubt become aware of my almost boundless enthusiasm for this issue.
Indeed the only blips on the horizon are the reluctance of the natural trumpets to ‘really go for the burn’ in the opening and closing choruses and ‘Fecit potentiam’, and a couple of less than clearly focused notes from the tenor Marcus Brutscher, in the ‘Deposuit’, in the context of what is otherwise a truly virtuoso performance.
One unexpected bonus (for those with contemporary level perfect pitch), is the fact that this is the original E flat version of the Magnificat , which means that those used to hearing the D major revision can rest comfortably as the ‘authentic’ pitch adjustment brings the whole thing down roughly a semi-tone anyway!
It also means we get the four sections omitted in the revised version:.
Those familiar with the revision will note slight changes, most notably to the melodic line in ‘Et excultavit’, and the tierce de picardie ending to ‘Omnes generationes’.
As a bonus we are also offered a pair of imposing and rarely performed Sancti ().
This is also only the second version of the Magnificat to be offered as part of a set (Münchinger's first-rate ‘traditional’ version on Decca is coupled to the Christmas Oratorio on three mid-priced CDs;).
The timing is far from generous, especially when one considers the full-price tag, yet I would urge all prospective customers to at least audition this set before making your final choice.
The major fillers are two Magnificats, one certainly by and one attributed Johann Kuhnau (1660–1722), a younger and shorterlived contemporary of JS Bach.
Yet that earlier birthdate (JS was born 15 years later) makes all the difference in terms of musical style.
Johann Sebastian may not have been the most avant-garde composer of his generation, but Kuhnau emerges as almost archaic in comparison.
If Bach's Magnificat is a supreme product of the high-Baroque, then Kuhnau's work is firmly derived from Monteverdian post-modalism and formal procedures.
Also Bach's Magnificat is clearly the work of a genius at white-heat, whilst Kuhnau's score(s), if lacking nothing in sheer inspiration, exhibit nothing like the extraordinary level of Bach's individuality and imagination.
Still, it is difficult to imagine this immensely civilised music ever being more persuasively presented, as once again performance (bar a couple of mild intonation slips in the ‘Sicut erat’ of the C major Magnificat ) and production values are (if you'll forgive the in-phrase) truly ‘state of the art’.
[JH]
Cantatas for Bass
KOOY (BASS), LA CHAPELLE ROYALE/HERREWEGHE
The orchestra of La Chapelle Royale is a dedicated ensemble, which produces a most satisfying Bach sound, due in no small respect to the Director, Philippe Herreweghe.
However, this is a programm devoted to ‘bass’ Cantatas, and I'm afraid I cannot be so enthusiastic about the soloist Peter Kooy, who is, quite frankly, rather inadequate in the celebrated Cantata ‘Ich habe genug ’.
The voice possesses neither sufficient depth nor weight, and the technique is often found wanting — literally hundreds of interfering aspirates break up the continuity between sound and text.
In the third aria, ‘Ich freue mich’, the florid music is simply too much for him.
With Kooy sounding rather more comfortable, is better sung.
Although there is once again some interfering aspirates, some improvement is noticeable, and the text in recitatives is better delivered.
The short Cantata  is an exceptionally beautiful work, embracing a fine violin concertante part that is played superbly by Monica Huggett.
The bass aria ‘Welt ade’, interspersed with a chorale by Johann Georg Albinus, is an outstanding composition and finds Peter Kooy at his very best.
In the chorales one might wish for greater definition of the inner parts, although the balance at the end of Cantata BWV 158 show marked improvement.
All things considered, I could not recommend this recording when so much better is currently available from the likes of Dietrich Fischer-Diskau and John Shirley-Quirk.
[RH]
Arias for Soprano and Violin
BATTLE, PERLMAN, ST LUKE'S ORCHESTRA/NELSON
With superstars Kathleen Battle and Itzhak Perlman lined up to give us just over an hour of Bach arias, one has to accept that almost whatever one says, artists of this calibre act upon collectors like the proverbial honeypot to the bee.
I could however moan on about the likelihood of anyone ever wanting to listen to this collection straight through at one sitting, or that Miss Battle could have done rather more in the way of characterising each aria (and her diction is also hardly crystal clear).
I could almost bemoan the fact that the two greatest Bach obligato violin parts (those contained in the St. Matthew Passion ), are not included; but then I can hardly blame Miss Battle for not being contralto or bass (shame though)!
What is beyond disputes is that Battle produces the kind of seamless, creamy sound, and faultless intonation that recalls the girlish purity of Gundula Janowitz at the very height of her powers, and Perlman turns on all his customary warmth and charm from which even his relatively close positioning cannot detract.
There is an old-fashioned quality to these performances which leaves me wishing for something just a little less well-upholstered, although I can imagine anyone coming to Bach for the first time with this recording could well come away with the impression that old LEAVES is quite simply the ‘bizz’, and I for one would not wish to argue with that!
[JH]
BACH-BUSONI
Transcriptions for solo Piano
DEMIDENKO (piano)
Nikolai Demidenko is certainly the name on everyone's lips these days — his extensive marketing and publicity has paid dividends — so it is refreshing to see him tackling repertoire which deserves to be recorded properly.
His Bach-Busoni is strong, no nonsense stuff, and he commands the sort of tonal palette which this music really needs.
In the ‘St. Anne’ Prelude and Fugue , one is overcome by the sheer majesty and regality of what one hears rather than by superficial pianistic fireworks.
It is in the three largest works on the recording that Demidenko is at his very best, with incredibly strong and deep sonorities at the end of the C major Toccato, Adagio and Fugue , providing an almost terrifying conclusion to this monumental work.
I was somewhat less impressed by Demidenko in the smaller-scale pieces: his Rejoice beloved Christians sounds slow and bland when compared to the super-human wizardry of Frederic Chiu on his stunning début recital of transcriptions for Harmonia Mundi,(— a ‘must’ for all Busonians) whilst the slower chorales on the Hyperion disc are given the visionary touch on MK by Tatiana Nikolayeva.
Despite this, and the fact that a warmer instrument could have been found, the new Hyperion issue deserves wide circulation, for Demidenko shows just how lofty and spiritual Bach-Busoni can be.
As Ates Orga's extraordinarily perceptive liner notes point out: ‘Bach-Busoni, in the Lisztian connotation, has nothing to do with arrangement, transcription, partition, paraphrase, reminiscence or fantasy.
Rather, it is a metamorphism of compositional intelligence and performance implementation, of the creative/re-creative moment, of reflection and refraction, and Orionesque constellation of images and dreams to set among the stars’.
Bravo!
[MM]
BARTOK
Violin Concerto No. 2; MORET: En Rêve (Violin Concerto)
MUTTER, BOSTON SO/OZAWA
Always assuming the unlikelihood of ever getting on disc a pluperfect realisation of Bartók's Second Violin Concerto , this new release from the prodigiously-gifted Anne-Sophie Mutter will come close enough for most people.
She plays it phenomenally well, with a dazzling combination of flawless virtuosity, and controlled yet always deeply passionate ardour.
The recording is very good, without being quite beyond reproach, and the orchestral playing is exceptionally well projected.
The main drawback to this account is Seiji Ozawa's seeming lack of total control over the inherent pulse: this masterpiece demands a profound appreciation of its structural unity, which is not always apparent here, beguiled the while as we are by Ms Mutter's enthralling seductiveness.
Such an approach occasionally  misrepresents the composer's explicit instructions.
Many people might prefer Bartók's First Violin Concerto , the obvious and most suitable coupling, but Norbert Moret's Violin Concerto of 1988, written for Mutter, receives a quite astounding performance.
The music will upset no-one who takes his Bartók neat, being a wide-ranging display of the wonders of modern musical eclecticism: quite interesting up to a point, a kind of ‘Hindemith meets Korngold on a foggy night in Detroit’ mixture, but utterly unconvincing as a work of art.
[RMW]
BAX
Symphony No. 3; IRELAND: These Things Shall Be; The Forgotten Rite; April
IRELAND, JONES, HALLE CHOIR & ORCH. /BARBIROLLI
I have to say straight away that the three star grading is highly personal decision that goes against the grain of usual standards.
The wartime Hallé ensemble and intonation are not always of the purest quality, and despite excellent remastering, the mono sound of Baxi's Third Symphony was never exactly ingratiating, although an amazing amount of detail does register — not least the gleaming anvil stroke in the first movement.
But I know of no other performance that encapsulates the charmed essence of this infuriatingly diffuse music with such surety and projection.
Myth and legend glow like hot coals in Barbirolli's hands, and the pacing and sense of atmosphere upon which the work depends so heavily are spot on.
The dance music is both fiery and resilient, and the mystic landscape of the famous epilogue so tantalisingly evoked that value judgements fade away as surely as the music's vision itself.
The ireland items were recorded after the war in 1948/9, and sound much fresher.
The Forgotten Rite (an early Prelude for orchestra from 1913) casts distinctly voluptuous runes, while These Things Shall Be , an uneasily optimistic Symonds choral setting from 1936, is much bolder and more astringent.
As is so often the case, the performer's proximity to the work's inception reaps an idiomatic bonus that transcends any technical shortcomings.
The composer himself playing April, the first of his Two Pieces for piano dating from 1914–25, is a touching pendant to an essential disc.
[IJ]
BEETHOVEN
Piano Sonatas Nos. 13–15
POLLINI (piano)
Thus far I have found Maurizio Pollini's recordings of Beethoven's Piano Sonatas rather forbidding — technically immaculate, intellectually probing, yet almost totally devoid of human interest.
His latest release programmes three of the most lyrically inspired Sonatas of the entire canon, and this time with stunning results.
Indeed I would place this alongside his two solo Schumann recordings, the 1972 Chopin Etudes , and the classic Stravinsky Three Movements /Prokoviev Seventh Sonata disc as representing this prodigiously gifted artist at his most consistently inspired.
Pollini's technique is legendary, and I can only report that in his fiftieth year (a large retrospective mid-price boxed set please, DG!), there are still no discernible chinks in the armour (indeed, a recent Petrushka Three Movements at the RFH would appear to suggest that he is, if anything, playing better than ever)!
The thorn in Pollini's side ( at least as far as his recordings are concerned) is his occasional refusal to gild the lily.
One is sometimes left with the feeling that he is presenting one with an interpretation cast in stone, with all unwelcome impurities filtered away — the ‘perfect’ solution, if you like.
In concert, Pollini's almost super-human control is just as evident, yet he normally allows himself a degree of flexbility which one rarely encounters in the studio.
When, as here, he imbues a potentially glacial vision with flecks of interpretative fancy, the sparks really start to fly.
Of course nothing remotely approaches the indulgent, yet time and time again Pollini characterises the music with an infinite subtlety which makes other interpretations appear almost cosmetic in comparison: listen to how gently he coaxes (never caresses!) the opening phrases of  and you'll hear what I mean.
I am always struck by Pollini's extraordinary ability to integrate even the most fearless of contrasts into a convincing whole.
One can rarely dip into a Pollini recording as a series of edited highlights (except perhaps as a demonstration of superlative digital execution), as he rarely ever plays ‘for the moment’; one is irresistibly drawn towards hearing the whole work, as only then does the integrity of his vision register with its fullest potency.
The same is true of the altogether exceptional recording, which held my concentration so effortlessly that I could hardly believe that nearly a whole hour had passed when I emerged elated at the other end.
Not Beethoven playing for everyday listening perhaps, but rather a fine wine, to be pondered over, and deliberated upon at length before its true quality most fully reveals itself.
[JH]
BERG
Violin Concerto; STRAVINSKY: Violin concerto; RAVEL: Tzigane
SIMMERMANN, STUTTGART RSO/GELMETTI
Frank Peter Zimmermann is a fine artist, a most gifted player, who delivers admirable accounts of these three different Violin Concertos. he also has the advantage of committed and clearly well-rehearsed support from a very good orchestra under a talented conductor who follows him like a cat.
As the recordings (a co-production with SDR Stuttgart) are also of notable quality, the result is an issue which can be firmly recommended to those looking for worthwhile versions of these works for their collections.
Personally, I would have preferred a more  neurasthenic approach to the Berg — more febrile and phantasmagorical — and a slightly faster tempo for the first movement of the Stravinsky, as though it were the tightest clockwork mechanism.
The recorded balance might have been improved so far as the Berg is concerned had the soloist been fractionally more forward, and an extra desk each of first and second violins would have added more weight.
But there is nothing to disappoint the collector here: this is a notable issue, and I look forward to hearing Zimmermann in the Beethoven; on this showing, he could give a splendid account of it.
Welldocumented notes.
[RMW]
BIRTWISTLE
Earth Dances
BBC SO/EOTVOS
I write as someone who's always been able to take or leave Harrison Birtwistle's music: the oeuvre as a whole arouses my respect, and impresses by its fiercely-defined character and self-consistency, but only a limited number of pieces (among them The Triumph of Time, The fields of Sorrow, Melancolia I, Carmen Arcadiae Mechanicae Perpetuum ) have spoken to me strongly and cried out for repeated listening.
Of that number, none has spoken more strongly than Earth Dances , the largescale orchestral work which Birtwistle composed in 1986.
Collins Classics has now made repeated hearings possible with this CD single in their ‘20th Century Plus’ series, a recording — but in excellent sound — of a ‘live’performance from the 1991 Proms.
Earth Dances is stunning simply on the level of virtuosic deployment of a large orchestra.
Like another release in the same series — Benedict Mason's Lighthouses of England and Wales , which I've reviewed at length below — Birtwistle's work is also, for all its contemporary superstructure and substructures, a species of tone-poem in a genre that British composers tend to be good at: in this case the quasipantheistic dark-pastoral in the tradition of North Country Sketches, In the Faery Hills, Enter Spring and, perhaps especially, the ‘Ritual dances’ from Tippett's Midsummer Marriage .
Yet the approach, at least by intention, is severely anti-Romantic, concerned with the shifting interrelationships of up to six separate layers of ‘strata’, defined by different hierarchies of intervals and, especially, by register from high to low — thus dividing the orchestral gamut into superimposed layers, like the overlaid strata of rock within the earth.
The actual material, as Andrew Clements writes, returns ‘in a variety of contexts and with changing perspectives, to hint at a structure that is never explicitly or completely revealed’.
Yet the material is articulated in a welter of precisely defined and highly original instrumental detail, which keeps the foreground in continuous, glinting, dithyrambic activity while in the background (and low in the bass) there is a quite different sense of motion: slow, glacial, inevitable.
One could almost characterise it as Tippett-like dancing over Sibelian pedals, but that's a very inadequate summation of a very rich and multi-faceted work.
It also doesn't account for the shattering effect of the great climaxes, nor the invigorating range and quickness of Birtwistle's motivic thought.
If I again mention Mason's Lighthouses — in its way a score of not dissimilar scope and fascination, written only a year later by a composer a generation younger — it's because a comparison (which Collins Classics has now made possible) of these two pieces helps to highlight the individual nature of Birtwistle's achievement.
Both composers seek to create a sense of ‘objectivity’ in their evocations of nature, whether as a record of topographical outline (Mason), or a mimesis of geological deep-structures and seismic motion (Birtwistle).
Each work creates its own, unclassifable form, overtly episodic and fragmented, yet engendering in the listener (by the turning of Mason's kaleidoscope, the shifting of Birtwistle's building-blocks) a belief in organic cohesion and overall design.
But Birtwistle's work is more than twice the length of Mason's, and he more than justifies his larger span.
Their handling of a large orchestra also reflects radically different attitudes.
Mason's approach, I would judge, is ultimately Impressionistic, its roots reaching down to Debussy and Berg; Birtwistle's is sculptural, sharp-edged, in subterranean descent from Stravinsky (who also wrote a ‘Danse de la Terre’).
In sum,Earth Dances is surely one of the most impressive British orchestral scores of the 1980s, and its appearance on this CD single is a matter for great satisfaction.
The playing of the BBC Symphony Orchestra under Peter Eötrös, who had given the work several times before this 1991 Prom performance, seems immensely confident and assured, all the complexities mastered; and the recording quality is so good (and the audience so quiet) I would have taken it for a ‘state-of-theart’ studio job.
[CM]
BOCCERINI
Guitar Quintets Nos. 1–3, G 445–7 in E minor, E major & B flat major
SAVINO (guitar), ARTARIA QUARTET
A very interesting release: the music is not top flight, but is well realised by these very talented artists on ‘authentic’ instruments, and — musically, much more ‘authentically’— with the violinists alternating with violas, and the violist with violin.
The result is a CD of greater interest to 18th-century music enthusiasts than to guitarists.
The recording catches the players rather forcefully, and the balance between guitar and string quartet is not always well managed: that is not the engineer's fault so much as Boccherini's who did not always judge texture as well as he might.
I prefer a more recessed sound with the guitar shade more forward, but nothing stands in the way of a hearty recommendation.
[RMW]
BRAHMS
Sextets Op. 18 & 36: String Quartets Op. 51 & 67; String quintets Op. 88 & 111
BARTOK QUARTET, KONRAD (viola), BANDA (cello)
Piano Quartets Opp. 25, 26 & 60
SZABO, LANTOS, FALVAI, KOMLOS, NEMETH, BOTVAY
I cannot imagine a more uplifting experience than listening through to a sequence of Brahms's chamber compositions such as if offered here.
Sometimes hearing a cycle of works by the same composer actually has the opposite effect, making one realise limitations in the music, but this is simply not the case with Brahms.
Quite clearly, Brahms felt a particular empathy for the chamber medium, and each work is an unqualified masterpiece exploring a different aspect of the composer's multi-faceted personality.
Arguably, the three-CD set devoted to the string music contains the most rewarding works, and it also allows one to make an almost comprehensive survey of Brahms's development, from the expansive Schubertian lyricism of the Sextets, through the storms and stresses of the Op. 51 Quartets , to the relaxed mastery and greater subtleties of the Quartet Op. 67 , and the later Quintets.
There are of course divisions of opinion as to the idiomatic nature of Brahms's writing, and none of these pieces lie easily within the hands.
But the Bartók Quartet, whose recordings of the Beethoven Quartets have won great acclaim, make light of the considerable technical demands.
In particular, their intonation, a special problem in such thickly scored music, is most impressive.
I do, however, have some minor reservations about their approach to individual movements (the Finale of Op. 51 No. 1 strikes me as a little lacking in urgency, for example) and the recordings tend to emphasise a rather compressed dynamic range.
Another niggling problem is their inconsistent approach to repeats.
Given the fact that brahms was quite specific about this matter, it is particularly frustrating to find the exposition repeat observed in Op. 67 and Op. 88 , but overlooked in the glorious Sextets.
Squeezing the string works onto three generously filled discs makes good economic sense, though it is annoying to have to experience a break between the first and second movements of the Op. 67 Quartet .
Mind you, this is not quite as unsatisfactory as the ‘Piano Quartet’ set where it would have been just possible to confine Op. 26 and Op. 60 to the second disc, rather than breaking after the magical slow movement of the earlier of these two works.
The performances of the Piano Quartets are also more variable.
While I like the idea of allowing a different pianist to combine with strings for each work, I miss that element of personality and insight which a great soloist such as Rubinstein brought to this music.
To be fair, none of the players here is less than extremely competent, but there are moments when the piano tone appears monochrome or lacking in warmth.
At the same time, the ensemble certainly rises to the occasion especially when Brahms is in his most dynamic mood — not surprisingly, the ‘gypsy rondo’ Finale of G minor Piano Quartet is a highpoint, the Hungarians revelling in its unbridled exuberance.
At present, the Bartók Quartet have the field to themselves as far as sets of the complete string works are concerned, so these 1974 recordings can be confidently recommended.
For the Piano Quartets, however, I would unhesitatingly turn to the more high-powered team of Emmanuel Ax, Isaac Stern, Jaime Laredo and Yo Yo Ma on Sony.
[EL]
Piano Sonata no. 1 in C major; LISZT: Consolation No. 6; Hungarian Rhapsody No. 17; Scherzo & March; Harmonies du Soir
RICHTER (piano)
I was discussing with a distinguished star in the pianistic firmament the other day as to whom he felt was the finest living pianist; no hesitation — Sviatoslav Richter!
Listening to this new recital recorded ‘live’ at the Schleswig-Holstein Music Festival in July 1988 it is not hard to understand why.
Richter is one of the very few artists making recordings of standard repertoire who are so awe-inspiring in their comprehensiveness that the long list of comparative versions becomes a virtual irrelevance.
Talk of ‘best versions’ and such like becomes almost distasteful in the face of such artistry.
It is very hard to pin down just exactly how Richter weaves his magic spell; that unique full sound he draws from the instrument at all dynamic levels, whilst utilising a seemingly limitless variety of articulation; the scintillating combination of intellect, technical bravura, and extraordinary interpretative perception?
Well, whatever it is, the playing on this disc is nothing short of mesmerising.
I must have heard the Brahms C major Sonata countless times, yet I cannot recall having ever encountered a reading which balances the young composer's variegated, emotionally charged adolescent outpourings as unerringly as Richter does here.
It's not as though he's even content merely to characterise short-to-medium term objectives.
The overall structural and emotional focus of the work is consistently sustained with such burning insight that it was almost as thought one were hearing the Sonata for the very first time.
If Richter's Brahms is a revelation, then his playing of Liszt is without equal.
When handled insensitively, Liszt can be mind-numbing in effect, either via machine-gun notespinning, or well-meaning poetics which ultimately drain the music of its inner vitality.
With Richter, one is left with the impression that there is not one single note (whatever the rate at which it might emerge) which isn't absolutely essential to the overall design, and there are pitifully few Liszt performances of which that can truthfully be said!
I just hope they've pressed enough copies of this outstanding release, to ensure that all serious collectors can manage to get hold of one!
[JH]
BRUCKNER
Symphony No. 7
NYPO/MASUR
Kurt Masur conducted one of the finest ‘live’ performances of this piece I have ever heard when he conducted it with the Leipzig Gewandhaus Orchestra in Nottingham during an English tour a few years ago.
What Teldec has given us here is his inaugural concert as Music Director of the New York Philharmonic Orchestra, recorded ‘live’ at the Lincoln Center on 13th September 1991, in front of a commendably quiet audience.
Masur paces the first movements with great skill and builds climaxes with just the right sense of slow, inexorable growth.
Even so, I have to express some slight disappointment with this new CD.
Part of the problem is the HYPO, a fine orchestra which just does not sound as if it has lived with the piece in the way that the Gewandhaus Orchestra have ever since they gave the world première under Nikisch on December 30th 1884.
The sound of the New York brass players quite simply does not suit this music particularly well and the trumpets, especially, have a fat, ripe sound which is quite unlike that of Leipzig or Vienna trumpets, either in Bruckner's time or in ours.
I really miss the beautifully  focused , much less hefty sound of the Leipzig orchestra.
Apart from this quibble, I do find that the whole performance has a slightly veiled and subdued quality about it, which may in part be attributable to microphone placement and the dull acoustics of Avery Fisher Hall, but may equally be the result of both orchestra and conductor being reluctant to take risks on such an auspicious occasion.
Despite these reservations, this CD contains an account of Bruckner 7 which is impressive by any reasonable standards.
masur is flexible with the tempi at times, but as a devotee of Jochum's best Bruckner performances I don't have any quarrel with this.
None of the movements is less than very well done, but I do miss the blazing splendour of this conductor's finest Bruckner with his old orchestra, none of which, alas, has made it on to CD.
His 1970s cycle of the complete Symphonies all too often gave us the plainer side of Masur's musical nature: these tend to be rather sober accounts.
Incidentally, the whole lot has been re-issued at a mid-price BMG/Eurodisc set 
I am all too conscious of the competing claims of some of the greatest Brucknerians when assessing this CD.
Karajan's 1975 recording on DG is majestic, but it doesn't excite me as it should, and I have to say that there are two performances I consistently turn to much more often: first, a Supraphon disc with the Czech Philharmonic conducted by Lovro von Matàcic, a rugged and unjustly neglected account which deserves a much wider circulation (.
The sound is not brilliant, but is never less than acceptable.
Second Karl Böhm's magnificent performance with the Vienna Philharmonic Orchestra.
On LP this never sounded particularly impressive but the transfer to CD on DG ‘Galleria’() has blown away the sonic cobwebs to reveal a blazing treasure and a worthy comparison for his incandescent Bruckner 4 with the same orchestra (Decca ).
With this DG performance at mid-price there seems little reason to pay more, though admirers of Masur's work (I could myself among them) really should hear his new version.
[NS]
BYRD
Mass for Three voices with the Propers for the Nativity
CHRIST CHURCH CATHEDRAL CHOIR/DARLINGTON
David Skinner's edition of the Threepart Mass employs an upward transposition from the written original of a minor third, rather than the minor third downward usually encountered.
Presumably Skinner has followed David Wulstan's theories of 16th-century English church pitch, a rather dangerous procedure given the diffuse nature of Wulstan's evidence for such a practice.
Skinner's notes to the final disc in the Christchurch recordings of the Byrd masses skate over the exact reasons for this change of pitch and, although I would agree that the brighter sound of trebles has the greater immediate impact than men's voices alone, it could be argued that if this Mass was ever used, it would most likely have been performed by solo voices or a small and musically skinned ensemble gathered to celebrate a recusant Roman service, probably without the participation of boys.
On the strength of this performance, however, there is nothing wrong in practice with Skinner's revised disposition of voices, especially when sung with such clarity and attention to the text.
Even so, I find the Christchurch trebles less robust here than in the choir's previous Byrd discs, tending to remain within a limited dynamic range, even in the more laudatory Latin Motets.
For example,Tui sunt coeli (track 6) never quite gets off the ground and Hodie christus natus est (track 10) is blessed with very little joy, its rhythmic energy sadly undermined by a rather uncommitted style of singing.
Stephen Darlington's pacing of each Mass movement is well judged, and would have been even more effective if the intervening mass prospers were better contrasted.
The plainsong hymns Christie redemptor omnium (track 11) and A solisortus cardine (track 13) are superbly done as is the response,O magnum mysterium (track 14), featuring by far the best choral singing on this disc, sensitively phrased and unhurried.
[AS]
CARVER
Mass a 5 ‘Fera Pessima’; Mass a 4 ‘Pater Creator Omnium’
CAPELLA NOVA/TAVENER
The third and, sadly, final volume of Cappella Nova's epochal recording of the complete works of the great Scottish Renaissance composer Robert Carver matches its fellows in musical importance and virtuoso commitment of performance.
For those who have already purchased Volumes 1 & 2, it is selfrecommending.
Nevertheless it raises some questions about the ‘completeness’ here attained, and the light in which we're asked to approach the music.
The five-part Mass Fera Pessima — as its mutilated manuscript superscription should probably be read, though certain scholars have tried to dub it A Pessinuntia (on account of its saturation in the dark Phrygian mode) or even A Pestilentia (speculatively linking it with an outbreak of plague in Stirling, where Carver might, or then again might not, have been living, in the 1940s)— seems freely based on a plainsong of the Sarum rite derived from Chapter 37 of the Book of Genesis: ‘Jacob…rent his garments.…
and said an evil beast [fera pessima ]hath devoured my son Joseph’.
At least one writer has speculated that Carver may recently have lost a son (by circular argument, in that selfsame Stirling plague), but the truth is we simply don't know what, if any, personal reference is composed into the music.
It is however a magnificent piece — the work of a great polyphonist at the very height of his powers.
Dark but lustrously rich in vocal and tonal colour, the predominant mood — if it's permissible to speak of such a thing in relation to a Mass setting — seems to be one of elegiac lyricism.
Despite many exquisite passages of florid embellishment in a manner familiar from the earlier works, there is much less of their sense of ecstatic suspension of time.
Instead Fera Pessima exhibits a quite different feeling of steady harmonic movement, which when considered together with the work's wealth of comparatively strict imitation certainly suggests and essay in an altogether more ‘up-to-date’ manner, even if the date itself eludes inquiry.
I have mentioned above that, for various reasons, some authorities wish to date Fera pessima to the 1540's — a fact strangely left unmentioned by Dr. Kenneth Elliott, in his notes to this release, who casually dates it ‘about 1525’, but postpones all argumentation for this to an as-yet unpublished article.
He may well be right; however, unlettered in the period though I am, I seem to hear fairly clear stylistic connections between it and the 4-Part Mass Pater Creator Omnium , which is securely and explicitly dated in the manuscript to 1546.
Pater Creator , customarily accepted (though not be all) as Carver's latest surviving music, is a curious and tantalising piece.
It's the shortest, simplest, and plainest of all his Mass settings, very modest in scale and largely eschewing the complex virtuoso decorated style that marks, to a varying extent, all his other authenticated works.
Dr. Elliott detects in it ‘a desire by the composer to accommodate progressive ideas about clear word-setting and harmonic, chordal idioms’: he has elsewhere invoked the violent and repressive political climate of the time, and seen an attempt by Carver to compromise — in a period of Protestant fundamentalism which had limited the formerly sumptuous musical presentations in the Chapel Royal to plainchant and Faburden improvised upon it — with the strictly harmonically-conceived music of English Reformation composers.
The movements are short and comparatively chaste in their polyphonic expression, some of them leaving space for text to be completed in plainsong; while the credo, uniquely in Carver's output, is composed in the note-against-note plainsong harmonisation technique of Faburden.
But in fact Faburden probably lies behind all the movements, the Credo being only the plainest and simplest example.
Carver as a learned composer, and clearly conversant with some of his English contemporaries, but it was surely worth noting that evidence, however tantalisingly fragmentary, exists to suggest the existence of a long pre-Reformation Scottish tradition of Faburden singing, of which Pater Creator might therefore be a late, indeed consciously crowning example
The preceding Kyrie and Gloria are unfortunately incomplete due to a missing page of the manuscript, leaving any prospective editor the not inconsiderable task of supplying two of the Carver's four voices.
To the best of my knowledge there are at least three editions of Pater Creator Omnium in circulation; Cappella Nova here sing Dr. Elliott's, as they have all the other works in the series (save, curiously, for the 10-Part Mass , which they recorded in the fine edition of Muriel Brown).
Listening for the purposes of this review with one of the other editions, which  was all I had to hand, may not have been very helpful, but it did rub home how much original composition any editor of this piece has to essay.
Dr. Elliott has devoted something like 35 years to Carver's cause, and has enabled many to appreciate the composer's quality and beauty of thought, but in the case of this particular work I have to say I find the results a little drab, making a somewhat downbeat conclusion to this invaluable series.
In particular the sharpened leading-notes (a feature of some of his other editions) are in this small space especially intrusive and seem stylistically odd, leading to a situation in the Credo where the plainchant itself has to be altered to accommodate the harmony, which I understood was against the commonly-accepted rules of musica ficta .
In noting with regret that this is the final disc in Cappella Nova's Carver series, I do so with a degree of puzzlement.
Certainly it has exhausted the works explicitly credited to Carver in the great Scone Choirbook, and I suppose that is why Dr Elliott remarks, in connection with Pater Creator Omnium , that any music which ‘may have intervened between the Mass Fera Pessima …and this work is sadly lost’.
Yet Dr. Elliott is elsewhere in print (on the back of an Abbey Records LP) as maintaining as almost certain that Carver composed the superb anonymous 6-Part Mass, ‘Cantate Domino,’intimately related musically to Fera Pessima , which survives in partbooks from Lincluden (Dr. Elliott has edited it from performance, and declared it ‘shows more assured technical command’ than Fere Pessima itself); while the Carver Choirbook itself contains a fine anonymous 3-Part Mass which several scholars have suspected to be genuine Carver — and which is moreover largely in his hand.
With such a small yet historically vital authenticated oeuvre , these ‘doubtful’ works surely cry out to be recorded as Volume 4 of ASV's series, fenced around of course with all proper scholarly dubitation.
For if they aren't by Carver, then they're by two close contemporaries of his who, on the evidence of the music itself, were comparably important composers — and thus they constitute even more precious evidence for the flourishing state of Scots musical culture in the first half of the 16th century.
One further point.
Cappella Nova, who have performed so nobly throughout this enterprise and are about to celebrate their tenth anniversary, have risen to prominence as Scotland's premier group specialising in contemporary choral music.
I trust that ASV realises this, and are even now preparing a matching series of modern Scots works.
There could be no more appropriate item with which to initiate such a project than the magnificent 12-part Motet In Memoriam Robert Carver which Ronald Stevenson composed for them in 1987–88: a work which deliberately spans the centuries to invoke the spirit of Carver in new, late 20th-Century context.
[CM]
CHOPIN
Andante spinato and Grand Polonaise; 4 Ballades; Barcarolle; Berceuse; Bolero; Concertos Nos. 1 & 2; Fantaisie; 4 Impromptus; 51 Mazurkas; 19 Nocturnes; 6 Polonaises; Polonaise-Fantaisie; 24 Préludes; 4 Scherzos; Sonatas Nos. 2 & 3; Trantelle; Trois nouvelles Etudes; 14 Waltzes
RUBINSTEIN (piano), NEW SO OF LONDON/SYMPHONY OF THE AIR/SKROWACZEWSKI/WALLENSTEIN
The adjective that has stuck most consistently to Rubinstein's renowned stereo recordings of Chopin (as boxed here in BMG's 11-CD ‘Chopin Collection’) has been ‘aristocratic’.
Many of the publicity stills make a great play of the stiff, straight back, the proudly jutting chin, and the tranced demeanour crossed with a hint of aloofness.
The poise, refinement, and eloquence of his playing were much lauded and, for those who treasured these qualities above all in Chopin, Rubinstein became an unassailable paragon.
On the other hand, dissenters have viewed this emphasis as a way of skating over a suspicion that something was missing and, amidst the cornucopia of riches here, the inclusion of early mono versions of the Berceuse, Barcarolle and Second Sonata from 1946 provide some supporting evidence.
Here are the extra impulsive fire and spontaneity that transform Rubinstein the poet into something more volatile and unpredictable.
This is splitting hairs of course, and probably no pianist has achieved such a fluid expressive line, or imbued the music with such natural lyricism or inevitable dramatic logic.
Highlights include the Nocturnes, which carry introspection to remote regions of intensity and the Ballades, where some of the old abandon is rekindled to powerful effect.
Rubinstein is always stimulating, never sleepy, and frankly, there's not a dull bar to be found.
The harsh, brittle sound of the old black discs, always a considerable drawback, has been replaced by a wholly revitalised and much more flattering aural image, enabling us to fully appreciate what remains a classic of the gramophone.
[IJ]
The Complete Préludes
ALEXEEV (piano)
Chopin's ever-spellbinding cycle is mercilessly tragic — the three low notes at the end of the final Prélude leave no room for optimism — and one of the most impressive things about Dmitry Alexeev's fine performance is the way in which he keeps intensity and concentration on the boil throughout all of the minor key pieces in the cycle's latter half.
Thus it was something of a surprise to hear somewhat slower accounts of the F minor and G minor Préludes, but they greatly benefit from this suspense-filled approach, and lead with inevitability to a deep-toned and wonderfully rich rendition of the final D minor Prélude.
Alexeev commands a wide tonal palette and his lighter, filigree strokes,(e.g. in the G major and E flat major préludes) k, but all in all this is a most satisfying interpretation, with just the right balance between control/taste and fascinating notes from the late Gerald Abraham.
[MM]
The Four Scherzi; Berceuse in D flat; Fantasie in F minor
SHELLEY (piano)
Chopin's Scherzi are amongst the most problematic of all his major works.
In performance, the first two are prone to bouts of noisy, head-splitting virtuosity, and Third mercilessly shows up those who fail to integrate this volatility into music of a more obviously poetic nature, and the Fourth is one of those elusive late pieces, whose  rarefied world is closed to all but the most sensitive of artists.
The overriding tendency is to lean towards the percussive aspect, and in one or two cases see who can get past the finishing post first.
The major speed merchants are Katsaris on Teldec (admittedly quite stunning as a technical display), and Szekeley on Naxos (who at least allows the more reflective passages some room for manoeuvre), to whom Ashkenazy (despite innumerable memorable turns of phrase), and Entremont can be added on the percussive front.
A more imperious stance is elicited by Pollini (cool-mannered, austere, infallible on DG ), Wild (grand style, subtly inflected on Chesky ), and Rubinstein (irresistible glitter and panache on BMG ).
Arrau Philips is indomitable, searching, eloquent, if perhaps lacking something in sheer abandonment.
Demidenko (Hyperion ) is also highly individual, not to say idiosyncratic, even if his penchant for the mildly unexpected will not be to everyone's taste, and Katin's sensitivity and rare gift for sustaining a seamless melodic line (Olympia ) is let down slightly by his converse reluctance to immerse himself in those many passages when the note-rate increases alarmingly.
That leaves us principally with two recordings, both from musician-pianists (I place the emphasis deliberately on the former): Emmanuel Ax (Sony ) and now Howard Shelley.
Shelley is superbly equipped technically, yet never self-consciously seeks to use virtuosity as an end in itself.
He appears to have no interpretative hang-ups about the music, nor attempts to project an individuality by resorting to mere effects and temperamental show.
In other words his is not the sort of playing which grabs you by the scruff of the neck, but rather disarmingly makes the whole process of playing this hugely demanding music appear the most natural thing in the world.
For some I know this is simply not enough, but as the years go by I find that Chopin's ultra-refined eloquence of utterance responds more readily to an unforced, more integrated style than the ferocious changeability that has been the very kernel of Chopin playing for the last twenty or thirty years.
As a result I have now listened to shelley's recording over half-adozen times with increasing pleasure, the complete reverse of so many of those versions listed above.
Best version?
Quite impossible, but for a representative cross-sectioned depending on your priorities, I would shortlist Ashkenazy, Wild, Arrau, and Rubinstein at present.
However, I shall not be parting with Shelley either, whose touching sincerity and integrity of approach, allied to enviable technical command, brings its own considerable rewards.
[JH]
DELIUS
Paris; Dance Rhapsody No. 1: Life's Dance; Piano Concerto
FOWKE (piano), ROP/DE, MAR
The present disc was made with help from the Delius Trust and certainly justifies the faith it always had in Norman Del Mar.
What a pleasure it is to hear some of these pieces for the first time in clear digital sound!
If Delius can be considered under-rated by the public at large, which I certainly believe he is, then Life's Dance and the Piano concerto , as two of his lesser known works, have up until now, been almost completely ignored.
But there is not a bar of music on this recording that does not claim for its author a major place in history of Western music.
I do not think that I am exaggerating.
There are many people who know Delius's work ell and would agree with me.
One day, perhaps, his time will come.
In the meantime this recording should go a long way to helping his cause.
del Mar takes his time over the more languid and sensuous passages, but never allows them to drag.
It also appears that he has taken much care to balance his orchestra.
In the Piano Concerto Philip Fowke is on superb form, although an extra orchestral rehearsal would have put the cap on it.
[AW]
DVORAK]
String Quartets Nos. 10 & 14
LINDSAY QUARTET
The disc is Volume 3 of the Lindsay/ASV series ‘The Bohemians’ and it continues the outstanding success of the first two.
Vols. 1 & 2 consist of the two Janźček Cypresses () and the two Smetana Quartets with some Dvořák miniatures ).
Both are notable for their fine sense of style and for playing of passionate commitment.
Now the Lindsays have turned their attention to two major Dovřák Quartets and the same qualities shine through.
The E flat major Quartet Op. 51 is a gem of lyrical warmth and nationalist vitality.
On this splendid new recording the main theme of the first movement seems to emerge almost as a happy accident from the gently rocking accompaniment — surely just the effect Dvořák intended.
The same acute musical intelligence is brought to bear on the rest of the performance: the second movement is a ‘Dumka’ which has often received rather heavy-handed treatment in the past.
Here the playing is warmly expressive, but never needlessly bold.
The changes from slow to fast speeds are managed with miraculous fluency.
by now the very high quality of this account should be apparent and happily this is maintained in the ‘Romanza’ and the frankly delicious Finale.
This is possibly my favourite Dvořák Quartet and I am delighted that we now have a CD version which does the piece proud.
The only caveat on this disc concerns Peter Cropper's intonation on one or two exposed high notes.
But I find the whole performance so persuasive that this really does not bother me much, and I imagine other listeners will feel the same way.
The A flat major Quartet Op. 105 is the last abstract work Dvořák wrote.
It was completed a few months after its companion piece (the G major Quartet Op. 106 and subsequently the composer devoted himself to programmatic tone poems and operas.
It makes a fine coupling for the E flat Quartet , being of a comparably sunny disposition.
Once again, the performance here is distinguished.
The recording, made in the Faculty of Music at Cambridge University, is rich, warm and clear: in other words it is just about ideal.
The booklet notes by Jan Smaczny are informative.
This series of Czech quartet discs is among the finest of all the Lindsay's recording projects to date.
The first three have all been exceptionally rewarding and I very much hope that ASV has plans to develop the series further in the near future.
I can hardly wait!
[NS]
ECKHARDT-GRAMMATTE
Piano Sonatas Nos. 1–6
HAMELIN (piano)
Altarus has a habit of making us think afresh with almost every release.
In the LP days Altarus released the first-ever recordings of piano music by John Foulds, thus casting overdue light on a substantial but hitherto shadowy figure (I understand this recording is scheduled for re-issue — keep an eye open for it: the music is wonderful).
Another neglected master emerged on three LPs of Piano Sonatas by Harold Truscott, played, as in the Founds, by the indefatigable peter Jacobs; they revealed a muscial thinker of a very high order who has been, and still is, cruelly ignored by the muscial establishment (again, I understand that John Ogdon's recording for Altarus of Truscott's Tenth is due for release soon — and I would also make a plea for a re-issue of those other Sonatas on CD: they are contrapuntal masterpieces, sometimes witty, often beautiful, and they ought to be much more widely known).
Then, on CD, Altarus released Ronald Stevenson's 80-minute Passacaglia on DSCH (— again an LP re-issue) and Sorabji's four-hour Opus Clavicembalisticum (); two gigantic acts of faith in two gigantic pieces of music (the performances are by Ronald Stevenson and John Ogdon respectively).
These recordings give evidence of substantial artistic and commercial courage, and also show a laudably pig-headed indifference to conventional wisdom.
And now Altarus has uncovered buried treasure where most of us didn't know there was a stone to be turned over, in this two-CD set of the six Piano Sonatas by Sophie-Carmen Eckhardt-Gramatté.
Who?
Yes, that was exactly my reaction when I first saw this set announced.
My initial recourse in such circumstances is to dive into Nicolas Slonimsky's Baker's biographical Dictionary of Musicians (no, I can't afford Grove either, but Baker's is much more entertaining in any case).
What I read there was intriguing: violinist, pianist and composer, born 1899 in Moscow, died in a car accident in Stuttgart in 1974; first piano lessons from her mother, a pupil of Anton (and, it turns out, Nicolas) Rubinstein; studied both piano and violin at the Paris Conservatoire and made her concert début in Berlin playing Beethoven sonatas for each instrument; violin lessons with Huberman and tours with Edwin Fischer as a duo-pianist; married the painter Walter Gramatté in 1920, and in 1934, five years after Gramatté's death, the art-critic Ferdinand Eckhardt; during 1936–42 composition lessons with Max Trapp, finally settling in Winnipeg in 1953.
Baker's also reveals an impressive list of compositions: two Symphonies, two Piano Concertos and several other concertante works, and a substantial body of chamber music, including three String Quartets.
Michael Pisani's informative notes with this set supply a good deal more information, revealing an extraordinary story indeed: Eckhardt-Gramatt é's; maiden name had been Friedman, after  her mother's ex-husband, who may not have been her father.
Her earliest years were spent in England, away from her mother, who was forced to make her living in Russia, where she taught French and piano to the children of Leo Tolstoy.
by the time Sophie-Carmen was six, she was improvising freely at the piano (though it was to be a year-and-a-half before she had any formal instruction in music).
In 1914, three years after her first public concerts, she and her mother moved to Berlin to a life of considerable hardship, until Joachim's daughter-in-law discovered her talents and arranged some scholarships for her to allow her to study with Huberman.
Her first marriage gave her the freedom to compose, and by the time of Gramatté's death Stokowski was booking here to play some of her own compositions under his direction.
Her second marriage coincided with growing recognition of her music, in the teeth of professional prejudice: two highlights were an Austrian state prize for composition in 1950 and a 1974 CBC radio documentary on her life and music.
Those are the bones of her unusual life.
the music is just an unusual, and some of it is downright odd.
These six Sonatas give evidence of an outstanding creative personality, and a ferociously energetic temperament (they sound ferociously difficult as well: her keyboard technique must have been staggering).
The music varies rather in its quality, but is always at least interesting; at is best it is passionate and compelling, sweeping the listener along with its sheer primal energy.
Sometimes, too, you have to scratch ear to make sure you really did just hear what you thought you had, for although spotting-the-influence occasionally seems to tempt the listener, there is some highly individual writing here, and the prodigality of the invention is startling: the music simply poured out of her, sometimes with a batty, Ancient-Mariner intensity that buttonholes the listener willy-nilly, not stopping to form its garrulousness into coherent shapes.
It is also informed with a deliciously perverse wit.
To begin with, her musical language is loosely, sometime unabashedly, tonal, and shows evidence of her varied background: Spain, Russia and France all peep through the passage-work. the last two Sonatas inhabit a sterner, more chromatic world, but the vigour of the counterpoint ensures that the music maintains the momentum of the previous works.
Those first four Sonatas date from 1923–31, and therefore constitute ‘early’ Eckhardt-Gramatté.
No. 1 was the first work she composed for herself to perform, and it is a pianistic tour de force .
In its Baroque inspiration its closest musical cousin is Enescu's First Piano Suite , though Eckhardt-Gramatt é's; side of the family is decidedly schizoid: there is a manic playfulness on almost every page of the work, and a knock-about unpredictability that is encountered throughout all six works.
The Second Sonata often has a Spanish flavour also found in good measure in No. 3 , and explained in part by her move to Barcelona in 1924: She lived there until Gramatté's death in 1929.
The second movement of No. 3 is a wildly witty Rondo, which she occasionally played as an encore; you can see why: the jaws of her audience must have dropped onto their collar studs at its combination of ding-bat humour and sheer difficulty.
No. 4 is at once a much more serious work than its predecessors: its first movement blazes with a Scriabinesque passion, and the third movements, ‘The Race of the Field Rats’ is, but for the last page, a bravura study for left hand alone.
The Fifth and Sixth Sonatas date from 1950 and 1952 respectively, but which time Eckhardt-Grammatt é's; musical language had become toughter and tougher, if no less prodigiously pianistic.
An aggressive urgency, not fully realised before, now comes into its own: listen, for example, to the no-nonsense power of the variations that end No. 5 .
And No. 6 displays both the breath-taking pianism we have now come to expect with a compositional skill to which one can only take one's hat off.
In a scheme that could have been inspired by Alkan's Trois Grandes Etudes Op. 76 (except that Alkan was virtually entirely unknown when the Eckhardt-Gramatté was composed; moreover, Pisani's notes explain the circumstances of its composition), the first movement is written for the left hand alone and the second movement for the right; the Finale re-unites the hands as it unites the music, combining the substance of the first two movements.
Quite astonishing.
Marc-André Hamelin is a Canadian pianist whom Altarus has already recorded in Sorabji's luxuriant First Piano Sonata (; well worth investigating).
That release brought glowing reviews from the critics.
However they might have trouble finding adjectives to do these performances justice: his breathtaking virtuosity, which takes appalling difficulties of the music in its stride, at times had me bogeared in admiration.
Indeed, the clarity of Hamelin's articulation, often at the most break-neck speeds, reminds me now and then of the playing of John Ogdon, and there can be no higher praise than that.
The recordings, made in Montreal church, initially strike the ear as a little distant, but it quickly adapts its focus; the piano tone is clear and uncluttered.
if I have gone on at length about this release, it is because I think it is of enormous interest and importance.
It is rare indeed that a composer of this stature comes to light, uneven though she is, and rarer yet for any composer to be served with performances of this quality.
Loud, strident huzzas to everyone involved in this project.
We want more; may I suggest the String Quartets…?
[MA]
FAURE
Mélodies (complete)
AMELING (soprano), ZOUZAY (baritone), BALDWIN (piano)
Discovering the jewels in this wonderful set is akin to exploring a Fabergé egg: the chiselled craftsmanship and ever-increasing refinement stir a whole gamut of emotions.
Both Ameling and Souzay are completely captivating in matters of style, with Dalton Baldwin's peerless accompaniment weaving a magical halo of subtle nuance and understatement.
Recorded not long after a live cycle at the 1974 Aix-en-Provence Festival celebrating the 50th anniversary of the composer's death, these are wide-ranging, run-in performances that completely escape the contrivance and routine that can so often creep into such extensive complete surveys.
Gerard Souzay was coming towards the end of his career by this time, and there's some occasional unsteadiness and frayed tone, but his sensitivity to mood is matchless.
Ameling encounters no technical problems whatsoever, and projects with beautiful clarity and chaste style, underlining the sovereign intimacy of much of the material.
The recorded sound is impeccable and suitably unobtrusive throughout, but although complete French texts are provided, there are unfortunately no translations.
The discs are laid out chronologically for convenience, but the consistently high quality ensures that endless options for personal programming can be planned with total confidence [IJ]
GERSHWIN
Piano Concerto; Rhapsody in Blue; ENESCU: Romanian Rhapsody No. 1; PROKOFIEV: the Love for Three Oranges: Suite
LEWENTHAL, RCA VICTOR SO, METROPOLITAN SO, ROYAL PO/DANON
A bit of a strange mixture, this.
The CD is entitled ‘A Gershwin Concert’; and, indeed, it does contain two Gershwin items.
But they sandwich two orchestral pieces thus presenting an otherwise plausible (though infrequent) sort of concert outline (Prokofiev, Gershwin, interval, Gershwin, Enescu) exactly inside out.
No, one suspects that Chesky's eyes are on the till, a suspicion confirmed by the billing on these 1962 recordings as ‘DDD’.
Are they, indeed?
The justification for such bare-faced cheek is in the recorded sound, which even the most jaundiced critic would have to admit is strikingly vivid for its age, the piano sound clear and articulate, and the orchestral detail as immediate as the day it was recorded — perhaps even more so — with just a tiny hint of brassiness and a slight shortfall of orchestral power to give the game away.
So what of the performances?
The late Raymond Lewenthal is perhaps best known these days as the first performer in modern times to have revived the music of Alkan, a collection of whose music he also published two years after he made these Gershwin recordings (in Walthamstow Town Hall, of all places).
the Alkan baton was then taken up by Ronald Smith, whose epic endeavours on Alkan's behalf have latterly overshadowed Lewenthal's.
So it is good to have these idiomatic recordings to remind us of just how good a pianist he was: in both the Concerto and the Rhapsody , rock-solid technique serves real musicality, and this CD would be worth acquiring on the strength of the Gershwin works alone.
In the Concerto especially, both soloist and conductor take the work entirely seriously, and make a substantial case for it as one of the leading Concertos of its time — the days are leaving us at least when Gershwin's ‘serious’ works (those aren't my scare quotes) were treated like the fortuitous good fortune of the upstart seven-year-old playing in big brother's room, as if he composed them by accident.
The Rhapsody , too, is given a strong, swaggering but solid reading from that famous opening clarinet Glissando onwards (it began its life, by the way, as a bit of tongue-in-cheek rehearsal mischief from Ross Gorman, the clarinettist of the Whiteman band; the delighted Gershwin insisted on retaining it).
Lewenthal's and Danon's performances, now (my goodness!) thirty years old, were recorded in the teeth of the dehaut-enbas prejudice of the day and, although their earnest approach loses a little spontaneity in the making of their point, they must have taken some of Gershwin's critics by the scruff of their ears.
So what of the make-weights, as the presentation suggests we consider them?
Enescu's Romanian Rhapsodies hung like albatrosses around his alter career, their popularity overshadowing the far more original music he was composing by then; and to add injury to insult, he  had signed away the royalties.
That doesn't affect the fact that they contain some wonderfully joyous music, especially in the First , the one on this CD.
Danon doesn't quite capture the swing that ties these dances to their Romanian background (the folktunes are genuine)— perhaps surprisingly, in view of his Yugoslav origins: it's only down the road, after all.
Nor does his love of Three Oranges Suite have the bite we have now come to expect — but the music offers delicacy, too, and Danon brings out brilliantly Prokofiev's debt to Ravel in the third movement.
So, if even there seems to be no obvious reason for having presented these recordings in this way, I am not really complaining.
[MA]
GOTTSCHALK
Piano Works
MARKS
With fine issues from Philip Martin,(Hyperion ), and Georges Rabol,(Opus 111 ), already on the market, the Gottschalk bandwagon is here given even stronger impetus with the re-issue of Alan Marks's outstandingly committed performances.
Commitment is the key word, and Marks is in full command through a most contrasted and well-planned programme that is a delight to listen to over and over again.
Take the first half-dozen tracks as a fair indication of Gottschalk's versatility and the American piano entertainer par excellence and you will covert even the most cynical of musical purists to the ‘cause’!
The disc opens with the flavour of Carmen (Souvenirs d'Andalousie ), continues with lively bravura/programmatic fun (Le banjo ), then charm (Grand Scherzo ), humour (Pasquinade Caprice ), breathtaking beauty (Berceuse ), and memorable rhythmic tautness (Tournament Galop ).
In a haunting Mazurka , Marks is fully the equal of Martin on Hyperion, and in union , I much preferred the American's fuller and deeper tone.
Overall there can be no question that this is the finest Gottschalk CD of the moment, but that should not detract listeners from the other two issues as there are few overlaps.
Nimbus should be strongly encouraged to embark on the complete oeuvre of Gotschalk with Alan Marks.
Such a cycle would admirably complement the excellent Martin Jones's Grainger cycle, and given piano enthusiasts a treasurehouse of spirit and sparkle.
Excellent sound quality and provocative sleeve notes from Klaus Geitel.
[MM]
GRIEG
Piano Concerto; SAINT-SAENS: Piano Concerto No. 2; LISZT: Hungarian Fantasy
WILD, RPO/LEIBOWITZ, STRANGER, RCA VICTOR SO/FRECCIA
I am normally wary of accepting claims made for a particular recording at the back of liner notes but when Chesky Records maintains that you can hear the difference in the sound quality of its discs, Chesky is by no means overstating the case.
Quite simply, this is one of the finest recordings of the piano concerto repertoire that I have ever heard; it has depth, clarity and a real sense of perspective.
You'd never guess that the performances actually date from the early to mid-1960's!
Which all goes to show what can actually be achieved when an analogue master tape is lovingly transferred to compact disc.
The performances too are most distinguished.
I am sure I am not alone in lamenting the major record companies' gross neglect of Earl Wild's pianism in recent years.
He is a pianist of extraordinary capability, with a virtuoso technique that is second to none.
Perhaps the poetic aspect of his playing is less apparent in these works — the slow movement of the Grieg, for example, could sound more reflective.
But in general I warmed to his fresh and unmannered account of this Concerto , and the orchestral accompaniment under René Leibowitz is especially supportive.
I would rate the other items on this disc even more highly.
The extrovert character of the Saint-Säens seem tailor-made for Earl Wild — the champagne corks really pop in the delightful Scherzo, and the rumbustious Finale is delivered with tremendous gusto.
And it goes without saying that Wild is a Lisztian of the finest order.
I do hope Chesky manages to reissue Wild's legendary RCA recording of the Scharwenka First Piano Concerto , but in the meantime all connoisseurs of superb piano playing should snap up this disc without delay.
[EL]
HANDEL
Belshazzar
ROLFE-JOHNSON, AUGER, ROBBIN, BOWMAN, WILSON-JOHNSON, ENGLISH CONCERT & CHOIR/PINNOCK
One of the great mysteries of the Bible, it has always seemed to me, was how Daniel managed to interpret the writing on the wall at Belshazzar's impious feast.
‘Thou art weighed in the balance and found wanting’ is the popularised version of his miraculous translation of the words ‘Mene, Mene, Tekel, Upharsin.’
I am no great linguist but I still can't see how both Menes are represented, nor can I understand at all, how Daniel could have drawn from these three apparently simple words his full translation: ‘God hath numbered thy kingdom and finished it.
Thou art weighed in the balance and art found wanting.
They Kingdom is divided and given to the Medes and Persians’.
The scholarly explanation is that the three words are past participles meaning ‘numbered’, ‘weighed’ and in the case of Upharsin both ‘divided’and ‘Persians.’
It all sounds a bit rich to me, and although Belshazzar swallowed it, Handel and his librettist Charles Jennens clearly took the view that it was not one of the moments from the Belshazzar story that should be dwelt upon or scrutinised to any serious degree.
Jennens drew his libretto from three books of the Old Testament as well as histories of Xenophon and Heroditus.
This wide range of reference helps to make Belshazzar one of Jennens's richest libretti and, from a musical point of view, one of handel's most unpredictable and enthralling Oratorios.
If the sound balance on this Archiv recording can seem at times a little unyielding, it is amply repayed by a freshness and dramatic spontaneity from a team of soloists who only have to have their names on the cover for us to be assured of the recording's qualities.
Trevor Pinnock ensures that the music keeps moving, and never allows us to forget that it conveys the emotional meaning of the words and is not, as some interpreters would have us believe, detached from all relevance except the purity of its own sound.
It is quite astonishing in view of Handel's vast output quite what a consistent and imaginative composer he was.
Belshazzar is unsurprisingly no exception.
With melodies, accompaniment figuration, choruses and arias on a par with Handel's very best, Archiv has produced a recording to be strongly recommended and much enjoyed.
[AW]
Messiah
RODGERS, JONES, ROBSON, LANGRIDGE, TERFEL, COLLEGIUM MUSICUM 90/HICKOX
Yet another Messiah on ‘early’ instruments, conspiring no doubt to send retailers completely mad in their attempts to decide which of the many available readings they should plump for.
There are three particular versions which all shops should carry if they have the space: Eliot Gardiner on Philips, Hogwood on l'Oiseau Lyre, and McGegan on Harmonia Mundi.
They each have something special about them.
The Philips set is probably the best overall, though it comes on three CDs, and is therefore expensive, Hogwood's is on two CDs and has Emma Kirkby terrifying the living daylights out of her listeners, while Nicholas McGegan provides the collector with an opportunity to hear all of Handel's cuts and revisions in a series of cunningly prepared appendices.
Without a moment's further hesitation, we must now add this new Chandos recording to the pile of exceptional Messiahs .
It comes on two CDs which makes it cheaper than either the Philips or Harmonia Mundi sets, and has a choir in Collegium Musicum 90 who for clarity of diction, and intense musicality, surpass all other versions with the exception of Eliot Gardiner's Monteverdi Choir.
Richard Hickox has long been recognised as an outstanding conductor and trainer of choirs, and here his usual high standards of excellence.
One has only to listen to the forthrightness of ‘Surely, He  hath borne our griefs’ or the intricate virtuosic weaving of parts in ‘And he shall purify’or ‘All we like sheep’, to realise that this is a choir or rare quality and precision which should be dragged straight back into the recording studio to commit to posterity its undoubtedly sublime view of Handel's great choral masterpieces,Solomon and Israel in Egypt , or the earlier but no less demanding Dixit Dominus .
It is not just the choral singing that puts this new Messiah up with the very best.
The soloists too each bring something unique and individual to their roles.
Christopher Robson (countertenor) has recently been electrifying audiences with his performances of Arsamenes in Xerxes at the English National Opera, and when he opens his mouth on this recording he may as well be plugging us all into the mains.
For his performance of ‘But who may abide’ alone I would go out and buy this Messiah even if the rest were trash.
Della Jones brings a new vitality to her mezzo arias.
The aria ‘He was despised’ can be quite a drag in the wrong hands, but she succeeds in making it one of the highpoints of the Oratorio, even though she appears to be under attack from a boa constrictor half way through.
It all adds to the fun.
Bryn Terfel also deserves special mention as a stunning bass who is actually in tune, and whose words are clearly understood.
Only too often have I witnessed a bad bass destroying, single handedly, a promising performance of the Messiah .
This recording has no weak link.
It is, in my opinion, as good a Messiah recording as one could wish for.
[AW]
HAYDN
Symphonies Nos. 99 & 102
ASMF/MARRINER
After their recent forays into full orchestral Tchaikovsky and Bartók, Sir Neville Marriner and the Academy of St Martin-in-the-Fields return to one of their more familiar stamping grounds in this release of two of Haydn's finest Symphonies.
Needless to say, there are a few surprises in these performances: the Academy's playing is a polished as ever, Marriner's conducting urbane and refined.
What is perhaps missing is that element of spontaneity which serves to project Haydn's originality in a more vivid manner.
Thus, while I admire the marvellous precision of ensemble and articulation in both finales, Marriner tends to underplay the music's irresistible sense of humour.
On the other hand, when Haydn is in a more dramatic frame of mind, as in the main section of the first movement of No. 102 , Marriner's controlled direction pays enormous dividends.
This particular movement, however, brings out one interpretative idiosyncrasy that I could do without; namely the inordinately drawn-out unison notes which form a dynamic contrast to the quieter material of the second subject.
The recording, made in Walthamstow Assembly Hall, is outstanding, neither too resonant nor too dry.
But the balance in the slow movement of No. 102 gives undue prominence to the solo cello line, and therefore undermines the ingenuity of Haydn's scoring.
These and other caveats prevent me from giving an unqualified recommendation to this new disc.
Besides, the playing time is hardly generous for an issue retailing at full price.
There's simply no excuse here, for Philips was perfectly able to accommodate three Haydn Symphonies onto a previous release featuring Sir Colin Davis and the royal Concertgebouw Orchestra!
[EL]
HOWELLS
A Sequence for St. Michael; The House of the Mind; Requiem; VAUGHAN WILLIAMS: Prayer to the Father of Heaven; A vision of Aeroplanes; Lord, Thou hast been our Refuge
BICKET (organ), FINZI SINGERS/SPICER
This enterprising new disc is a most worthy successor to the finzi Singers's fine Chandos recordings of Finzi and bliss released last year.
Most of these pieces are rarely enough heard, let alone recorded, so to have available performances of such obvious dedication, meticulously prepared (all praise to their director Paul Spicer) and engineered, is a rare treat indeed for all lovers of neo-romantic English music.
However, I should not automatically assume that all these pieces represent a choral distillation of the ‘green pastures and meadows’ style of English composition.
Howell's A Sequence for St. Michael was composed in 1961 for the 450th anniversary of the foundation of St. John's College, Cambridge.
It opens with a pair of agonised cries of ‘Michael’, an emotive outburst made doubly poignant when one remembers the life-long devastation that the premature death of Howell's nine-year-old son, Michael, had inflicted on the composer.
I found this a deeply disturbing work, an impression which was further intensified upon repeat hearings.
Thank goodness for the peaceful resolution of the final lines ‘Heal our sick, Ease our pain, And give us to share In the joys of the blessed’, a much-needed balm to soothe the overriding impression of inconsolable grief and anguish.
The Motet The House of the Mind (a setting of a poem by Joseph Beaumont) represents a more comfortable listening experience altogether, its rolling climaxes delivered by the Finzi Singers with moving intensity and passion.
If I would now recommend the Finzis in the shorter pieces in preference to the otherwise fine Higginbottom performances of Howells choral works on , the situation regarding the delectable Requiem is not quite so clear cut, as Hyperion also possesses an outstanding version from the Corydon Singers under their gifted director, Matthew Best ().
The Finzis have marginally the bolder recording, the voices conveying a greater sense of physical presence, experienced as if from, say, the tenth row of pews.
The Corydons are placed further away, which lends their performance an intoxicating dream-like quality, which I find particularly apt.
This is also coupled to more Howells (Take him, Earth ) and fine accounts of Vaughan Williams's G minor Mass and Te Deum in C .
Serious choral collectors will want both versions.
the Finzi Singer's VW pieces are rather more obscure, but no less intriguing.
Prayer to the Father of Heaven (a setting of a John Skelton poem) was written in memory of the composer's erstwhile teacher Hubert Parry, and forms an enticingly sensual opening to this altogether outstanding recital.
It is many years since I last heard VW's restless setting of words taken from Chapter I of Ezekiel, which in context form a strangely appropriate backdrop to the work's actual inspiration,A Vision of Aeroplanes .
More a ‘chip off the old block’ than a fully-fledged offspring, it is nonetheless a piece which all admirers of VW should certainly hear.
The Motet Lord, Thou has been our Refuge , in which VW ingeniously combines Psalm 90 (his own setting) with the Hymn ‘O God our help in ages past’(to the tune of ‘St Anne’) to ravishing effect, should certainly satisfy those with a musical sweet tooth.
Highly recommended.
[JH]
JENKINS
Six-Part Consort Music for Viols
HESPERION XX/SAVALL
This is a very beautiful music, serene, noble, discreet, poignant, composed, grief-stricken, understated, sublime — it has been a long time since I discovered anything quite so touching.
I was enormously impressed by a recent Thorofon CD of the four-art Fantasias for viols (), and so I was delighted to see six-part works follow them in time for the quatercentenary of Jenkins's birth this years.
But I was not ready for the sheer, throat-tightening beauty of virtually the entirety of this CD, which contains all eleven of Jenkins's six-part Fantasias (a twelfth may be spurious, and was omitted from this recording) as well as the other works for six-part viol consort, the two Pavans and two In Nomines.
Peter Holman's exemplary notes suggest that Jenkins composed these works in his 20s or 30s, but the quality of the music seem to belie that generally accepted claim: it is difficult to imagine such depth of repose in so young a man — though that in turn gives the modern listener a clue as to why Jenkins was such a respected and well-loved figure in his day.
The apparent ease of his contrapuntal textures, too, is another example of art concealing art: a moment's listening behind the quiet, untrammelled ease with which Jenkins expresses himself reveals the downright mastery involved.
Jordi Savall seems to have acquired a habit of strewing gold wherever he treads, and these performances buoy his reputation still further.
No recording of Jenkins's music had been available for years before the Thorofon CD, and now this Astrée issue comes onto the market, as if to underline how huge a gap in the recorded repertoire that was.
[Hyperion too will soon also be plugging this gap — Ed.]
Jenkins is revealed as a master, unarguably one of the finest composers Britain has produced.
Ultimately, of course, it doesn't matter where or when the music was composed, and I urged any reader with an ear for beauty — whether your tastes habitually range from Mozart to early Beethoven, or from Bartók to Stockhausen, or anywhere in between or beyond — to investigate this CD forthwith.
It is too important not to have the widest success.
[MA]
LISZT
Pieces from St. Elisabeth, Christus; St. Stainislaus: 2 Polonaises; Salve Polonia
HOWARD (piano)
Here we reach Volume 14 of the projected complete Liszt Piano works series by Leslie Howard, about one-third through the total.
Apart from the CDs I have already reviewed, I have been playing through others in the series to get    things into perspective and to try and plot the diverse range of Liszt's output which has so far been performed and recorded with such remarkable consistency.
Works like the transcriptions of Berlioz's Fantastic Symphony , and the opera excerpts,Hexameron , the Ballades, Legends, Polonaises, and then there are those colossal religious pieces, some well known, others complete rarities; all extend our appreciation and knowledge as no-one has done previously for Liszt's piano music.
Howard and Hyperion are to be congratulated.
The present Liszt disc is among the finest of the series to date.
The Legend of St. Elisabeth (1857–62) features three pieces from the Oratorio on piano solo: the ‘Orchestral Introduction’ sets the atmosphere with a simple devotional melody; ‘Crusaders’March’is a series of contrasting fanfare motives over a vigorously varied key structure, and ‘Interludium’uses first, fifth and eighth note repeated sequences with a tail-end flourish throughout.
The contrast between Saint Elisabeth and Christus (probably Liszt's finest single work) is marked.
Shepherd's Song at the Manger (1862–6) is intricate in both right and left hand figurations that ideally  complement one another.
It is fascinating to compare this with similar sections in Berlioz's Childhood of Christ , completed eight years previously.
‘The Three Holy Kings — March’ strides out a first with gallant confidence, but very soon the left hand accompaniments grow even more daring and complex in harmony.
By the time the star is sighted, octave passages have taken over and the excitement reaches fever pitch.
Whatever Liszt was doing to please his Polish Princess zu Sayn-Wittgenstein, which interfaces prevented the completion of the Oratorio Saint Stanislaus , the music that remains shows an enormous step forward.
We have moved onto 1875 and the two Polonaises (not to be confused with the two earlier numbers for piano solo) could not be more different.
Polonaise No. 1 is alternately minor/major throughout, with a strong atonal feel.
Like Nuages Gris , it fades away into oblivion.
Polonaise No. 2 is brash and sardonically rhythmic.
The six note left hand rhythm is literally punched out to lend a strong, exultant ring to the proceedings.
The ‘Interludium’ from the oratorio,Salve Polonia , was composed earlier in 1963.
The beginning is very dour (Fuńrailles without the regular metre).
Then, without warning, the music bursts forth with the polonaise motive.
A 15-note phrase takes over and is continuously repeated, the left hand accompanying figure becoming more and more embellished until octaves grab the attention, with the right hand adding cadenza passages to create a maelstrom of excitement.
Leslie Howard revels in it all.
Make no mistake, this series is a remarkable achievement.
Trygg Tryggvason does him full honours with both production and engineering.
If you are interested in virtuoso piano playing, you simply must own this set.
[BN]
Piano Concerto No. 3; Buch der Lieder fur Piano allein, Vol.
II; Franz Schuberts Marche S426
JANDO, HUNGARIAN STATE ORCHESTRA/GARDELLI
This is at least the third CD issued recently of Liszt's Third Concerto — a genuine work for those who may harbour doubts.
As is well-known, Liszt took many years over the composition of the two Concertos (No. 1 in E flat and No. 2 in A ).
But at the same time he composed a Third Concerto which he never played or published.
As this Third Concerto was drafted on similar manuscript paper as the others (and shares the same key as No. 1 ), and portions ended up in two countries, the substantial music for it was thought to be discarded ideas for the Firsts , although all the thematic material used in it is found in music composed or published around his fifteenth year.
In recent times, thanks to painstaking musicological research by Jay Rosenblatt, it has been shown conclusively that the Third Concerto in E flat had been there all along, as it were, obscured by drafts of other works, and by the pages having become separated and acquired by various libraries.
And so we have a ‘genuine’Third Piano Concerto by Liszt, a mature work of considerable substance.
This Hungarian account is quite the best: Jändo — a fine player — is well supported by the orchestra.
His readings of the rare solo works are also very good, but his tempi go awry near the end of the third March .
A firmly recommended CD without quite being the last word.
The acoustic in the solo works is a shade reverberant, and I'd have liked a longer gap after the Concerto , but the recording quality throughout is very acceptable.
[RMW].
Piano Works
ORLOWETSKY (piano)
Here is an interesting case of pseudo-authenticity.
This attractive and well-played recital is given on an Erard piano made in 1889, three years after Liszt died, and the latest work on the disc was composed in 1860.
Actually the instrument is a lovely one with a characteristically lucid tone, but I am bothered that anyone should think this was the sort of instrument Liszt had in mind (or played) at the time of writing works such as the Rigoletto Paraphrase and First Mephisto Waltz , both of which are delivered with considerable panache by Orolowetsky.
Born in 1959, Orolowetsky won second prize in the Utrecht Liszt Competition in 1989.
He has a fine technique and a good grasp of Lisztian idiom: the Mephisto Waltz in particular has suffered horribly at the hands of stop/go pianists who ‘apply the brakes’ all over the place.
Orolowetsky makes no such miscalculations, but he seldom produces playing of real imagination either.
The recording is bright and clean, and the rest of the programme includes the transcriptions of the Trovatore ‘Miserere’, the ‘Spinning Chorus’ from The Flying Dutchman, Polonaise No. 2, ‘Les Cloches de Genève ’from the first book of the Années de pèlerinage , and Funérailles .
A finely planned programme, but the playing lacks the last ounce of distinction and the choice of piano is somewhat curious.
[NS]
MAHLER
Symphony No. 3 in D minor
BPO/HAITINK
Although the long list of available versions of Mahler's various symphonic off-spring can usually be whittled down to a shortlist without too much difficulty, the situation regarding praiseworthy recoding of the Third has almost reached saturation point.
The Chicago SO/levine (RCA ), and the LPO/Tennstedt (EMI ), are particular favourite of mine, both of which combine superb sonics, sumptuous orchestral playing, and interpretative warmth in near-ideal proportions.
Despite the uningratiating recording quality, Bernstein's earlier NYPO (Sony ) recording still casts a magnetic spell, even if certain details are pulled out of focus long the way (the DG remake hasn't quite the same sparkle and energy).
For those who wish the work to emerge with its character heavily emboldened without in any way resorting to selfregarding artifice, then there is no denying the enormous impact of both the LSO/Tilson Tomas (Sony ) and VPO/Abbado (DG ) versions.
Finally, there are two ‘naturalistic’ conductors who apparently effortlessly allow the work to unfold in a way which becomes increasingly satisfying upon repetition: Kubelik on DG (only available as part of a highly recommended ten-CD set of the complete symphonies), and now Haitink, whose new BPO version can safely be said to  supersede his earlier Concertgebouw version.
Haitink is not one given to lofty poetics (try the decidedly unmagical, if immaculately balanced gossamer string texturing of [iii]), nor outbursts of uncontrollable excitement (close of [i]), yet the fact that one arrives at the finale with one's emotions reasonably intact pays dividends in the long-term, especially as the conductor and the BPO (on stunning form, incidentally) raise the emotional temperature several notches for this glorious movement.
Jard van Nes makes the most gorgeous sounds throughout her ‘O Mensch!
Gib acht!’(matched to perfection by the extraordinary sensitivity of her accompanists), and the Tölz Boys' Choir are engagingly fresh and alert sounding in their charming little ‘Bimm bamm’.
I would be happy to recommend this new Haitink disc, if only to hear that last movement, which features a quite miraculous synthesis of creative inspiration, interpretative insight and spellbinding BPO playing.
I can imagine that there may be some listeners who fill find the earlier movements just a shade self-effacing, despite the exceptional playing standards, typically glowing Philips recording, and exemplary foresight and structural awareness.
But if you're prepared to hold your horses a little until that final fence, I've a feeling that you may well end up ahead of the rest of the field [JH]
Symphony No. 5
BOSTON SO/OZAWA
My initial reaction to this ‘live’ recording of Mahler 5 was to question how far Seiji Ozawa really identifies with this work.
I ask this not because I believe that he doesn't care passionately about Mahler's music — you only have to hear the vocal exhortations with which he galvanises the Boston players at the most intense moments in the score to realise  this.
Neither can I complain about the standards of execution, which are on the whole extremely impressive.
Yet the resultant effect sounds unidiomatic to my ears.
It's difficult to put my finger on exactly why my response is somewhat cool.
In the opening ‘Funeral March’, for instance, Ozawa chooses tempi which allow for a good deal of flexibility, but although the Boston strings produce much expressive warmth in their long melodic lines, the doom-laden atmosphere is not immediately obvious.
Neither does Ozawa attack the second movement with the ‘great vehemence’ demanded by Mahler.
Yes, the playing is fast and brilliant, but it doesn't sound angry and desperate.
Because the temperature in the first half of the Symphony is less impassioned than in some rival performances, Ozawa has greater problems in delineating the dramatic contrast of mood which characterises the succeeding movements.
Taken on their own, the Scherzo and Finale receive highly virtuosic performances, though the nostalgic charm of the middle section of the Scherzo seems to elude Ozawa.
The Adagietto , too shows the Boston Symphony Orchestra at its most refined, but, while I admire Ozawa's emotional restraint, there needs to be more sense of ebb and flow, even at such a slow speed, if the moment is not to fall apart.
Competition is this much-recorded Symphony is pretty formidable, and there are several recordings, from Kubelik and Walter to Barbirolli, Bernstein, Haitink and Karajan, which offer more penetrating accounts of the score.
Ozawa, I'm afraid, isn't really in the same league here.
[EL]
Piano Quartet; BRAHMS: Hymn to the Veneration of the Great Joachim; BEETHOVEN: Septet
ALPE-ADRIA ENSEMBLE
A curious programme.
The Mahler Piano Quartet is a very early work in one movement, written when the composer was only 16.
Yet for all its obvious allusions to Schumann, its unrelieved and intense melancholy, which culminates in a passionate cadenza-like passage for the violin, offers a fascinating foretaste of his mature style.
As a sharp contrast, the Beethoven Septet is pure entertainment, music that makes no attempt to grapple with more complex emotional issues.
In between comes a short pièce d'occasion by Brahms, written in 1853 as a surprise birthday present for the violinist Joachim, and receiving its first commercial recording.
It is a rather uncharacteristic work, scored fr the unusual combination of two violins and double bass, which like Mozart's Musical Joke , pokes gentle fun at badly played dance music, and even includes a section where the players are instructed to shout at the beats of the bar!
This is precisely the sort of work to play to your friends if you want to keep them guessing as to the true identity of the composer.
The Alpe-adria Ensemble, which draws its personnel from a geographical area that covers Central and Eastern Europe, give a strong and hot-blooded account of the Mahler, and are suitably po-faced in the Brahms.
But I found their approach to the Beethoven far too earnest and heavy-handed for music of such freshness and charm.
Only in the Scherzo and in certain passages in the Finale do they begin to lighten the texture sufficiently.
If it's the Beethoven that is your main interest, there are far more engaging accounts in the catalogue, my personal favourite being the Vienna Octet's on Decca.
[EL]
MASON
Lighthouses of England & Wales
BBC SO/ZAGROSEK
Benedict Mason's is a highly individual (not to say aberrant) voice in contemporary British music.
Though he has attracted some favourable notices in the last few years, his works have had very few prestigious performances, and there has been absolutely no powerful publicity machine or critical coterie building up behind him.
As a result her remains one of the least known and most infrequently discussed of our younger composers; and it's thus immensely encouraging to see one of his major pieces appear on Collins Classic's new flagship ‘20th Century plus’ collection.
This is an undeniably gifted, but enigmatic, composer, who stands — as E. M. Forster said of Cavafy — at a slight angle to the rest of the universe.
Sometimes, to be honest, I don't always understand what his music is doing.
But I would much rather find Mason puzzling than feel, as I do only too often, that I know all too well what so many of his more consistently praised contemporaries are on about, in music that routinely tells me nothing I didn't know already, or would indeed prefer never to hear again.
The biography in the liner notes says that ‘his output comprises a body of works composed in the last five years’: but Mason is in his late thirties now, and his music didn't just appear from nowhere.
In fact long before the last five years he was copiously producing more or less fantastical inventions with which he comprehensively worked through a natural flair for parody, irony and offbeat musical humour.
In the early 1970s, I recall, he was associated with the Garden Furniture Ensemble, a small, diverting collective of performer-composers     (Mason is a fine violist) with roots in the halcyon innocence of British Experimental Music.
In fact I still possess a tape of the GFE performing some pretty oddball chamber pieces of Mason's, with titles like Dead Swan in Bolshoi Pit Incident, Slug Tease and McGonagle's School Bus Rumpus .
Later he did a lot of work for that curious Radio 3 Arts programme, ‘New Premises’.
I once had a humble role in one of his features: I played myself as enthusiastic musicologist, introducing a rare recordings of famous cellists performing various juicy bits (none of them had bothered to play it all) out of a stylistically promiscuous Cello Sonata by a rightly-obscure Swiss genius never existed; the cellists (who ranged from ‘Beatrice Harrison’, complete with atrocious surface-noise and garden crow effects, to ‘Yo Yo Ma’) were graphically impersonated by Moray Welsh; the ‘Sonata’ excerpts themselves, fondly murdering many turn-of-the-century composers and idioms, were of course all Ben's own work.
Do these odd origins give some clue to the complex and ambitious pieces to which mason is now prepared to put his name?
Perhaps.
A highly-developed sense of the ridiculous is inimical to the striking of certain musical attitudes; and, while I'm sure mason regards the craft of composition itself with profound seriousness, there are clearly many compositional modes and self images which he's quite unable to invest with the spurious dignity they often demand.
Certainly the taste for parody hasn't deserted him (witness the piano pieces in homage to Scarlatti, Medtner, Alkan, late Liszt et al ); nor has his taste for rum titles (such as the choral work Oil or petrol Marks on a Wet Road are Sometimes held to be Spots where a Rainbow Stood ).
Being the master — and comprehensive underminer — of so many styles has left Mason free to identify wholly with none of them; style has become one of the objects, rather than a subject or a medium, or his music.
As we discover in Lighthouses of England and Wales .
On one level, this work is a seascape/symphonic poem: a genre the British are traditionally good at, witness Tintagel, The Sea, The Forgotten Rite, Goodnight to Flamboro', Four Sea Interludes and so on.
But Mason insists on his ‘entirely objective intentions’: the music is ‘a guided tour around a chorus of the main English and Welsh lighthouses (and Fog Signal characters and Equipment), from the Solway Firth to the Farne Islands, some of which were notated ‘in the field’…each lighthouse is portrayed solo, in turn, with accompanying pre-echoes and after-images of the others’.
It's one of a series of pieces ‘featuring compositional surveying, whereby physical characteristics and statistics form the basis of a piece's musical realisation…
Precise depiction of weather was important.
I worked in all conditions and travelled to other locations during daylight’.
The composer as surveyor rather than painter, therefore, armed not with canvas but night-glasses and a theodolite.
He also says in a note on the score (the disc's liner note is slightly different) that Lighthouses ‘examines orchestrational notions of depicting weather and sea and natural phenomena in terms of our conditioned responses to such musical ‘approximations’.
Such musical devices are not intended therefore as direct Romantic ‘mood-painting’’.
Quite so.
But, maybe Romanticism creeps in anyway, albeit by way of indirection and irony.
In fact, whatever else it may be,Lighthouses is a cornucopia of virtuoso orchestral effects, a continuously shifting, shimmering kaleidoscope of sonority by a composer who seems to know just about every effect in the book, plus many he's discovered for himself, and who knows just how to use them.
Piano clusters, multi-divided strings,glissandi in harps, in brass, in timpani, semi-aleatoric sections, players breathing through wind instruments: one can't list them all, but they're packed with bewildering rapidity and truly remarkable skill into a comparatively small structural space.
To some extent the work might be categorised as a study in the various possible kinds of orchestral glissandi ; or indeed as a specious of tuba concerto, for that instrument, so evocative of whales and fog-signals and ships' sirens, often plays a quasi-obbligato role.
And the structure itself?
I detect no conventional underlying plan: although certain melodic ghosts (from La Mer , and if I'm not mistaken from Berg's Op. 6 Orchestral Pieces ) seem to cry like shags and gannets from the rocks at various locations around the coast, the work really does offer itself as a succession of episodes, most of them only a few bars in length (the shortest of all is the single bar — string and brass glissandi giving onto flutter-tongue flute with gong — that represents Orfordness).
Yet it creates a feeling of cohesion, and a larger form is imparted by the palpable sense of a journey in space and time.
It's a cold, wet night all the way down the West coast, but as we round the Lizard, about 7:00 in, it comes on to blow hard and there's quite a storm up the Channel until the serene sounds of Dungeness (at 9:40) leading to the mysterious aleatoricism of South Foreland.
What lends the work a more than merely programmatic cohesion is, I think, the extreme sensitivity of Mason's ear for harmony: the strangest agglomerations of texture have a vertical consistency in terms of pitch that identify them all as integral parts of the same piece.
Altogether this is a remarkable orchestral debut, and I strongly recommend readers to sample it.
One cavil.
In their publicity for ‘20th Century Plus’, Collins Classics has been saying that each disc in the series ‘contains around 30 minutes of music’.
This one contains around half that figure: short measure however you look at it, whatever the delights of the piece.
I hope that, as with some of the other CD singles in this series, the disc is in fact a taster for a well-filled Mason CD: there is a striking recent Double Concerto for Horn and trombone, a strange Horn Trio , and a huge, weird and wonderful String Quartet , which all deserve the repeated hearings the CD medium can provide [CM]
MENDELSSOHN
Songs Without Words (complete)
EDLINA (piano)
mendelssohn's Songs Without Words are groups of short pieces for piano arranged in ‘Books’ of six.
In total there are eight Books making 48 pieces all-told.
As the title suggests, the emphasis of each piece is song-like melody, and the nature of the music is predominantly lyrical.
With distinguished complete sets of these pieces from Daniel Barenboim  and Livia Rev , this new recording from Chandos is up against tough competition.
As a broad generalisation I'd say Luba Edlina is darker and more probing with the music, making it sound more serious and perhaps less mercurial than usual.
It's a valid approach, though I feel there is often a simple charm in these pieces that just eludes her.
So far as artlessness and simplicity is concerned, Livia Rev's recording is very special, while Barenboim scores by bringing lightness and freshness to the music which is often quite bracing.
The latter comes at midprice and offers over twenty minutes' extra music — but DC's 1973 analogue recording isn't as ripe and sonorous as the new Chandos and exhibits a little tape hiss if played too loudly.
The Hyperion recording is much more recent (1986) and fully digital, though it aims at a softer more recessed sound picture than the Chandos.
The latter was taped at different venues with the second disc (containing books Five to Eight) having a more reverberant acoustic than the first.
For those wanting a good highlights selection of the best pieces, Antrás Schieff on Decca would be a good bet .
[JMH]
MOZART
Piano Concertos Nos. 20 & 23
SHELLY (piano & director), LONDON MOZART PLAYERS
Murray Perahia's versions of Mozart's Piano Concertos Nos. 21 & 27 with the Chamber Orchestra of Europe (as screened by BBC 2 and released by Sony) were the cat's whiskers.
Howard Shelley has now achieved equally marvellous results with Concertos Nos. 20 & 23 with the LMP.
I presume this is ‘Volume I’ of a complete series.
What a beginning!
First off, may I applaud the printing of Thomas Bowes's name as a leader.
I was very impressed with him in action in the Mozart Requiem under Jane Glover which was televised to mark the anniversary of Mozart's death in December.
Under his control, the LMP show in these two highly contrasted works from 1785–6 that the blend of tonal balance and stylistic accuracy which has been their trademark ever since the group was founded is better than ever.
Shelley has performed these works consistently in live concerts and broadcasts, so has obviously formulated his ideas and polished the interpretations well.
Yet, as is always the case the results sound quite different when directed from the keyboard.
The choice of church (St. Peter's, Morden) is a good one for Brian and Ralph Couzens.
I wonder just how easy this is when so many record companies are spreading their nets far and wide to find just the right location for an increasingly varied range of repertoire commitments.
I will be interested to see Chandos's forward planning for contracted pianist Shelley and hope that his ambition to record various Romantic and 20th century repertoire is evenly spaced with the Mozart series.
[BN]
Violin Concertos Nos. 3 & 4, K216/K218
HORIGOME, CAMERATA, ACADEMICA OF THE SALZBURG MOZARTEUM/VEGH
These are elegant and stylish performances of these two delicious Concertos, and beautifully-played by all concerned.
When Mozart is played this well, it all sounds so easy, but such natural, relaxed spontaneity is the hardest thing for any musician to achieve.
The soloist is brilliant, and she is superbly accompanied by Sandor Vegh, who gets vitally responsive playing from the orchestra, with no feeling of hurry or strain.
Indeed, my only complaint is that the playing time is a bit on the short side!
Sweet, clean, well-balanced recordings make this a highly desirable disc.
[JMH]
Symphonies Nos. 40 & 41
BPO/GIULINI
‘Big-band’ Mozart; smooth, rich, warm, mellow and played with love and fastidious concern over the tiniest detail.
Giulini's view of both works has broadened noticeably since his 1965 Decca recording of these Symphonies was made, and for some listeners these performances will seem impossibly flabby and sentimental.
Current musical fashion may dictate a leaner, more vital Mozart style, but it would be a great pity to dismiss these beautiful and extremely musical accounts just because they fail to match present-day ideas.
The orchestral playing is quite ravishing at times, and Giulinii displays the utmost care over detail so that lots of subtleties can be heard despite the full textures.
Exposition repeats are observed in the outer movements of K550, but not K551, and the recordings are sweet, clean, and warm, with excellent clarity.
Providing you accept these performances for what they are, there is a great deal to enjoy here.
[JMH]
The complete Piano Trios
MOZARTEAN PLAYERS
I welcomed the Mozartean Players' disc of the two Mozart Piano Quartets () with open arms and I must say that I like their set of the Trios even more.
Up to now, I would have directed anyone looking for these works, especially as played on ‘period’ instruments, to the Hyperion set by the London Fortepiano Trio ().
I still think highly of that set but it comes on three discs — and even taking Hyperion's cheaper price into consideration, you will make quite a saving on the newer set.
The only things you will lose, are a couple of repeats which the London players include, and the newcomers do not.
I am sorry The Mozartean Players omit the repeat in the first movement of K542, which is one of Mozart's best Trios' especially since there is plenty of room for it on the disc.
I am not so bothered about losing the repeat in the Andante cantabile of K548, although that to is a lovely work — it might be argued that at 12:44, the London Fortepiano Trio's performance of this movement is too much of a good thing!
But I would not have objected to having the extra music.
Both teams include the same six central works for fortepiano, violin and cello, omitting the unfinished K442 — a ragbag of three probably unrelated movements gathered together and completed by Abbe Maximilian Stadler after Mozart's death — and the ‘Kegelstadt’ Trio for Fortepiano, Clarinet and Viola.
If you want K442 you must go to the historic monto set by Lili Kraus and co. on EMI, or the second, somewhat overblown  stylistically , Beaux Arts Trio set on Philips; but it is no masterpiece.
The first of the Trios, K254, is really a ‘Divertimento’, and the last, K564, is also a slight work (though a great favourite of mine).
To concentrate on comparisons between the period instrument groups, the London Fortepiano Trio's main asset is Monica Huggett, perhaps the world's best player of early violins.
The Mozartean Players are an American group consisting of Steven Lubin on fortepiano, Stanley Ritchie, a vastly experienced violinist, and the cellist Myron Lutzke.
I don't find Ritchie to be much behind Huggett in style and purity of tone; the cellists are about equal; and I definitely prefer the playing of Steven Lubin by a small margin.
He also uses a modern reproduction piano, which is a shade safer than Linda Nicholson's refurbished old piano.
I find Lubin's fingerwork in faster movements absolutely sparkling; and the slightly more flowing tempi he adopts in the slower movements are more to my taste.
Since the keyboard instrument sets the tone of the entire performance in a Mozart Trio, this tips the scale in favour of the Mozarteans, even without their price advantage.
They are mellowly recorded and Lubin provides a very readable essay on the music —though it is admittedly not a detailed as Timothy Crawford's for Hyperion.
[TP]
Sontas for Piano and Violin
KANTOROV (violin), PLANES (piano)
This could so easily have been a recommendable mid-price set of Mozart's mature Piano and Violin Sonatas, but it is arguably put out of court by the early digital recording (made between 1975 and 1978) which gives the violin an unpleasant rough edgy tone.
Background hiss levels are quite high, and sometimes alter in mid-track, and there is little if any sense of ambience, the sound being dry and colourless.
The performances are certainly very competent, but this isn't quite the vintage Kantorov we've come to expect from some of his later Denon recordings; a degree of blandness gives the playing a slightly ‘automatic’ quality.
With Barenboim and Perlman's set available as a mid-priced four-CD box (), readers need look no further, for there the music-making is inspired and the recording is first-rate.
[JMH]
Piano Sonatas K332, 333 & 457
HAEFLIGER (piano)
It may be thought unwise to present a young a artist in repertoire as familiar and well-recorded as this, but one only needs to listen to the first minute of track one, the F major Sonata , to realise that Haefliger is in complete command and has something unique to offer, namely youthful energy, dash and charisma.
This is very much a young man's conception of Mozart, and many will find the no-holds-barred approach works as the perfect antidote to those who nurture an overreverential conception of Mozartian style and grace.
Haefliger's Mozart is ultra romantic, and he commands an enormous daytime range.
His range of colour and tonal shading makes you sit up.
It goes without saying that a beautiful piano was used for the recording, and that Haefliger communicates and obvious sense of joy in performing.
Perhaps he does go a little over the top with the rubato in the slow movement of K332, but no-one could really object to such sincere intentions when they are delivered with such conviction and zest.
K333 in B flat is, perhaps, a little tamer, and a shade bland, particularly in the slow movement.
Nevertheless the Finale is given high definition characterisation, through scrupulously worked articulation, and a fine rhythmic sense.
The great Fantasy and Sonata in C minor is presented orchestrally, on a large but unified canvas.
The ‘Mannheim Rocket’ opening of the first movement really whizzes, whilst the depth and richness of the sound in the slow movement shows a totally different side to Haefliger's pianism.
The Finale receives an exciting and well contrasted performance, with passagework that leaps out, demanding your attention, yet remaining authoritative and stylish.
[MM]
ORFF
Carmina Burana
GIEBEL, KUEN, CORDES, WEST GERMAN RADIO CHOIR, COLOGNE RADIO SO/SAWALLISCH
There are two reasons why this 1956 mono recording of Orff's well-worn choral work is of more than usual interest.
First, the original LP enjoyed the imprimatur of the composer whose concluding speech of thanks is preserved at the end of this disc.
Second, this was one of the first commercial recordings to feature the work of the young Wolfgang Sawallisch, at that time conductor of a provincial opera house at Aachen.
Sawallisch's identification with and commitment to the music of Orff is evident from the opening bars.
The maestro breathes new life into the composer's primitive neo-Stravinskian language.
Where other interpreters fail to bring variety to Orff's incessant repetitions, Sawallisch draws infinite contrasts from the instrumental texture, at one time sensuous  then ribald, ecstatic and powerful.
The Bavarian folk material, upon which some of the music is based, is clearly in his blood, and the energy generated in the second section of the Cantata, where these dances abound, has to be heard to be believed.
Much of the credit for the high standard of this performance has to be attributed to the forceful singing of Westdeutscher Rundfunk Choir, a pro-Cordes's highest notes betray an occasional sense of strain.
EMI has been unduly cautious in not supplying the full text and translation of Carmina Burana with this release.
But I suppose in the last resort, they must have thought that the less sophisticated engineering featured here is only likely to attract a specialist audience.
Perhaps Sawallisch should be persuaded to record the work now, though I very much doubt whether he would be able to recapture the real sense of occasion which makes this disc such a compelling experience.
[EL]
POULENC
Mélodies
AMELING, GEDDA, SENECHAL, SOUZAY, PARKER, BALDWIN (piano)
The perfect contrasting partner for the complete Fauré Mélodies also released by EMI [See review above — Ed.].
Poulenc rarely achieves or even tries to emulate his fellow countryman's emotional intensity, although the more overtly entertaining and witty numbers can suddenly catch you out with a characteristically bitter-sweet volte-face .
The wider range of styles prompts five vocalists; Souzay is the least satisfactory, sounding woolier here than on the Fauré set, but again, his intuitive style more than makes amends.
Gedda is at his most genial and liquid, while Sénéchal is artfully characterful with some of the spicier songs.
William Parker takes on some of the baritone material with unabashed lyricism and plangency, leaving Elly Ameling to bring refreshing charm and beauty of tone to the soprano Mélodies.
Dalton Baldwin's linchpin accompaniments are all that one could hope for in terms of grace and humour.
Pure delight.
[IJ]
PROKOFIEV
Cello Sonata; RACHMANINOV: Cello Sonata
MA (cello), AX (piano)
As a coupling, this is not too hot: almost 50 years separate these works which ideally require different styles of playing; this highly-gifted duo unfortunately approach both works in exactly the same way.
Rachmaninov's Sonata would be better coupled with Grieg's, and the Prokofiev with more Prokofiev (the Ballade Op. 15 and the Solo Sonata Op. 133 ); this CD is akin to mixing Reger and Henze.
Both Sonatas are cleanly played, but the inner momentum of Rachmaninov's first movement is lost: Yo-Yo Ma too often takes a back seat when he ought to be showing the lead, and this affects the balance.
Cellists often fail in this work, which demands a close understanding of Rachmaninov's style, rather closer than cellists customarily experience.
Whereas the Rachmaninov is a confident masterpiece, Prokofiev's late Sonata inhabits a distant Russian Winter landscape; its inner subtleties remain obscured in this account, which I found rather too self-indulgent for genuine musical understanding.
[RMW]
RACHMANINOV
Piano Concertos Nos. 2 & 3
GUTIEREZ, PITTSBURGH SO/MAAZEL
Really terrific new recordings of Rachmaninov's Second Concerto are rare events, but I think we have one here.
Sviatoslav Richter (DG made such a memorable recording of the piece, that others have had an almost impossible act to follow unless they too have had something comparably original to say about the work.
I have to confess extreme disappointment with most new versions over the last few years, making my pleasure in the newcomer even greater.
Here is a similar mixture of impetuosity and nobility which makes Richter so special.
The orchestral accompaniment from Maazel and the Pittsburgh SO is supremely alert and radiant sounding.
The recording is good even by Telarc's standards: definitely first class.
Try the Finale (track 3) for a representative example of the dazzling but highly intelligent pianism on offer here, as well as the impressive orchestral contribution.
The Third concerto is no less successful.
I love the calm nobility with which Gutiérez plays the opening paragraph.
Equally impressive in his playing of Rachmaninov's accompanying figurations which can sound like rather tricky note-spinning in less intelligent hands.
He really knows which details to bring out as part of the musical logic of the piece, and he has the technique to do it.
Again in this movement the orchestral playing is superb.
I have frequently been bothered by Maazel's work on record for all sorts of reasons, but here he sounds thoroughly absorbed in the proceedings.
The same is true in the slow movement — listen to the meltingly beautiful oboe and string playing at the start.
With soloist, conductor and orchestra on this kind of form, it is no surprise that the Finale goes off like a rocket.
Gutiérez is never the servant of his own brilliant technique.
Heart and mind are fully engaged as well as fingers, and the results are very exciting indeed.
For this generous coupling there are comparatively few rivals.
Of these, Wild and Horenstein () are undeniably impressive, but I find the present performances have an even greater sweep to them.
For either Concerto, this new disc deserves a place close to the top of a very long list.
[NS]
Symphony No. 2; Vocalise
BBC WELSH SO/OTAKA
Rachmaninov's Second Symphony appears to have fully emerged from the shameful obscurity it once endured to become one of the most popular and recorded of all Romantic symphonies.
Not only that, but there are at least half-a-dozen versions vying for pole position at present, to which this new recording from Tadaaki Otaki and the BBC Welsh can safely be added (the halfstar is only dropped, incidentally, for the less than ideal internal clarity and rhythmic definition of the recording, which is otherwise tonally pleasing and possesses a warm ambience ideal for this particular work's lush textures).
Otaka has clearly had a most inspiring influence on the BBC Welsh, so much so that I am quite convinced that anyone coming to this excellent new recording blindfolded would never guess its provenance.
Everything has obviously been well prepared both technically and musically (not the remotest suspicion of a studio run-through), and the orchestra sound really fired up, which is more than one can say about a disturbingly large number of recordings which have emerged over the last few years!
We record reviewers love to  pigeonhole performances, but this one has a distinct personality all its own.
Not for Otaka the near-hysterical passion of Ashkenazy, the laid-back portamento style of Litton, the intoxicating flair of Ormandy, or the knife-edge brilliance of Maazel.
Otaka ensures that nothing is allowed to detract from the overview, yet he allows his orchestra sufficient freedom to shape phrases affectionately   without every suffocating them.
This extends to his judicious choice of tempi which thankfully avoids the ‘brakes on for the big melodies’ approach, which in some versions comes close to collapsing the entire edifice under its own emotional weight.
His control of all those long-arched phrases is also most praiseworthy so that nothing overheats too soon, although the peaks of phrases blossom affectionately.
The Nimbus engineers also ensure that the ever-lovely Vocalise emits a particularly warm glow.
The BPO/Maazel version on DG has become something of desert island version for me in recent months, although the Philadelphia/Ormandy (Sony ) is every bit as essential for its uniquely authentic atmosphere (despite the cuts).
It is a sign of the success of this new Nimbus recording that it is far from effaced in such company, and will no doubt win this barnstorming masterwork of late-Romanticism many new friends.
The important thing is to ensure that you acquire at least one of these versions of Rachmaninov 2 — if it's a piece you're still not familiar with, then now's as good a time as any to rush down to your local shop and do something about it.
I assure you, you won't regret it!
[JH]
Symphony No. 3: Symphonic Dances
PHILADELPHIA ORCH. /DUTOIT
Compared to the extraordinary finesse of Maazel (DG ), the infectious volatility of ashkenazy (Decca ), the white heat of Ormandy (Sony ), the affectionate warmth of Previn (EMI ), and the quite extraordinary magnetism of the composer's own recording (Pearl ), Dutoit may at first appear a shade reluctant in the Third Symphony to fully indulge Rachmaninov's unequalled genius for long-breathed lyrical melody.
He refuses to play for the moment, boldly pressing on where others tend to dwell; yet, with those Philadelphians really turning it on for the composer with whom this orchestra is most indelibly associated, superbly captured in Decca sound of great sumptuousness and tonal allure (even if not always ideally balanced), it all makes for compulsive listening.
The orchestra's apparent refusal to play at anything less than mezzo-piano robs the music of atmosphere in such magical moments as the lead into the second subject of (ii), and the violins are not quite the matchless section they once were, yet the sheer bravado and infectious confidence of the whole venture carries an unmistakable stamp of authority.
As regards the Symphonic Dances , competition resides mainly with the boundless energy and excitement of Ashkenazy on Decca, the luxuriantly seductive LSO/Previn (EMI ), and the stunning physical impact and knife-edge precision of Maazel (DG ).
Dutoit is remarkably successful at avoiding the Hollywood cinematic style, so that the 1940s nostalgia endemic in, say, the unforgettable saxophone second subject of (i), is sounded with a purity and sense of line which one would more readily associate with Ravel than Rachmaninov — yet, by golly it works!
The composer's extensive treatment of this theme comes very close to toppling the first movement's structure in some versions, where virtually every note is caressed to the point of near-suffocation.
Only Maazel is as successful as Dutoit in maintaining a true sense of forward momentum, as opposed to the usual effect of a lengthy ‘dream interlude’.
If you like the idea of the Symphonic Dances being performed as a series of mildly undulating curves around a firmly maintained central axis, Dutoit is your man.
Maazel is similar in his general approach except that the undulations are markedly more exaggerated.
Previn and Ashkenazy in their different ways indulge the undulations without worrying unduly about the central axis, which considering rachmaninov's generic title ‘Symphonic’ is perhaps a little too much of a good thing.
Incidentally, Dutoit dampens the tam-tam at the end (he's not the only one!), despite Rachmaninov's clear instruction that whilst the rest of the orchestra play a quaver, the tam-tam should go to the end of the bar (notated dotted crotchet) with the implication that it should be allowed to carry on beyond.
My preferred versions?
Undoubtedly Maazel and the composer in No. 3 , but I would be hard-pressed to choose between Maazel and the splendid new Dutoit in the Symphonic Dances .
[JH]
Variations on a Theme of Chopin; Variations on a theme of Corelli;(arr.)
WILD: Four song transcriptions
WILD (Piano)
By an extraordinary coincidence the two greatest composerpianists of this century both chose the same Chopin theme, the prelude, Op. 28 No. 20 , as the basis of a set of variations, and each set was its composer's Op. 22 .
The two approached the task from very different starting positions.
In 1884, when he finished the first version of his set (he revised it to form part of his Klavierübung in 1922), Busoni was only eighteen, but he was always a practised composer, with an enormous quantity of piano music to his credit — indeed, he had composed five Sonatas and a host of other pieces for all sorts of forces before he was fifteen.
Rachmaninov, almost 30 when he completed his Chopin Variations , was by contrast more cautious, setting out to compose his first large-scale solo work for his own instrument; and, although he already had the popular Second Concerto behind him, he had also been deeply affected by the disastrous première of his First Symphony , just four years earlier, under the erratic baton of the guttered Glazunov.
And although there are similarities, too, not least in the prodigality of the invention, the real difference lies in the music: in essence, while Busoni, ten years younger, was on the doorstep of discovering his own language, Sergei Vasilyevich had found his some time back.
But even if he knew he was speaking with his own voice, rachmaninov, the eternal doubter, wasn't happy with his structural abilities: he authorised the excision of three of the variations and the coda.
But all his caution can't hide the fact that this is a substantial achievement, with some particular memorable piano writing, especially towards the end, as the music becomes more and more compelling, ultimately aspiring to the monumental.
Quite how individual that voice could become is underlined in the surest possible way in his later Corelli Variations Op. 42 of 1931: the monumental is the very stuff of which they are made.
The melody which receives Rachmaninov's magisterial attention was not Corelli's own but that old Iberian favourite,La Folia (its origin has been traced to Portugal, around 1500).
It had attracted the interest of several composers before (Corelli, Localelli, C.P.E. Bach and Salieri among them), but Rachmaninov's ‘foliations’ leave the others standing: this is simply one of the finest sets of variations composed for the keyboard since Beethoven's Diabellis .
In Earl Wild it receives the treatment it cries out for.
Marketing people would have us believe that every eighty-oddyear-old pianist who dies was ‘the last of the Romantics’— yet there is something in that, and there does seem to be an increasing number of younger pianists who play, as Horowitz had it, like typewriters.
Quite simply, they don't take risks.
But the Cherkasskys and the Wilds do, which is what makes their playing so exciting.
There is undeniably something ‘over-thetop’ about Rachmaninov's piano music, a larger-than-life quality that requires larger-than-life treatment, and that extra dash of daring in Wild's playing (not for nothing do his fans call him ‘Wild Earl’) can be relied upon to produce something more than unusually exciting.
There is, indeed, so much vigour in the playing that it is hard to credit him with the age the dictionaries seem to agree on (he was six months short of his 75th birthday when he made these recordings).
In the Chopin and Corelli Variations virtuosity is in general subservient to long-term musical goals.
But in the four transcriptions of Rachmaninov songs recorded here (the first is the ubiquitous Vocalise ), of a series of fourteen that Wild made in 1981, his prestigious pianism is let off the leash, most exhilaratingly in the fourth, ‘floods of Spring’, in which floods of notes offer the pianist a platform for some hair-raising virtuosity.
Wild is served admirably by his producer and recording engineer: the piano tone is both crystal-clear and powerfully meaty.
This is, in short, an entirely successful CD, and one of those rare recordings that can be described as a monument to the art of playing the piano.
For a while Wild was one of those master-pianists whose neglect by the recording companies is quite inexplicable (Jorge Bolet, pre-Decca, and Mieczysaw Horszowski are only two among many others obvious examples).
But now he seems to have attracted the attention of Chesky Records (the CD of Wild's dazzling Gershwin transcriptions is on Chesky CD32 ).
So let us hope that the association is long and fruitful.
If the people at Chesky know what is good for them, they will give ‘Wild Earl’ his head and record whatever he wants: there is almost no other pianist around playing his kind of repertoire with his kind of zest.
(I hope someone whispers ‘Medtner’ in his ear…
)[MA]
RAVEL
Bolero; Piano Concerto in G: FAURE: Ballade; Piano works; DEBUSSY: Piano works
LONG (piano), LAMOUREUX CO, UNNAMED ORCHS. /RAVEL, GAUBER
The recording of Ravel conducting his Bolero was originally coupled with the Chansons madécasses and Prokofiev's Romeo & Juliet Suite ().
This programme however is far more attractive as it features the great Marguerite Long in music by the three 20th Century French composers with whom she was closely associated.
Neither the Lamoureux nor ‘Symphony Orchestra’ in the early 1930s were first rate ensembles technically, but the authentic feel for the music is there, no mistake about it.
I was very interested by the trombone solo in Bolero — the quickening of phrase and shortening of notes during the slides give a distinctly french feel, and a touch of    naughtiness into the bargain!
Long's playing in the Concerto possesses feather-light dexterity with sly, wittily contrasted phrasing, which only serves to emphasis the nonchalant brilliance and simplicity of her interpretation.
In keeping with the composer's wishes, the orchestra play with and not against the piano.
Collectors familiar with Marguerite Long's recordings of the two Fauré Piano Quartets will know she is ideal in these works.
The Ballade for Piano & Orchestra provides a further valuable insight into the essential ‘rightness’ of her approach, with its naturalness of phrase and no sentimental cloyness.
Some of the tempi in Fauré's solo piano music —Nocturne No. 4, Impromptus Nos. 2 & 5 — are rather fast, but always clear and concise.
Long studied with Debussy and in the book ‘At the Piano with debussy’(Rene Julliard 1960, trans.
J. M. Dent & Sons Ltd., 1972) she tells of her first meeting with the composer, of his influence on her technique and interpretation, of how she came to terms with the music, of Plante and other virtuosi, and gives a detailed analysis of various pieces.
On this record, the Deux Arabesques, La plus que lente and Jardins sous la pluie , originally recorded in 1930, fully illustrate debussy's teaching.
Pearl's transfers by Attwell, Wells and Haynes have safely committed them to CD.
[BN]
Daphnis et Chloë (complete); Bolero
CBSO & CHORUS/RATTLE
I found this in many ways remarkable performance of Daphnis frustratingly difficult to assess, even after several hearings.
Sensuous of sound, immaculately directed, the playing somehow never quite manages to transport one fully to the idyllic world of nymphs and shepherds.
One admires the results as one might standing back for a painted landscape, yet I miss the sensation of really ‘being there’.
I wouldn't describe Rattle's treatment as in any way unfeeling, merely that the various strands are shaped and honed with an unusual sensitivity to detail but at a relatively low emotional temperature.
Rattle's apparent desire (masterfully achieved) is to shape the piece into a convincing, cogently-argued structure, almost turning it into an extended ‘symphonic’ rather than‘choreographic’poem in the process.
The image of Ravel as the master Swiss clock-maker is readily brought to mind.
The sadly ubiquitous Bolero is also a shade coo, yet here rattle's meticulous approach scores a bulls-eye.
There is an other-worldly quality to this performance that when listened to cumulatively makes for compulsive listening.
The individual solos may have been characterised more knowingly elsewhere (most notably on the old PCO/Cluytens on EMI ), but the almost Karajeanesque sheen and Maazelian attention to detail bring their own rewards.
The Daphnis is beginning to grow on me; the Bolero is required listening.
The fine recording possesses a very wide dynamic range — try playing the opening of Daphnis at a realistic level, and twoand-a-half minutes later I guarantee your speakers will be demanding overtime!
[JH]
REGER
6 Burlesques Op. 58; Introduction and Passacaglia: 12 Waltz Caprices Op. 9; variations and Fugue on a Theme by Mozart O. 132a
TAL, GROETHUYSEN (piano duet)
Has Reger's time finally come?
I only ask this question because devotees of this composer have probably never been in a better position to acquire a good cross-section of his output on disc.
Hopefully, this new and intelligently planned release, emanating from one of the major record companies, should do much to further Reger's cause.
Those who cling to an impression of Reger as an unrelievedly turgid and ponderous musician should certainly sample the 6 Burlesques of 1901 which open this recital.
They are surprisingly varied miniatures, demonstrating Reger's ability to avoid the predictable, and indulge in some daring modulations at the same time.
The set culminates in an outrageously zany harmonisation of the famous ‘O du lieber Augustin’, whose adventurousness may well have made even a composer like Prokofiev blanch.
After this comes the composer's 1914 arrangement of an organ piece, the Introduction and Passacaglia in D minor which illustrates another side of Reger's creative outlook, namely his interest in extending the neo-Baroque traditions of Romantic style.
Unlike some of reger's other works in this manner, this piece is economical in gesture, yet grand in its architectural conception.
While the early Waltz-Caprices , composed when Reger was only 19 years of age and a student at the Wiesbaden Conservatory, are evidently modelled on the numerous dance sets by Brahms (yet another of the composer's musical heroes), they amount to much more than blatant pastiche.
Again, I was astonished by the range of Reger's resource and the variety of moods captured within these engaging salon pieces.
Piano duettists who have tired of presenting the Brahms Hungarian Dances or the Op. 39 Waltzes in recitals could do well to make the acquaintance of this work.
Finally, we come to the Mozart Variations , Reger's acknowledged orchestral masterpiece.
Like Brahms's Haydn Variations (to which it owes a great deal), the work was originally published in two versions, one for full orchestra, the other for two pianos with a different final variation.
But Yaara Tal and Andreas Groethuysen elect to perform the work in Reger's later transcription for piano duet which restores the original orchestral variation.
It is only in this particular section, where Reger resorts to the use of low tremolandi on a pedal point, that the orchestral provenance of the music is in any evidence.
Elsewhere, the transcription strikes me as being entirely successful.
Undoubtedly its effectiveness is enhanced by the sensitivity and tonal variety of this duo partnership.
The concluding Fugue, for example, exhibits a clarity and lightness of texture which once again serves to negate the label of prolixity which for too long has been attached to Reger.
Strongly recommended.
[EL]
RHEINBERGER
String Quartets Nos. 1 & 2
CAMERATA QUARTET
Liechtenstein is not famous for many things.
It is the world's leading exporter of false teeth.
And it gained some notoriety for obduracy on female  sufferance while the rest of the developed world was gradually seeing sense.
And Liechtenstein's chief musical claim to fame is that its capital, Vaduz, was the birthplace of Josef Rheinberger (1831–1901), a fairly prolific composer even by the standards of his day.
He is remembered chiefly for his series of twenty Organ Sonatas, but there is much more besides; a substantial corpus of choral music, including three Requiems and no fewer than twelve Masses, two operas, a Symphony, symphonic poem, two Concertos for Organ (once upon a time available from E. Power Biggs on a CBS LP) and one for Piano — and a fair amount of chamber music, sixteen opus numbers in all, of which this Thorofon CD (the least of seven) rounds off a complete recording.
I have a suspicion, too, that we ow something else to Rheinberger: his Eighth Organ Sonata in E minor , appeared in 1882, two years before Brahms's Fourth Symphony (also in E minor).
Both works end with a passacaglia .
We know that Brahms kept a keen eye open for new music, and that he knew Rheinberger — what I wonder is whether it was the Rheinberger Sonata that suggested to Brahms the form for the last movement of his Symphony ?
Still, if Brahms knew his Rheinberger, what this CD makes clear is how well Rheinberger knew his Brahms, who stands over theses String Quartets, as Beethoven did over the young Brahms himself, only much more obviously: there are echoes of Brahms in the textures, the themes, the passage-work, the construction.
Still, if you are going to admit the influence of another composer, it might as well be the greatest one of your day.
There are also little hints of other composers peeping through the odd snippet of theme, a chordal progression here and there, a rhythmic outline — often not quite obvious enough for you to put your finger on it.
But for all the insufficiency of Rheinberger's digestive tract, this is an enjoyable disc.
Rheinberger was, to put it mildly, a very competent craftsman, and both these quartets are very well turned,No. 2 in particular closing with an impressive fugue.
And although he wrote no fewer than twelve String Quartets between the ages of fourteen and nineteen, as well as a set of Variations for String Quartet Op. 93 , these two are Rheinberger's only two mature works for a medium in which he obviously felt very much at home.
Indeed, it is the ease of his academicism that marks these Quartets, rather than any inspired invention.
One can hear why Rheinberger was a respected teacher: the compositional technique is well-nigh faultless, there are no surprises, none of the aural wrong-footing that makes for memorability.
Does it sound as if I am striving to avoid saying that the music is boring?
I am trying to avoid going that far: it does keep the ear occupied, at least for its duration, even if it doesn't drift back into your consciousness afterwards, and these are solid, lusty performances by the Camerata quartet, a young Polish group, in impressively immediate recordings.
What's more, releases like this, and the others in the series, are extremely valuable in allowing us to form a fuller picture of the musical background against which giants such as Brahms are judged.
It's just that I can see myself listening to the Brahms Quartets rather more often.
[MA]
SAINT-SAENS
Christmas Oratorio
This is a lovely piece — very Romantic, very Victorian and quite enchanting.
The booklet claims 1858 for its date (as opposed to the usual 1863), and the work bears excellent testimony to the precocity of Saint-Saëns's talent.
The piece begins with an orchestral prelude, subtitled ‘In the style of Bach’— well, Bach revised by Gounod perhaps, an elegant an charming pastorale, which sets the mood for much of the rest.
Simplicity and grace are the keynotes of this music, which is generally well executed by these German forces.
Edith Wiens has a tight vibrato, not at all like the vibrato of French sopranos and which rather spoils her second soprano solo, but the others make up for it with the highly unusual duo for first soprano and bass, accompanied by harp and organ (an arresting combination), or with the utterly ravishing trio for first soprano, tenor and bass, with its elaborate harp accompaniment.
I'd like to hear French or English forces record this; there is a certain Teutonic stolidity here which is not always appropriate.
However, the sheer charm of this performance is not to be denied.
Never mind its length, this is a delightful CD.
[KL]
Symphony No. 3; La Jeunesse d'hercule
ALAIN (organ), VIENNA SO/PRETRE
I have been eagerly awaiting the re-issue of Paul Paray's Mercury recording of Saint-Saëns No. 3 .
I hope it won't be too long coming now — it remains my ideal performance of this piece [Just released — Ed.].
The features of Paray's performance which make it such a success are relevant to assessing the newcomer on Erato.
For instance, in the Finale Paray drives the music very hard from start to finish, with the result that it comes over as something genuinely exciting as well as grand and loud.
He also brings out some thrilling orchestral details which can easily be submerged in the sound of a organ going for glory.
Of other earlier recordings, I much admire both charles Münch's RCA versions for similar reasons.
In my view, no recording made in the past 20 years has managed to emulate the vigour and thrust of Paray and Münch in this piece, though I know Barenboim, Levin (both DG ) and Dutoit (Decca ) have their committed admirers and these are undoubtedly impressive in their own way.
I doubt very much if Prêtre's disc is likely to attract as enthusiastic a following as any of the above.
Listening to the Finale in particular, I was struck by the lack of driving force there is behind it in this performance.
In fact the conductor actually makes matters worse by indulging in all sorts of slowing up at phrase ends, making the thing into rather an elephantine procession.
The recording captures all this quite impressively, along with what sounds like a false entry by one of the trumpets in the middle of the pomp and splendour, but Prêtre wears very heavy boots throughout.
Marie-Claire Alain makes a wonderful sound on the organ of the Vienna Konzerthaus, and at least this disc has the advantage of having been made withe the organ and orchestra in the same building.
This is not the case with several of the better-known recordings of the work where the organ has been added on later.
Not a winner then, but if you relish the wonderful excesses of this piece (as I do), Prêtre seldom causes offence.
It's just that other have had so much more to say about the work.
[NS]
SCHILLINGS
Violin Concerto: Moloch: Harvest Festival; King Oedipus Prologue
ROZSA, CZECHOSLOVAK STATE PO (KOSICE) /WALTER
It was really only a matter of time before a label as enterprising as Marco Polo got round to unearthing Max von Schillings (1868–1933).
If he is remembered for anything it is probably his opera Mona Lisa first performed in Stuttgart in 1915, thereafter enjoying some modest success.
Politically, he was an enthusiastic member of the Nazi party in its early days.
As the most informative booklet points out, he only avoided the later excesses of the Nazis by conveniently dying in July 1933.
It is fascinating to hear one of his major works such as the Violin Concerto , composed in 1910.
It is heavily influenced by Richard Strauss and Wagner, but it is by no means absurdly derivative: in fact Schillings has quite a flair for arresting harmonic ideas.
I am not so convinced about his melodic gifts in this work.
Anyone with taste for late-Romantic byways should enjoy this piece, though the 23-minute first movement is decidedly long for its material.
Even so, this is lush stuff indeed, well played by Ernö Rosza and accompanied acceptably by the Kosice State PO under Alfred Walter.
The disc also includes an extract from one of Schillings's earlier operas Moloch| , composed in 1906.
This is the ‘Harvest Festival’ scene, which was apparently found pretty banal by the Dresden critics at the time of the première.
I don't really think much has changed in appropriate critical judgements since 1906, but it is an intriguing example of Schillings in triumphalist mood.
The final piece is a dour symphonic poem inspired by Sophocles's Oedipus .
It lacks the rich colours and harmonies of the Concerto , and has difficulty producing a single memorable idea during its 13 minutes.
The new CD is well worth investigating for the Violin Concerto .
It is a very long piece (probably too long) but contains some attractive ideas.
I am delighted to have heard anything worthwhile by Schillings, whose music I have known for some time in piano-vocal scores but have not encountered in performance.
Full marks to Marco Polo for enterprise.
There is a substantial crowd of Schillings contemporaries waiting on library shelves awaiting discovery, and I am sure Marco Polo will bring us some of these.
Could I urge exploration of the Zemlinsky pupil Johanna Müller-Hermann, whose String Quartet (once published by Universal Edition) looks intriguing?
Even more pressing in the need for recordings of the original left-hand versions of the Franz Schmidt piano works (three Quintets, a Concerto and the Beethoven Variations ).
Is anyone ever going to record these magnificent works in the form they were written?
And if Marco Polo feel like something less earnest, how about a first complete recording of Richard Heuberger's glorious operetta Der Opernball ?
[NS]
SCHUBERT
Symphonies Nos. 4 & 6
LCP/NORRINGTON
Regular readers will no doubt be nodding their head knowingly: it's ‘authentic’, it's Norrington, it's [JH]— bound to be at least!
However, my enthusiasm for authenticism in general and Norrington's performances in particular should not lead readers to assume that the moment his latest CD goes in the tray I'm all set to start spraying stars around like confetti.
The fact is that Schubert's Symphonies are appallingly badly served at present, with the exception of the ‘Unfinished ’ and ‘Great ’, although there too my heart tends to sink at the memory of even some of the established ‘best buys’.
I would be inclined to choose Abbado's COE versions (DG ) as the finest available recordings of the Fourth and Sixth Symphonies on modern instruments (or Wand's on RCA if you really must have full orchestral forces), and until now the Hanover Band under Roy Goodman (Nimbus ) have had the field to themselves, ‘authentically’ speaking.
I rather like the Nimbus set, despite the generous acoustics and the occasional technical frailty, as not only has one the inestimable benefit of hearing the music shaped, balanced, and paced in a way that at least approximates the sort of thing Schubert originally had in mind, but they all sound as though they're having such a jolly good time (one palls at the though of all those ghastly, poe-faced Schubert records which litter the catalogue).
And this is where I feel they have the edge over Norrington.
The LCP are recorded more closely (note entirely to the violins' advantage in the busier moments of the outer movements), and although this lends a welcome clarity, I find the results almost totally devoid of charm.
I'm not one for imbuing phrases with a coy, knowing wink in their gait, but at the same time there is a meticulousness about these particular performances (the Sixth is slightly better in this respect), which prevents the music from leaping off the page as quite it should.
Mind you, this is still far preferable to the overblown, textural obesity of versions from the likes of the BPO (Böhm and Barenboim), and VPO (Kertesz and Muti).
Not one of Norrington's finest recordings then, but one that at least has one rethinking these delightful scores in the wake of countless recordings that have found me positively itching to get to the end!
[JH]
SCRIABIN
Symphony No. 1; Prometheus
Segerstam is wonderfully intoxicating with Scriabin's languid wafting, as the very opening of the Symphony amply demonstrates.
But when it comes to the ecstatically energised and demonstrative music, he either plays safe with tempi and tones down orchestral brilliance or, more alarmingly, decides to add a wealth of extra cymbal (suspended and clashed), presumably in the misguided notion that more emphasis is required.
This tampering is fairly extensive and becomes tiresomely predictable; moreover, instead of adding to the impact, already well-saturated textures are clouded even more.
Scriabin's First Symphony is a cyclic, tautly structured work than can well    manage without being manoeuvred towards the sound world of the Poem of Ecstasy , and Segerstam would have done better to have had more of an ear for pacing and projection than is evident here.
He's much more in his element in prometheus , which heaves and sighs as though it's actually giving birth to fire.
The daunting concertante piano part is well integrated into the burgeoning orchestral texture, and sharply articulated by Love Derwinger.
The ultimate distinction for any performance of this work must be to topple over and drown in its own pretentiousness and Segerstam's direction doesn't possess quite the urgency or the dazzle to achieve that.
But it's a worthy attempt nevertheless and greatly assisted by the voluminous recording quality.
[IJ]
Préludes, Etudes, Mazurkas,(Selection)
This is a fascinating historical testament for specialist collectors, pianofiles, and the curious-minded, which offers some tantalising glimpses of great playing through a haze of appallingly bad (mono) reproduction.
The sound quality varies enormously throughout the 39 tracks,(which span roughly 50 years), but is at its worst in the eight cylinder recordings made by the composer himself in 1910.
Yet how interesting and how informative it is to note Scriabin's rubati, rhythmic subtleties, and extreme tempi.
The famous D sharp Etude begins fairly quiet and slowly, but the temperature gradually rises to an incredible degree at the climax.
Scriabin was obviously an heroic pianist and master of the big gesture.
By contrast Alexandre Goldweiser, the teacher of Nikolayeva, Berman and Bashkirov, seems quite tame and civilised.
The quality of sound on his tracks is boxy, but the playing ha a wistfulness about it, showing Goldweiser as a past master of charm and elegance on an intimate scale.
Surprisingly the highlight of the CD is undoubtedly the performances of Mazurkas by Samuel Feinberg (1890–1962).
He was the first Soviet pianist to play and record all of Bach's Well-Tempered Clavier , and his Scriabin was praised by the composer.
On listening to these performances it is easy to understand why.
Feinberg is devoted to every detail of the text, and his rhythmic understanding is breathtaking.
From the elegance of the slower pieces to the humour of Op. 3 No. 6 , he proves that Scriabin's Mazurkas are worthy of the closest attention.
Heinrich Neuhaus, the great teacher, performs a selection of the Préludes with a civilised warmth, authority of experience, and conviction of phrasing, whilst the disc finishes with performances from the composer's son-in-law, Vladimir Sofronitski.
Through the appalling Sofronitski's tone.
The care and attention given to every phrase is apparent in a selection of Etudes before an enormously conceived Vers la flamme rounds off the recital in a haze of white hot passion and intensity.
[MM]
SHOSTAKOVICH
Symphonies Nos. 6 & 9
OSLO PO/JANSONS
I must confess that in the case of Mariss Jansons, I have (on record at least) so far failed to hear quite what all the fuss has been about.There is a streamlined efficiency about his recordings which is beyond question, with everything well prepared and executed, but it has always struck me that his interpretative qualities have always lagged way behind his undisputed capabilities as an orchestral trainer.
Until now , that is, for here's a disc of which virtually any conductor/orchestra partnership could justifiably be proud!
The long opening movement of the Sixth Symphony is customarily played either as though all the cares of humanity were resting heavily upon its shoulders (try the Previn/LSO on EMI ) or as a nerve-jangling protest against Stalinish suppression (Moscow PO/Kondrashin on Chant du Monde ).
Jansons encourages playing of the widest emotional (and dynamic) range without ever resorting to hysterical contrast, effortlessly integrating the various changes of mood into a meaningful symphonic whole.
There is a tendency for this weighty movement to overbalance its relatively terse bedfellows —(ii) and (iii) are often experienced as mere appendages.
Jansons masterfully keeps the music's internal momentum alive without any sense of undue haste, and although the allegro bustles energetically along, Jansons resists the temptation to tear Shostakovich's occasionally violent texturing to shreds For once the Finale appears as a crowning inevitability, rather than merely a throw-away moto-perpetuo of staccato virtuosity.
As for the Ninth , that delicious reaction against the ‘monumental’ Ninths of Beethoven, schubert, Mahler et al , Jansons is once again clearly in his element.
The knockabout humour of (i), with its intentionally ludicrous juxtaposition of standard cadential formulae, is an absolute riot (the more so for not trying too hard), as is the central presto Scherzo which illicits a truly remarkable response from the Oslo players (gloriously fruity trumpet solo).
In other words Jansons encourages the listener to join in all the fun without ever spoiling it by camping things up along the way.
Bravo!
[JH]
Symphony No. 10
ROYAL CONCERTGEBOUW/FLOR
A less than shattering experience simply won't pass muster in this of all Shostakovich symphonies.
In an unusually perceptive liner note, Robert Layton hits the nail on the head when he says ‘It is the exercise of true symphonic discipline that removes the Tenth from the private world to the universal’.
Quite so.
But when the performance doesn't fully clothe the score with its attendant quota of emotional drama, we're left with no meat on the bones.
Flor gets off to an impressive start; the terraced dynamics and tempi of the opening section are brooding and solid, with deep, ruminative phrasing from the Concertgebouw basses.
The solo flute persuasively nudges momentum forward, and the arrival of the bassoon trio in pained, baleful tones really dredges the depths.
But the move to the climax doesn't build with inexorable power, the backward placing of the horns and percussion finds the sound wanting, and the emotional grip simply isn't tight enough to pin you helplessly to the wall.
For all its surface vehemence, the second movement observes the explosion from a safe distance, the following allegretto is sluggish and mechanical, with little in the way of slyly pointed playing to sustain it — even the climax fails to break free from its rigid framework, and the Finale, despite a powerful, thrusting allegro , is dogged by a lethargic introduction.
Karajan (DG ) has often been taken to task from making an adagio meal of Shostakovich's andante here, but Flor turns it into a snail's banquet (beautiful Concertgebouw wind playing notwithstanding).
With the likes of Previn (EMI ) and Skrowaczewski (IMP ) around, as well as the superb earlier Karajan version (all at mid-price), Flor underplays the possessed trenchancy of the music at too low a temperature to effectively compete [JH
Symphony No. 10
LSO/ROSTROPOVICH
Rostropovich's new recording of Shostakovich 10 was made at Abbey Road in July 1989, and is a complete success.
The recording is superbly rich and imposing, and Rostropovich, as might be hoped, conducts a performance of staggering expressive force, with the LSO on fabulous form.
This is one of the most absorbing accounts of this tragic masterpiece which I have heard recently, and I would confidently place it among the very best of recorded versions.
This may seem a bold claim in the light of the competition.
On CD at present there are discs by Haitink, Järvi and Maxim Shostakovich among others, all of them sonically impressive but not always possessed of the brooding tension which Rostropovich brings to the first movement.
Of course this is a work where even Karajan's detractors can only suspend prejudice in the face of his two superlative versions on DG, but Rostropovich communicates a sense of stark yet searing tragedy which makes his performance, of the first movement in particular, very special.
In the Scherzo, the playing is very concentrated and incredibly exciting.
Some performances treat this as a rather flashy excuse for orchestral fireworks.
Here the approach is one of supreme commitment allied to virtuoso playing and remarkably natural recorded sound.
The sense of urgency and drive generated by the conductor is memorable.
The same is true of the two remaining movements.
In other words this is a remarkable achievement.
At less than full price the collector can have Karajan's earlier version, which I think is almost impossible to overpraise, or the fine recent version by Skrowaczewski and the Hallé on IMP.
That having been said, I would not want to be without the very special qualities of this new Teldec release — a most moving interpretation brilliantly performed.
On the other disc, Teldec offers Symphony No. 15 on its own — distinctly short measure at under 45 minutes.
The present recording was made in November 1989, again at Abbey Road.
At the risk of attracting an angry postbag from irate readers, I have to confess to considerable misgivings over this piece.
Shostakovich himself declared that he wanted to write a ‘happy’ Symphony, but somehow he does not quite seem the natural choice for such a thing.
The quote from the William Tell Overture in the first movement may be deliberately banal, but more to the point, I find that it actually is banal.
I have similar problems with the Wagner quote in the Finale.
Shostakovich obviously had good reason for these references, but they are to music so well-known that I worry about finding them in someone else's piece, even a composer of the supreme integrity of Shostakovich.
Many people regard this work as a great masterpiece, though, and may well want to hear this impressive new version.
I don't find it quite as remarkable a performance as that of No. 10 , but is very good.
Of the available competition, Mravinsky ‘live’ in 1976 is pretty hard to beat, but the new version has much better sound and a comparably strong performance.
The third star is withheld on the basis of Teldec's meanness is not providing a coupling.
They could comfortably have accommodated Shostakovich's other ‘happy’ Symphony (No. 9 ), particularly if these two releases are the fist in a complete cycle.
I believe they are.
[NS]
SIBELIUS
Symphony No. 1
VPO/BERNSTEIN
There are many fine performances of Sibelius No. 1 on the market, but it seems to me that two really stand out: the recently re-issued VPO/Maazel on the Decca (part of a desirably all seven symphonies on ), and the EMI BPO/Karajan (also mid-price the Karelia Suite on ).
If Maazel and Karajan are essentially musical structuralists (if deniably impassioned), then Bernstein is the emotional structuralist par excellence .
Take on example: after the twisting, oily chromaticisms which crown the development section of (i) the big ‘Tchaikovskian’ tune returns emphatically as a heart-warming eruption.
With both Maazel and Karajan the point is readily made, but their eyes are clearly set on the internal music argument.
For  Bernstein , this is to experience the music at second hand; he wants us to live through the emotional upheaval rather than be merely aware of its implications.
Here the ‘tune’ is not merely a luxuriating tonal resolution in the relative major, but a radiant affirmation that the struggle is over (not for long admittedly), and that we have all gained immeasurably for having experienced it.
The slow movement is a highly introspective affair, never afraid to dig in deep where others merely navigate surface implications.
No longer the emotive outpourings of a composer just beginning to find his mature compositional feet, Bernstein uncovers a sinister, almost malevolent undercurrent which vastly increases the work's stature.
The effect is almost as though one were experiencing full immersion for the first time after years of paddling around in the shallows.
I can imagine that there will be those who fill find his rendering of the main theme's final return somewhat cloying, but by this time I was already far to engrossed to worry unduly.
A wealth of subtle detail emerges from the Scherzo which usually remains obscured behind a curtain of all-purpose muscularity, and even the diffuse musical elements of the Finale coagulate effortlessly in this reading (energetic stamps from the rostrum and all).
Forget the price-tag versus timing issue, this is a quite treasurably memento of Bernstein's art is at its most absorbing.
STANLEY
6 Organ Concertos O. 2
ANTONIO FRIGE (organ) & ENSEMBLE ‘PIAN & FORTE’
John Stanley's extemporizations on the organ of Temple Church in London were attended by Handel, and yet the esteem in which he was held by his contemporaries has failed to gain him the reputation that he should enjoy today.
He gained his degree in music in Oxford at the age of sixteen, already a brilliant organist and violinist, and yet he was blind from the age of two.
The six Concerti on this interesting release were published in 1742, and were rearranged and reprinted many times, the composer actually rearranging the Sixth Concerto in an edition published 33 years later, such was its popularity.
Antonio Frigé, the organist on this Italian recording, founded the ensemble ‘Pian & Forte’ which is devoted to playing ancient music on ‘original’instruments or reconstructions.
His muscianship is unquestionable, and the fine quality of Stanley's music is constantly illuminated by his playing of the concertante part in the B minor concerto and the solo violin contribution in the third movement of the same work.
The opening Adagio of the Sixth Concerto readily commends itself to one's attention as it did in Stanley's time, especially as performed on this fine recording.
The notable Largo represents the ‘Ensemble Pian & Forte’ at its very best, the continuo theorbo adding to the tonal colour whilst the organ is silent.
The recording quality in the main is very good, but there are minor lapses of balance, usually favouring the solo instrument.
Nevertheless, a recording well worth acquiring.
[RH]
STRAVINSKY
The Firebird (complete ballet); Le Chant du Rossignol
DANISH RSO/KITAJENKO
A toothless, gummy Firebird with no bite.
The softgrained, ponderous opening sets the tone for a lifeless, long drawn out haul.
Kitajenko encourages extremes of legato , usually at very slow tempi which make heavy weather of the opening sections, completely robbing the music of any momentum or atmosphere.
When faster music does at last arrive for the ‘Magic Carillon’ and the ‘Infernal Dance,’its energy splutters ineffectually on the back burner.
The orchestra is severely stretched to maintain any sort of cogent line, and the fantasy of the work is all but lost.
Le Chant du Rossignol is much more animated and characterful with a more sharply focused recording, but hardly rescues the disc from the ball and chain of balletic torpor.
[IJ]
Jeu de Cartes; Orpheus
ROYAL CONCERTGEBOUW/JARVI
Neeme Järvi probably turns recordings out faster than any other artist in recorded history.
Inevitably some fall by the wayside, but his success rate is surprisingly high considering the breadth of the repertoire he tackles.
The fact that he is capable of making discs of superlative quality is also in no doubt, as this stunning new Stravinsky disc strikingly bears out.
Jeu de Cartes , in particular, is nothing short of a tour de force or orchestral wizardry, superb engineering, and interpretative control.The playing of the Concertgebouw throughout is quite magnificent in all departments, and Järvi's pacing quite faultless.
I would place this new Jeu de Cartes above the much-favoured LSO/Abbado DG recording, and as a vital alternative to the composer's own Cleveland version on Sony.
If in Orpheus everyone sound just a fraction less involved in the proceedings, this is partly because the music itself elicits a certain degree of emotional detachment.
It is a sadly neglected work, and again the only serious alternative to Järvi is Stravinsky's Chicago recording which like the Jeu can only be obtained as part of a mammoth 22-CD Sony set of virtually all Stravinsky's major works (totally indispensable though that is).
If having encountered, say, the Rite, Petrushka , and Firebird , you wish to make further inroads into Stravinsky's compositional genius, you could hardly do better than invest in this splendid disc.
My only complaint is that room could have easily been found for, say, the Pulcinella Suite , which, given the tremendous form of everyone concerned here, is quite a tantalising thought.
Oh well!
[JH]
TCHAIKOVSKY
Francesca da Rimini: Marche Slave; Serenade for Strings
USSR MINISTRY OF CULTURE SO/ROZHDESTVENSKY
Every composer naturally deserves to be played with total dedication at all times.
Yet there are certain composers who fall flat on their face unless the adrenalin really start to flow.
Tchaikovsky is without doubt one of these, and Francesca and Marche Slave (both composed incidentally in 1876) require an approach bordering on the hysterical if they are to be heard to their best advantage.
Up until now serious collectors have tended to rely on the famous New York Stadium/Stokowski version in Francesca , and either Szell or Karajan in the Marche (of which there is a ludicrously overinflated 40 plus versions in the current catalogue)!
Even in such exalted company, Rozhdestvensky holds his own (although Szell's breathtaking final coda to the Marche remains a uniquely compelling experience), and what a joy to hear a native Russian orchestra accorded engineering which for once does them proud!
The full-throttle climaxes of Francesca are delivered with a frenzied desperation which is guaranteed to play havoc with all but the most robust of dispositions, and the spine-tingling emotionalism of the gloriously protracted central section is entered into with a fearlessness which borders on the overwhelming — one can feel this music coursing through the orchestra's veins.
After all this high-profile imagery I had fully expected the Serenade to hit me with a physical force akin to Karajan's classic BPO digital remake (DG ).
Not so!
The ‘Pezzo informa di Sonatina’ first movement turns out to be a fairly laid back affair, with every attempt made to lighten the load of Tchaikovsky's passionately heavy scoring, even to the point of having multi-spread quadruple stopping reduced to simultaneously sounded double stops.
The little recitative passage for the firsts in the Elegy is also (beautifully) played by a solo violin; on whose authority I have no idea.
The Tema Russo Finale can hardly be said to go off like a rocket either.
However, it's all extremely well played, the Waltz is light as air, and the Elegy all the more moving for its having been relieved of any hint of bogus pathos.
The Introduction to the Finale is given with a beguiling simplicity, and therein lies the key to this performance; Rozhdestvensky has clearly taken the generic title ‘Serenade’ at its face value.
I guess that one would not normally expect such a work to plumb the depths, or explore an emotional range equivalent to a full-scale symphony.
Karajan does everything in his power to do just that, whereas Rozhdestvensky is clearly convinced that is more the Romantic offspring of a late-Eighteenth Century Classical genre.
If you can accept the interpretative stance (and it is growing on me), I simply can't imagine it being better realised than here.
[JH]
THALBERG
Fantasias on Operas by bellini
NICOLOSI (piano)
Another of Marco Polo's largely successful attempts to rewrite history.
For the general view of music-making in the Nineteenth Century is inaccurate: time has winnowed away the reputations of many of the figures best known at the time, and completely obscured the smaller fry that occupied nine-tenths of the publishers' catalogues of those days.
One of the reputations that has taken a bit of a bashing is Sigismond Thalberg's.
Thalberg (1812–71) was considered in his time Liszt's only true rival.
After studying in Vienna with Hummel and with Simon Sechter (whose other pupils included Schubert, in the last days of his life, and Bruckner, half-way through his), Thalberg's career as one of the leading virtuosi of his days was already well established by the time he moved to Paris.
And it was in Paris that the Liszt-Thalberg rivalry began (though it was not a thing of their own making, and there does not seem to have been any genuine animosity between them); when they played in a contest in an aristocratic household Thalberg was declared the first pianist in the world and Liszt was thus deemed to have won on points, and it was said that Thalberg departed with his head hung low.
But Thalberg went on to play much more widely than Liszt, even visiting North and South America (which Liszt never did); and Liszt kept some of Thalberg's operatic paraphrases in his repertoire.
Fantasias ‘on themes from such-an-such opera’ were staple fare for many of the less substantial virtuosi of the first half of the nineteenth century, and even Liszt contributed a fair number of them to the literature.
Among the operatic composers whose music caught Thalberg's attention were Rossini, Meyerbeer, Weber, Verdi and several others, including, not least, Bellini. this CD collects give of his Bellini paraphrases; two ‘Grandes Fantaisies et Variations’ on norma and I Capuletti , two ‘Fantaisies’on Beatrice de Tenda and on Straniera , and a ‘Grand Caprice’on La Somnambula .
They are more illuminating than compelling; they show the operatic paraphrase in the hands of one of its most experienced practitioners, using as their basis music that will often have been more familiar to the listeners of its day than they now are to us (there are some obvious exceptions on this CD); and one can see why they were so successful at the time, even if they now seem slightly shallow set alongside the giants that selective history has chosen to remember.
These works follow roughly the same form: opening flourish, followed by a quiet tune over arpeggios; more tunes are brought in and developed; leading to swaggering finale.
And they are not short works: the shortest here is nearly 13 minutes long.
The recording quality is quite acceptable, and the performances are Nicolosi is a reliable player but he lacks the keyboard  bragadocio to make these pieces sparkle in a way that Thalberg must have.
Still, it would be churlish not to greet this release for the light it casts on an age long gone.
[MA]
VAUGHAN WILLIAMS
Symphonies Nos. 2 & 8
HALLE/BARBIROLLI
These pungent performances are a signal reminder of why Barbirolli was so favoured by this composer.
Although the familiar con amore style is much in evidence, it never topples over into sentimentality, and Barbirolli's grasp of the music's inner life allows both Symphonies to breath dramatic contrast to the full.
He's certainly not slow to probe beneath the outwardly cosy surface of Edwardian London in the Second Symphony .
After a shadowy introduction, the opening allegro is sharp and vehement, the slow movement shot through with unease, and the Scherzo faintly menacing in its nocturnal rustlings.
The wrenching cry at the start of the Finale claps a vice on the emotions that is sustained through to the ambivalent release provided by the Epilogue, and Barbirolli is one of the few conductors to prolong the agony of the climax by observing VW's protracted emphasis on the grinding trombone and tube underpinning.
This account of the Eight , conducted by its dedicatee, was the work's première recording.
It remains by far the most convincing performance committed to disc by virtue of its natural pacing and brazen flair, which serve to underline the experimental nature of much of the content.
Ensemble is not always clean, and the strings sound rather undernourished, but for sheer daring — especially in the percussion roots of the finale — it easily eclipses subsequent versions.
Let's hope that EMI goes on to restore Barbirolli's stereo account of the Fifth Symphony with the Philharmonia.
[IJ]
VICTORIA
Tenebrae Responsories
THE SIXTEEN/CHRISTOPHERS
There are now several recorded versions of Victoria's Responsories for Holy Week , all of which are of the highest order.
My own favourite rests with David Hill's Hyperion recording with Westminster Choir, mainly because I favour the sound of boys' voices in this most pure of works.
Even so, The Sixteen generate the sense of contemplative mystery and ritual appropriate to the music and the text
The ‘Tenbrae’ service at the time of Victoria would have begun in the evening gloom, lit by the symbolic number of candles (representative of the Apostles, the three Marys, and Christ himself).
As the service progressed, so each candle was extinguished until one solitary candle, the sign of Christ, was left, a highly charged moment of pure theatre.
This, too, was eventually extinguished leaving the entire church in darkness.
Victoria's genius in the Tenbrae Responses is to set the text to music of simple strength, built on memorable melodic lines in which the  text often receives one note per syllable.
His counterpoint helps to emphasise points within the text, at time giving short phrases to all voices to quicken the pace, at others extending a word over many bars.
A perfect example of Victoria's sensitivity to the text is furnished by ‘tenebrae facta sunt dum crucifixissent Iesum Iudaei’(‘There was darkness when the Jews crucified Jesus’— track 8).
Harry Christopher has done his homework well here, shaping each phrase according to the meaning of the text.
When Christ cries out in a loud voice, ‘My God, why hast thou forsaken me?’,
The Sixteen's choral response to the words seems genuinely heartfelt.
Occasionally I would have preferred a more urgent tempo for the most turbulent responses, such as‘Seniores populi’(track 6) and ‘Tradiderunt me’(track 10).
Nevertheless, there is no shortage of energy in passes such as‘cum gladiis et frustibus exierunt’(‘They went out with swords and clubs’) in the former, and Christophers prefer to concentrate on Peter's fear as he watches Christ being led away from afar, rather than anger at his betrayal in the latter.
For sheer economy of musical expression and beauty of sound ‘Eram quasi agnus’(track 4) stands out as something very special, aided by fine singing and the reverberant acoustic of St Jude's Church, Hampstead.
[AS]
‘Victoria and the Music of Imperial Spain’
MIXOLYDIAN/SCHMIDT
A small black mark to Pickwick for not adding the names of the composers to the list of contents printed on the reverse side of the CD box.
Of course, Thomas Luis de Victoria is better known than Juan Gutièrez de Padilla but, as Bruno Turner points out in his informative programme note, he is ‘undoubtedly the finest composer of the colonial period to come from Old Spain and spend nearly all his productive life in the New Spain’.
In 1629 Padilla became maestro de capilla at the richly endowed cathedral in Pueble, Mexico, where he remained until his death 35 years later.
What is interesting about this disc is the way in which Padilla, presumably familiar with the polyphonic style of his peers, including that of Victoria, crossed the Atlantic at a time of considerable change in European music only to uphold and preserve the traditions of Spain's musical heritage.
Piers Schmidt handles the contrasts between each session of the two Masses on this disc with sensitivity, making the most of Padilla's double-choir writing in the Missa ego flos campi .
The singing is always very fine and full bodied, although I feel that the chance has been missed occasionally to drop the dynamic level to the point where hairs are raised.
This is certainly the case in the ‘Et incarnatus est’ in the Credo of Victoria's Missa Surge propera (track 3), even though the sound is beautiful and ensemble highly polished.
Many of the singers on this disc were formerly Oxbridge choral scholars, and the discipline of their training serves them well here.
Whilst not wishing to sound preferential where the general level of performance is so high, I feel that Schmidt's sopranos deserve special mention, every bit as assured and  skilful in their work as their counterparts in longerestablished groups.
Hearing the Credo of Padilla's Mass , with its rhythmic life and impressive interplay between opposing choirs, makes one want to hear more both of the man's music and of Mixolydian.
Here, Schmidt achieves the quietest and the loudest sounds from his singers, the recurrent statement of ‘Credo’ underpinning the true sense of faith in this movement.
Padilla's Stabat mater (track 11) setting, and Victoria's sublime Alma redemptoris mater (track 12) receive the same attention to detail as displayed in the masses; ensemble and intonation once again excellent.
The pick of a very good first crop from ‘Allegro’: definitely one not to be missed.
[AS]
VILLA-LOBOS
Genesis; Erosca; Amazonas; Dawn in a Tropical Forest
CZECHO-SLOVAK RSO/DUARTE
With hindsight one can see that this was a CD crying out to be made; four of Villa-Lobo's magnificent nature pieces make obvious companions.
It made sense, I suppose, to begin with the symphonic poem Genesis , paradoxically the most recent music on the disc, commissioned as a ballet by Janet Collins in 1954, although not performed in the concert hall until 1969, on the tenth anniversary of the composer's death.
Erosion (Origin of the River Amazon)was commissioned by the Louisville Orchestra in 1950, and performed the following year.
Drawn in a Tropical Forest was another Louisville work, requested late in July 1953 and ready by early November.
Amazonas is the earliest score here: it dates from 1917, five years before the first of Villa-Lobos's sojourns in Paris, and it was there, in 1929, that Amazonas was first performed.
All four works present the same sort of world — the teeming, overgrown, majestic Amazonian rainforest that Villa-Lobos knew very well.
He evokes its atmosphere with uncanny skill.
Low rumblings pulsating, throbbing in the orchestra, building up to ferocious explosions of energy, exotic percussion and birdsong streaked through the texture, Indian melodic patterns woven into it, all in some of the most imaginative, kaleidoscope scoring ever devised.
Villa-Lobos produced so much music that critics occasionally tret him as a sausage factory, the scores dropping off the end of the belt without the composer paying much attention to them.
so it is salutary to be reminded of just how good a composer he could be, how inventive, how much sheer skill he had.
The performances are conducted by the Brazilian Roberto Duarte; it sounds as if he knows his jungle, too, for his interpretations are full of life, pointed rhythms, striding basses (Villa-lobos has in common with Havergal Brian that his textures often inhabit the bottom end of the orchestra, with free and easymoving bass lines).
Time and again, Marco Polo boldly goes where no recording company has ventured before, pulling wonderful surprise after wonderful surprise out of the hat, and this is as good as any of them.
Hearty congratulations to everyone involved in this project.
But there is just one thing that worries me: tucked away in the bottom left-hand corner on the back cover of the jewel case is the innocent phrase ‘Works revised by Roberto Duarte’; it is explained nowhere else.
Now, what has he done?
Cut them?
Tidied up the scoring?
Transposed them up a semitone?
I think we should be told!
[MA]
ZEISL
Piano trio Suite; Second String Quartet; ‘Arrowhead’ Trio
BRANDEIS-BARDIN ENSEMBLE; DEBUSSY TRIO
Eric Zeisl (1905–59) was yet another of the stream of Austrian composers who fled before the jaws of Hitler's army, though his music has met with less acclaim than that of many of his fellow refugees.
To judge from this new CD from harmonia Mundi, it is through no fault of the music: he is obviously a composer of real stature.
Zeisl, who was born in Vienna, showed early determination to compose, and entered the Vienna State Academy of Music at the age of fourteen.
His precocious skill is immediately evident in the Piano Trio Suite Op. 8,which he wrote in his late teens.
It is a work of bold gestures, strong, often dancing, rhythms, a sturdy sense of structure and counterpoint, and a very Viennese feel for melody, coloured too by his Jewish background.
The language is accessible mid-European, direct and diatonic, confident — perhaps most of all the buoyant theme and variations that form the last movement.
By the time of Zeisl's Second String Quartet , nearly thirty years later, than language had tightened — hardly surprisingly, in view of the reversals he had suffered.
Malcolm Cole's programme notes don't specify the circumstances of the ‘grim struggle for survival which left serious composition out of the question’ for the first few years after he had settled in the United States in 1939, but, whatever they were, they informed his music with an intensity that the exuberance of his early style didn't find much room for.
Its results can be heard to best effect in the rapt serenity of the slow movement of the Second Quartet ; the composer described it as an ‘intimate talk between God and man’, and it really is music of extraordinary beauty, a half-lit oasis of repose amid the vigour of the rest of the Quartet .
That movement alone would be worth the price of this CD.
The disc is completed with Zeisl's ‘Arrowhead’ Trio , written in just 23 days on the shores of Lake Arrowhead, in southern California, during his summer holidays in 1956.
Scored for flute, viola and harp, it is alternately perky and elegiac in mood, reflecting the happier circumstances of its composition — and Zeisl's knowledge of the heart condition that was to kill him three years later.
Harmonia Mundi is not normally a label one associates with exploration of the by-ways of the repertoire.
But here HM has done itself proud.
The performances are recordings and uniformly excellent, and the music certainly didn't deserve its half century of neglect, So one hopes that Harmonia Mundi will give us more Zeisl: there are Sonatas for violin, viola and cello, a goodly quantity of songs, and a fair amount of orchestral music, as well as two operas and three ballets.
The booklet with the CD asks listeners interested in Zeisl's work to write to .
I have a feeling I won't be the only one dropping them a line.
[MA]
COLLECTIONS
‘BRODSKY UNLIMITED’
BRODSKY QUARTET
A couple of years back I reviewed the Delmé Quartet's standard encore disc on Hyperion.
The Brodskys in striking contrast go for what I can only describe as an unconventional line-up to match the photo on the cover.
First violin Michael Thomas explains in the liner notes that in the early seventies they would often let their hair down in private, arranging and playing pieces from Joplin to the Beatles and Brubeck purely for fun.
To everyone's surprise they now find this somewhat unusual repertoire much in demand, to such an extent indeed that it could be described as ‘cult’.
At a function in Bucharest the British Ambassador asked for something from home.
Hurried copying produced Elgar's Chanson de Matin .
Ravel's Mother Goose followed standard French quartets at the Dartington International Summer School, and Prokofiev's ‘Classical’ Symphony made its string quartet début at the Wigmore Hall.
It doesn't end there.
Golliwog's Cake Walk, La fille aux cheveux de lin, Porgy & Bess, Danza espagnola, El Amor brujo , a selection of Shostakovich Piano Preludes, a March by Prokofiev, and an original by Michael Thomas all come up fresh as daisies in new string quartet settings.
Perhaps 20 items is a bit much to take in at one sitting, but choose your favourites and you will not be disappointed, as everything is captured in wonderful sound and expertly performed.
[BN]
‘FIDDLE STICKS’
Irish Traditional Music from Donegal, recorded ‘live’ at the 1991 Fiddlesticks Festival, Cork
This is cracking stuff!
Just over an hour of marvellously invigorating fiddling from some of the best traditional musicians in Ireland.
All the music here was recorded at the ‘Fiddlesticks’ Festival held at University College, Cork, in January of this year, before an enthusiastic audience — and a sober one, by the sound of it: although this is music that lives in the pubs, it seems to have been presented here in a concert that took it seriously, with real respect.
It seems, indeed, that part of the purpose was didactic: to let audiences hear how distinct the traditional fiddle music of Donegal is from that of the rest of Ireland.
One of the main differences comes about through contact with Scotland, through seasonal emigration: it has left its mark both in technical features (in the bowing, for example) and in the repertoire of tunes — and to my ears, brought up in Scotland to ear fiddling at many Highland gatherings, the Music does have a more familiar ring than much of the rest of Irish music.
The performances on this CD are of constant interest: ten of the finest exponents of this repertoire, playing both solos, duos, trios, even à 6 at one point, giving the music a contrapuntal interest to complement its obvious rhythmic attraction.
The spontaneity which attends the structure of each number (decided both before the music begins and as it proceeds) is evident in the sheer sparkle of the music-making.
The tracks vary in their individual interest, and I am not sure that there is enough variety in the textures to warrant playing the CD from beginning to end.
But dipping has already provided a source of enormous pleasure.
[MA]
‘WILHELM FURTWANGLER; THE EARLY RECORDINGS 1926–1937’
WEBER: Freischütz Overture and Entracte; Invitation to the Dance; MENDELSSOHN: Overture to A Midsummer Night's Dream; Hebrides Overture; BERLIOZ: Rackoczy March (Damnation of Faust); WAGNER: Prelude to Act 1 (Lohengrin); Prelude and Liebestod (Tristan und Isolde); Funeral march (Götterdämmerung); BRAHMS: Hungarian Dances 1 & 10; J. STRAUSS II: Overture (Die Fledermaus); R. STRAUSS: Till Eulenspiegel
BPO/FURTWANGLER
Unlike some of his most distinguished contemporaries, the conductor Wilhelm Furtwängler is reputed to have found the whole process of recording totally congenial, offering the possibility to refine interpretations in a manner which was not always possible in the white-heat surroundings of the concert hall.
This makes his recorded output of particular interest to those fascinated by Furtwängler's unique and individualistic conception of the mainstream concert repertoire.
It's therefore entirely appropriate that some of his earliest (mono) recordings should be made available to the widest public through this fascinating boxed set.
Admirers of Furtwängler's renowned mastery of large-scale symphonic structures will no doubt be disappointed that all the items presented here are of relatively short duration.
But even with this limitation, there is sufficient evidence of the conductor's authority.
Just listen to the flexibility Furtwängler achieves in Mendelssohn's Hebrides Overture .
the ebb and flow of the musical invention is perfectly sculpted, and the deviations of tempo, in response to the emotional impact of the melodic writing, are contrived with infinite subtlety.
Likewise, the balance between incidental excitement and structural cohesion is finely tuned in Strauss's Till Eulenspiegel .
The Wagner items, frustratingly brief as they are, further confirm this conductor's pre-eminent and intuitive grasp of the Wagnerian melos .
It has to be admitted that the sound quality on some of these recordings at times leaves something to be desired, and some listeners may no doubt be disturbed by the occasional fluctuations of pitch, as in the Lohengrin Prelude.
But I do not believe that H. Ward Marston's transfers are surpassable, and am grateful that the surface noise of the original discs remains intact rather than being artificially eliminated.
A couple of points about the documentation strike me as being slightly unsatisfactory however.
For an historical re-issue of this nature, I believe it's essential to include not only details of the original matrices but also reasonably accurate dates for the recordings.
Koch provides the former, but in only one instance, Weber's Freischütz Overture, are we told the actual year it was issued.
But this detail is not of such great import that you should be put off sampling what is a most absorbing set.
[EL]
‘GERMAN HARPSICHORD MUSIC BEFORE BACH’
OGG (hapsichord)
This is the sort of CD that the ‘ordinary’ music-lover is likely to pass over in favour of something better known, on the assumption that ‘German Harpsichord Music before Bach’would be of interest to the specialist only.
That would be a mistake: this is one of the most satisfying and interesting CDs I have come across in a long while.
It is full of little gems, whose length disguises the stature of their contents.
It serves as a dual purpose: it performs a musicological service by presenting us with an intelligently planned selection of the kind of harpsichord music current in the Germany in which the young Bach grew up, and it also lets us hear several composers of outstanding merit in their own right.
Top marks, too, to Globe for particularly interesting and scholarly programme notes, first by Clemens Romijn, on the music and then by Joop Klinkhamer on the harpsichords used in this recording; the innovative touch is that Klinkhamer is the builder responsible for the reconstructions played here by Jacques Ogg.
Best of all, the music is glorious.
it would take too long to go through the entire programme, which is studded with jewels, but if you can dip into it, try the two Passacaglias (Kerll's and Muffat's,in D minor and G minor respectively), the deep and moving Allemande which opens Froberger's Suite No. 20 (it bears the inscription, in French, ‘Meditation on my future death, to be played slowly and discreetly’), or his Fantasia No. 2 , which follows it here; try too Buxtehude's extraordinary Choral Suite Auf meinem lieben Gott ; or Weckmann's two Toccatas…
Oh, try all of it.
Jacques Ogg's immaculate performances are lively and sensitive: in this very different music, he plays with all the depth that Horszowski finds in Chopin.
The recording is exemplary.
Worth every penny.
[MA]
‘VIRTUOSO GUITAR TRANSCRIPTIONS’
A brilliant record.
If the idea of transcriptions for guitar of music manifestly written for other instruments offends your aesthetic sensibilities, then prepare to have them confounded: this is very fine music-making, with the emphasis on music.
Nicola Hall is an exceptional artist; her transcriptions are most cleverly contrived, and her playing is an unmitigated joy, the immediate and lasting impression being of a highly-gifted musician.
She also has the advantage of an outstanding recording.
Very strongly recommended — even to those who don't usually like guitar albums.
[RMW]
‘THOMAS HARDY AND LOVE’
An Anthology with music, compiled and presented by Bernard Palmer
From a corpus of almost one thousand poems this anthology is well selected and presented.
‘Love’(in all its aspects) is the theme of most of Hardy's fiction and poetry, and the well known poems To Lisbie Browne , and The Dark-Eyed Gentleman are excellent contrasting examples.
The Wistful Lady is most attractively performed and an excerpt from The Dynasts (‘Napoléon and Joséphine’) was relatively new to me.
The interpolated narrations by Bernard Palmer are informative and relate clearly to the selections.
However, the songs from Betty Roe's song-cycle Satires of Circumstance dotted here and there, seem hardly relevant to this compilation.
When extrapolated and heard as a song-cycle (as intended), its light quasi-sardonic  approach, and uncomplicated musical setting, is attractive enough, sung stylishly by Margaret Cable and Christopher Keyte, with the composer at the piano.
There is a slowly burgeoning market for this type of entertainment, with many music and arts societies looking for such a programme.
I would have thought that there would be an appreciable market for this CD, which, on a personal level, I have enjoyed a great deal.
[RH]
‘HOROWITZ THE POET’
SCHUBERT: Sonata in B flat D960; SCHUMANN: Kinderszenen Op 15
HOROWITZ (piano)
Deutsche Gramophone has chosen to call this album ‘Horowitz the Poet’, which is by any standards an annoying an inaccurate title.
Schubert and Schumann could whimsically be described as poets, but calling Horowitz a poet is as silly as calling Lawrence Olivier a poet, or for that matter the builders who followed Wren's drawings and erected St. Paul's Cathedral.
We must be careful in controlling our natural urges to defy musical interpreters.
During my inglorious years as a concert agent I used to reduce my clients to tears by stubbornly refusing to call them ‘artistes’.
Musicians was, and still is, the appropriate term.
I turned straightaway to No. 13 of Kinderszenen (‘The poet speaks’) to see if perhaps I missed the point.
Kinderszenen I felt was somehow a bit disappointing compared to the studied and elegiac reading of Schubert's great B flat Sonata .
He draws out the richest tones that he is capable of here.
Nonetheless he brings new ideas to ‘Haschmemann’ and ‘Am Kamin’.
I am convinced though that Horowitz would be able to produce a more moving ‘Traumerei’ than this.
There is nothing wrong at all with the Schubert, however.
Horowitz's strong, warm personality is everywhere in evidence.
As one would expect, the recording is as musical as one could wish for.
The opening of the Scherzo sounds remarkably like the twittering of birds in the trees, something I first noticed when it was played to me on an 1820s Graaf piano similar to the one owned by Schubert.
It is a relief to hear him taking the Trio at the same speed as the Scherzo, and not inexplicably slowing down like so many others.
But you can never expect Horowitz to toe the party line which is why, in the end, he succeeded in making so many first-rate recordings.
[AW]
‘LES INTROUVABLES DE CZIFFRA’
CZIFFRA (piano)
Hungarian-born pianist Gyorgy Gziffra has never been as well known, or for that matter, as well regarded in England as he has been on the Continent or in the USA.
Since 1956 he has lived in France.
He is now a nationalised Frenchman and it is a fitting tribute that EMI France should be releasing this extraordinary set of CDs, a tribute to one of the most commanding piano technicians since recording the instrument began.
If Cziffra is remembered at all in England it is for his technique, which has acquired a quite legendary status.
It is true to say that no composer would write music hard enough for him.
there is not a single piece by anyone other than himself on these discs which he is not able to rattle off with the short of nonchalant ease that would probably make even ARgerich or Pollini green with envy.
Only in his own pieces (all transcriptions of other composer's works) is he able to stretch himself to the outer limits of his technique.
He is the only pianist I have ever heard who does not make Balakirev's Islamey sound clumsy in places, who does not need to slow down for the middle section of Liszt's Rhapsodie espagnole , and who can play repeated notes faster than a machine-gun can shoot bullets.
Playing the piano is as easy for Cziffra as playing tiddly-winks is for you and me.
But as I became more acquainted with this set and stopped rushing from impossible passage to impossible passage, hoping against hope that at some point he would lose his balance and tumble like a second-rate trapeze artist off his swing, I was unwittingly dragged in to a more sinister, melancholic side to his playing.
In the slow passages Cziffra's deep, brooding tone can hold the listener as enthralled as his legendary virtuosity.
In Balakirev's Islamey , for instance, he allows the beautiful second subject to sing out, slower and more meaningful, than I have ever heard it before, while his deadly accuracy and exquisite pianissimos produce a stillness in Liszt's Les Jeux d'eau à la Villa d'Este that is rare indeed for such a fast moving piece.
Cziffra revels in the different sounds he can produce from a piano, from the classical purity of his Couperin and Beethoven, to an almost demonic largesse in his own improvisations, and an uncommon joie de vivre in Schumann's great C major Toccata .
Whether you disagree profoundly with his interpretations, as I sometimes do, or take them all for what they are, it is almost impossible to break away from the spell of his playing which is, at very worst, interesting.
As sometimes happens with pianists of exceptional technical ability there can often be a sense in their playing that they are trying hard not to run away with themselves in the easy passages.
Like thoroughbred horses chafing at their bits before an important race, they are liable at any moment to sprint off at a hundred miles an hour in the wrong direction.
Cziffra only occasionally succumbs to that particular devil within him but, when he does, it can be either disastrous, as in the middle section to the slow movement of Tchaikovsky's First Concerto , or it can miraculously work, as in Beethoven's ‘Rage over a Lost Penny ’, where an unexpected surge of tempo cannot fail to take his listeners with him.
John Ogdon too was prone to these unexpected departures, though the success rate of such abandonment is always about 50/50.
The two ‘Concerto’ discs are generously filled with both Liszt Concertos, Tchaikovsky's First , Liszt's Hungarian Fantasy and Totentanz , Franck's Symphonic Variations and a beautifully warm and heartfelt Grieg Concerto .
It comes a no surprise to me that the most outstanding playing should be the Liszt.
Cziffra's affinity with Liszt is strongly evident on four of the eight discs.
His Totentanz and Mephisto Waltz No. 1 are driven with a demonic precision and wild, romantic fervour.
Though he never allows the piano to become clangy, and overbearing he is capable of producing a richly powerful sound.
Cziffra's Beethoven and Schumann interpretations are certainly quirky.
The ‘Moonlight’ Sonata is impetuous even in the opening sostenuto first movement, and his Carnaval is flighty, skittish and full of character.
His interpretations are always, for one reason or another, compelling.
With this historic and rewarding set EMI are able to show us that they have an artist in every way as important as Horowitz, and in many ways less affected.
It is not just a historic document of immense important, it is a fascinating insight into what a really great pianist can do to the music we all know so well.
Perhaps it will provide a beacon of hope for future generations of pianists for whom it is not too late to swerve off their mat and sterile paths, to follow the lead of a genuine eccentric and a genuine musician?
[AW]
ITALIAN RECORDER MUSIC
Music by 
AMSTERDAM LOEKI STARDUST QUARTET
This is an attractive collection of keyboard and vocal pieces from late Sixteenth- and early Seventeenth-Century Italy, performed in arrangements for four recorders prepared by the excellent Amsterdam Loeki Stardust Quartet.
There is nothing anachronistic about the change of medium; it was common around the time of the composition of these pieces to hear them transferred to instrumental groups.
But despite the presence of several musical forms here — canzonas, capriccios, ricercars and motets — and it does begin to sound a bit samey, and I was just beginning to tap my fingers halfway through when the Loeki Stardusters began their arrangements of a part of Palestrina's Lamentations of Jeremiah , a hauntingly beautiful piece of music, arranged here for a lower-pitched recorders than the rest of the programme.
It's only five minutes long but it saves the day.
Yet even if there is a little textural variety in the CD as a whole, in performances as polished as these you can't begrudge the time spent listening to such uniformly lovely music — it just doesn't take to end-to-end listening.
Indeed, this is the kind of music that is better enjoyed in playing than in listening passively; still, swallowed in limited doses, this CD will give a lot of pleasure.
I was surprised to see that the recording venue was good old Abbey Road Studios: there is such a prominent background rumble that I had assumed it must have been some city church.
There are also a disconcerting number of rustlings and clickings, perhaps because the recording is so close you can almost hear the stardust settling.
Clifford Bartlett supplies informative notes on the often obscure composers here and on the musical background against which they wrote.
[MA]
‘LOVE OF COLOURS’
Music by 
KATIA & MARIELLE LABEQUE (pianos & synthesisers)
A ‘stotter’(as they say in Glasgow); a real winner.
One of my preferred methods of listening to CDs is to put them on and then lie back with closed eyes to concentrate on the music.
But when I put on Love of Colours I couldn't lie still.
There is so much energy and life in this recording, so much infectious enthusiasm, that I had to get up and do something.
I am not an uncritical admirer of the Labèque sisters: their performances can be uneven, and I have sometimes found them guilty  of grabbing a composition by the collar and belting off with it before it can gets its breath.
Nor do I spend much time listening to jazz.
But credit where it's due: this is one of the most enjoyable recordings of anything I have heard in years, and one track in particular— Michel Camino's wildly exhilarating Caribe , which opens the CD — is already a fair contender for my Desert Island eight, up there with  and the other lands.
For half of the twelve tracks here, the Labèques use acoustic pianos (that has always struck me as an oddity, by the way: a piano, or a guitar that wasn't acoustic would be damned difficult to record; the only non-acoustic piano that I can think of is Joseph Cooper's dummy keyboard); for the others we are told they play ‘MIDI Grand pianos & Synthesisers’.
The sound world (dare I say ‘the acoustic sound world’?) is somewhere between Elton John and the Graingere two-piano Porgy and Bess Fantasy , and there are echoes throughout (I wonder, indeed, if John Mc Laughlin knows John Foulds's April-England ?).
The percussive nature of some of the playing and ‘rat-at-tat’ rhythms sometimes suggest Prokofiev (the pianos take a fair bashing), and at various points Messaien, Villa-Lobos, and Ligeti came into my mind.
Not that all these concerns about pedigree matter a damn as far as the music is concerned — it's jus tot give your ears a clue as to what to expect.
There is often considerable contrapuntal interest, although not always: some of the arrangements degenerate into a languid succession of chords that do little to retain the interest of at least this listener.
In fact, the synthesised parts of the album are, to my ears, the least successful, with the sheer, staggering brilliance of the Labèques fingerwork replaced by rather unatmospheric electronics.
But where it works, it works wonderfully.
There is an animal excitement about the best parts of this CD that is enormously refreshing.
When music turns up for review, you often listen to it two or three times while you wonder what you can say about it that is useful and informative, and then it makes its way to your shelves for ever.
But this CD has been on my player many times since it arrived.
And not much dust will collect on top of it.
Not a word, by the way, in the presentation about the composers or the arrangements: there are, in fact, no notes at all, suggesting that, despite its appearance on Sony Classical, the recording is not aimed at people who, like me, are interested in how music is made.
So I hope Sony's marketing department doesn't go for too narrow a target audience.
I hardly ever browse through the jazz section in a record shop (I have usually been scalped in the classical section, in any case), and I would have been very sorry to miss this cracker of a CD.
[MA]
‘MODERN PICTURES’
We have become so used to thinking of Günter Wand as a conductor who specialises exclusively in the late 18th and 19th Century symphonic repertoire that it comes as something of a shock to find him performing a wide variety of works of more contemporary lineage.
Yet a brief perusal of the central details of Wand's career to date confirms that in fact his commitment to new music was paramount from the time he began to rebuild musical life in Cologne in the early post-war years.
This commitment is manifest in these ‘live’ recordings made in the mid-1980s in collaboration with North German Radio (NDR).
All the performances communicate a tremendous intellectual grasp of the music, although some individual details of interpretative approach may strike the listener as unusually idiosyncratic.
Take the Stravinsky, for example: those who are familiar with the composer's definitive recording (on Sony ) may find Wand's heavy articulation and sober approach to this work, particularly its first movement, rather unnerving.
Yet it's arguable that the Germanic qualities that are prevalent in Wand's conception are entirely appropriate to a composition that is so closely modelled on Bach's Brandenburg Concertos.
The balance between Germanic notions of symphonic integration and a French refinement of instrumental texture is perfectly drawn in Frank Martin's Petite Symphonie Concertante .
This masterpiece of musical invention receives a performance of white-heat intensity, and Wand is particularly successful in structuring the work's emotional climaxes.
The Webern, too, demonstrates Wand's sensitivity to the structural implications of these fleeting miniatures, and the engineers have captured the instrumental detail with admirable clarity.
For those who might be disturbed that the ambience of ‘live’ recordings is in appropriate for music of such delicacy, I'm happy to report that audience noise is minimal.
It's difficult to offer a fair assessment of the Interludes from Wolfgang Fortner's opera Blutchochzeit (‘Blood-Wedding’), which forms the other work on this disc.
Günter Wand actually conducted the opera's first performance in Cologne in 1957, and it was immediately hailed by the critics as one of the most important post-Schoenbergian music theatre pieces of its era.
Yet divorced from the context of the stage and without the aid of a useful programmatic description of Lorca's drama in the liner notes, listeners may well be baffled as to the work's coherence as an orchestral piece.
No doubt, this performance has great authority, but I would purchase the disc primarily for the other items.
It's perhaps worth pointing out that for some inexplicable reason, BMG has decided not to provide individual tracks for each of the movements which is something of a disadvantage in a work like the Webern.
[EL]
EGON PETRI
Vol 1:
PETRI (piano)
The one name which has been consistently absent from the annals of great pianists now re-issued on CD is Egon Petri.
Born in Hamburg of Dutch parents, his family moved to Dresden where he played the violin in his father's string quartet and the King of Saxony's orchestra.
Paderwski and Busoni suggested young Egon should change to the piano and he never looked back.
Early lessons from Carreno, and attendance at Busoni's Weimar classes, led to Petri meeting many famous celebrities of the day.
were regular  visitors at his home, but it was Busoni who became Petri's mentor, and close friend.
Petri often quoted the older man's opinion: ‘He called me his most genuine pupil and tried everything to further me, recommended me to managers and conductors, sent to me all the pupils he did not want to take, and was instrumental in getting me the appointment of Professor of Piano at the Royal College of Manchester, England, where I remained from 1905 to 1911’.
Later Petri taught in Berlin, but resigned in protest at the dismissal of Jewish colleagues in 1933, making his home in Zacapone, Poland, where he participated in a Summer School.
But the Blitzkrieg of 1939 put an end to that.
He and his family escaped just a few days before the Nazi invasion, abandoning all their property and possessions.
Much later these were miraculously recovered intact, and smuggled out of Poland in 1960.
The United States of America witnessed Petri's greatest successes.
A New York d' but in 1932 with 33 encores, several colossal programmes during 1940, and valuable teaching posts at Cornell and Mills Universities crowned his career.
Earl Wild, Victor Borge and John Ogdon are just three pupils.
He recorded for Electrola, Berlin, Columbia, London (produced by Walter Legge) and for Westminster in the States.
What a selection we have here!— the Gluck/Sgambati Mélodie from Orphée , Bach/Petri Menuet, Bach's Chromatic Fantasy & Fugue (Busoni edition, made in one take complete with Petri's comments for Lee Hoiby at Mills College in 1951 and sounding fantastic), Beethoven's Sonata in F sharp (with a singing tone similar to Solomon's), the greatest ever Brahms Variations on a Theme of Paganini (also done in one take), three gorgeous Liszt numbers —Un Sospiro ,Gnomenreigen and Mazeppa , and four Liszt transcriptions —‘Faust’ Waltz (Gounod),Liebebotschaft, Die Forelle and Soirée de Vinne No. 6 (all Schubert).
Pearls indeed!
All are immaculately and truthfully reinstated by Allan Evans and Seth B Winner Sound Studios Inc.
[BN]
‘PIANO MUSIC OF THE NETHERLANDS’
DE BIE (piano)
This conspectus of Dutch piano music is full of unexpected delights.
There are a few surprises in the music itself, no neglected giants waiting to be discovered (not, at least, on the strength of the music recorded here).
But it is almost always interesting, and sometimes quite beautiful.
The music, from a period of just over sixty years, varies considerably in character.
Jack de Bie's recital opens with the Fantasia No. 1 of Jan van Boom (1807–72), basically a set of rather salon-ish variations on a theme (the song Nara ) by the Swedish composer Adolf Lindblad — and it is the them, simple, but very lovely, which guarantees the attractiveness of the piece.
Van Boom is followed by the Sontania Op. 3 No. 1 , of Gerrit Jan van Eijken (1832–1879), Classical à la Mendelssohn in character, unadorned and simple, its contrapuntal interest rather pertly displayed.
Mendelssohn joins hands with Schumann, Chopin and Brahms as the éminences grises behind the music of Ernst Lubeck (1829–76) in four of a set of Twelve Preludes , as plainly derivative as they are easily enjoyed.
One hears from the piano writing why Berlioz praised Lubeck's technique: he doesn't have to show off to demonstrate a familiarity with the keyboard, for this music is at its most fetching when at its simplest.
Léandre Schlegel (1844–1913) is represented by the sixth, somewhat characterless, piece of Der arme Peter , which I assume to be a ‘suite’ of some sort (Willem Noske's otherwise intelligent and informative notes do not tell us).
And Schlegel in turn is followed by the Three Pieces Op. 29 by Jan Brandt Buys (1868–1933), whose abrupt, rather Janáčekian turns reveal that we are now in the Twentieth Century, if only just.
Debussy takes over for the first two of five of the Eight Piano Pieces Op. 15 , of Dirk Schäfer (1873–1931)— surprisingly, in view of the derisory remarks Schäfer made about Debussy quoted in the notes.
But there are other influences at work in Schäfer's music, not least Brahms, Scriabin and Ravel.
Influence-spotting is usually a fairly pointless business, of course,.
The trouble here is that none of these composers had a strong enough creative personality to absorb his antecedents to his own advantage.
Paul Valéry wrote that ‘a lion consists of digested lambs’— but there are no lions roaming this CD.
Neither are there sheep, though: this is an intelligent programme of satisfying second-class music, honest, unpretentious and enjoyable.
High praise for both performance and recording.
Jack de Bie's playing is rhythmically alive, thoughtful and passionate as required, with some particularly sensitive pedalling in evidence.
The recorded tone is warm, and nonetheless very open, allowing the strands of the textures to be heard with ease — the bass, for example, is marvellously clear.
To anyone fed up with yet more recordings of standard stuff I eagerly recommend this fine CD.
[MA]
PIANO TRANSCRIPTIONS
Works by
CHIU (piano)
The young Chinese-American Frederic Chiu displays spectacular virtuosity, glitter and panache, as well as deep sensitivity and thought in this, a most enterprising and important recording début.
This superb recital illustrates that the art of transcription is, in its finest form, at least as valuable as the art of variation on a borrowed theme.
Chiu's remarkably witty and lucid liner-notes quickly bury the myth that transcription is a somewhat impure or even dishonest genre by stating that when Bach transcribed Vivaldi ‘There was no stigma of dishonour’, placing the notion of egotistical individuality in is proper Nineteenth Century context.
The sound quality varies throughout the recital, so that the somewhat dry acoustic in Schulz-Evler's ‘Blue Danube Paraphrase ’,(sensationally performed by Chiu) sounds somewhat mis-matched against the bloom of the Busoni pieces, and the Liszt lieder transcriptions are perhaps a notch too dry.
But all complaints should be forgotten when one hears Chiu's account of three Bach-Busoni Chorale Preludes.
His fleeting account of Rejoice Beloved Christians reminds one of Horowitz, whilst the depth of tone in Nun Komm der Heiden Heiland transforms the chosen Yamaha instrument into something very special.
Perhaps most valuable of all, Chiu includes Busoni's visionary transformation of the second of Schoenberg's Op. 11 Piano Pieces .
In the hands of this artist, this transcription sounds as it surely was intended — as Busoni's ‘eighth elegy’, complete with delicate bell-like arpeggios, subtle sequential off-shoots, and a thickening of textures which help elucidate the Schoenbergian language.
This is a most welcome and important release.
[MM]
‘PLAY THE PASSIONATE’
CUNNINGHAM (bass viol)
During recent years, groups such as Fretwork and Hesperion XX have considerably broadened our knowledge of the richly satisfying repertoire for viol consort.
That for solo viol is a different matter, although Jordi Savall has devoted discs to Tobias Hume (d. 1645;Astrée E7723 ) and ‘Monsieur’ Demachy (his first name and dates are unknown)(E7746 ).
A particularly welcome aspect of the present disc is that Sarah Cunningham presents us with a survey spanning the entire period of the repertoire — as such it will perhaps be more welcome to the non-specialist than the Savall discs.
It might still be thought that an entire disc of music for solo viol could be a daunting prospect.
That those fears are proved ill-founded may be explained not only the totally assured and expressive Sarah Cunningham and the high quality of the music, but also in the nature of the music written for instrument.
With its fretted neck and comparatively loose stringing, the bass (or lyra) viol is uniquely suited to playing a melodic line and chords almost simultaneously, thereby supplying constant harmonic interest.
This facility is utilised to full advantage by the composers represented here (all, with the exception of Telemann, virtuoso players themselves), Hume also showing a penchant for imitative writing between the upper and lower registers in Deth (track 3), an extended dark-hued piece with a ritornello-like refrain.
Other highlights include Demachy's subtle exploration of the tone colours of the instrument, Johann Schenk's beautifully crafted writing throughout his Sonata and Telemann's imaginative imitation of an operatic recitative (track 3).
As already imitated, Sarah Cunningham's playing throughout this fascinating recital is a constant pleasure, and she has been provided with a recording which does ample justice to the ripe sonority of her instrument.
An excellent note by the performer rounds off a valuable issue.
[Brian Robins]
‘THE ROMANTIC PIANO CONCERTO’
LANE, BBC SCOTTISH SO/MAKZYMIUK
When I spoke with Mike Spring, creator and master planner of this new and important Hyperion series about a year ago, he was full of enthusiasm about the music and artists which were to be recruited to perform it.
Besides the present releases, at least three others are planned for the fairly near future.
Hyperion's exclusive signing, Nikolai Demidenko, has recorded Medtner's Second and Third Concertos , de Waal (remember the exciting Godowsky CD on ) has Hiller and Henselt Concertos in the bag, and Christopher Coombs with his new partner Ian Munroe (a Leeds Festival winner not so long ago) have Mendelssohn's neglected and marvellous 2 x 2 Piano Concertos planned.
What a wonderful prospect for piano buffs who for far too long have had to put up with hurriedly performed and inadequately recorded Vox recordings from the young Michael Ponti and others in a ragbag assortment of concerti with ‘mix and match’ orchestras and conductors.
The BBC Scottish SO under their conductor-in-chief Jerzy Maksymiuk are firmly in charge of accompaniments for the Hyperion project, and for openers the gift Piers Lane (born London, lived in Australia) has the spotlight.
You may remember him giving that super performance of the Bliss Concerto at the Proms last year; indeed he relishes neglected music which he considers should be more firmly established in the current repertoire.
Radio 3 listeners will have heard the two ‘previews’ of the Moszkowski and Paderewski Concertos performed by Lane and Maksymiuk on successive Saturday afternoons during the summer of 1991.
Beecham's comments are worthy of repetition: ‘these two Concertos have a refinement and distinction that never fails to fall fragrantly on the ear, and offers to the musical amateur, who may feel at times that the evolution of his art is becoming a little too much for either his understanding or enjoyment, a soothing retreat where he may effectively rally his shattered forces’.
Moszkowski's very skillful, tuneful Concerto divides responsibility fairly between piano and orchestra.
Where one spins the tunes, the other continues the melodic line to give cogency and consistency to the whole.
In the first movement the piano suddenly reaches high up in its register to remote regions, rather like Rachmaninov during the first movement of his Fourth Concerto .
Paderewski's Concerto is a strong, well-constructed work and rewarding for the soloist.
Together with the Fantaisie Polonaise , it typically expresses his strong nationalistic beliefs.
His post of Prime-Minister of Poland set the seal on his reputation as a great patriot, and although the demands of affairs of state subsequently diminished his artistry, he always remained an important musical figure.
For those who never saw him, the old film ‘Moonlight Sonata ’ shown occasionally on TV will reveal his dignity as a man and musician.
This is a strong work, well constructed and rewarding for the soloist.
First class recording, of course, from Tony Faulkner, and faultless production from Martin Compton.
An absolute winner — I can't wait for the new items in the series.
[BN]
‘SIENNESE SPLENDOUR’
Organ works by
MARSHALL (organ)
The secret of whetting an audience's appetite for music of the long-distant past has much to do with the way in which it is presented.
Although there is no doubt of the appeal of much of the Italian Renaissance organ music presented by Kimberly Marshall and of the insight of her performances, her attendant notes are both authoritative and immediately engaging.
With ‘Allegro ’ discs retailing at mid-price, there is always the problem that programme notes will be curtailed: that's certainly note the case here, although the ship is in danger of being spoilt for ‘ha'penth of tar’thanks to some careless proofreading.
Marshall outlines the history and special qualities of the so-called Piffaro Organ of 1519 in the Church of Santa Maria della Scale, Sienna, on which she brings to life works that almost demand the voicings and colours of such an instrument.
Marshall achieves her aim of expressing the vocal character of the Sienna organ.
So much of the music produced for keyboard and other polyphonic instruments throughout the 16th century was based on works originally written for the voice, and Marshall adeptly shows the colourful way in which they transfer to the Piffaro organ.
Girolamo Cavazzoni's arrangement of Passereau's well-known chanson Il est bel e bon (track 8) and his father Marcantonio's Madame vous avez (track 11) contrast sharply with the same composer's freely composed Recercare primo (track 6), in which Marshall draws the instrument's ripieno stops to create a sound of impressive brilliance.
The three dances by Gardano (tracks 13–15) provide further proof of the Sienna organ builder's skills, and of Marshall's imaginative use of the apparently limited number of stops at his disposal.
Two adjacent tracks begin with almost identical motifs and in the same key (tracks 16 & 17), and it might have been better to place another work between them; however, this is a small criticism of a thoughtfully prepared and magnificently played programme.
[AS]
SPANISH AND MEXICAN RENAISSANCE VOCAL MUSIC
Music in the Age of Columbus; Music in the New World
HILLIARD ENSEMBLE
This splendid collection from the Spanish Renaissance has been put together as part of the Sociedad Estatal Quinto Centenario's recording programme of Ibero-American music.
The fund of music from Imperial Spain has only recently begun to be investigated with anything approaching seriousness, and the 500th anniversary of the discovery of the Americas by Columbus has provided an additional focus to unearthing further treasures.
The Hilliard Ensemble marks the quincentenary here with two distinct discs, one of works by composers associated with the courts of Ferdinand and Isabella, and other of music by Hispanic musicians living and working in the New World.
A limited idea of the impact of Spanish culture of the indigenous population of Mexico can be heard in the only two surviving examples of Aztec polyphonic songs, hymns to the Virgin in Nahautl (Disc 2, tracks 1 & 2).
Needless to say the Spanish settlers brought missionaries with them and successful attempts were made to impose the Catholic liturgy on a people with their own living religious tradition.
The Hilliard Ensemble, using six male voices, gives immaculate performances that are rhythmically alive and expressive.
With 30 different works spread between the two discs, this set makes a first-rate introduction to early Spanish music; sacred and secular works rub shoulders, showing the definite cross-influences of courtly song on religious music, a fine example of which is provided by Francisco de Penalosa's dramatic Magnificat setting (Disc 1, track 3).
Encina's unadorned villancico,Trista Espana sin ventura (Disc 1, track 9), highlights the Hilliard's accurate intonation and almost psychic rapport in phrasing.
The recording places the singers quite close, but there is no lack of ambient warmth: try Encina's bawdy Cucu, cucu (Disc 1, track 17) for a near-perfect way of putting such music on disc.
[AJ]
‘THE VIRTUOSO MANDOLIN’
Music by  
Hard on the heels of an Amon Ra disc of music for mandolin  comes this much cheaper Tuxedo reissue (1978 recordings) of more modern repertoire for the instrument; they share only two Mozart settings for voice (in this recording that of the estimable Kurt Equiluz) and mandolin, here with the rather shy obbligato lute (as far as my ears can make out).
The Tuxedo discs begins with the rather pedestrian Preludio 2 by Raffaele Calace (‘father of modern mandolin playing’, according to the informative notes in the Amon Ra release, where more music by Calace, equally dull, is to be found; Tuxedo, by contrast, seems to have cut back on fees for notewriters).
For me the chief attractions of this programme were the two pieces by Hans Gàl, whom I knew towards the end of his long and fecund life (he died in October 1987, at the age of 97).
A more erudite musician — or courteous companion — you won't meet; and I shall treasure for aye the memory of his sitting down at the grand piano in the front room of his Edinburgh town-house to demonstrate how two operations to his 95-year-old hands had not impaired his keyboard ability: what he then produced was some of the most sheerly beautiful bach playing I have ever heard.
Gál was a consummate craftsman, and he wrote an enormous amount of music, not least for mandolin; indeed, a quick look at the catalogue compiled by his daughter Eva to celebrate his 95th birthday reveals no fewer than fifteen works involving that instrument.
I would love more people to be aware of the sometimes painfully beautiful music that Gál wrote, but (and I do no injustice to his shade) I wouldn't try to convince anyone of his stature on the basis of the music for mandolin and piano recorded here: it seems to have been composed for the sheer enjoyment of the players — well-tuned, amiable, and slightly unmemorable stuff.
Norbert Sprongel's Duo for Mandolin and Guitar must be, I suppose, slightly later (the notes are no help): the tone is generally more serious, though still Hindemith-with-Ribena rather than late Beethoven.
The sound-world is close to that of Villa-Lobo's guitar music: just enough harmonic instability to keep the ears alert.
The sound is acceptable enough; but I do wish that companies which release older recordings like this would spend just a little more (what would it cost?) to accompany them with notes worthy even of the music as slight as this.
[MA  
OPERA REVIEW
Samuel Ramey: resonant Hajj in new Kismet (see page 80).
BELLINI
‘Romeo and Juliet’ has been a source of considerable inspiration to composers as varied as Berlioz, Tchaikovsky, Prokofiev, and Bernstein and, on the operatic front, Gounod, Zandonai and Bellini, whose lovely bel canto rendering goes under the title of I Capuleti e i Montecchi , taken from the names of the two feuding families.
This new recording from Nuova Era was taped ‘live’ in April and May 1991 during performances given at Venice's beautiful Teatro La Fenice.
It's well recorded, with a good balance between stage and pit, and not too many distracting ‘noises off’.
Bruno Campanella leads a lively, perceptive and well-paced performance, enthusiastically, if sometimes scrappily, played by the Fenice orchestra.
The best of the singers is the underrated and under-recorded Dano Raffanti, who sings Tebaldo here, as he did on EMI's recording under Riccardo Muti, with plangent tone and sensitive style.
Muti's Romeo and Giulietta were Agnes Baltsa and Edita Gruberova, and I'm afraid that  Diana Montague and Katia Ricciarelli on the new set are no match for them.
Montague's tone is too shallow and lacking in body in the lower register to do justice to this ‘breeches’ role, and Ricciarelli, though often touching, has all too many and too conspicuous vocal difficulties above the stave.
A clear recommendation would therefore seem to be in the order for the Muti recording, but unfortunately EMI appears to have delated it.
So, until EMI comes to its senses and restores it to the catalogue, the Nuova Era will have to stand as an adequate, if less than ideal stopgap.
[AK]
CHABRIER
Une Education Manquée; Songs
Chabrier's music for this miniature operetta is a pastiche of 18th century style, but filled with all the charm that you might expect from him.
The young nobleman, Gontran de Boismassif, has just married his equally youthful cousin, but is suddenly acutely conscious that he has never had the facts of life explained to him, and neither his bride nor his tutor (likewise innocent) are of any assistance.
In the end (a storm aiding), the couple find that instruction is quite unnecessary after all!
A  simple story, but recounted with light and fresh humour.
Particularly appealing are two of the duets; that between Gontran and the tutor (almost a ‘patter’ duo), as Pausanius lists the improbable subjects which he has taught his pupil (like metallurgy and hydrotherapy!); and the second one, a sweeping waltz between Gontran and Hélène, as they discover that it's more fun to be two in a storm than all alone.
Charles Bruck is almost infallible in this repertory, and conducts the unidentified orchestra with delightful elegance and vivacity, well caught by a recording that sounds remarkably crisp for its age (1953/4).
Both the singing and the dialogue (of which there is a good deal) are expressive and sparkling, though there are times in her two solos, when Christiane Castelli (Gontran) seems a little uncertain pitch and fragile of tone.
The same fragility can be heard in the six songs that complete this issue, and she seems too light a voice for either the humouristic pomp of the Ballade des gros Dindons , or the lovely lyricism of Chanson pour Jeanne and L'île heureuse .
Again the recording, from the same period, is very clear, and Hélène Boschi's accompaniment is excellent, which makes it even more regrettable that Castelli sounds so unsure of her ground.
The huge leap () that marks the end of each verse in the Ballade , never sounds very confident.
Still, the songs are enchanting, and makes a good filler for a very pleasant disc.
[KL]
FALLA
Interested readers will be aware that a couple of years ago, two new recordings of the 1915 version of El Amor brujo were released, one from Virgin with Aquarius (which I've not heard), the other from Nuova Era with the Carmé Ensemble.
This new version came as a surprise, for rarely have I heard such contrasting views of the same piece.
Much of it is in the recording itself; the Carmé Ensemble play in a warm, romantic glow, whereas the Chamber Orchestra of the Teatre Lliure have a much sharper, harsher acoustic, which highlights some tremendously edgy brass playing, and gives all the instruments a primitive feel very well suited to the music.
However, when the first violin takes up the theme of the lullaby high up in its register, he plays with a pure sweetness that makes him sound like a luminous voice in the distance.
Virtually all of the spoken text is omitted, and in place of the burnished mezzo of Martha Senn, Josep Pons has engaged a cataora , a flamenco singer, who again brings a raucous, primitive edge to the music.
The principal movements that found their way into the full orchestral suite have ben heard too often to allow much deviation in interpretation, but in the other, rarer music, Pons is far freer with his tempi than Izquierdo, possibly because there is no narration overlaying the music.
Now that I've heard what can really be done with this 1915 score, I greatly prefer the flavour of the Teatre Lliure's tough and stringy version to the Carmé Ensemble's plump, battery-fed one.
If the disc does not get a higher rating, it is because of the coupling.
It was an excellent idea to couple the 1915 El Amor brujo with El Retablo de Maese Pedro , to show that there is not such a gulf between the ‘Andalusian’ and ‘Castillian’periods of Fall's musical output as is commonly supposed.
All his really popular works belong to the former category, with its strongly Impressionist tint.
However, there has been a superficial gloss lent to this music by its very popularity, which obscures the no less beautiful, but more demanding masterpieces of the later period, notably the Harpsichord Concerto and El Retablo , and the coupling of the latter with the sparser, bolder first version of El Amor brujo works well in principle.
Despite appearances,El Retablo is neither episodic, nor meant to sound unpolished.
It is a carefully conceived piece of theatre, evoking the Age of Chivalry, both that, legendary, of Charlemagne's court, and that, imaginary, to which Don Quixote aspires.
On the other hand, the singers are not the puppets of the show, they are meant to represent flesh-and-blood people, and should react accordingly.
The three soloists here all sound rather distanced from the music.
The Boy does not have that rather hoarse sound that Falla wanted, but sounds merely like a well-trained choirboy. master peter sounds neither servile, which he is at the start, nor terrified, which he should be at the end.
And the Quixote himself sounds too light, and lacks that dominating nobility of expression that allows him to impose himself suddenly on a scene hitherto occupied almost exclusively by the Boy and the orchestra.
This is not a performance which truly holds the attention, and that is an unpardonable fault.
[KL]
GAZZANIGA
Don Giovanni
Giuseppe Gazzaniga's Don Giovanni received its first performance in February 1787 during the Venice Carnival, a mere eight months before the Prague première of Mozart's version.
And that, I am afraid, is just about the most interesting thing you can say about it.
Even eschewing the inevitable comparisons with Mozart's sublime masterpiece, it seems a pretty feeble effort, mildly diverting to hear once perhaps, but otherwise hardly deserving of one's hard pressed time, income and shelf space.
Astonishingly this is the second recording of the work to appear within the space of a year, and it has the advantage over its predecessor (on C) of appearing on one disc instead of two, courtesy the omission of all the recitatives — no great loss in this case, I feel.
It's very well played by the original instruments of Tafelmusik under the expert direction of Bruno Weil, and very well recorded, but the singers, though never less than adequate, sound not much more convinced of its merits than I am.
It wouldn't surprise me to learn that the original Venetian audience ate, drank, gossiped and gambled its way through that first performance.
But then they, unlike me, weren't being paid to listen.
A dubious resurrection.
[AK]
HANDEL
Agrippina
When Nicholas McGegan took over from John Eliot Gardiner as Music Director of the Göttingen Handel Festival, he took with him the idea of recording all his performances on CD.
Eliot Gardiner made three oratorio sets for Philips from the hall at Göttingen:Alexander's Feast, Jephtha and Saul , setting in the process an up-hill task for McGegan with some pretty serious competition.
McGegan has so far produced two Handel operas from Göttingen,Floridante which came out on Hungaroton [see below — Ed. ], and now Agrippina on the label with which he is most commonly associated: Harmonia Mundi.
McGegan's problem (if it can be considered one) is that his own orchestra, Philharmonia Baroque, is based in Los Angeles, and is therefore too expensive to bring annually to Göttingen.
He has had to find an alternative group in Europe which will be able to hold its own against the formidable record of Eliot Gardiner's English Baroque Soloists, and has chosen well with the Hungarian ‘authentic’ orchestra Capella Savaria.
One ploy that McGegan has adopted to avoid any unnecessary comparison with Eliot Gardiner is to record, initially at least, Handel's operas which, being Italian, are very different works from the English oratorios that Philips were releasing to such great acclaim.
Agrippina is, above all, a humorous opera and, as is always the case with Handel, contains a huge amount of first-rate music.
Ottone's aria ‘Voi, che udite’ is as heartfelt as anything from Jephtha , while Claudio's ‘…
Basta, che sol tu chieda’ has all the solemnity for which we most admire the great bass arias from Messiah .
Agrippina's aria ‘Ogni vento’ smacks of the kind of traditional popular song which was to make Gay's Beggar's Opera so popular some twenty years later.
Agrippina contains all the right elements to make it one of Handel's most popular stage works.
It certainly has one of the most well thought-out texts, and it seems as though Handel, although no great literary expert, always responded well to libretti of quality.
The actual sound ambience of this recording is less dry than the sort of sound that Philips is prepared to settle for in the same hall, and it is refreshing to hear Nicholas McGegan's fine cast of soloists use the hall's natural resonance to give the distinct impression that they are enjoying themselves and confirming, to one listener at least, that an important part of enjoying oneself is showing off.
Agrippina makes rich and rewarding listening.
This new recording does full justice to a work which will inevitably become acknowledged as yet another hypnotic masterpiece from the great master's glorious plume.
[AW]
Floridante
Nicholas McGegan attacks the Overture to Handel's thirteenth opera Floridante with the determination of a crazed broncobuster from the Wild West.
Some might worry that he is allowing the Californians to influence him too much, but I can't help feeling that so long as he manages to stay on his horse he remains the best sort of Englishman aborad.
The Floridante Overture nearly throws him off as he takes the corners with no evidence of concern for his own safety, but the overall effect is thrilling as he leads us on an absorbing and unexpected journey with an orchestra and cast consisting, in the main, of unknown and unpronounceable Hungarians.
McGegan is not afraid of Handel: nor does he feel that the composer's awesome genius need be treated with kid gloves.
When the music is angry you can feel McGegan shaking his orchestra by their throats, and when Handel calls for celebration, he hands them sticks of candyfloss.
Like all good recording artists, McGegan realises that to make a successful recording you must be prepared to exaggerate, and it is this that makes Floridante a success.
Drew Minter, the American counter-tenor, who has appeared in many of Nicholas McGegan's recordings with Philharmonia Baroque, takes the title role.
He has an interesting and persuasive voice, for which he is in ever-increasing demand outside the USA.
He is the only non-Hungarian in a strong cast of rare finds, proving once again that, although Hungary might not be a country of great political or economic importance, it is crammed full of first-rate musicians.
Istvan Gati, as the Persian King, Orontes, is a sensational baritone with a clear, passionate tone, although his baritone Jozsef Moldvay sounds as though he has something stuck at the back o his mouth, a bit of dust maybe, which causes him to deliver the interpretation of his role in a somewhat unexpected manner.
Perhaps the real star of the show is Annette Markert who, as the heroine Elmira, as some of the opera's most interesting arias and advocates them with a sublime realism.
Just a small quibble.
When a recording is ‘live’, as this one is, it should say so on the cover, and if that's too difficult or exhausting there should be mention of it at the beginning of the booklet.
I had a sort of seizure when clapping started loudly and unexpectedly at the end of Act 1!
After a long search through the booklet I discovered that Floridante was put together form ‘live’ performances at the Göttingen Handel Festival in much the same way as many of John Eliot Gardiner's marvellous Handel oratorio recordings for Philips.
[AW]
Giulio Cesare
There can be no more encouraging sight amongst current record company listings that the steady addition of Handel's operas to the catalogue.
For long ignored, or performed in bowdlerised versions, these marvellous works, when faithfully performed, continually underline his stature as one of the supreme opera composers.
Julius Caesar is to some extent a case apart, being not only one of his most successful operas when first performed in 1724, but also the most frequently revived this century, recently even having the dubious distinction of being given the ‘Peter Sellars’ treatment on television.
Of previous recordings, all with one exception can be safely ignored, since they are disfigured by damaging transpositions and/or cuts; the exception is Mackerras, whose EMI recording (in English) provides a faithful, if still cut, souvenir of a successful ENO production.
What we have at hand is therefore of major importance — the first complete recording (running to four hours!) of one of Handel's very greatest operas.
The plot (to an excellent book by one of Handel's favourite librettists, Nicola Haym) has two clearly delineated strands — Cleopatra's seduction of Caesar, initially in order to further her own political ends against her treacherous brother and coruler of Egypt, Ptolemy, and the pursuit of revenge by the widow and son of Pompey, brutally murdered by Ptolemy before the curtain rises.
Cleopatra's gradual development, from scheming flirt to a woman who finds herself deeply in love, lies at the very heart of the opera.
For the first performances, Handel assembled one of his most star-studded casts, and the resultant demands on singers today are formidable.
Fortunately Jacobs has a team which, to a considerable degree, are capable of meeting the challenge.
Cleopatra is one of the supreme creations in any opera, and if Barbara Schlick does not quite capture the full measure of the role, her singing is lovely throughout; she is particularly touching at Cleopatra's more vulnerable moments.
Jennifer Larmore's Caesar is a triumph, magnificently assertive in her man heroic arias, but yieldingly tender in the face of Cleopatra's charms.
Even Jacobs's very fast tempo for the famous ‘Allampo’ is justified by Larmore's ability to articulate every semi-quaver.
Bernarda Fink's rich contralto brings tragic intensity to the role of the widowed Cornelia, whilst Derek Lee Ragin is a suitably blustering Ptolemy, singing the despot's often angular lines with commendable accuracy.
Indeed there are no really weak moments vocally, although I am not convinced by the style of all the vocal cadenzas.
Perhaps surprisingly for a conductor who is also a singer, Jacob's direction tends towards the fast and furious style of Handel interpretation, with dramatically accentuated rhythms and strongly articulated bass lines.
Concerto Köln may not be the most polished of today's period instrument groups, but their playing of Handel's miraculously varied score makes up in commitment what it lacks in finesse.
The recording is arguably a little close but otherwise fine.
Harmonia Mundi's generous presentation is to be applauded: in addition to three very filled discs, a fourth, which contains the Finale and an appendix aria from the 1725 revival, is given free.
The booklet provides full translations, and an excellent introduction by the doyen of Handel scholars, Winton Dean.
It should by now be apparent that this recording is obligatory to all Handelians.
To those less committed I would strongly urge sampling (try Disc 2, track 4)— and will be surprised indeed if you resist the seduction any better than Caesar !
[BR]
HONEGGER
Scant weeks after I cited Ozawa's new recording of this work (thankfully  superseding his 1967 recording) as one of my favourite discs of 1991, this one reappeared on the market, like a challenge.
I had missed it on its first appearance, around 1974, but considering the excellent standards of Baudo's other Honegger recordings for the same label, it would be a mistake to overlook it entirely.
The two conductors' approaches are highly contrasted, although the difference in recording circumstances has its part to play as well.
Ozawa's was recording ‘live’ in a very resonant church; the spoken voices come across very naturally, but some of the orchestral detail is blurred.
The Supraphon recording, made in studio conditions, puts some ‘special effects’ onto the voices of Jeanne and Frère Dominic, which are not entirely welcome, but the orchestra is very much more sharply defined.
You can really heard the ondes martenot in this recording.
Baudo is much more lyrical in style.
I missed Ozawa's sheer rhythmic energy at times, such as in ‘Porcus's Introduction’, where Baudo does not quite manage to bring out the basic dance rhythms behind the music.
On the other hand, Baudo's gentler touch with the music of Jeanne's childhood, and later of her apotheosis, is more immediately appealing.
Some of Baudo's Czech soloists have a rather thick accent, but on the whole, all the singing roles are very well taken.
There's little to chose between Marthe Keller (Ozawa) and Nelly Bourgeaud (Baudo) in the title role; however, Ozawa scores significantly with an outstanding Brother Dominic in Georges Wilson.
Michel Favory, for Baudo, sounds a little youthful  and not sufficiently incisive, which is where, for me, Ozawa's recording wins.
On the other hand, the Supraphon recording comes on two discs, with, as filler, a luminous performance of the ‘Christmas’ Cantata , far more exhilarating than the more recent Erato recording under Corboz.
It makes an enchanting conclusion to the set, and one which might well influence one's decision to purchase.
For Jeanne d'Arc itself, I still recommended the DG disc, but to have both that and the ‘Christmas’ Cantata , then this fine Supraphon is a perfectly viable option.
[KL]
MUSSORGSKY
Boris Godunov (original version)
After the late Emil Tchakarov's excellent recordings of other Russian operas, notably Tchaikovsky's (The Queen of Spades and Mussorgsky's Khovanshchina , this rather lacklustre performance of Boris Godunov comes as something of a disappointment.
Although his love and understanding of much pertinently observed detail, he too often fails to energise the drama at key points, with tempi that are distinctly on the slow side.
Nor does he always succeed in persuading us that Rimsky Korsakov was altogether wrong in thinking Mussorgsky's orchestration ineffective.
Admittedly Tchakarov is not helped by an opaque and woolly recording that fails to properly focus the orchestra, but even so he misses the raw power and vigour that Fedoseyev finds in his Philips set.
The other big disappointment lies in Nicolai Ghiaurov's muted Boris.
His voice is still in good shape, but compared to his wonderful performances for Karajan in 1970, he now sounds fatally uncommitted, interpretatively a shadow of her former self.
Elsewhere there is some very good singing, especially from the excellent Marina of Stevka Mineva, the more than usually listenable Grigory of Michail Svetlev, and Boris Martinovich's splendidly sinister Rangoni.
These three combine with Tchakarov at his best to make the ‘Polish Act’ this set's particular highlight.
Even so, with a dull Boris this cannot compete with Fedoseyev's flawed but gripping reading as an account of the original score.
And despite (or perhaps because of?) its use of the Rimsky version, the Karajan is easily the best conducted, sung and recorded.
Tchakarov's was a great talent, and his recent death at only forty two a tragedy, but his true memorial is to be found in the earlier issues of this series.
[AK]
PAISIELLO
La Serva padrona
Not to be confused with Pergolesi's catalytic opera of the same name (the one reputed to have sparked off the operatic ‘Guerre des Bouffons’ in Paris), Paisiello's La Serva padrona (‘The Servant Mistress’) has enjoyed a less exalted fate.
Both set the same frivolous text by Gennaro Federico, which, by the time Paisiello came to write his opera nearly fifty years after Pergolesi's — must have seemed a little out of date.
Perhaps Paisiello hoped his ‘Intermezzo’ would achieve the fame equal to that of its predecessor; in the event, confusion over names has often meant that this ‘mark II’setting has been completely ignored.
Once again, Nuova Era is venturing to put a neglected opera back on the road.
The intention is laudable, the achievement — on this occasion — sadly not.
The fault lies only in one performance, that of Serpina (the maid who, by wily means, becomes the mistress), sung by Anna Victoria Banks.
Unfortunately, she makes up fifty per cent of the cast — the only other character is her master, Uberto — and sings rather more than fifty per cent of the music, so the drawback becomes quite a serious one.
Approximate intonation, coupled with a decided tendency to the flat side of the note, and a pronounced break between ‘chest’ and ‘head’voices are fatal flaws in this particular context.
All this is most unfortunate, especially for Gian Luca Ricci, the other young soloist who gives a charming performance, and for the Orchestra da Camera de Milano and the conductor Paolo Vaglieri.
For determined Paisiellists only, I'm afraid.
[GH]
ROSSINI
‘The Best of…‘
VARIOUS ARTISTS
The first disc of this compilation is very much more successful than the second.
The latter has an excellent Silken Ladder Overture conducted by Muti, but also extracts from Gardelli's William Tell , which was as unsatisfactory as most recordings of that exceptionally difficult opera.
In addition, there is a disappointing ‘Domine Deus’ from the Petite Messe Solenelle — EMI has more flattering recordings of Gedda than this — a stirring ‘Inflammatus’from the Stabat Mater , with Pilar Lorengar, and an indifferent selection of the Pechés de vieillesse.
The first disc, on the other hand, has some real gems; Giulini conducts the Overtures to the Barber and Cenerentola , Muti those to The Thieving Magpie and 8888 Semiramide .
There is June Anderson with a splendidly langorous ‘Bel raggio lusinghier’, Samuel Ramey gleeful in ‘La calunnia’ and Gobbi even more so in ‘Largo al factotum’, though the voice is not at its best.
Edita Gruberova delivers a fine ‘Una voce poco fa’, though I now thoroughly disapprove of soprano Rosinas.
Perhaps perversely I have nothing but admiration for the high-wire acrobatics of Mady Mesplé in ‘Diapiacer mi balza il cor’ from Magpie , but then, I've never heard a complete version of this opera, ‘authentic’or otherwise.
Finest of all, however, is Callas in the Finale of Cenerentola , whose identification with whatever she sang puts her beyond all authenticist arguments.
A patchy collection, therefore, but largely acceptable, and a decent introduction to Rossini in his bicentenary year.
[KL]
Arias for Bas
RAMEY, CHORUS AND ORCHESTRA OF WELSH NATIONAL OPERA/FERRO
The Rossini bicentennial releases are flooding in, but this is one of the more attractive ones that I've received.
It certainly helps that Samuel Ramey is the bass of this generation, right up there with Pinza and Siepi, so that almost anything he does is thoroughly enjoyable.
It also helps that Gabriele Ferro and the WNO orchestra have a strong feeling for Rossini, and deliver excellent support throughout.
‘Come un'ape’ might have been replaced with something more apt for a bass voice (Dandini really should be a baritone), and the newly-exhumed concert aria ‘Alla voce della gloria’, though a fine showcase for the voice, makes an indifferent showing beside such gems as Alidoro's ‘Là del ciel’(also from Cenerentola ).
The raison d'être for this recording has to be the extraordinary ‘mad scene’ from Semiramide , eighteen minutes of the most astonishing music Rossini ever wrote, truly looking forward to the great lyrical outbursts of Verdi, and given a superb performance by Ramey.
[KL]
VERDI
La Traviata
This has always been the most controversial of Toscanini's NBC opera recordings.
As one would expect, the precision and detail or the orchestral playing is fantastic, the Preludes to Acts 1 & 3 superbly built, the party and gambling scenes of coruscating brilliance.
The sense of live being lived on the edge is both striking and appropriate.
But La Traviata is essentially a singer's opera, and when it comes to the singers, Toscanini displays a rigidity that is little short of insensitive.
There's simply no give and take in the arias, which sound mechanical and unfeeling, the vocal line held fast in a the straitjacket of Toscanini's unyielding beat.
No wonder the singers sound uncomfortable and sometimes plain terrified.
Best of them is the young Robert Merrill, who at least manages to extract some expression from Germont's part.
But Jan Peerce makes a very coarse and unromantic Alfredo, and Licia Albanese, who might have made a good shot at the role of Violetta under more sympathetic direction, sounds particularly nervous and unsettled.
It only makes matters worse that the sound remains harsh, boxy and quite uncomfortable to listen to.
This must be just about the most unmoving performance of Traviata ever recorded, and does little justice to Toscanini's reputation as an opera conductor.
[AK]
WRIGHT & FOREST
Kismet
This is the second new recording of Kismet to have come along in the last couple of years.
The previous version was on That's Entertainment (TER)— a set which I enthusiastically reviewed in CDR 11/90.
The most immediately obvious difference between the two recordings is that TER's is on two CDs whereas Sony's is accommodated on just one.
However, TER includes not merely more music from Kismet itself, but additional tracks from the film version and the 1978 African version,Timbuktu .
Nonetheless, everything important is included on Sony's single disc, which thus enjoys a considerable price advantage.
On performance though, good as the new one is, I remain firmly attached to the TER, which is more romantically conceived, and captures much better the work's operetta style.
The sony has a touch too much Broadway slickness for my taste and, despite the presence of bigger name international stars, is not on the whole as well sung.
I except from that last statement Samuel Ramey's resonant Hajj, a splendidly rich voiced assumption, though not superior to TER's Donald Maxwell.
Ruth Ann Swenson also makes a sweet voiced Marsinah, and Jerry Hadley sings well as the Caliph, but Valerie Masterson is even more appealing and David Rendall more impassioned.
However, TER's Judy Kaye is clearly superior to Sony's Julia Migenes in the role of Lalume.
Migenes's voice divides disconcertingly into two quite separate halves, the lower located on Broadway, the upper in the opera house.
Kaye is rightly all Broadway.
Mind you, at least Migenes has a voice, however schizophrenic.
The comedian Dom De Luise makes an amusing enough Wazir, but his singing can't hold a candle to Richard Van Allan's and isn't always exactly in tune.
To cap it all TER has the richer and more atmospheric sound.
Sony's is perfectly good, but the voices are further forward and the orchestra has a less sumptuous bloom.
If you want a single disc of Kismet , the new Sony is certainly recommendable enough, but for all true ‘Kismetophiles’ it's on TER that ‘Paradise’will be found.
[AK]
COLLECTIONS
DAME ISOBEL BAILLIE
Oratorio, opera, Lieder, songs
This is an enchanting disc.
It begins auspiciously with Purcell's sacred aria The Blessed Virgin's Expostulation , not available elsewhere, but back again at last and doubly valuable because it is handled so beautifully.
I can't think why pure-voiced sopranos like Emma Kirkby haven't also taken it up; it would suit them very well.
If you are a purist, you may be somewhat put off by the lame, if not sticky English translations of words in Bach's Cantatas Nos. 201 & 68 , but don't be, for the exceeding purity of Dame ‘Bella's’ voice overcomes all.
Some Handel operatic arias — especially ‘Let the Bright Seraphim’— give way to Mozart, Schubert and Mendelssohn.
‘Voi che sapete’ and ‘Deh! vieni’prove the singer's Mozartean technique.
The disc ends with Arditi's ‘Il bacio’ and more Schubert:An die Musik (‘Thou heav'nly art’) accompanied by Gerald Moore.
One track I've omitted on purpose the Barcarolle from Tales of Hoffman , in which Dame ‘Bella’ is joined by Nellie Walker, and does not attempt to sing it with herself as Elisabeth Schumann did.
Which brings me to consider the likeness — and differences — between these two sopranos who often sang much of the same repertoire.
Each had bell-like clarity of a tone (a kind of Belinda-ish voice), each rejoiced in what she was singing, and each was an adorable person.
But while Schumann lacked a reliable lower range to the voice, and frequented the upper reaches wherever possible, dame Isobel's had far more substance, which ultimately gave her a wider range of songs to sing.
Listen to the Hirt auf dem Felsen here, and then to Schumann's for a tantalising comparison, both cut, but differently.
Sound is up to the usual Pearl standard, and the disc is a long overdue tribute to the ‘Pride of Manchester’ who died there less than a decade ago.
[AJ]
FRIEDRICH SCHORR
Operatic arias, oratorio and Lieder
BETTENDORF, VARIOUS ORCHS./CONDS. 
NAZZARENO DE ANGELIS
Operatic arias, duet, ensemble
When somebody suggested, early in the LP era, that eventually all the old 78s we knew — and possibly many that we didn't — would one day be transferred to the new medium, he was answered by the shaking of heads.
‘It wouldn't be worth it…people only want to hear new issues not scratchy old ones…’ and so on.
As time passed, and the cost of making new recordings has increased, so that prophesy of about 1953 has been proved right.
And since CDs, and the digital process, allow us to hear far more far quietly than was ever before possible, a number of companies are, very sensibly, capitalising on the 78 treasures which many people have never heard.
For this we have to thank those dedicated collectors whose affection and care for the once ‘ordinary’ 78s has led to a great deal of pleasure for all of us today.
There is another aspect: the voices themselves.
It is all very well to hark back and praise what used to be then, over and above what is today, just because the aura of a past age hangs round it.
Sentimentality!
But if you listen to the two discs reviewed here as examples, you will discover that, in their respective vocal ranges, these artists are without equal in 1992.
Some voices of the past may have been based on shaky techniques, or their use transgressed today's views about musical taste, but many others still shatter the sense by their beauty, magnificence and sheer character in the vocalisation.
One of these is undoubtedly Friedrich Schorr, former principal barritone at the Berlin State Opera, and an early political emigré to the USA.
He was a great Wotan and Hans Sachs of his time, but he assumed many more characters, as this disc sketches in, by means of what can only be called ‘random’ arias.
Thirteen of them were made by the electrical process in 1930–31, but three were acoustically produced ten years earlier.
A cross section of Schorr's repertoire introduces us to opera, oratorio and Lieder where the voice is always displayed in a completely even production with every note placed impeccably and coloured with great thought and beauty to fit the occasion.
Two particular tracks demonstrate this great artist's ability at both ends of the emotional scale:(track 5) his towering, raging Don Pizzaro from Fidelio (pictured on the booklet) and (track 16) Strauss's Lied Traum durch die Dämmergung .
I need say no more: Schorr says it all far better.
[AJ]
‘3 HISTORIC TENORS ‘IN CONCERT’’
One can't help feeling there may be a bit of tongue in cheek here!
The ‘three tenors’ gambit has been played, and played, and replayed but with the valid excuse that they are always different in content.
Not a bad idea therefore to chose and use three such spanking tenors as these: all were born in the last century; all made operatic débuts in their early 20s; all enjoyed singing to the people as well as to operatic audiences.
This spread of interest is very much borne out by the selection of numbers given to each of the tenors where Tauber has more semi-serious and operatic numbers to sing than his tow seniors.
Caruso's ‘Recondita harmonia’ from Tosca is his only one, otherwise they are Neapolitan songs, all done handsomely, though, and not a breath of criticism possible; Gigli has ‘O Paradiso’from L'Africana , and the famous ‘Improvviso’from Andrea Chénier , then five popular songs.
Tauber sings light songs from the operettas he made famous, including Blossom Time , and the Viennese Vogelhändler , also a strange vocal setting to Rubinstein's Melody in F !
But he not only sings ‘E lucevan’ from Tosca (in German), the ‘Drinking Song’from Act I of Traviata (without a Violetta); he also has a very famous concluding number, one in excess of the other tenors, who also sang it.
This is — guess!
And in German too.
I think he is being favoured, but what does that matter?
It is all good fun and just the thing to encourage not-especially-musical people to discover that real singers make everything sound great.
In this instance (and because it's in the ‘Flapper’ series perhaps) Pearl has adjusted the upper sound-range slightly from its usual practice.
[AJ]
HMV CHART
HMV CLASSICAL CHART
This chart is compiled by THE HMV CLASSICAL DEPARTMENT at 150 Oxford street, London W1.
This special five-year chart shows a more balanced result than our two-month version (see page 67); here longer term, established titles mix it with the ‘Big Names’.
Du Pré and the LSO/Barbiroli's Elgar, the BPO/Karajan's Mozart, and the NPO/Barbirolli's Mahler all show up well alongside more recent releases from such as Rattle, Pavarotti and Eliot Gardiner.
What might we see in another five year's time?
Will rattle's Mahler stand the test of time as well as Barbirolli's?
Will a new Carmina Burana wear as well as Previn's St. Clement Danes recording?
FEATURE
STOMPING WITH SAVOY
A round-up of the latest jazz releases, majoring on newly ‘refurbished’ and important Savoy recordings from the '40s and ‘50s
Shortly after Christmas I received the first batch of rereleases from the Savoy label, or rather from the Nippon Columbia Co.
Ltd. (aka Denon), who now owns the rights to this important jazz label.
Denon has ‘recreated’ the ‘true original sound’of the original Savoy master recordings (the quotes being Denon's words) and is now re-issuing many Savoy albums as originally presented, at mid-price, and complete with original LP front covers and notes (and Savoy's famous  misspellings .
All titles are short in length (the inevitable result of the then-available vinyl technology), though this is no hardship given both the price and the fascinating nature of much of the music making.
Original Savoy titles have been painstakingly transferred to digital disc from either original Savoy lacquer masters or tape masters where applicable.
The technicalities of this transfer process are ultimately of peripheral interest compared to the quality of the music and how well it is shown off.
Suffice to say, however, that there has been noise deletion (pertaining to the surface noise from both lacquer and tape masters) and there has been adjustment of level by way of compensation.
Much is made of the sound quality, of which more below.
Thirty of the first 40 titles are mono (contrary to the original Savoy notes provided with six of these), and all are marked ‘AAD’— surely an eccentricity given the work that has been done on the original signal?
Take for instance the very subtle though artificially ‘modern’ sounding reverberation effects that occur especially on ‘Presenting Cannonball’and ‘Byrd's Word’(both reviewed below): an alteration or not?
It is worth noting at this point that currently there is very little overlap with the Savoy titles from France which have been available through Vogue (distributed by New Note in this country).
It has to be said that so much is there of interest within the new ‘Denon Savoy’ titles and — until stocks run out — in the largely parallel ‘Vogue Savoy’catalogue, that at this time there is little point making too much of which is ‘better’or ‘worse’.
CENTRAL TO THE FIRST REFURBISHED ‘Denon’ Savoy release are five discs devoted to Charlie Parker (1920–1955)—‘core repertoire’for all enthusiasts of jazz in the second half of the 1940s, from whence all these recordings (if not the actual compilations) come.
The late '40s means ‘bebop’, much harder and faster than the ‘swing’ tempos of the '20s and '30s, and certainly not intended for dance halls.
And, at the core of bepop, along with Dizzy Gillespie, Bud Powell et al , is Charlie ‘Bird’ Parker.
The discs are ‘The Charlie Parker Story’, ‘Charlie Parker Memorial’, ‘The Genius of Charlie Parker’ and ‘The Immortal Charlie Parker’.
All are mono.
These titles are retrospectives, released by Savoy shortly after Parker's premature death (aged 35); with this handful of LPs, Savoy sought to encompass the late great alto saxophonist's complete Savoy discography, which to all intents and purposes they do.
They are catalogues (albeit with some eccentricities) of Parker's Savoy sessions.
Billie's Bounce for example(‘The Charlie Parker Story’) is heard in five separate though shamefully not chronologically ordered takes, including a suddenly interrupted ‘short take’ of 1:40 duration!
What all (bar for some reason ‘Memorial’ Vol. 1) have in common is the inclusion of takes from the now-famous November 26th 1945 quintet session which represents for jazz — and bebop in particular— something akin to what Woodstock would later be for another generation (but without the audience participation).
Significant yes, a watershed of sorts, yes, but more for its importance as a marker in the Parker's career.
The personnel present at this session (about which there is some doubt) reads like a who's who of jazz: Parker (alto sax), Miles Davis, Dizzy Gillespie (trumpets), Sadik Hakim and/or Bud Powell (piano), Curly Russell (double bass) and Max Roach (drums).
But there's more to these 26th November recordings than famous and soon-to-be-famous names: take such as Kogo, Now's the Time, Warming up a Riff and Billie's Bounce represent Parker at what one might consider his recently matured best.
There's a distinctly inventive yet methodical progression to be found in his solos in these series of takes and there is a collected and rounded economy to his playing that is less remarkable in earlier recordings.
As Max Harrison points out in the anthology Max Harrison: A Jazz Retrospective (Quartet Books ), there is in reality little of the truly ‘revolutionary’ in Parker's performances from these Savoy sessions.
There is however much more to be said here about the development of Parker the musician.
The occasional comment one hears that Parker plays the way he is here simply because he was by that time a seasoned performer and recording artist is not really to the point; Parker was a naturally developmental musician.
He also always displayed apparent technical ease with the difficult rhythmic and harmonic extensions that so divided ‘swing’ from ‘bebop’jazz performers not so many years before, and his lightning quick playing merely reinforces the impression that he was never really extended.
It all sounds effortless, but this is the effect if not the reality of Charlie Parker, alto saxophonist.
Working through the takes (in order, courtesy of your CD player if necessary), one hears Parker fine tuning his solos with method, allied to inspiration, rather than simple perspiration.
As such, the best cross section of Charlie Parker here is ‘The Charlie Parker Story’, all of whose takes are from the 26/11/45 session, and for which I award the extra half star.
(Further invaluable Parker reading, especially insightful with regard to the November 26th 1945 session: Parker's onetime manager and Dial label boss Ross Russell's Bird Lives!
[Quartet Books ]).
BEFORE RETURNING TO THE MUSIC, LET'S take time out to talk about the sound : does Denon's painstaking work with these Savoy masters really represent an audible improvement or does it mean — as with some historic classical recordings that have been treated to ‘NoNOISE’ or ‘Cedar’— merely reduced surface noise at the expense of the loss of the top end (important ambient noise, feathery cymbals etc.) and a tubby overall sound?
The best comparison one can make is with either a largely exactly contemporary set of recordings on a Vogue Savoy collection, ‘Original Bird — The Best of Bird on Savoy’(Vogue , full price ) or a similarly anthological album highlighting his slightly later (1946–47) efforts for the Comet and Dial labels, namely ‘Bird Symbols’(Rhapsody , full price ).
Comparing the ‘Charlie Parker Story’ directly with Vogue's 14-track ‘Original Bird’release (and in effect listening critically for the first time), I found the Denon ‘sound recovery’system somewhat inconsistent in places.
Certainly denon's is a substantially clearer and less muddled sound, but this can often also be achieved with simple care and attention to mastering, allied to  access the original lacquers or tapes — which Denon has in many cases had.
But the differences between ‘old’ and ‘new’Savoy go further than this.
The new Savoy exhibits a more open sound than the Vogue ‘original Bird’(which has a distinctly ‘bathroom’ acoustic), with much more space between instruments, especially around the soloist.
I do have to say that on occasion I found myself baulking at a certain inconsistent and artificialsounding short reverberation effect following the odd sudden soloist (trumpet or saxophone)sforzando (two specific cases are mentioned above), but this is a price I'm more than willing to pay for the added ambience and clarity that Nippon Columbia has afforded these treasurable recordings.
The 16 Dial/Comet recordings of ‘Bird Symbols’, by the way, also have an enclosed ‘bathtub’ sound (actually no worse than many discs taken from nth generation masters), although they are also cleaner and less distorted (and with less surface noise) on the whole than the French Savoy product.
Rhapsody's ‘Bird symbols’ is a worthwhile adjunct to the Parker collection for its addition in one package of several other ‘essential’Parker renditions of such as Night in Tunisia, Yardbird Suite and Ornithology .
Also interesting and worthwhile is Verve's 17-track ‘Swedish Schnapps Plus’ release from late last year (); this is an album of Parker's quintet recordings (from 1949–51), as with ‘The Charlie Parker Story’, but with additional interest in the form of trumpeters Red Rodney and Kenny Dorham (as well as Miles Davis) and Kenny Clarke and Max Roach on drums.
On different tracks, bassists are Ray Brown and Teddy Kotick, while the piano stool alternates between Al Haig, John Lewis and Walter Bishop Junior.
This is another CD to offer alternative takes, although far more moderately than the Savoys, and which provides yet more insight into the fascinating process of invention, modification and progression within a jazz recording session.
OF THE OTHER NEW ‘JAPANESE’ SAVOY titles, a few stand out from the crowd.
One such is ‘Opus de Bop’(), a collection of three distinct sessions from 1946 and ‘47 and three fascinating groups: a quartet led by the late great tenor saxophonist Stan Getz (Hank Jones [piano], Curly Russell [bass]and Max Roach on drums); a quintet featuring influential arch-bebop pianist Bud Powell (Sonny Stitt [alto sax], Kenny Dorham [trumpet], Al Hall [bass]and Wallace Bishop on drums); and trumpeter Fats Navarro's quintet (Leo Parker [alto and baritone sax], Tadd Dameron [piano], Gene Ramey [bass]and Denzil Best [drums]).
The Stan Getz (1927–1991) of ‘Opus de Bop’ is not the tenorseductor of Girl from Ipanema , nor does he sound as lush and soft as in his later recordings, but there's a fluidity in his solos that's equally as distinctive as the later ‘bossa nova’dates.
The works of Stitt, Dorham and Bud Powell are also key to the bop style of jazz; picking a high point is difficult but if I must I'll go for ‘Bebop in Pastel’(Powell quintet), which is a quintessential bebop track.
Great stuff but a half star has been deducted for the sadly inconsistent sound quality between the three sessions.
‘Fiery’() encompasses six tracks from 1957 by a quintet led by Red Rodney (b. 1927), preferred trumpeter in Charlie Parker's 1949–51 quintet.
Personnel are Rodney, Ira Sullivan (mixing tenor sax and trumpet), Tommy Flanagan (piano), and an immaculate rhythm section comprising Oscar Pettiford (bass) and Philly Joe Jones or Elvin Jones on drums, with three tracks apiece.
Highlight is the Rodney/Sullivan duet in Red Arrow (with Sullivan changing to trumpet during the piece for a ‘cutting contest’).
Support from Jones and Pettiford is immaculate.
For more of the immaculate touch drumming of Philly Joe Jones — but I'm afraid without much in the way of quality in the supporting cast — try ‘Mo'Joe’ from 1968 on Black Lion (for Jones alone); brushwork especially of the very highest order.
Another important title is the prematurely named ‘Modern Jazz Quartet’(Savoy  ), by the Milt Jackson Quartet:Jackson (vibraphone), John Lewis (piano), Ray Brown or Percy Heath (alternating on bass) and Kenny Clarke or Al Johns (ditto on drums).
Lewis, clarke and Browns were the Dizzy Gilespie band's original rhythm section, and with Milt Jackson and Percy Heath instead of Brown, would eventually become The Modern Jazz quartet (MJQ) in 1954, under Lewis's musical direction.
The recordings here (dating from 1951–52) were among this quarter's first formal sessions together.
Even so, these sessions reveal much of the formula that would make the MJQ so successful in later years, with the loose basis of a style that would later (perhaps unfairly) become known as ‘chamber jazz’.
The generally slow and mellow nature of most of the tracks here shows just how wide the differences were between the styles of go-ahead be-bop (as exemplified by Savoy's Parker recordings) and a more easy-going approach to jazz which developed in the late 1940s and '50s in the wake of the bop's increasing hectic and adventurous music.
Heard here, Milt Jackson's vibes sound is significantly different from, say, Lionel Hampton's more pianistic or percussive approach, with a greater lyrical content and a far greater variety of attack and articulation than Hampton's more ‘accompanist’ technique.
That is not to underplay the contribution of the other members of the quartet: all are heard here in (mainly) Jackson compositions and all make solidly individualistic contributions in advance of the more formal direction that Lewis would take up with the MJQ.
Essential sampling: Jackson's Bluesology and Autumn Breeze , Thelonious Monk's Round Midnight .
ON NOW TO A MISCELLANEOUS BATCH OF jazz titles from early this and late last year, in alphabetical artist order.
Old faces mix with the new but all have something to say.
(All are full prices issues, unless otherwise indicated.)
First up is tenor saxophonist and arranger Teddy Edwards's bluesy and mainstream ‘Mississippi Lad’(Verve ‘Gitanes Jazz’); Edwards (b. 1924) has worked as soloist and arranger with bands led by Red Callender, Benny Goodman, Milt Jackson and others; but this is a sextet album recorded last year and features the vocal and guitar stylings of Tom Waits (notably on the immensely moving Little Man ), as well as drummer Billy Higgins and bassist Leroy Vinnegar.
Edward's ‘forthright’, breathy style lends itself naturally to blues (Mississippi Lad or I'm not your fool any more , also featuring Waits on vocals, and the soft and low Ballad for a Bronze Beauty ), but less well to the rest of the album, parts of which also have an oddly out of character Brazilian flavour.
Sample before buying.
More ‘traditional’ though equally individualistic jazz vocals k next from the incomparable Ella Fitzgerald (b. 1918) in ‘Ella Returns to Berlin’(Verve  ), a previously unreleased ‘live’Norman Granz concert from early 1961.
Backing comes from Lou Levy (piano), the excellent Herb Ellis (electric guitar), Wilfred Middlebrooks (bass) and Gus Johnson (drums), although Oscar Peterson, Ray Brown and Ed Thigpen (the Peterson trio for many) take a guest spot on This can't be love .
The atmosphere is charged (worth noting: the building of the Berlin wall is mere months away), the singing good (thought the voice occasionally sounds overworked as in Take the A Train ), the intonation typical Ella (spot-on) and the songs typically ‘Fitzgerald in Concert’.
Highlights?
Misty, Mack the Knife, Anything Goes, Round Midnight, This can't be Love .
Sound is a little thin, but amply compensated for by the ‘live’ atmosphere.
Another ‘old stager’ in concert is Stephane Grappelli (b. 1908), whose ‘In Tokyo’album (Denon  ) appeared late last year.
Here he is recorded ‘live’ in 1990 with electric guitar and acoustic bass back-up, as well as the bonus of Marcel Azzola on  accordion on several tracks.
Grappelli's swinging, fluid style seems at first to be leaving his young guitar/bass duo behind, however well before half-distance they are fully warmed-up (say by Just one of those things ) and thenceforth come into their own with sympathetic accompaniment and youthful aplomb.
Best of the concert:Them there Eyes and the medley Time after Time/Two sleepy People/Satin Doll , which is smilingly played by Grappelli — at the piano!
MOVING BACK IN TIME AGAIN WITH Sony's new mid-price ‘Columbia Jazz Contemporary masters’ series, which takes the '70s as its core period; ‘fusion’(rock-meets-jazz) albums such as Weather Report's ‘Heavy Weather’(starring the powerful and unforgettable Birdland , from 1977 on ), John Mc Laughlin's ‘Johnny Mc Laughlin, Electric Guitarist’(from 1978 on ; try New York on my Mind ) and the Mahavishnu Orchestra's ‘Birds of Fire’(improvisation from 1973 on ) are high water marks, while future releases will include such important albums as Miles Davis's ‘Nefertite’and ‘Filles de Kilimanjaro’.
Top recommendation in the first batch of ten titles is the excellent anthology ‘Herbie Hancock — A Jazz Collection’().
Precociously talented pianist Hancock (b. 1940) played Mozart's D major Concerto with the Chicago SO at the age of eleven and was a key member of the Miles Davis Quintet at 23.
He left in 1968 having found his own particular ‘voice’: his chair was taken by Chick Corea.
Hancock's ‘Collection’ is a fascinating and highly enjoyable perusal through Hancock's career between circa 1978 and the early ‘80's.
Highlights for me are the duets with the Chick Corea on Liza, Someday my Prince will come and the Hancock ‘standard’,Maiden Voyage ; the interplay and mutual understanding on show here is astounding.
Then there's a single track (Wayne Shorter's haunting Nefertiti ) from Hancock's VSOP group sessions; VSOP comprised former Davis Quintet members Shorter (tenor, soprano sax), Ron Carter (bass) and Tony Williams (drums), with Freddie Hubbard (trumpet), and Hancock on electric grand.
The ‘Collection’ also features no less than five ‘live’tracks from Hancock's early '80s and primarily acoustic quartet featuring rising trumpeter Wynton Marsalis and once more Carter and Williams.
Try I fall in love too easily for the young Marsalis's strong sound gelling with the experience of the rhythm section.
Uniformly excellent, especially Some Day my Prince will come .
On to John Harle's ‘In the Shadow of the Duke’(EMI Classics  ): classical saxophonist Harle is a fan of Duke Ellington and this album reflects his clear affection for both  Ellington/Strayhorn tunes and the ellington band's characteristic smooth, swelling, surging sound.
the John Harle Band is Steve Lodder on synthesisers, Paul Morgan on bass, Simon Limbrick on percussion and Paul Clarvis on drums, with Harle himself on (principally) alto and soprano saxophones: ‘Shadow of the Duke’ also includes substantial additional strings (based around Balenscu Quartet members), horns and woodwind.
But for me it's the smaller scale works that really succeed: Harle's enjoyable arrangement of Ellington/Mills's Caravan for example is more like an Intercity 125 than a rolling camel train, while the exoticism of Isfahan (from the ‘Far East Suite’— available on RCA Bluebird , by the way) is all but drowned in the sweet smell of strings; compare to Ellington's original spicy reeds!
Now contrast and compare Sucrier Velours with its simple synths, brushed drums and sax, or Sultry Sunset , with Harle and Richard Rodney Bennett on piano (low-key Bennett also shares arranger's credits on three of the ten tracks here): successful assimilations of the Ellington sprit, without being too close to the original.
For me Ellington's bands were all about soloists extemporising (admittedly within ultra-strict limits), while the band swung on, but Harle is obviously not one to leave things to chance.
Rigid in feel or not, I like this album a lot.
Young American alto sax player Antonio Hart's début album ‘For the first Time’() features Lewis Nash on drums, Mulgrew Miller on piano and Christian McBridge on bass.
Distinctive young trumpeter Roy Hargrove guests on the funky Big H.M. ,
one of Hart's five self-penned tunes, and a good one at that, reminding me of ‘pop’ tunes by such jazz luminaries as Herbie Hancocks, Lee Morgan (Watermelon Man and the Sidewinder respectively).
Hart is nevertheless unafraid of tackling more purely ‘jazz’ tunes (such as the brief, intense and aptly-named Straight Ahead by Kenny Dorham).
In short he's something of a crossover artist; he clearly feels as comfortable borrowing from the past as he does with a more modern approach.
He's not afraid of lyricism either: try Bewitched .
Impressive.
YOUTHFUL BRITISH PIANIST AND BERKLEE graduate Julian Joseph's début album is portentously entitled ‘The Language of Truth’(East West ).
This should not however put you off sampling: Joseph is an original.
Ten Joseph tunes line up alongside a poppy cover version of Curtis Mayfield's The Other Side of Town ; all fall together under a common musical blanket that's soft, funky, rolling and affectionate.
McCoy Tyner and Herbie Hancock are cited as ‘influences’; there's more to it than that and I suggest you give this one a try soon.
Very good indeed:The Language of Truth, Art of the Calm , and the horrendously titled Ode to the Time our Memories forgot .
Joseph's splendid and highly skilled young quartet features Marc Mondesir (drums), Alec Dankworth (bass), Jean Toussaint (tenor, soprano sax), with vocals by Sharon Musgrove and Dee Lewis (Other Side of Town, The Magical One respectively).
If you like the similarly ‘philosophical’ Courtney Pine, you'll like Julian Joseph.
Geoff Keezer is another young American pianist.
‘Here and Now’(), his Blue Note release from the autumn of last year, is his first for a major label, although ‘new’ he is not: Keezer was the last occupant of the Jazz Messengers' piano stool at the time of Art Blakey's untimely death last year.
Keezer's all-acoustic quartet features fellow Messenger Donald Harrison on alto saxophone, Steve Nelson on vibraphone and relative old-stager, the excellent Billy Higgins on drums.
The accompanying press release calls this album ‘mainstream’; perhaps it is, but there's nothing wrong with that, as the elders in the Marsalis family are always happy to prove.
Try Keezer's own tune,Leilani's Mirror for a cross-section of both the quality of the quartet and the young New Yorker's evident writing abilities.
Yet another pianist — and one who also sounds as if he might list Herbie Hancock or Chick Corea as his most direct influences — is Kenny Kirkland (b. 1957) with an eponymous album just released over here().
Kirkland is of the same sort of ‘mainstream’ school as Geoff Keezer and his curriculum vitae is also impressive; he's played with both Wynton and Branford Marsalis, as well as in the pop arena with Sting's group (on the ‘Dream of Blue Turtles’album, along with Branford) and with David Sanborn, among others.
His pedigree may be long, but nevertheless here he is on piano and electronic keyboards leading his own band for the first time on disc with the driving drums of Jeff ‘Tain’ Watts (also of Branford Marsalis group fame), Branford himself on tenor sax, Roderick Ward (alto sax), Charnett Moffett, Chris McBridge, Robert Hurst or Andy Gonzales (all alternating on bass), Jerry Gonzales (percussion) and on one track Steve Berrios and on two Don Alias (both on drums, percussion).
A long list of names yes, but there's nothing larger here than a quintet format.
Highlights?
El Rey , a 1:35 drum solo track featuring the explosive Watts, the sardonic Steepian Faith (written by Kirkland, with Marsalis on alto), Bud Powell's Celia (lightly à la cumbre), and Kirkland's Blasphemy , both with Kirkland on electronics and with drummer Don Alias the sole accompaniment.
Immaculate production (co-produced by Kirkland and Delfeayo Marsalis) and well worth investigating.
THE IMPULSE!
LABEL WAS THIRTY LAST year and is being celebrated by the release of several of its classic jazz titles, courtesy of the GRP label in the form of the full price ‘GRP Presents the legendary Masters of Jazz’ series.
Titles that I have heard thus far are both digitally remixed and remastered — and very successful they are too.
To showcase the import of Impulse! there is a truly superbly presented two-CD ‘sampler’ of many of the label's highlights (Coltrane with Ellington, Ellington with Coleman Hawkins and a Charles Mingus big band, to name a few), mostly dating from the mid '60s.
Catalogue number is ; it comes in a booklet style case with top class notes and design.
Find one now!
From among the most recent releases comes the swinging ‘Sing a Song of Basie’, from circa 1960 and the vocal trio of Lambert, Hendricks & Ross ().
Dave Lambert, Jon Hendricks and Annie Ross (originally a latter-day Manhatten Transfer) are here backed by Freddie Green (guitar), Nat Pierce (piano), Eddie Jones (bass) and Sonny Payne (drums).
But such is the style of most of the arrangements that it's almost as if the Basie band themselves were performing, rather than a vocal trio backed by a quartet.
Take for example Two for the Blues , in which Ross and Hendricks vocally intimate and Franck Foster/Frank Wess tenor sax duet; all soft swing and a mellow music until the ‘brass chorus’ cuts in with a blast and then returns to the ‘Foster/Wess duet’.
Take too Little Pony where Hendricks emulate a Wardell Grey solo, or  Ross's ‘Buck Clayton trumpet solo’ in Fiesta in Blue .
Sounds trite?
Try it for yourself.
Tenor saxophonist Joe Lovano (b. 1952) has in some respects come up the hard way; passing the 40-year mark last year, he's nevertheless a craftsman often overlooked in the public eye in favour of younger more ‘marketable’ musicians.
His work with the Paul Motian, and John Scofield groups and his work in the Woody Herman, Charlie Haden and Mel Lewis big groups seems to have passed almost unnoticed.
It is good therefore to be able to mention his first album for Blue Note from last year —‘Landmarks’().
Lovano's equally experienced and virtuosic support includes bassist Marc Johnson (also from the Herman and Paul Motian bands), guitarist John Abercrombie, Ken Werner (piano) and Bill Stewart on drums.
The tone is (loosely) swing with ample space for solo improvisation in the nine Lovano tunes here.
Try Emperor Jones (affectionately dedicated to sometime Coltrane Quartet drummer Elvin Jones) for lyricism, or Where Hawks Fly (dedicated to the ‘father’ of the tenor saxophone in jazz, Coleman Hawkins) for a more uptempo beat and playing of exceptional agility.
Excellent, individual and about time.
An easy link takes us to Paul Motian's German-produced album and tribute, ‘bill evans’(); drummer Motian's modern but easy-sounding quartet comprises Joe Lovano (tenor sax, as above), Marc Johnson (bass, ditto) and electric guitarist Bill Frisell.
Truly a top class outfit with more experience than you can shake a stick at.
It's appropriate that this group should undertake such a tribute: Motian himself spent five years (1959–64) in the late pianist Bill Evans's trio, while Johnson on bass was in Evans's ultimate trio with Joe LaBarbera.
But — no piano in an album that pays  homage to one of the great pianists?
No matter — Motian's small groups have been ‘led’ by Frisell's electric guitar since the 1980s and in practice, Evans's complex Walkin' up , or the equally complex interplay of instruments and tempi in Five do more than simply survive with either guitar or saxophone (or both) leading.
Motian's drumming is much less ‘accompanist’ in style than most (although there are no true drum solos here), which also lends greater integration to the ensemble than one might expect.
Outstanding and affectionate; technically and musically virtuosic.
ANOTHER NEW STAR-IN-THE-MAKING IS 31-year old British vibraphone, marimba and percussion artist Orphy Robinson whose album ‘When Tomorrow Comes’ is just out (Blue Note ).
Former Jazz Warriors and Courtney Pine band member, Robinson is also active in jazz-funk circles but this album nevertheless owes as much to jazz history as it does to today's pop scene.
Robinson's collaborators are Rowland Sutherland, whose earthy flutes and piccolo inform much of the album, Winston Clifford (drums), Dudley Phillips (acoustic and electric bass), Tunde Jegede (tinkling African kora and cello) and Joe Bashorun (piano and keyboards), with whom Robinson shares both writing and arranging credits.
Significantly, the producer is John Surman, English jazz composer of note.
In Robinson's own words, this seven-track album represents the sum of the component parts that make up Robinson's musical education: pop, funk, reggae, African music, jazz…and much more of the true originality besides.
Bashourun's All at Sixes & Sevens is an intriguing mix of all of these, with kora, flute and Robinson's marimba softly driving the simple and attractive tune to its conclusion.
Bach to First Bass (9:06) has Robinson on vibes in a halting and catchy jazz mode, with Jegede's simple cello part emerging now and again, as if with comic intent; after four minutes or so, the piano part steams away in a trio with drums and acoustic bass, only for Robinson's vibes to re-appear and lead the tune to its intense conclusion.
Also worth listening to: the tongue-in-cheek Jigsaw , with its ‘variations on a Scottish theme’, sounding like a bagpipe chanter played by flute and marimba, with accompanying drone from Phillips's double bass.
Overall, a fascinating project, which doesn't deserve the title ‘crossover’— it's more than that.
It is indeed jazzy, but adorned with and enlarged by outside influences, which is a very healthy and happy state of affairs.
McCoy Tyner's ‘Soliloquy’(Blue Note ), is, as its title suggests, a set of entrancing and involving solo piano pieces, with an improvisational orientation.
Tyner (b. 1938), another original and previously precocious American talent, was one fourth of what has been called the ‘most influential quartet in jazz history’— namely John Coltrane of 1960–65 (Coltrane, Tyner, Jimmy Garrison and Elvin Jones).
Tyner's style and sound are distinctive: tremendously powerful, highly communicative and always highly conscious of the composition as a whole, Tyner is another ‘vocalising’ pianist, in the tradition of Bud Powell et al .
Here we have a stunning solo set of 14 songs including four Coltrane tunes (Crescent )[and alternative take];Lonnie's Lament and After the Rain ), standards (All the things you are: I should care; Willow weep for Me ) and tunes by Tyner's influences and friends (Bud Powell's Bouncin' with Bud and Dexter Gordon's Tivolo ) and a quintet of songs by Tyner himself.
Tyner's achievement here is that, while all the tracks here are largely improvisations (or at least spontaneous), and each is imbued with Tyner's own sense of the appropriate (including thundering chords in All the Things you are , for example!), each has a fully rounded and selfcontained form.
Every track seems complete; there are few obvious lapses in concentration or low points, as the opening and closing (and very different) alternatives of Crescent show.
Massively absorbing and enjoyable.
This will be among my ‘CDs of the Year’ come December, no question, and is already turning into one of my most played discs.
THIS MUST BE A YEAR FOR SURPRISING pianists and here's one I have never heard of before: young Belgian Laurent de Wilde , whose latest album is ‘Odd and Blue’(IDA Records ).
De Wilde's trio features the posed and highly motivating drums of Jack DeJohnette (a greatly experienced performer, musician and composer, whose extensive C.V.
includes Miles Davis [‘Bitches Brew’]and a long association with Keith Jarrett) and the pacey acoustic bass of Ira Coleman.
De Wilde's tone (all acoustic by the way) is soft, but his ever-moving fingers are almost classically sharp and telling.
(De Wilde is also quietly vocal; I know it annoys some people.)
There are five de Wilde tunes (most compelling of which is the brooding Twilight ), Irving Berlin's How deep is the Ocean?(given a rousing treatment!),
Herbie Hancock's The Pleasure is Mine , Wayne Shorter's House of Jade and Thelonious Monk's Four in One .
Highlights: the atmosphere of Twilight , the trio's cohesion in House of Jade and de Wilde's rapid virtuoso fingerwork on Four in One (even though the ghost of Monk might shudder at the plethora of notes and the lack of significant spaces).
A very pleasing discovery.
Cassandra Wilson's most recent album for Munich's JMT label, ‘Cassandra Wilson Live’(JMT ), was released in December, to little apparent acclaim; Wilson is one of the top vocalists today, yet her fame seems not to have spread as far and wide as justice might dictate.
Her throaty-cum-husky voice and staccato, often peaky and explosive delivery and songs (four out of seven are hers on this album) with a funky electronic feel are nevertheless altogether a very singular and instantly recognisable package.
Here she's backed by a quality quartet with a subliminal rock/funk calling, comprising James Weldman (piano, synthesisers), Kevin Bruce (electric bass) and Mark Johnson on drums.
Three tracks are from previous albums —Desperate Move (driving, excellent and written by JMT stablemate Steve Coleman),Body & Soul (as with Round Midnight below, a standard given a singular and distinctive modern treatment) and Rock this Calling (a modern jazz blues?)— while four are previously unrecorded by her: the melancholy-then-strident Don't look Back (highlight for me of this album), the quixotic Soul Melange , the Monk/Williams ‘standard’Round Midnight (a refreshingly individual rendition) and My Corner of the Sky (a modern son, which reminded me of an uptempo Ella Fitzgerald scat rendition…but with a rock group); all bar Round Midnight are Wilson compositions.
All are infected by Bruce's proto-funky basslines and the tender piano of Weldman (especially Round Midnight ).
Best with which to dip your toes?
The opening track,Don't look Back .
Recording quality (typical of JMT) is excellent — dynamic and clean as a whistle.
Remarkable for its (and Wilson's) individuality.
(You might also try last year's ‘She who weeps’[JMT ]; the beautiful song New African Blues certainly received a deal of wholly warranted airplay from London jazz station Jazz FM and many people have asked me where it came from.
Now you know.
Tell your friends.)
Finally, another highly individualistic album: ‘Metamorphosis’ by the World Saxophone Quartet (Elektra-Nonesuch ); not so well known in the UK as an ensemble, its members — David Murray (tenor sax, bass clarinet), Oliver Lake (alto, soprano saxophones and flute), Hamiet Bluiett (baritone sax) and Arthur Blythe (alto sax)— are however individually (and, as you will find, jointly) something rather special.
Improvisation is the key here.
For this album, the World Saxophone Quartet are joined by three Senegalese drummers (Chief Bey, Mor Thiam [who also shares a writing credit]and Mar Gueye) and an electric bassist (Melvin Gibbs, on three tracks).
The results range from the almost predictable (say the unsettled but distinctly South African ‘township’ feel of Lullaby ) to the totally unpredictable,; the title track is indeed just that, ranging from a tight, boppy ensemble that would not be out of place as a riff in a Basie band arrangement and transforming (metamorphosing — see?) into a complex interweaving of improvised joint soloing against rhythmic drumbeats and back again.
Masai Warrior Dance is more of the same; intermeshed, slightly jarring reed interplay, but held together with insistent African drums.
All compositions, bar the least complex song,Lullaby , are by Bluiett, Murray or Lake.
Fascinating and definitely moreish.
[Steve Bohling]
Cassandra Wilson: see following page.
COLLECTORS GUIDE
Following last month's investigation into budget labels and series, Peter Brown seeks out and sorts what's what in the mid-price (£10 and below) mainstream.
BMG CLASSICS (RCA)— Under old name of ‘RCA Gold Seal’, at a very reasonable £7.99, one finds the cream of RCA's old American catalogue including such treasures as ‘The Toscanini Collection’, the Chicago SO under Fritz Reiner, Horowitz and Heifetz playing Beethoven Sonatas, the Guarneri Beethoven String Quartets, Rubinstein in Chopin and Mozart, Sviatoslav Richter in Beethoven, and Mussorgsky, and Van Cliburn in concerto and solo piano performances.
The list is endless and I would go as far as to say virtually every ‘Gold Seal’ is worth its weight in gold.
Another interesting BMG label at £7.99 is the more specialist deutsche Harmonia Mundi ‘Editio Classica’, a collection of Baroque to 18th century composers featuring period specialists such as Gustav Leonhardt, Sigiswald Kuijken and La Petite Bande, Pro Cantione Antiqua/Bruno Turner, the Collegium Aureum under Franzjosef Maier; the Consort of Musicke/Anthony Rooley and Camerata Köln.
It is unusually varied opera and operetta catalogue, both on ‘Gold Seal’ and the ‘Victor Opera Series’at mid-price, BMG has treasures such as Barber's Vanessa under Mitropoulos; Donizetti's Lucrezia Borgia with Caballé, Verrett and Alfredo Kraus; Korngold's Die tote Stadt conducted by Erich Leinsdorf; lots of Suppé, Kalman, Robert Stolz, Johann Strauss and Lehár;Cavalleria Rusticana with Milanov, Björling and Merrill, as well as Marek Joanowski's commendable Dresden ‘Ring ’Cycle.
As might be expected in such an ‘historical’ but never dated catalogue, BMG's £7.99 vocal recitals include names with the pedigree of Lucia Albanese, Björling, Flagstad, Lotte Lehmann, Melchior, Milanov, Rosa Ponselle, Leontyne Price, Tito Schipa, Leonard Warren and Lawrence Tibbett.
CHANDOS — Chandos entered the mid-price frame in October 1990 with its ‘Collect’CD-only series currently retailing at around £7.99 and totalling some 40+ recordings.
These digital and digitally remastered recordings date from the late ‘70s and '80s and information/presentation/quality are up to the usual Chandos high standards, although playing times tend to be short.
Highlights include the Gibson/Royal Scottish Orchestra Sibelius, Elgar and Nielsen Symphonies; the Athena Ensemble in two discs of music for wind by Milhaud, Gounod, Poulenc and Ibert; Jane Manning and the Nash Ensemble/Rattle playing Stravinsky, Schoenberg (Pierrot Lunaire ), Webern (Concerto Op. 24 ); William Boyce Overtures (Cantilena/Shephard) and classic Tchaikovsky 1st and Prokofiev 3rd Piano Concertos played by the much lamented Terence Judd.
These are ‘live’ performances (Moscow PO/Lazarev) from the finals of the 1978 Moscow Tchaikovsky competition and have a special place on my shelves, as does that much underrated and under-used conductor Jascha Horenstein, who accompanies Erich Gruenberg in the Beethoven Violin Concerto (New Philharmonia, circa 1980).
Lastly ‘our Nige’ pops up in a jazz programme with Peter Pettinger (piano), recorded on impulse in the time left after the Elgar Sonata in 1984.
Perhaps only Chandos boss Brian Couzens would grasp an opportunity like that.
The playing has a freedom and spontaneity sometimes lacking in his recent work.
Chandos's latest ‘Collect’ releases came out in February and include more boyce from Cantilena, Elgar wind music (Athena), Stravinsky Symphonies with the RSO/Gibson, and delightful Vivaldi Concertos from the Bournemouth Sinfonietta/Thomas.
COLLINS — Since its launch in early 1989, Collins Classics has pursued an adventurous, if commercially difficult, course in engaging artists such as Joanna MacGregor, Yuri Simonov, Seta Tanyel, Jacek Kaspszyk, Tamas Vasary, Jennifer Stinton, Maxim Shostakovich and the Britten and Talich Quartets, in repertoire which while relatively mainstream, still has interesting curiosities such as Kaspszyk's Puccini orchestral fragments disc.
Last November, Collins launched its ‘Plus 20’series of contemporary British music on CD singles at £4.99 for a playing time of around 30 minutes, and this January they too entered the mid-price arena with ‘Quest’, a new digital label at only £6.99 — DDD Ambisonic masters using 20 bit technology.
I welcome the return of Fou Ts'ong to the recording studio in Chopin's two Concertos (Sinfonia Varsovia/Tang), heralding the start of a complete Chopin collection, and a disc of Scarlatti Sonatas.
A unique introduction to the work of one of this century's greatest composers comes in the shape of ‘Max’ the music of Peter Maxwell Davies, while the LSO/Kapszyk include the discarded ‘Blumine’movement in their account of Mahler's First Symphony and the Serenata of London shed new light on Strauss's Till Eulenspiegel , together with more conventional Dvořàk and Britten.
With established favourites by Strauss, beethoven, Tchaikovsky, Sibelius, Bach, Vaughan Williams and others, this is a splendid initiative which deserves support.
DECCA CLASSICS — One is spoiled for choice when it comes to Decca's mid-price range — no less than fifteen labels and series, all between £8–9 — covering everything from Gregorian Chant or Baroque brass on ‘Serenata’, through imported ‘Historical’re-issues, to ‘Gilbert and Sullivan’, ‘Strauss Gala’ with the VPO/Boskovsky, ‘Cinema Gala’— sensible couplings of film themes and music — even special CDs for Christmas.
There is an ‘Essential’ Chamber Music series with the peerless performances, and an ‘Enterprise’collection which takes us into the worlds of Szymanowski, Berio, Ligeti, Schoenberg, Poulenc, Franz Schmidt, Stravinsky and others.
British music is acknowledged in colourful packaging of Britten, Elgar, Delius, Grainger, Holst, Tippett, Vaughan Williams, Walton and Warlock.
Opera is covered by the ‘Grand Opera’and ‘Opera Gala’series, classic performances and soloists from Decca's extensive opera archives — lots of Tebaldi, Sutherland and Del Monaco under experienced operatic conductors such as Serafin, Gavazzeni, Erede, Varviso, Pritchard, von Karajan, Solti, Gardelli and Patané.
Two unquestioned gems from the ‘Grand Opera’ series are both by Mozart — Josef Krips's Don Giovanni and Eric Kleiber's Le Nozze di Figaro , both with the VPO and vintage singers of the Vienna State Opera's immediate post-war period.
Decca's principal mid-price label in terms of size is ‘Ovation’, an extensive repertoire with something for everybody, in performances that stand confidently against the latest full price issues.
I cannot leave Decca without drooling over its ‘Historic’recordings — Backhaus/Clemens Krauss, LSO/Krips, Monteux, VPO/Kleiber, Knappertsbusch, Amadeus/Curzon/Brain; Della Casa, Flagstad, Julius Katchen, Rachmaninov and the incomparable Rosenkavalier (Jurinac, Reining, Weber, Gueden, Poell, VPO/Kleiber).
The issue on CD of these recordings which one tended lovingly on LP for so long has been one of the joys of my collection.
DEUTSCHE GRAMMOPHON —‘Galleria’is DG's longstanding presence in the largely orchestral market.
All the expected names — Barenboim, Kubelik, Abbado, Jochum, von Karajan, Böhm, Giulini with soloists Milstein, Berman, Pollini, Kempff and Rostropovich — are here.
Also available on cassette.
By contrast ‘Archiv Galleria’gives us some of the classiest presentation in the business.
As always Archiv, the artists are specialists in their fields; Pinnock, Preston, Musica Antiqua Köln/Goebel, Hollinger, Walcha, Camerata Bern/Füri.
When ‘authentic’ performances are coupled to intelligent, informative and visually stimulating presentation like this, who needs coffee table books?
DG has an invaluable asset in ‘Dokumente’, a series devoted to top class individual artists of the recent past and today — Hungarians Foldes, Anda, Fricsay and Kodály; Russians Markevitch, Richter and David Oistrakh, and the native Richard Strauss, Hindemith, Furtwängler, Böhm, Gieseking, Streich and the late lamented Fritz Wunderlich.
All ‘dokumente’ discs are of enormous interest, and once DG has marked the passing of Karajan and Bernstein, I hope it will extend this series as a permanent ‘historical’project to match EMI's superb ‘Références’output.
Given their massive resources, DG also has the knack of marking special occasions such as the 150th Anniversary of the Vienna Philharmonic.
At mid-price and also available separately, these sets offer considerable savings on full price recordings, and you have the guarantee of classic performances from the likes of Bernstein, Furtwángler, Böhm, Klemperer, von Karajan, Hans Knappertsbush, Clemens Krauss, Walter, Schuricht and Richard Strauss conducting his own music.
Still available is the ‘Mozart 3D Collection’on 25 CDs and cassettes, plus five ‘Compact’boxed sets of ten CDs or cassettes each featuring a single composer (Bach, Beethoven, Brahms, Chopin, Tchaikovsky etc.) in intelligent and highly reputable couplings from established DG artists.
All are also available singly.
DG's contribution to ‘modern’ music comes from ‘20th Century Classics’, a series devoted to Orff, Pfitzner, Schoenberg, Scriabin, Stravinsky, Webern, Kurt Weill, Zemlinsky and (from in our time) Reich and Takemitsu.
EMI CLASSICS — As might be expected, EMI Classics has a host of mid-price opportunities on CD.
The list is endless —‘Studio’, the invaluable ‘Références’, ‘Digital DDD’, ‘Reflexe’, ‘Great Recordings of the Century’, ‘British Composers’, ‘Mozart Editions’, ‘L'Esprit Français’, ‘Phoenixa’and the Klemperer/Beecham ‘Editions’.
Prices vary between £8.00 and £9.49.
Clearly it is impossible to give each of these the attention they merit and I do find EMI makes life extremely complicated with such a plethora of titles; although each clearly has its place in the EMI scheme of things.
One or two highlights then.
‘L'Esprit Français’was first issued last August and the second batch came in January; more are promised for June.
Unlike the budget ‘Rouge et Noir’ series this is exclusively devoted to French repertoire and artists with names like d'Indy, Gounod, Fauré, Henry Rabaud, Debussy, Poulenc, Gabriel Pierné, Koechlin, and nearer our own time, Boulez and Messiaen.
Most discs feature orchestral works and conductors such as Dervaux, Baudo, Plasson, Prêtre and Martinon, but Ciccolini and Tacchino make welcome appearances.
‘Phoenixa’is EMI's culling from the old Pye  Nixa catalogue, which it acquired a few years ago and launched with a contribution from each record sold to the environmental music charity ‘Music for the World’.
Lots of Hall é/Barbirolli,; splendid Janácček from the Pro Arte Orchestra/Mackerras and London Baroque Ensemble/Haas.
Special ‘Editions’ of Klemperer or Beecham need no recommendation.
For those who like to be a little more up to date, I recommend the ‘Digital DDD’series (CD or cassette); recordings featuring Previn, Tennstedt, Marriner, Ozawa, Sawallisch, Slatkin, Muti, Ousset, Gavrilov and Zacharias from the mid '80s.
Price £8–9.
EMI (‘EMINENCE’)— This mid-price label (£7.99) is handled by EMI's ‘Music for Pleasure’ company, whose budget label ‘Classics for Pleasure’I wrote about last month.
Many of its characteristics — borrowing from the main EMI catalogue, introducing young artists to the recording studio, a certain emphasis on British music — can be found on ‘Eminence’with Nigel Kennedy's Elgar Violin Concerto with the LPO/Handley, Elgar and Vaughan Williams with the LPO/RLPO/handley and the recording début of Franz Welser-Möst in Mozart's Mass in C minor, Requiem and Mahler's Symphony No. 4 .
Over a third of the ‘Eminence’ output is new recordings, so we also have the first appearances on discs of Litton, Hough and Iŝan Edwards.
Most ‘Eminence’ recordings are now digital as opposed to CfP's largely analogue list, but frankly I find little to choose between them in quality of performance or recording, and there is a quiet sense of purpose behind this less publicised side of EMI's work that I find quite refreshing.
NIMBUS (‘PRIMA VOCE’)— Nimbus's ‘Prima Voce’ series now numbers some 27 single CDs, two three-CD sets devoted to ‘Tenors’and ‘Divas’plus Charpentier's Louise and the historic first complete recording of Die Zauberflöte made by Beecham in Berlin in 1937.
Launched in 1989 the series employs unique technology to transfer great vocal performances of the past, from 78s onto CD.
The ones selected for each disc present the artists' finest performances and these are only transferred from high quality original pressings.
Listening to these ‘old’ recordings, most of which date from the early days of this century up to 1939, one is conscious of a technical vocal mastery, musical understanding and intensity of communication that bridges the years.
Names like Caruso, Chaliapin, Melchior, Gigli, Martinelli, Ruffo, Schipa and Tibbett, or Tetrazzin, Galli-Curci, Muzio and Ponselle need to recommendation from me at £8.50 (£6.25 cassette).
Those wishing to sample before they surrender completely should try ‘Covent Garden, An Early History on Record’ or either of the two ‘Great Singers’volumes which span the period 1903–1939.
PAVILION RECORDS (PEARL)— I am, I hope allowed to cheat here because, Pearl comes just above mid-price at £10.50.
Pearl specialises in historical re-issues using technology to provide more original, natural sound.
Pearl uses none of the electronic or ‘sound enhancing’ techniques currently fashionable, and aims to concentrate on extracting from the original grooves the essence of music.
Over the years I have bought many Pearl recordings and although occasionally I find a particular passage hard to live with, I would find it difficult not to play any of the following at least twice a year:Otello with Martinelli/Tibbett; Bruno Walter conducting Mahler in 1936 and 1938 (Das Lied von der Erde and the Adagietto from Symphony No. 5 ); the pre-war Glyndebourne recordings with Busch; the 1935 Vienna Rosenkavalier with Lotte Lehmann and Gerhard Hüsch singing Schubert's Winterreise and Die Schöne Müllerin .
MANAGING AT MID-PRICE
Pearl has also embarked on a four volume three-CD ‘History of Covent Garden on Record’(1930–1936).
Over 150 singers appear in this superb retrospective, assembled and engineered by Keith Hardwick, which prompts the thought that given current prices at the Royal Opera House, I would gladly exchange almost any performance for one of these volumes.
For orchestral buffs there are superb collections by Stokowski, Koussevitsky in Sibelius and Prokofiev, a three-CD set of ‘Great Toscanini Recordings’(1926–36) and a recent major survey of the NYPSO and its greatest conductors.
PHILIPS CLASSICS — Unlike its sister companies Decca and DG, Philips has a more manageable presence in the mid-price slot with ‘Silver/Laserline Classics’and ‘Mercury’.
All are in the £7 to £8 range.
Sadly the superb and unique ‘Legendary Classics’ series has now been deleted, but I gather Philips has something similar up its sleeve for September.
I find little to choose between ‘Silver’(ADD) and ‘Laser’(DDD), although the latter 30 or so titles, from Philips Germany, have highly futuristic designs that to my mind sit ill with the largely ‘classic’ repertoire.
Also from Germany is a handy set of eleven compilation discs devoted to instrumentalists, orchestra and chorus, which apart from offering good value and superb sound can be used to set up or check your hi-fi.
The last track on each disc consists of ‘audio test signal’ which take one step by step through problems of balance and positioning.
One of the most important contributions to the CD repertoire since its introduction has been the re-issue of ‘Mercury Living Presence’recordings.
The story behind these is set out in typically complete sleeve notes, but essentially it all started with a recording of Mussorgsky's pictures at an Exhibition with the Chicago SO under Kubelik.
Listening to the new recording was ‘like being in the living presence of the orchestra’ wrote Howard Taubman, chief music critic of The New York Times .
Following this spectacular release, Mercury's classical team went on to produce more than 350 albums during the next seventeen years using their unique approach.
Bob Fine, the late audio engineer and inventor, had a vision of how orchestral recordings should be made.
The conventional method of recording orchestras was to place microphones throughout the ensemble; Fine contended that given a hall with excellent acoustic properties, a single ultra-sensitive microphone should be capable of capturing the sound of a symphony orchestra with unprecedented clarity, balance and definition.
The ‘Mercury’ catalogue is by no means all showpiece music — there are concertos by Dvořák, Schumann and Beethoven for example— but the discs one lingers over include Doráti and the LSO in Stravinsky, Paray/detroit SO in an all-Ravel programme, or Dorźti again with the LSO and his own Minneapolis Orchestra in Respighi's Pines, Fountains and Birds .
All of note (see ‘Preview’ in this issue ): Philips's ‘Insignia’series, which repackages much that is available elsewhere but by artist , rather than by composer or theme.
Worth investigating for your favourite performers.
PICKWICK —‘IMP Masters’is now effectively Pickwick's full (i.e. mid-) price label.
Some 26 titles only, it's largely a mixed bag of solo piano and chamber music, but there is an interesting orchestral disc of music by Joachim, Felicity Lott singing Liederkreis and Frauenliebe und Leben , and Stravinsky's Rite of Spring (Boston Philharmonic?
Benjamin Zander) complete with Rex Lawson's pianola version based on Stravinsky's original tempi, which are faster than we are accustomed to.
PILZ (ACANTA)— I wrote at some length about this German newcomer in last month's review of budget labels.
Pilz's midprice offering comes on the ‘Acanta’label, and consists of Fono Team material acquired by Rainer Pilz.
Extremely varied and sometimes eclectic in taste, with emphasis on German and Austrian repertoire, there are many solo discs by the likes of .
Operetta also features strongly with representation from , while the operas include d'Albert's Tiefland , Lortzing's Zar und Zimmermann , Rossini's La Cenerentola , Wolf-Ferrari's Sly and Verdi's Rigoletto/Trovatore .
There are some interesting historical issues too, including Furtwängler conducting Wagner with various orchestras, and the Brahms Violin Concerto played by Ginette Neveu and the NDRSO/Schmidt-Isserstedt recording in 1948 after her famous 1946 Abbey Road recording, and shortly before her tragic death (together with her brother Jean) in a plane crash in the Azores.
Unlike the other rock-bottom Pilz discs, these do have adequate notes.
Clearly ‘Acanta’ at £7.49 has much to offer and I look forward to hearing future releases.
SAGA CLASSICS — Older readers will have affectionate memories of this homegrown 1950–1970s label now newly returned to the catalogue under the aegis of ‘Sound Products, Holland’ and imported by The Complete Record Company.
Saga provided the training ground for such industry doyens as Ted Perry of Hyperion, and Martin Compton, now a successful freelance producer.
It only remains to say that at £7.99 there are some real treasures for the discerning collector: a blistering account of the Shostakovich Tenth Symphony by the Leningrad PO?
Mravinsky, Chopin Etudes from the eighteen year-old Ashkenazy, and two early gems from Janet Baker.
Schumann's Frauenliebe und Leben , and songs by Schubert and Brahms are on  while an ‘Anthology of English Song’() has 17 lesser known songs by English composers from the beginning of the century.
Also recommended are an early recital by Jill Gomez of songs by Grandos, Turina and de Falla; three miraculous Debussy discs by Livia Rev, and first recordings by the Hilliard Ensemble and the Camerata of London.
Future releases include recordings by Berman, Rostropovich and LSO/Sargent.
SONY CLASSICAL — Sony Classical's mid-price range spreads across three labels —‘Masterworks Digital Masters’, ‘Masterworks Portrait’ and ‘Maestro’; the latter sells for around £6–7 the others at between £7.50–£8.
Focusing on mainstream repertoire,‘Maestro’, features perennial favourites such as Walter's Mozart and Beethoven Symphonies; Szell/Cleveland and Haydn and Mozart Symphonies; Philadelphia/Ormandy in the three Rachmaninov Symphonies; Kubelik/Bavarian RSO in sparkling form for Schumann, and sensible chamber music sets.
Single CD titles include NYPO/Bernstein, Lorin Maazel/French NO and distinguished soloists such as Gould, Serkin, Casadesus, Gilels, Barenboim, Stern and Zukerman.
‘Masterworks Portrait’has equally fine artists of a slightly older generation in beautifully presented performances that are classics of their time — Mitropoulos in  and podium stalwarts such as Ormandy, Walter and Szell.
For those who like their recordings to use the latest technology,‘Masterworks Digital Masters DDD’brings us up to date with , in welcome re-issues of his best Cleveland recordings.
Just off the presses at mid-price is the first massive delivery in a one hundred volume, 119 CD series celebrating ‘Leonard Bernstein:The Royal Edition ’.
The ‘Royal’ come snot from any posthumous title bestowed on the late and much lamented ‘Lenny’, but from the use of water colours by HRH Prince Charles on the covers.
In acknowledging his love of music, Sony Classical is able to benefit the Prince of Wales Charities Trust and pay complementary artistic respects to one of the most talented and complete musicians of all time.
Between the '50s and '70s more than 500 works were recorded by Bernstein for CBS ‘Masterworks’, many with the New York Philharmonic, who incidentally celebrate their 150th Anniversary this year.
Some are new to the UK, many were produced by the legendary John McClure, all have been digitally remastered.
At the time of writing I have not been able to hear any of the discs, but they include the first  integral recording of the ten Mahler Symphonies complete sets of Brahms, Beethoven and Shostakovich, Stravinsky, Gershwin and Copland, plus concertos with Serkin, Stern and Francescatti.
Two discs are of special interest: featuring Bernstein the pianist and conductor in Mozart and Beethoven concertos, and  in which Bernstein talks about ‘How a Great Symphony was Written’(Beethoven 5) in four languages with the Columbia Symphony Orchestra and then performs the work with the NYPSO.
WARNER CLASSICS — Warner Classics is only gradually getting into the mid-price market.
Erato launched its ‘Hommage’series last September with tributes to two much loved French musicians, the conductor Charles Munch and cellists Paul Tortelier playing Bach, Vivaldi, Schumann, Fauré and Debussy.
Like Saga, the record designs incorporate reproductions of the original LPs from the '60s, which is a nice touch.
For opera lovers, Erato's ‘Libretto’series launched in the UK last year, aims to provide ‘affordable opera’.
In addition to mainstream repertoire, Erato also aims to present unknown or neglected works.
Hence ‘Libretto’ includes recordings not available elsewhere such as fauré's Pénélope , Dukas's Ariane et Barbe-Bleue and Chausson's Le Roi Arthus , together with the more familiar Rossini Italian Girl in Algiers , Purcell's Dido et Aeneas , Debussy's Pélléas Mélisande , Offenbach's La Périchole , Gounod's Faust and from the English Baroque Soloists under John Eliot Gardiner, handel's Tamerlano .
Last October, Rozhdestvensky's monumental Prokofiev War and Peace returned to the catalogue.
‘Libretto’ is  identifiable by its distinctive red and white ‘stage curtain’packaging and, are top quality box sets with full documentation and — naturally — libretti!
Erato's main mid-price label is ‘Emeraude’(DDD)— initially a dozen or so titles varying from Corelli and Charpentier to Grieg and Tchaikovsky, with established ‘Erato’ names such as Schimone, Koopman, Paillard and Guschbauer.
This is due to be extended later this year, and should form a solid basis for Erato's planned UK expansion programme.
Teldec's contribution to our pockets comes from a new alldigital series somewhat unadventurously called ‘The Digital Experience’.
Concentrating on a range of much loved (but not overpopular) classics at around £8.49, we have the stylish Franz Liszt CO conducted by Janos Rolla in Rossini's delightful String Sonatas, bach Concertos and Horn Concertos by the two Haydns (Joseph and Michael) the Leipzig Gewandhaus/Masur; the Royal Concertgebouw/Harnoncourt and pianists Katsaris and Buchbinder.
[Peter Brown]
REPRODUCTION
How do three fascinating hi-fi products compare to…
THE GOLD STANDARD
This month: Ariston's CD3 (a careful, thorough and successful implementation of a ‘standard’ kit of parts), SD Acoustics' Ribbon speaker (a vastly different design from the norm which repays a thoughtful approach to system building) and last but not least, Linn's Karik/Numerik CD player.
Better than a turntable?
Read on…
It is all too easy to become bemused and befuddled by the enormous range of compact disc hardware now cluttering deals' shelves.
It is tempting to take the cynical view that compact disc is ‘all in the numbers’, and in most cases there is little to choose between them.
This feeling is only likely to be reinforced by the realisation that the underlying technology used by most players — the set of chips that makes them tick — comes from a very limited number of sources.
It's easy to become cynical about the vastly excessive range of features and over-complicated facias that most manufacturers seem impelled to provide.
It's not necessarily in the hi-fi reviewer's own interests to belittle those differences that do exist of course, but it's hard to avoid concluding that all too often the range of variations between CD players really is as small as suggested above.
What lends this observation particular piquancy however is that remarkably few players sound particularly good.
Nearly ten years ago, in CD's infancy, I was writing that most CD players sound like poor quality amplifiers, not least because they contain poor quality amplifier circuits, and little seems to have changed in the interim.
Even today many CD players sound flat, thin and scratchy: they throw detail at you yet lack homogeneity and focus.
Compared to the experience of hearing music ‘live’ even under unfavourable circumstances there is often very little sense that the musicians are pulling in the same direction, or that the music ebbs and flows in a natural, organic or above all believable way.
Which brings us neatly around to the subject of this report.
Scottish manufacturer Ariston is not one whose products you have seen peering from too many of your local hi-fi shop windows, but the new £430 Ariston CD3 is well worth the effort involved in seeking it out.
The CD3, which is Ariston's third CD player in roughly the same number of years (they all remain available by the way) heralds no revolution in technology or features, but may be just what you are looking for if the brief is for a medium-price player which will offer musical excellence without frills or complication.
As suggested, the CD3 is a simple, almost artless player, rather heavier than it looks, but simply built, with a bent metal box fronted by a smart alloy front panel extrusion and a drawer whose rather stately progress in and out of the player was bettered by an earlier sample I examined.
Apart from the on/off switch, there are just seven controls covering mainly standard play and track skip functions; the remote control adds audible cueing and a random access (numeric) track keypad to the total.
The display is simple and of high quality, and, best of all, can be extinguished entirely, which is a useful aid to concentration as well as making a small but positive contribution to sound quality.
Rear panel furniture is limited to a set of analogue outputs for connection to an amplifier input, and a coaxial digital output which might be better used for later upgrading via an outboard digital converter.
Don't be swayed by the fact that many players have an optical digital output socket instead; this ‘higher tech’ alternative is invariably audibly inferior, and is usually fitted to ensure compliance with RFI (Radio Frequency Interference) regulations in countries such as Germany that are particularly strict on the subject.
Technology is ‘old-style’ Philips 16 bit, the system that preceded the current and mor fashionable Bitstream process, but which has been found to be easier to ‘tweak’for a desired effect.
Although Bitstream players often sound a little smoother and more presentable, the process is difficult to engineer successfully.
It is based around ultra high speed serial processors whereas a multibit system employs slower, less problematical parallel processing.
This is part of the reason why multibit refuses to lie down and die, not just in the case of Ariston, but with a number of other producers, Naim, to cite just one such.
The bottom line is the way it sounds, and it is here that the Ariston CD3 accumulates most of its brownie points.
For my money, and at the time of writing (things can change rapidly) this deck represents the cutting edge in compact disc reproduction at the price — an important caveat.
There are players which sound sharper and clearer, and some (though very few) that sound warmer and easier on the ear.
There are however none to my knowledge that combine the two more successfully than the CD3, nor which sound more convincingly at home with a wide range of music.
There is a trace of fierceness in the upper reaches of the violins, and that serves to highlight some woodwind and vocal sounds, but by and large it merely underlines treble presence without causing obvious exaggeration.
Rhythmic information is also unusually well presented.
The drums and percussion section of orchestral recordings lack their customary undernourished bass and tizzy top-end — a reversal of the traditional finding   with compact disc — and the strong pulse that underpins music as varied as Bach's Violin Concertos and Stravinsky ballets (both well represented in the test programme) was captured with a power and ‘snap’ that make many of the Ariston's closest price competitors sound feeble.
In short, the CD3 is a solid and meaty sounding deck, verging at times to rich in balance, yet remaining tonally close enough to neutral to avoid censure on the grounds of lack of tonal realism.
Dynamics are handled with unusual force due to its solid bass, and musical architecture is not, for once, underplayed.
Linn's Karik/Numerik CD player (clockwise from top): impeccable two-box engineering; Numerik DAC component; Numerik interior shot; Karik transport quality of build; transport quick-acting and smooth.
There are few absolutes in high fidelity.
The Ariston CD3 is, in the end, just another player, and although I have tried to highlight its special attributes, there will be listeners and systems for and with which the Ariston is less at home than it was here on test.
The answer is to listen carefully before buying, or to arrange a hum loan (usually against the cash price) from a dealer with alternatives on offer.
My guess however is that the Ariston's unusually musical qualities will appeal in the long term where some more glamorous looking contrivances will ultimately be found tiresome or wanting.
Just in case you are in any doubt though, you can treat this as an enthusiastic endorsement.
(Further information:
SD ACOUSTICS IS ANOTHER IN THAT RICH crop of small British manufacturers with something interesting to say to the discerning listener who is wiling to seek out a brand that is by no means as widely distributed in the shops as it deserves to be.
In this respect if in no other, the story of this speaker is akin to the Ariston CD3 story, related above.
Where it differs is that whilst the Ariston is a simple refinement of standard OEM hardware, the SD Ribbon is an extremely radical design, especially by British standards.
The price is also out of the ordinary: £2295.
Centrepiece of the design is the tall, rectangular flat diaphragm, which, produces all the treble information, and the midband area above 200Hz (in fact there's a slow handover which takes place over a matter of octaves).
The driver is a ribbon transducer, which, though rare in this country, is much favoured amongst some of the more exotic US manufacturers.
The bass is handled by a pair of high grade bass cone units of not quite conventional design which are housed in the lower half of the enclosure.
I first heard and reviewed a pair of SD Ribbons several years ago; to look at, the design has scarcely changed in that time, except that it is now obviously more professionally engineered and finished.
In fact virtually every aspect of the original has been either extensively modified or replaced.
All the drive units are new, and the crossover has changed, special anti-resonance measures have been incorporated into the ribbon driver, and the woodwork uses thicker panels and is also better damped.
The ribbon midrange/tweeter unit is certainly no more common a sight now than it was way back when, which seems a pity, and not readily explicable by the way it sounds, though high intrinsic manufacturing costs certainly play their part.
The SD Ribbon is tall and slender, matched by a  comparatively shallow fore-aft dimension which in earlier incarnations made the system rather unstable, and liable to topple forwards with the sort of provocation that the average three year-old would have found only moderately challenging.
This has been solved simply by lowering the system's centre of gravity, largely by attaching a heavy mild steel plate to the base.
Attaching carpet piercing spikes to the base, and making sure the system pierces the top few millimetres of wood below the carpet adds further to security.
With the covers in place, the SD has the appearance of a monolithic column, but appearances are deceptive.
The bass section is fully enclosed as expected, but the rest of the enclosure is open a the back, and only partly enclosed at the sides, making the system free to radiate backwards as well as forwards (this property is known as ‘dipole’, or figure of eight radiation).
This type of loudspeaker is therefore best used well forward of rear walls, whilst being relatively uncritical with respect to side walls, except in the deep bass.
As a result the system can be used in large rooms, or long but relatively narrow rooms, but conversely is ill-suited for use across the narrow dimension of most rooms, which can work well with many other transducers.
By the same token they are unsuitable for small rooms, and would be so even if their considerable bulk wasn't so dominating in such surroundings.
There is one other important feature of the SD Ribbon which must be taken into account: it presents an unusually punishing electrical load to the partnering amplifier (or power amplifier for those with two or three amplifiers).
The SD Ribbon is relatively insensitive and needs a good 50–100 Watts before it will blow properly, but even taking this into account, many amplifiers will sound harsh, grainy or in some other way ill at ease, especially if the volume is would up.
Your dealer will know which models match, but few amplifiers in three figure price territory will suit.
I used some big valve and transistor amplifiers from Michelson Audio and from Krell, but various other amps of otherwise good reputation bombed badly.
As you can see, getting a pair of SD Ribbons up and running is no picnic, and will not be accomplished without series damage to your wallet.
Whether it will prove a worthwhile exercise is also not something that can be answered with a definitive yea or nay, but the potential is definitely there from a design with an unusually bold and coherent presentation, and which lacks many of the subtle compressions and colourations of big box speakers.
The bass end is deep and true, and like the rest of the system, it is notably free of overhang and bloom.
Exactly how this translates into music depends on the music, but the general prognosis is favourable.
I found the SD Ribbon especially successful with complex, large scale music (choral, operatic, large orchestral) where its scale and authority, and well defined and authoritative midband were allowed to do their best.
Performance was relatively weaker with small scale acoustic recital and chamber material where a certain hardness sometimes intruded.
In a very real sense, the SD Ribbon is what you make of it, and should be shortlisted, subject to the remarks made above, by those with (or contemplating purchasing) a high performance system costing in excess of £4000 or so, and with rooms larger than about 4 x 3 meters.
There are no guarantees with this one, but this is nothing less than standard form with equipment whose effect is to open the window just a little bit wider.
(Further information: SD Acoustics, c/o Cotsfield Investments Ltd., 179–183 Riverside Business Centre, Bendon Valley, London SW18 4LZ.)
LINN PRODUCTS IS…
WELL THERE'S THE perfect hanging clause, and one that turns out to be surprisingly difficult to complete.
It is easy to describe where most Japanese electronics multi-nationals stand, where they're coming from, what they aim to achieve, and ditto in the case of most specialists producers.
Linn Products however is an exception to the rule.
The company has always stood for excellence in analogue sound reproduction, its fame having been made by its first and longest running model, the LP12 turntable.
The company attribute to matters digital however has always been ambivalent.
In fac that's putting it mildly indeed.
The launch of the Linn CD player, an exotic two-box player priced at ten pounds less than £2600, comes just a decade into the era of CD, and at a time when record player sales are on their uppers, and W H Smith, the UK's largest purveyor of prerecorded music, is pledged to withdraw LPs from its stores by about the time this issue hits the  newsstands .
Whither W H Smith goest, you are likely to go (statistically speaking of course), whether you like it or not.
The end result, the Karik/Numerik CD player, is not less than Linn promised (that it would accord with Linn's very high [analogue]standards or that it would not appear at all), but strangely different.
At the very least I had expected something unusual and exotic, something which breaks the rules.
The reality could not be more down to earth and straightforward, though there is much more to this player than meets the eye.
This is a two-box player, seemingly built into the same size of compact box used by Linn Products for its other up-market hi-fi machinery; they each measure 32x32x8cm, which is an unusual but practical and attractive size.
The only readily accessible controls are the load and play keys, although a number of minor controls covering all normal play functions are also accessible — albeit awkwardly — behind a front panel flap.
A similar but somewhat more conventionally presented set of controls is also available on the system's remote control handset (an extra cost item), an unusually well built device  which does not come from the Philips parts bin, though it does obey Philips commands.
It has an unusual reach, and can be operated from all kinds of oblique angles, or even bounced off walls or ceilings with little fear of misoperation.
The two boxes can be placed on top of each other(not always recommended with this class of equipment) or side by side, and, due to their compact size, this should not be too space consuming.
A standard electrical connector is used to link the two together (and there is an optical output for matching the Karik transport to a different DAC), but there's also a special custom link which when connected allows a single master clock to control the whole shebang to the benefit of sound quality.
Linn is one of several manufacturers who provide a similar facility, and as usual the effect is the elimination of the digital near-equivalent of tape wow & flutter known as ‘jitter’.
The effect of jitter in a digital system is to reduce precision, clarity, stereo imagery and that curious and almost indefinable property normally described as ‘timing’ and which loosely translates into a feeling that the musicians are not all on the same  wavelength .
The effect is substantial and the listening comments below all presuppose that the link has been made.
There is one other point to be made about the Linn before discussing how it sounds.
It is extremely well made.
It is not any sense over-engineered in the manner of some US made exotica that has crossed my path, but over-engineering is not necessarily good engineering — it can be more correctly seen as wasteful engineering — it can be more correctly seen as wasteful engineering, which is a quite different thing.
Open the two components and you find a densely packed and somewhat complex arrangement, with short signal paths, a very fine and unusually quick loading transport of Linn's own design which does not require locking screws, high class components throughout, even a ‘diagnostic’ socket so that dealers can advise on such routine maintenance items as laser wear quickly and precisely.
Turning to performance, on one level at least, the  Linn is very hard to fault.
It sounds fast, fluid, detailed, and has a neutral tonal balance so that violas sound like violas — and not violins or cellos.
All instruments reproduced have a positive, sharply defined sound with clear differentiation between then, even when the music becomes complex.
The Linn is the very essence of good presentation: and there are no obvious flies in the ointment such as an audible distortion.
Timing is good; this tends to be particularly noticeable in recordings such as the Keith Jarrett interpretation of Bach's Goldberg Variations , which has superbly organic style that is pulled this way and that, but which never spoils the music or prevents it from working.
Having said all this, I still felt vaguely uneasy about certain aspects of the Linn.
For all its obvious clarity and positiveness, the Linn does not entirely escape the charge that applies to many lesser (and most older) CD players, of being a little inorganic, or if you prefer, lacking in expressiveness.
In some ways the Linn is a rather old fashioned sounding deck, even to the extent of sounding cold and uncommunicative, and at times it fails to rise completely to the challenge set by the music it is reproducing.
Its presentation is as far away from an analogue style as it is possible to get, which is a surprise given Linn Products' roots.
These subtle departures from expectations are at their most obvious with fine recorded solo works, as on a disc of Heifetz potboilers, and another of Gervaise de Peyer playing English music (on Chandos), both of which tended to sound mechanical, and both of which left me largely unmoved.
The long and the short is that the Linn is a player that will shake, but which may not, ultimately, stir.
But, in its own way, it could never be described as anything less than a remarkably articulate and detailed player, and certainly no-one will fail to be swayed by its fine engineering, or Linn's track record in improving existing products in the field when the time comes, instead of merely replacing them.
Above all, the Karik/Numerik is not a player that anyone in the market for a genuinely high class deck can afford to ignore.
[Alvin Gold]
Further information: Linn Products Ltd., Floors Road, Waterfoot, Eaglesham, Glasgow G76 0EP .
SD Acoustics' Ribbon (right): expensive and demanding, but can ‘open the window’ to music given the right system and room.
COMING SOON
JUNE
JUNE's CD Review will feature ZUBIN MEHTA ; more than simply the conductor of the ‘Three Tenors’ concert, Mehta's work in Romantic opera remains a significant undercurrent in his career.
Keyboard artist, conductor and scholar Ton KOOPMAN is our second interviewee; Joanne Talbot seeks out the essence of this contemporary ‘renaissance’ man.
We will also have our interview with conductor NEEME JARVI (held over from May due to circumstances beyond our control).
JUNE will also enclose the fourth and concluding part of our Guide to budget & mid-price classical CDs.
mo 
Zubin MEHTA: more than the ‘2 tenors’…
CD REVIEW — ORDER YOURS TODAY   