

FIRST WORDS
This is the season of weddings: fortunately for hatters, florists and vicars, and for the enjoyment and happiness of us all, they have been rescued from their decade of unpopularity.
But I couldn't agree more with Philippa Davenport when she writes of the formality that seems to have overtaken marriage celebrations, particularly in England (page 47).
I speak from the heart here, as it so happens that my sister is to be married this month and my mother is trying her hardest to organise the wedding that we (never mind my sister and fiancé, these things are family affairs), want.
My mother will, of course, succeed, being a very determined person; this day is far too important to allow the caterers or hoteliers to dictate the proceedings.
But it is alarming how often the professionals take over.
If only we could have real country feasts set out like this one:
‘At last the day of the love-carriage came and a tremendous blue day it was, with a sky like a dark bowl, Worcester china colour.
We'd got fifty people coming, no less counting the women-folk.
I was up afford dawn getting all ready, setting the china, both ours and what we'd borrowed on the trestles in the orchard, helping Gideon to put the casks of beer in the yard, ready for the men to fill their harvest bottles, and fetching water from the well for the tea.
The orchard was a sight to see when the trestles were set out (for I could put all ready with no fear of rain on such a day) with the mugs and platters of many colours, and the brown quartern loaves, and the big pats of butter stamped with a swan, and the slabs of honey-comb dough cakes, gingerbread, cheese, jam and jelly, let alone the ham at one end of each trestle and the round of beef at the other.
Even Gideon didna begrutch the food on this day.
For it was one of the laws you couldna break, that at a love-carriage everybody must have his bellyful.’
I am an incurable romantic and remember being captivated by this image of the ‘lovecarriage’ feast held in the yard of Prue Sarn's farm in Precious Bane .
Weather permitting, this is surely the sort of event of which Philippa would approve.
Of course, it is purely coincidental that to help other mothers and brides-to-be, we also consulted Harry Dodson, he of The Victorian Kitchen Garden fame, to find out which flowers a Victorian country bride would have picked to decorate the church and make her bouquet.
And to crown the day, Robert Burgess has chosen hats for all the guests (pages 126–131).
The ham for the Sarns' table in Precious Bane presumably came from pigs kept in humane conditions, unlike the poor animals that inspired Mike Baxter to develop the new-style pig pens described in Quentin Seddon's feature on page 58.
It may make you want to ask the caterer if the coronation chicken was free range.
Alighting on another optimistic subject for British wildlife — butterflies to be exact — Edwin Mullins explains why he is so bewitched by them and James Driver advises on how to increase their numbers by breeding caterpillars (see page 80).
Let's hope for a butterflyfilled summer this year, and if you're off to a country wedding, may it be as joyful an occasion as the Sarns' feast.
Francine Lawrence
MAGPIE
CRAFTS TO BUY, CAUSES TO SUPPORT AND A PAGE OF ANNIVERSARIES TO CELEBRATE.
COMPILED BY VICKY CARLISLE
RUGGED LOOKING
Weaver and tapestry worked Ingrid Parker lives in Devon but sells her work mainly in America and has recently completed a tapestry for a church in Austria.
Her inspiration also comes from abroad: having spent a month travelling all over Morocco, Ingrid tries to incorporate the dramatic colour combinations and designs used by Arab weavers.
Our picture shows a cotton rug that costs £250 and the beckets (handles) woven by her husband Chris to decorate his sea chests (£150).
WINGED WORDS
Butterfly Cooing Like a Dove (Doubleday, £25) by Miriam Rothschild is a unique and uncategorisable delight, an autobiographical musing on the extraordinary appeal of these two winged creatures.
One of our most distinguished lepidopterists, she reflects with pleasure that the butterfly has been ‘in many lands at different times…a symbol of the soul’.
Here, along with glimpses into her own life, are scientific puzzles: what, for instance, causes the ‘improbable brilliance’ of butterfly wings?
We have five copies to be won.
Tell us on a postcard the Latin name of the domesticated Chinese silk moth and send it marked CL /Moth to the address on page 2 by 30 June.
The Essex Wildlife Trust has produced a leaflet detailing ways to encourage butterflies back to our gardens.
Send an A4-sized sae, plus 50p, to Fingringhoe Wick Nature Reserve .
More on butterflies on page 80.
CREATURE CROCKERY
Exhibiting in his local village of Stoodleigh in Devon was intended to be little more than a spring clean of his workshop for ceramicist Chris Speyer, but it led to the launch of Yerja Ceramics.
‘The response was so amazing,’ Chris recalls, ‘that we went on to exhibit in London and the business really took off.’
This dog-adorned coffee pot costs £47; you can have all kinds of different tiny creatures crawling across your crockery, including fishes, snails, crocodiles and insects.
SALT OF THE EARTHENWARE
Glossy finishes hold no fascination for potter Toff Milway (here with his son Hugh in his Gloucestershire studio).
He is more enamoured of the lumpy, mottled effect of saltglaze — somewhere between orange peel and porridge.
Saltglazing involves introducing salt into the kiln at a very high temperature so that it volatilises and coats the clay.
The unpredictability of the glaze means that each pot is unique.
And while Toff claims his techniques are very much part of the English slipware tradition, his pots often look like something out of Africa, where he lived for several years.
THROW YOUR HAT IN THE RING
If you thought hat boxes were exclusively for housing prized straw ensembles, Mike Shepherd from The Box Office urges you to think again.
‘Our Victorian-style boxes turn up in all sorts of situations,’ Mike explains, ‘from the storage of socks to window displays in clothes shops.
I even know of one customer whose cat has taken to bedding down in hers.’
FIELD GLASSES
There will be no mistaking a phalarope for a sandpiper with our pocket binoculars.
At £51, the Praktica Sport Super 10×25 measures 4½ × 2¾ × 1¾″ and weighs just 240g.
Features include: multi-coated optical lenses and high refractive prisms, with a focus range of 6m to infinity; centre-wheel focusing and eyesight correction; adjustable inter-eye distance; roll-back eye cups for spectacle wearers; lanyard and case with belt loop.
Order on page 163.
PERFECT COUNTRY PILES
‘Too small for Envy, For Contempt too Great’ runs the inscription carved in stone over the doorway of a Georgian house in Scotland.
Candida Lycett Green adds that this aptly describes many of the houses in her irresistible book The Perfect English Country House (Pavilion, £17.99).
It's not true, of course; who can avoid the lurch of envy on catching sight of the Gothick octagons and ogee arches of Grampton Court's Lake House in Gloucestershire?
Or a gasp of delight at the Manor House in Sandford Orcas, Dorset (below)?
These are the finest flowers of our domestic architecture.
Still family-owned, most are closed to the public — so these photographs and vivid word profiles are all the more valuable.
BIRD'S EYE VIEW
Puffins and gannets, guillemots and kittiwakes flock to the cliffs of Flamborough Headland near Bridlington to nest in spring and early summer.
The colony is one of the most accessible for birdwatchers, and Puffin Cruises — run by the RSPB — takes them to the bottom of the cliffs for close views of the birds diving for fish and flying back from feeding grounds.
Trips, costing £6, run during May, June and July.
Armchair birdwatchers can see red kites and peregrine falcons through the eyes of painter Bruce Pearson in David Cobham's Birdscape on Channel 4 on Thursdays in May and June.
THE BATIK TECHNIQUE
The ancient art of batik, a form of resist dyeing, has been perfected over centuries on the Indonesian island of Java, so it was there that Angela Newport went to learn the technique.
She now puts her lessons into practice in a studio at the Bristol Craft Centre, producing exquisite wall-hangings, pictures and scarves.
Using pure Chinese silk, she paints exotic mythological and Egyptian patterns, as well as more everyday subjects like hens and fish.
Prices start at £15 for a 7 × 9″ picture.
Larger wall-hangings can be commissioned.
MUSICAL AIRS
Mozartian melodies will drift across the lawns of Garsington Manor near Oxford this summer, in recognition of the bicentenary of the composer's death.
At the beautiful country house loved by D H Lawrence, Opera 80 will stage a new production of the comic love story Die Entführung aus dem Serail on 21, 23 and 30 June.
AMBRIDGE ANTICS
Just after the war a BBC programme assistant called Godfrey Baseley, searching for an alternative to the stiff, technical talks from farming experts on the radio, hit on the idea of giving agricultural advice in the form of a story.
Thus Radio 4's long-running soap opera The Archers was born and this year it celebrates its 40th birthday.
David and Ruth Archer are shown below, and you can meet members of the cast at many of this summer's agricultural shows, or join them for a weekend in Bromsgrove.
Details from the recently formed Archers Addicts on 0993–778531.
HOORAY HENRY
On 28 June this year, it will be 500 years since the birth of Henry VIII.
We all know that Henry accumulated six wives; he also collected 55 palaces, some 2,000 pieces of tapestry, 94 swords and 40 girdles.
Now the treasures of this most acquisitive of monarchs — portraits, armour, jewellery and so on— will be exhibited at the National Maritime Museum at Greenwich from May to September as part of the anniversary celebrations.
Among other quincentenary revelries you may or may not want to get involved in are: jousting at Hever Castle, Tudor music at Kenwood and a pageant at Hedingham Castle.
DIAMOND DOGS AND PRECIOUS PUPPIES
Sixty years ago the first British guide dog led its blind owner through crowded streets with skill and devotion.
Another Pair of Eyes by Peter Ireson charts the development of the Guide Dogs for the Blind Association in this country and celebrates its Diamond Jubilee.
The movement originated in Germany, where Red Cross ambulance dogs were trained to help blind veterans after the First World War; today we have 450 centres across Britain.
LOSE YOURSELF
Henry VIII's great palace at Hampton Court also celebrates a birthday this year: its famous maze is 300 years old.
This is convenient for the English Tourist Board and the Maze Society, who have dubbed 1991 the Year of the Maze.
To mark the occasion, the world's largest symbolic hedge maze opened recently at Blenheim Palace and this, like more than 100 other labyrinths across the country, is open to visitors this summer.
And for those who really want to get lost, there's a maze game, Adrian Fisher's The Art of the Maze and a travelling exhibition.
‘The damage that has been done in the pursuit of production is the direct result of treating farming as if it were simply another business’ BRIAN REDHEAD
Fifty years ago, in 1941, I spent my summer holidays on a farm.
It was not difficult to arrange because I went to stay with the same farmer with whom I had spent the whole of the previous year as an evacuee.
But he and his wife had moved.
In 1939 when I arrived with my gas mask from Newcastle they lived in a farm in the grounds of a castle in what was then called Cumberland (and still should be).
It was a small farm.
They had hens and ducks of their own, but as tenants of the family in the big house they were commissioned to rear only beef cattle.
However, for me it was heaven on earth.
I went to bed by candlelight, slept on a feather mattress, collected the eggs, and was even allowed, in the company of Spot the dog, to drive cattle to market.
Spot knew the way.
It was like a nursery rhyme come true.
But then The Scholarship, as we called the 11-plus, intervened.
I was dispatched to the grammar school, which itself had been evacuated from the big city to a small town.
That too was a heady experience, but I still hankered for the farm life.
And so it came to pass that when we broke up for the summer holidays in 1941, I set off on my bike to the farmer's new settlement.
It was, incidentally, a journey of about 20 miles, and it is an interesting reflection on the times that no one saw any danger in an 11-year-old embarking on such a trip alone.
The new farm was majestic — a handsome house, a huge acreage, a dairy herd as well as beef cattle, sheep as well as shire horses, and no tractor.
It must have been a long summer holiday because I managed to be there both for the haymaking and the harvest.
I returned to school in mid-September firmly persuaded that farming was the essential life of the countryside.
And 50 years later I remain convinced of this.
When I first became involved in what I suppose can be called the politics of conservation, I was swift to argue that farmers are the essential inhabitants of the countryside, and not least of the most beautiful parts of the countryside.
It is they who have shaped the landscapes we all love.
But there is much more to farming than that.
John Dower, the father of the National Parks, got it right when he said that we look to the farming communities for the continuance not only of the landscape but of the drama itself, rural life and work.
He was much given to quoting that wonderful phrase to describe the endless battle between man and nature: ‘the mild continuous epic of the soil’.
It is a phrase that I think ought to be recited wherever people meet to discuss the future of farming, and recited with special emphasis on the words ‘mild’ and ‘continuous’.
There has been too much upheaval, too much conflict, too much misunderstanding, about farming and the countryside.
The Prince of Wales put his finger on it when he said recently that the crisis in farming is a cultural crisis.
It concerns the very identity of farming.
Farming is not just another business.
It is not like any other business.
It is, or it should be, a special way of life.
And he called it the long-term stewardship of a precious natural resource.
He also pointed out that although the new technology of agriculture is here to stay, we need to retrieve the wisdom of the past.
The catalogue of recent error is now common knowledge.
We all know, and indeed can see with our own eyes, the damage that has been done to the countryside in pursuit of production.
That is the direct result of treating farming as if it were simply another business.
It was thought to be efficient to increase the yield to produce more than we need at a price which is more than we can pay and then dump the surplus on the world market, leaving the farmer with nothing.
Nor is it sensible to flee from farming and treat farmers as if they were simply game-wardens or wood-rangers or park-keepers.
The farmers' calling is more than a livelihood, it is a way of life.
Their land is more than an address, it is a territory.
They belong to the countryside and were they to be evicted the countryside itself would cease to exist.
They need to farm, and the countryside needs to be farmed.
As it always has been.
It is the tradition.
But a return to traditional farming does not mean wearing smocks again or having only three little pigs.
It means having a respect for the past, concern for the present, and an eye to the future.
A tradition is not a matter of being set in your ways.
It is a flow of sympathy, a sustained endeavour, a careful husbandry.
I already knew the right word for it when I was 11.
Farming.
NETWORK
WE INVESTIGATE WHO'S AFRAID OF THE BRITISH COUNTRYSIDE, THE ETERNAL BYPASS DILEMMA AND THE SHAMEFUL TRADE IN WILD BIRDS, EDITED BY JULES MACMAHON
FEAR OF THE COUNTRY
People in the country should provide a warmer welcome and be more socially aware towards visitors, the Countryside Commission has recommended in a new report.
According to the Commission's National Survey of Countryside Recreation 1990 four out of 10 people in England and Wales are worried about trespassing on private land, getting lost and not knowing where to go or how to behave when visiting the country.
Now the Countryside Commission has published a consultative document on the issue of rural awareness and accessibility, its main aim being to increase the choices for visitors to country hotspots.
The survey reveals a staggering lack of understanding about rural Britain.
Only 18 per cent of respondents knew even their local countryside very well, and 25 per cent of people rarely, if ever, visit it.
Although 20 per cent go out into the country once a week, the study showed that less than half of the population are monthly visitors and 80 per cent of visits are for only a day or less.
Drives, outings and picnics accounted for 19 per cent of the visits, long walks for 14 per cent, and visiting friends and relatives 13 per cent .
More than £12,000 million is generated by visitors, sustaining 530,000 jobs — equal to the number supported by agriculture.
The survey showed that people fall into three different categories of countryside use: the young professionals, often with two cars, who visit regularly; the middle-income clerical and skilled manual workers who visit occasionally; and the unskilled, unemployed or elderly who rarely, or never, visit.
‘Our view is that everybody should be offered the genuine chance to enjoy the countryside, and we feel that frequent users are very well served,’ says Peter Ashcroft of the Countryside Commission's Recreation and Access department.
‘But for the other two groups we feel there are many factors that spoil their enjoyment or deter them from making trips.’
The Commission is proposing a ‘welcome audit’ that will assess the friendliness of country venues, and a new database of countryside  activities for libraries and tourist information centres.
However, to prevent friction between country residents and visitors, the Commission is recommending that a new Country Code should be established, and the tourism industry should help to preserve the attractive elements of the country.
‘Although we want to increase the choice for visitors,’ Ashcroft says, ‘we also want to ensure that they foster a caring attitude to the places they visit.’
Visitors to the Countryside: A consultation Paper on Promoting Sustainable Countryside Recreation is available free from the Countryside Commission Publications .
…
AND A POSSIBLE SOLUTION
A pilot project to bring countryside recreation information into the town centre has proved so successful that it is set to become a permanent feature in Northampton.
The town's Countryside Centre, within easy reach of central car parks, shops and so on, was opened in February by Northampton Countryside Services to beat the classic Catch 22 situation facing urbanised Britain.
‘The difficulty for so many people in towns is that most of the information about the countryside is in the country.
People don't go there until they know where to go, and they can't find out where to go until they've been.
It's a typical chicken-and-egg situation,’ explains Northamptonshire's Countryside Development Officer, Kaja Sylvest.
‘Some information is available in the town, but we were becoming very aware that there was no focal point.
What we wanted to create was an easily accessible, one-stop-shop for country information.’
The centre has received around 45 enquiries a day, six days a week since it opened, and the numbers are expected to increase during the summer.
A wide range of information has been supplied, ranging from details about local walks right through to the opportunities for work in rural areas.
Another major benefit of the centres is that local countryside groups can use it for meetings and displays.
Adrian Colston, director of the Northamptonshire Wildlife Trust, says the centre has given the Trust a shop window in the town centre: ‘It's early days yet, but the centre has already doubled our volunteer workforce and we think it will become a major focal point.’
Trevor Lawson
THE BEST BEACHES
Swimming off Britain's sewage-strewn beaches can make you sick, but constant campaigning from The Marine Conservation Society has put pressure on local authorities to tell the public exactly what and where the dangers are.
Also, in association with Heinz, the Society has published the 1991 edition of The Good Beach Guide providing up-to-date information on the bathing-water quality of over 450 British beaches.
Among the 10 new best beaches in this edition are Teignmouth in the south-west, Thorntonloch in Scotland and Borth in Wales.
But brickbats to Brighton, South Shields and Llandudno which have failed the EC standard.
REPORT FROM THE REGIONS
To bypass, or not to bypass : that is the question troubling the people of north Norfolk.
The county council plans to build a bypass so that the A148 will no longer bisect the conservation village of Letheringsett.
Few would deny that something has to be done to alleviate the problems there, caused by up to 9,000 vehicles per day negotiating a narrow, winding road.
But each of the five possible routes proposed has drawbacks: apart from the cost (about £4 million), they would bring new problems for other villages, cut through farm land or devastate the watermeadows and wildlife habitats in the Letheringsett and Glaven Valley Conservation Areas.
The local branches of the Green Party, CPRE and FoE, and the newly-formed Glaven Valley Protection Group, all oppose a bypass; but rather than adopting a negative NIMBY position they propose improvements to the existing road, which they believe would deal effectively with the hazards.
Speed limits, a better-designed crossroads, a new crossing and pavement would make the road safer for both pedestrians and drivers, and entail far less disruption and expense.
Inevitably the issue has proved highly emotive: even in Letheringsett opinion is divided.
Rupert Rosser, a villager and member of the GVPG, thinks a bypass would divert only a fraction of the traffic.
Others feel outsiders are scuppering their chance of the bypass they have long wanted.
Councillors were due to meet on 25 April to consider the matter — no easy task when hundreds of letters, suggesting numerous solutions, have been sent.
Whatever the outcome, one thing is clear: where new roads are concerned, you cannot please all of the people all of the time.
Teph Willis
RSPB CAMPAIGN TO BAN WILD BIRD TRADE
On 21 May the RSPB is launching a campaign aimed at achieving a total ban on the import of wild-caught birds into Europe.
The ban is desperately needed as the EC imports around 1.5 million birds annually.
In the UK alone in 1988 and 1989 we imported 369,178 wild birds — 8,747 of these were dead on arrival, and about 40,000 more died within the following 35 days.
These figures don't take into account the huge numbers that die shortly after trapping or while awaiting export, and studies show mortality at this stage could be 50 per cent.
Unscrupulous bird exporters don't care: they simply catch more birds, and as long as a few per cage survive, they are still in profit.
The RSPB is pressing the Government for stricter import controls and to sort out the EC's double standards, which allow the importation of many Asian, South American etc birds, but ban trapping of European birds.
In the meantime, if you're still keen to keep birds, you can help by buying only those bred in captivity (many of the common pet species like budgerigars are bred in UK aviaries): look out for close-rings fitted to bird's legs as proof (above).
These are attached when the bird is less than 10 days old, and as it grows the ring becomes impossible to remove.
Check further by asking your dealer for the name and address of the breeder.
See ‘Green Shields’ in our July 1991 issue for more on the environmental agencies fighting illegal wildlife imports.
SMALL BUSINESS SELF-HELP
Charles and Wendy Russell own the largest herd of Gloucester Old Spot pigs in the UK .
They began farming three years ago, when loans were easy to get and their bank was happy to lend them all they needed.
Last March, in common with many other small businesses, the Russells needed extra funds to tide them over a difficult period.
The mathematics were simple: £10,000 would enable them to fatten up their piglets, sell them off in the autumn, clear their overdraft and continue preserving all the surviving Old Spot bloodlines.
The meat from their Old Spots is succulent, free-range and in such demand that the Russells have enough orders to sell it four times over.
Their bank, however, refused to extend their credit.
‘We put £130,000 of our own money into the business,’ Charles says, ‘but a year ago the bank's attitude changed.
It suggested we kill the breeding sows to pay for fattening the piglets and then buy commercial stock to replace them.’
One hundred sows — 90 per cent of the breeding stock — came within days of slaughter.
News of this reached the press, pig-lovers throughout the country came to the rescue and enough money was donated or pledged interest-free to ensure the herd's survival.
As well as the Old Spots, the Russells also breed Berkshires, Saddlebacks, Lops, Middle Whites, Large Blacks and Tamworths — all recognised as rare breeds by our Charity of the Year, the Rare Breed Survival Trust.
To help them expand the herd further, the Russells now operate a ‘Sponsor A Pig’ scheme on their farm to enable people to pay for the upkeep of a chosen pig.
Their local bank manager isn't expected to take part in it.
David Shannon
HOMEFRONT
CANE AND ABLE
TAKE A CHAIR: CLAIRE GERVAT STUDIES RUSHING IN PROVENCE; HESTER PAGE FINDS STOCKISTS KEEN TO BRING BACK THE CANE
To many people, Provence is as much an idea as a place: endless summer evenings, good food and flowing wine.
To antique lovers it is something else — the home of the rushand cane-seated chairs that are the best-known examples of the Provençal furniture.
They are immensely adaptable: designed for the plainer interiors of the hot south, they sit happy in stark modernist décors, but don't look out of place in rooms stuffed with antiques.
At their most basic, rush and cane seats provided more comfortable seating than the wooden chairs and stools that preceded them.
There was, however, tremendous scope for decoration of the seat itself and the wooden frame, plus the cushions that were almost invariably attached.
Superior versions found their way into 17th- and 18th-century country houses and even into the smaller rooms at Versailles.
The seats were made in a variety of materials, plaited with subtle variations in pattern: freshwater rushes gathered from the banks of the Rhône, rye straw (top right ), and wheat straw wrapped with raffia (bottom right ) were left plain, or stained red, green, yellow, blue or pale purple.
Weaving the seat was a difficult and messy task, for the materials had to be damp to keep them pliable.
It took about three or four hours to complete an ordinary chair seat; more complicated patterns could take as much as seven or eight hours.
Cushions tied with ribbons to the seat and back of the chair supplied extra padding and decoration — a legacy from the days of wooden-seated chairs.
They were usually covered in local cotton prints or in printed fabrics from  Alsace or Neufchâtel, but grander versions had silk cushions in brightly coloured and lavish damasks and brocades from the silk works in Lyon.
Various woods were used for the chair frames: oak, walnut, beech, mulberry, chestnut, and sometimes alder and lime.
Frames were frequently left plain to emphasise the natural beauty of the wood.
But some were painted green, grey, red, yellow or blue, with highlights picked out in contrasting colours (see left ,middle and bottom ).
More extravagant versions were embellished with carving and no surface escaped unscathed.
The chair backs were usually the most heavily carved, in relief or cut-out.
The restrained decoration of chairs made during the reigns of Louis XV and Louis XVI gave way to more complicated ornamentation in the 19th century: fluted columns, pilasters and other architectural motifs (inspired by classical Greek architecture) characterised chairs of the early 19th-century directory period (top left ).
The legs also gave scope for embellishment; they were turned into columns or bent into distinctive arch shapes with ball feet.
Even the bar across the front of the seat, originally intended to protect the straw or cane, was another surface to be carved, painted, and even inlaid with gold and pearls.
There are few remaining examples of some of the older designs, like the duchesse (which was a sort of daybed in three pieces).
Nor are there many rodassiers , ample benches or daybeds which many French people regard as the most typical item of Provençal furniture.
The pieces that remain are sought after and valuable, and even chairs that were originally very cheap are in demand.
Happily there are caners and rushers who restore old furniture or make new chairs, in England as well as in France.
After all, these chairs were built to be used, not to be museum pieces.
EMPORIUM
CURTAINS FROM A COWSHED AND COLOURFUL TILES FOR SUMMER: FIONA DOUGLAS ROBERTSON SHOWS HOW TO RECREATE THE EFFECTS IN THIS MONTH'S HOMES FEATURES
OFFER
1 Breakfast in bed tends to be a luxury indulged in only on birthdays or when feeling ill, but our tray could turn it into a daily ritual.
With deep sloping sides in solid English oak, and base in oak-veneered laminate, the tray is finished with heat-and stain-resistant melamine lacquer.
Measuring 12×17½″ along the base and 14×19½″ on top, it costs £28.99.
To order turn to the coupon on page 163.
2 David Salomon is a self-confessed colourist, creator of a bathroom bright with haphazardly placed tiles and reminiscent of a Mondrian painting (page 95).
Fore those who aren't colour-shy, Fired Earth has more than 100 shades in its Haute Provence range of clay tiles.
Tiles cost £2.23 each (£176.37/sq yd).
For stockists countrywide ring 0295–812088.
3 Primary-coloured Zoe bowls for summer meals: made in France, they cost £7 each from Heal's 
4 The work of artist Ilana Richardson evokes the intense colour the Mediterranean where cobalt-blue shutters pick out the windows of white-washed houses.
Now you can achieve a similar effect in your home; Putnams is importing paints from Turkey of a type used in the Mediterranean for thousands of years.
These water-based paints are for wood, concrete and plaster.
A 3.4kg pot (£25) will cover 20–30 square metres.
Ilana will be exhibiting at the CCA Galleries, London  in September.
5 Exotic fabrics proliferate in David Salomon's house, even masquerading as wallpaper (page 94).
This year Yves Delorme introduced its Paon range of cotton throws ; combining patterns inspired by the paisley motif with the colours of Provence, these rich textiles can be used on tables, sofas, curtains or anywhere you please.
6 In a converted cowshed near Devizes, curtains of every type hang from wooden beams.
This is The Curtain Exchange, where you can buy high quality secondhand curtains at a fraction of the normal cost.
Prices range from £12–£2,000; simple cotton curtains hang alongside the occasional antique pair from a French château.
This is not a swapping agency, but Jo Rodwell, the owner, will sell your unwanted curtains on a commission basis.
7 & 8 A few years ago Sally Baring of Borderline went into an antique shop and left with an 1895 fabric block.
This hand-blocked Daisy linen and cotton border (21 cm side) was the result.
It costs about £25.20/mp; use this and Sally's silk taffeta ribbons  to enhance plain fabrics.
There are stockists countrywide, but if you contact Borderline direct on 071–823 3567 before 30 June, quoting Country Living as reference, you will receive a 10 per cent discount on all hand-blocked borders and ribbons.
9 Simon Horn Furniture now has a range of reproduction French beds; this Lit Bateau is veneered with unstained, unsealed cherrywood ready for finishing.
Recommended paints are from J W Bollom.
Prime with two to three coats of eggshell, thinning down the first one with white spirit to avoid ridges.
A scumble glaze will give an antique effect; finish off with a matt or satin varnish.
10 Taken from ‘Bed in Summer’(page 102), this is one way to enhance shuttered windows: white ticking (The Conran Shop) lined with crisp waxed calico (F R Street) is draped over an antique curtain pole (Antiques & Things, stockists page 110); the maple pot cupboard is from Simon Pugh .
Both Terence Conran's The Soft Furnishings Book  and Tricia Build's New Soft Furnishings  are well-illustrated and helpful.
FEARS OF A CLOWN
OVERPOPULATION, NOISE, CARS AND CATS ALL Trouble SPIKE MILLIGAN.
HE PUT HIS PERSONAL PROGRAMME FOR THE ENVIRONMENT TO TREVOR LAWSON
Living in the countryside is no laughing matter for humorist Spike Milligan.
A one-time regular denizen of city theatres and radio broadcast suites, one might argue that only an ex-Goon would have chosen to live along Dumb Woman's Lane in a small hamlet near Rye in West Sussex.
But choice didn't really come into it.
‘It was circumstantial.
I couldn't afford my house in London any more, so I decided to try to buy a house in the country.
I bought this bloody awful place.
I thought that it was made of stone, but to my horror I discovered it was made of cement blocks!
‘It's an awful building really, architecturally.
It has absolutely not one thing about it that is meritorious.
All we've done is to make it look nice inside with our furniture, our pictures and our paintings and so on.’
‘Nice’ is an understatement.
Milligan has crammed it so full of Victorian antiques, paintings and illustrations that the cement is hidden by memorabilia.
The only modern items in the entire house are a television and a video.
‘Modern technology is so infinitesimally delicate,’ Milligan explained, eyeing the electronic boxes with distrust.
‘Like these new telephones.
I still have a phone with a dial on it, but my wife has one with buttons.
It's not practical; it's lightweight and easy to break.
But my old-fashioned black one is lovely and sturdy.
Contemporary things have no regard for gravity, except video machines.
That thing over there seems to weigh a ton.
I can't work it.
I've given up trying.’
Spike Milligan is a man whom time forgot.
Now in his seventies, he and his third wife Shelagh live as genial semi-recluses on the edge of the Sussex Downs, overlooking grand views of the coast.
He ‘doesn't drive much’: simply walking along the local village road gives him enough of the excitement of modern transport.
‘I'm always expecting to be sucked under one of these juggernauts taking a cross-country short cut.’
Despite a diary mix-up, my unexpected arrival on a Saturday did not perturb him in the slightest.
I was welcomed in through the front door almost before it was opened, and settled down in front of a Victorian stove that was brimming with hot coals.
‘I like antiques, I suppose because I've become one myself,’ Milligan said with a wry smile, stirring up the fire.
He still looked rather tired, having spent several weeks in hospital undergoing  treatment for manic depression.
A long-standing sufferer of this terrible condition, thought to be caused by a chemical imbalance in the brain, he once said that living in the country helped control it.
‘It's quiet out here, that's the main thing.
I can get a good night's sleep.’
Although he now lives far from the art and theatre world of London on which he thrived for so long, Milligan would not want more arts in the countryside.
‘More is bad; the worst word you could use with me.
I think arts in the countryside are about right as they are.
There isn't a lot, but any more would attract more people, which means more cars.
And then the countryside wouldn't be the countryside.
It would be an extension of the town.’
The Milligan country ideal is peace and quiet, with trees, birds and space.
It's little different from the usual ideal image, but Milligan sees influences that many of us miss.
‘Out in the back lanes you see crows, robins, jackdaws, linnets — delightful birds — blue tits and so on, but there are cats all over the place.
Bloody cats!
I don't know how the birds survive, I'm stunned actually.
When you think of what birds have to go through — shooters, hunters, in Malta, Spain, Italy and Cyprus — I'm stunned that anything survives with cats around as well.’
‘Rabbits they say/Are very scarce today/My diagnosis? /Myxomatosis’, he wrote in The Bedside Milligan in 1971.
‘There is something about animals that attracts writers because you can't interview an animal,’ he says.
‘You have to write about it from outside experience.
Animals have been anthropomorphised since as long ago as Egyptian times.’
Milligan says his crazily abstract poems, such as Bald Twit Lion , are merely a 20thcentury equivalent of Egyptian hieroglyphics showing cats and other animals dancing.
Milligan's jottings have often had a strong environmental message as well.
In 1967 he wrote: ‘Human beings will become so used to being crushed together that when they are on their own, they will suffer withdrawal symptoms: ‘Doctor — I've got to get on to a crowded train soon or I'll go mad’.’
He saw a Population Apocalypse approaching and now he claims the wheels of disaster are beginning to turn in Britain.
‘The first signs are traffic jams.
Idiot Peter Bottomley, Minister for, I don't know — roads, bridges, exportable heads — once said: ‘There's nothing I can do about traffic in London.
It's a sign of financial success.’
He should have said it's a sign of too many people.
Milligan moved to the Sussex hills because he couldn't find anywhere close to London ‘which didn't involve living on a motorway’, but XR3 prosperity has pursued him.
‘They even drive at 60 mph in narrow country lanes.
There's no escaping that aspect of London.’
His horror at overpopulation, however, contains a cheerful touch of irony.
He is the father of four children.
‘Environmentally, they're disastrous,’ he says of his own progeny.
His solution is a moratorium on childbirth for two years.
‘The world won't stop.
It'll just give us some breathing space.
For future generations alone we've got to stop having children.
It sounds contradictory, doesn't it?’
He has a point.
He waved at the generous landscape beyond the window, rolling down to the sea.
‘I expect people will react to the idea in a typical way.
Violently.
And stupidly.
With the ‘I want’, ‘I have the right’, attitude.
OK then, go on.
But the quality of life will go down.
We're already used to traffic jams in London.
Now they're talking about building a bypass around Winchelsea.
One wonders where it will go.
Right through here, I suppose.’
Like many comedians, Milligan is surprisingly serious.
But it doesn't take much to draw a smile from him, and almost everything in the country — especially its people — provides material for his humour.
‘A man hears a knock at the door of his country house and opens it to two vicars wearing stockings over their heads.
‘We're Jehovah's Burglars,’ they say.
‘What do you want?’ the man asks.
‘We're seeking sanctuary from the police.
They're persecuting us for our beliefs.’
‘Really?’ the man says.
‘What do you believe?’
‘We believe there's a lot of silver and money in the house.’
You see,’ Milligan says, grinning, ‘there are no jokes at all.
It's all abstract.’
Spike Milligan is patron of the Manic Depression Fellowship 
the GARDEN path
THE CAN YOU CANNOT BE WITHOUT, CATMINT AND THE QUINTESSENTIAL ROSE.
BY MIRANDA INNES
OUR VERY OWN ROSE
David Austin's English roses are a delicious fusion of the past and the current state of the art — they have all the romantic charm, the graceful form, the fresh, sweet perfume of antique roses.
But they don't just flower for the fortnight you spent in Sarajevo: English roses fill the air with fragrance for month after month.
So we are very honoured that Mr Austin has bred a rose just for us — a perfect beauty, the closest he has ever come to the old Alba rose, beloved of Redouté, and going back 2,000 years beyond him.
Like the white rose of York, another Alba, ‘Country Living’ is a perfect rosette of small blush-pink petals with a speck of green at its heart, set against dark-green foliage.
It will grow into a shrubby bush 3′–4′ tall and looks equally beautiful grown alone or companionably in a border where it will flower away to your heart's content.
Watch out for our special offer of the ‘Country Living’ rose and three other new David Austin English roses in next month's issue.
OFFER
ANYTHING YOU CAN DO…
Nothing beats a properly designed metal watering can.
Our model, which is made by Haws the specialists, is beautifully proportioned, capacious (it holds ¾ gallon) and painted a garden-friendly green.
It comes equipped with two solid brass roses, the extra, smaller one fitting on an extension spout for the gentlest watering of tender seedlings.
You'll be glad you bought this highly desirable garden ally (and another for green-fingered Aunt Flo) for years and years.
The can costs £29.35 including p&p.
To order, turn to the coupon on page 163.
STEADFAST AND SUPPORTIVE
If you have ever tried growing anything taller than a lettuce in a grow-bag, you will have encountered the problem of floppy stakes.
Given a light breeze or a heavy shower, your garden (already suffused with all the charm that yellow plastic can add to an otherwise fastidious colour scheme) will be further disfigured by prostrate plants clinging desperately to and probably uprooted by their erstwhile supportive canes.
The Biobax Growtray will solve these problems, and will almost transform the unwieldy sagging yellow object into a thing of beauty.
The Growtray is a simple timber box, that is treated with non-toxic preservatives.
It has handles at each end so that you will be able to move the whole thin, makes watering more effective, incorporates cane-supports, costs £19.95 and looks fine.
The free colour shows the Growtray and a range of similar planters that come filled with non-peat compost, some even ready planted.
GIANT STEPS
The best edging for herbs or paths or as a billowing blue cloud beneath roses is Nepeta ‘Six Hills Giant’, a misty paradise for bees and cats that grows 60cm tall and has small fine grey leaves.
A bit of judicious trimming will keep it flowering generously all summer: a careful haircut for the lower half of the plant will hold back the flowers while the top half is in bloom, then when that has finished cut it back and let the lower half flower.
And continue alternating the cutting all summer.
MUSIC AND FLOWERS OF WALES
Baritone Sir Geraint Evans is the patron, Humphrey Littleton will cover jazz, Osian Ellis will play the harp and from 19–24 June a host of musicians, poets and craftsmen will congregate in Criccieth for the annual Festival.
The seaside town in north-west Wales, south of Snowdonia and within yodelling distance of Glough Williams-Ellis's Portmeirion, will be showing its gardens, too (see below)— from the grandeur of Lloyd George's Bryn Awelon, to the cottagey Bryn-y-Bont.
PHILIPPA DAVENPORT'S NOTEBOOK
Tall tales and toasts, strawberries and syllabub, singing and dancing, should all be part of a village wedding: Philippa Davenport plans the perfect marriage feast
The village wedding I remember with most vivid pleasure took place in Sardinia.
We were summoned to church, as the faithful were every Sunday, by loudspeakers blaring a scratchy recording of Mario Lanza singing Ave Maria .
The bride spoke her vows with tremulous modesty.
Old ladies dabbed their eyes happily.
The couple were deluged with rice and we all walked back to the bride's parental home afterwards.
The house was decked in virginal white.
Streets were draped in swags over the windows and doors, with branches of lemon pinned to them.
Trestle tables in the courtyard were laid with crockery loaned by neighbours and foods brought by relations: carta di musica, the local unleavened bread; pecorino sardo, the salty ewes' cheese of the island; olives and salami to keep hunger pangs at bay.
Kid and suckling pig were done to a turn on spits attended by uncles and a rapt audience of neighbourhood dogs.
Women drifted in and out of the house and nearby kitchens carrying pasta and salads, clearing plates and replenishing baskets of bread.
Babies belched and slept.
Children played.
The young flirted.
Old men retold old tales once again.
Tumblers were refilled, toasts were drunk, the cake was cut and there was singing and dancing till nightfall.
At the turn of the century a village wedding in Britain might have been celebrated in much the same way.
Weddings were smaller affairs then, more intimate than they tend to be now.
The feats would have been long saved for, and would have boasted plenty of meats, sweets and intoxicants.
Rabbit pie or rabbit brawn would be served and one of the pork meat specialities of the region.
Thee would be the biggest bacon joint or ham that could be afforded — and a joint of beef for a farmhouse wedding.
In addition to the cake there would probably be trifle, gloriously awash with sherry and cream and as heavily decorated as a Russian general.
Beer and cider would flow and maybe home-brewed parsley or parsnip wine, innocent sounding and innocuous tasting but capable of rendering the unwary legless.
In the Scottish Highlands weddings  still retain a hint of times past.
The celebrations may last well into a week, as long as there is enough whisky to keep the party spirit afloat, with people from neighbouring glens calling by to offer their congratulations and share a wee dram.
I dare say similar goings-on persist in pockets of Ireland and Wales.
Long live the Celts.
Generally speaking, though, suburban gentility has seeped across the map.
Bawdiness has been toned down and feasting reduced to sadly impersonal uniformity.
Gone is the sing-song, the knees-up, the fiddler, the man with the squeezebox or pipes.
A disco with flashy strobe lighting provides the music now.
Guest lists have swollen beyond recognition, peopled with business colleagues and mere acquaintances: the village hall or a marquee has to be hired to fit them all in.
Even the regional flavour of the menu has been lost.
Food without frontiers is the norm now with quiche, tacos or tapas and coronation chicken readily supplied by outside caterers.
Maybe the tide will start to turn shortly as the avant-garde begin to lead the way back to the old traditions.
Village wedding feasts may soon forsake smoked salmon canapés in favour of such things as Lincolnshire chine and Wiltshire porkies once again.
My own wedding was a small affair with just two dozen of our closest friends and relations present.
An aunt lent her house for the occasion, my mother did most of the cooking helped by my sister, and my mother-in-law baked the cake.
It was a wedding breakfast in the true sense, the foods breaking the fast we observed in order to go to Holy Communion during the nuptial Mass.
As for drinking, we didn't do badly on the day and more followed later.
When we returned from our honeymoon, feeling bronzed and glowing, a drinks party was held so that all the rest of the family and our friends might share in our celebration.
Lucky me — I reckon I was given the best of both worlds.
If I had a daughter getting married this summer I would be tempted to give her a twopart party in similar vein.
The wedding breakfast would have a Scottish flavour and the centrepiece would be a proper breakfast dish of kedgeree made with plenty of salmon, generously buttered, flecked with herbs and cucumber.
This would be prefaced by asparagus, a traditional choice for weddings in my family; and followed by raspberries, to my mind the most exquisite of summer fruits, served either pure and simple with a little cream, or combined with redcurrants and packed into a bread-lined basin to make summer pudding.
If I wanted to have just one, larger party, and bearing in mind the recession, I might copy a friend and give a wedding tea.
For tea, like breakfast, is a great British forte, and one of the most charming weddings I have ever been to in Britain took place at teatime.
It was one of those joyous occasions to which as many children as adults and elderly grannies were invited.
Everyone, whatever their age or status, was encouraged to wear white and the church brimmed with the milky-white and creamy-gold froth of buttercups, meadowsweet and Queen Anne's lace.
We sang All things bright and beautiful as loud as we could and tucked into the tea-table contributions of aunts, cousins and friends with rare gusto.
My menu for a village wedding tea would include mountains of sandwiches made with many different sorts of breads, all politely crustless and cut into triangles.
There would be fillings of tomato with mint, cucumber and Marmite, scrambled egg and cress, cream cheese and greengage jam, honey with walnuts, potted shrimps, smoked trout with nasturtiums, ham with or without mustard, and chicken, toasted almond and mushroom mayonnaise.
There would be washstand-basin bowls of strawberries, and jugs and jugs of cream.
Maybe some wobbly gooseberry jellies, lemon possets or syllabubs, whim-wham or fresh raspberry trifle, brown bread and cinnamon ice-cream, blackcurrant leaf water ice, and sweet geranium sherbet.
There would be biscuits and little cakes galore (including gingerbread men and chocolate fancies iced with the initials of bride and groom) to flank the towering tiers of the wedding cake.
As for drinks, there would be silvery twirled urns of tea on tap for the grown-ups and milk or fresh lemonade for the young.
Plus glasses of bubbly for toasting the newlyweds — the real, fizzingly alcoholic stuff for those who like it, and elderflower champagne for the children and incurable romantics like me.
…
AND THE BRIDE WORE MYRTLE
VICTORIAN WEDDING POSIES WERE ELOQUENT EXPRESSIONS OF A COUPLE'S LOVE.
MIRANDA INNES TRANSLATES THE SECRET LANGUAGE OF FLOWERS
When weddings were weddings, and the scullery maid would faint if she were seen by her ladyship in the wrong part of the house not attending to her duties, there were rules of etiquette and runic codes to cover every contingency.
And given the prevailing prejudice against people actually speaking to each other, suitors and their intended sposi had to have recourse to the ambiguous and easily misunderstood language of fans and flowers.
Many a promising liaison must have been nipped in the bud by Algernon being a duffer at flower arranging or breaking the significant corn stalk with a clumsy tweak; and many a passion choked to premature death because Augusta absentmindedly pinched the petals off her posy of moss rosebuds and myrtle.
An unseasonal hot summer, and discreet romances — kept so by the message ‘secrecy’ conveyed by a full-blown rose over two buds — must have been splattered over the front page of the Bradford Clarion , owing to the overheated eagerness of the aforementioned buds to bloom.
However, just occasionally, floral messages were correctly uncoded and fond couples managed to get married.
Weddings were an excuse to indulge in a complexity of symbols, some of which look like vestiges of atavistic and pagan ceremonies — a whiff of Pan, a nuance of Sleeping Beauty.
We still have a fondness for unreasonably tall cakes and showers of rice, but contemporary brides tend not to be hedged about by garlands of orange blossom (signifying chastity) and smilax pinned to their dresses like a comelier version of the Queensferry Burry man.
Harry Dodson and his wife are well versed in the language of flowers, and have made wedding bouquets professionally for a good long time: they made the beautiful posies for the Victorian wedding in the forthcoming television series The Victorian Flower Garden .
As the event was filmed on a hot day in June Harry has to prepare a batch of duplicates, which awaited their call in the cool of the fruit room.
‘Corsages were kept in a little drop of water,’ Harry explained, ‘but you can't plunge a bouquet in a drop of water, so I put them over a bowl of water supported by two canes.
It made a slightly damp and cooler atmosphere.’
Preventing the bouquets from wilting was the least of Harry's worries.
It had been his job to grow all the flowers in the first place, and they all had to be at their best on this particular auspicious day in June.
The old Bourbon ‘Boule de Neige’ rose was planted in the glasshouse for the bride's bouquet and corsage — glasshouse-grown roses can be forced into flower four to six weeks earlier than normal.
The hothouse flowers gardenia and stephanotis had to be coaxed and nurtured into flowering for the posies and the bridegroom's buttonhole.
It was touch and go, because gardenias in particular are very moody.
‘We had a bit of a struggle to get them for the wedding, but you can pull various strings to hold things back.’
Then there was the bouquet-making — no simple feat with the large quantities involved.
The bride carried the roses (‘I am worthy of you’) mixed with white carnations (‘pure love’ according to some sources, ‘disdain’according to others, so it is imperative to synchronise your sources), edged with myrtle (more love — this stems from the Arabic tradition that Adam was expelled from Eden carrying a myrtle sprig plucked from the bower in which he first declared his love to Eve).
These were surrounded by a starched frill of Honiton lace, which was supported by a stiff disc of white paper and held in place by wire, wrapped with tissue and bound with ribbon.
Jane and Jennifer Davies, the associate producer, achieved this miracle of dexterity.
In the old days, the bride's bouquet would be displayed in the entrance of her house for a day or so, and then a sprig of myrtle would be removed and planted to grow into a nice little bush, a sentimental memento to flourish on her estate and murmur ‘constancy’ into her subconscious.
Jane made up the basket for the bridesmaid from a sweet and innocent mixture of soft pink roses, sweet peas (the pink and mauve ‘Painted Lady’ and the blue ‘Countess Cadogan’), small sprays of pink larkspur, pink marguerites and the miniature Victorian gladiolus ‘The Bride’.
Both bride and bridesmaid had flowers in their bonnets —‘just like earmuffs’ was Harry's less-than-poetic description.
Additionally there was a basket of favours, small buttonholes and corsages to be given to guests and relatives while the bride and groom were signing the register.
The church received its share of attention, too, with a wreath of ivy for fidelity and Asparagus asparagusoides (smilax) decked with posies of orange blossom.
Because there was neither carriage nor honeymoon Harry was saved the bother of providing sacks of rose-petal confetti.
But he did have to endure the ordeal of being photographed between the bride and bridesmaid.
‘I must have been the thorn between the roses,’ he said, with some satisfaction.
A new bon mot in the language of flowers.
The eight-part BBC2 series The Victorian Flower Garden will be screened in the autumn, and the accompanying BBC book by Jennifer Davies will be published at the same time at £14.95.
Main picture Dianthus, sweet peas and Rosa ‘New Dawn’ filled the bridesmaid's basket
Inset The wedding group.
The bride's bouquet was edged with dark green myrtle, her skirts swagged with orange blossom
Left The bridal bouquet.
White carnations, stephanotis and the Bourbon rose ‘Boule de Neige’ were fringed with dark green myrtle and Honiton lace
Below Harry Dodson taking gardenia and stephanotis out for an airing, backed by a hedge of oldfashioned sweet peas
ANIMAL HOUSE
ASKING PIGS AND CHICKENS HOW THEY PREFER TO LIVE IS LESS FANTASTIC THAN IT SOUNDS.
QUENTIN SEDDON MEETS THE RESEARCHERS WHO HELP THEM DECIDE
Pigs are charming and intelligent animals with an irrepressibly delinquent and greedy streak.
George Orwell put these characteristics to imaginative use in his book Animal Farm , in which top pig Napoleon became the Stalin of the muckyard.
Since then, critics of commercial pig farming have charged it with taking somewhat Stalinist counter measures: but now, in the era of glasnost, a more liberated future beckons.
This has come about through wealth, not the poverty that provoked it in Russia.
But while affluent British consumers began to ask for organic vegetables and real meat, total demand for these more naturally produced and more expensive foods remained small.
So welfare supporters argued for new laws to augment the workings of the market place.
Last year, Sir Richard Body brought in a private member's bill to introduce within five years a ban on the use of sow stalls and tethers — devices that make it easier and cheaper to manage the animals during their four months of pregnancy.
He has now agreed to extend his changeover period to eight years in line with the Government-backed ban.
Both will bring changes that will alter the demands on pig producers.
While others have argued with passion about these intensive methods, animal scientists have been quietly asking pigs how they prefer to live.
The answers have suggested new designs for housing, which are coming on the market.
Mike Baxter, senior research scientist at the Centre for Rural Building, Aberdeen, was at the National Pig Fair in April to help launch the Freedom farrowing system, which he has spent eight years designing.
Funded partly by the RSPCA but not by pig producers, it is built around the idea of allowing a sow to do what comes naturally when she settles down to her accouchement .
He found that, left to herself, she takes up to 24 hours to prepare for farrowing.
First she finds a suitable nesting place.
Then she makes her nest, carrying mouthfuls of bedding to the chosen spot before rooting and pawing it into shape.
She will cover 30 kilometres in completing these preliminaries.
Added up for each of our 800,000 sows, this would take the British herd to the moon and back 30 times.
But pig farmers should not despair.
Baxter found that a sow would cover her 30 kilometres inside a pen five metres square, and that several sows would happily farrow down together within such a small space.
But all that toing-and-froing would endanger newborn piglets, and  Baxter knew no farmer would accept increased losses.
So the next question he asked was whether, to protect the young, sows would willingly accept controls as an alternative to being forcibly confined.
He put different shapes and sizes of enclosure inside the larger pen, and found the expected mothers readily went into an enclosed but generously bedded area, slightly larger than the space needed to stand up and lie down.
Some of them had to learn this.
In one group of eight, half chose to go in for their first farrowing; the second time they farrowed, all eight went in.
Once farrowed, sows stay with their litter for several days, then begin to leave the nest after about a week as the piglets grow larger and more troublesome.
Baxter had to find a way to stop the piglets getting out to bully their mother and steal milk from others with younger litters.
The final design, a roller step 400mm high, lets sows out of the nursery but kept all the piglets safely inside until they were around three weeks old.
Next he questioned the newborn piglets.
Soon after birth they start to nose and mouth at the back end of the sow, before gradually working their way round to the udder.
When they get there, their rather random search gives way to much more deliberate seeking for the nipple, and mouthing changes to active sucking.
What provokes the changed behaviour?
Udders are both softer and warmer than a sow's hindquarters.
Could either or both factors be the trigger?
He used water-filled rubber bags of varying warmth and softness, and found that the warmest and softest not only attracted the piglets but stimulated the change from nosing and mouthing to searching and sucking.
Litters today are so much bigger than they used to be that sows inevitably find it more difficult to avoid harming their offspring.
And the sows themselves are now a different shape.
They are larger, and longer in the body, so the way in which they lie down and get up has probably altered.
Together, these mean that piglets need protecting from their own mothers as well as from other sows.
It is just this protection that has been the justification for farrowing pens.
So Baxter has redesigned the creep — the protected area where piglets can both sleep and, as they get older, eat without challenge from the adults.
They are attracted to a warm, soft area of wall and floor large enough for them all to lie in, and they find it more quickly when it is brightly lit.
The Freedom farrowing system, designed to house six sows and their litters, is now available commercially.
Will farmers buy it?
Baxter is optimistic, for three reasons.
First, in his experimental work he has achieved performances that match existing systems.
This has yet to be proved in everyday commercial use but he believes it can be done.
Second, costs for the new system will generally be no higher than they are now, and in some circumstances will be lower.
Third, it has long been known that sows farrow best in conditions similar to those they are familiar with: if they have been unconfined previously, they should be unconfined at farrowing.
Since by the end of this decade the law will ban stalls and tethers, farmers will need to match the new houses for pregnant sows with new harrowing houses.
The pig industry, in turn, has three doubts about any new system.
First, what works well during research may not work in the rough-and-tumble commercial world.
Not long ago, electronic collars seemed an excellent replacement for those restrictive systems that Sir Richard Body wants banned.
These collars give pigs a computer key to let them in and out of stalls where they can feed unmolested.
But in practice, bullying takes place around the stalls; there are mor difficulties in handling animals for routine inspection; or the electronics break down and the key won't work.
The result may be as bad for welfare as what it replaced.
The second doubt is cost, about which the industry is sceptical.
Money must be found to build the new loose housing, which it says will then also cost more to run.
Small producers will find it tough raising the extra cash and are likely to pack it in — and poor meat-eaters may buy something else if pork costs 10p a pound more.
Indeed, recession has already eroded middle-class ethics so that less of the expensive real meat is being bought.
Third is competition.
It would be one thing if all pork went up in price, but if European producers still use old methods, they will undercut farmers here.
At the present pace of progress in Brussels, similar changes throughout the EC may not come in for a dozen years or more, and British farmers fear that they will lose business while waiting for European competitors to catch up.
Farmers want all three issues to be addressed before change becomes compulsory.
If pigs have occupied the House of Commons recently, chickens are likely to do so soon.
Battery cages, like sow stalls, came from economic pressures in the days when cheapness was all.
They put a stop to predators, parasites and cannibalism, simplified feeding and kept eggs clean — very significant for production when the law forbids farmers to wash eggs because of the risk of bacteria getting inside the shell.
But they denied hens much of their normal behaviour and in particular frustrated the urge to nest.
Ethologist Ian Duncan, formerly at the Edinburgh research station of the Agriculture and Food Research Council, has asked them how much they mind.
He found that when a hen has decided where to nest, she works her whole body about to mould a comfortable shape, then pecks up more loose stuff to tuck in around her.
Then he made this behaviour steadily more difficult for his birds by challenging them with blasts of air, or baths filled with water, or by making them push past weighted doors.
Faced by these discouragements, all worked hard to reach a nest box.
He also found that moulding the right shape was more important than pecking up loose stuff, and that they would mould in a bean bag as well as in straw.
They were even willing to occupy pre-moulded nests so long as they could carry out their normal movements before laying.
Research by other scientists showed that birds spent more time on the nest and laid more eggs when peckable objects were attached to the wall beside it.
Duncan and other scientists have suggested new designs with nest boxes and perches to give birds up to twice as much space as existing cages.
They have found that, given three nests for four birds, fewer than one egg in a hundred is laid elsewhere.
And they have worked out how to channel the eggs out of the nests so as to keep them clean.
According to John Webster, head of the department of animal husbandry at Bristol University, new cages of this sort would cost twice as much as existing ones, and would add one-third to the price of eggs at the farm gate.
Since costs of packing and transport would not change, consumers might pay an extra 1p–2p an egg.
But for the moment these designs remain just that: the experts are still trying to sort out the answers that chickens have given them and, until they do, cannot finalise a commercial prototype for improved cages.
In turn, this makes it more difficult for legislation about battery cages to be brought in.
Those who want to outlaw all cages won't be satisfied with these ideas.
But commercial free-range flocks are also a long way short of welfare heaven.
Hens can be both fearful and aggressive when meeting strange birds, and as a result some birds never leave the house while others become victims of cannibalism.
Hygiene and disease control are more difficult.
And the birds suffer in cold, wet weather, becoming chilled or, in the extreme conditions of last winter, even frostbitten.
Similar problems afflict outdoor pigs, so that for both species the problems of welfare are less straightforward than cage-haters will allow.
Indeed, the most naturally farmed animal in this country is the mountain ewe: at the end of a long hard winter and late cold spring her lamb will depressingly often be stillborn, and she herself moribund or even dead.
In the end, however attractive the idea of glasnost, it is only as good as the people who must make it work.
First-class stockmen are considerably more common in this country than capitalists in Russia but, even with their expert help, total freedom for commercial animals shares many problems with the unbridled competition of free trade in the market place.
At the least, it will take time to make the new laws work well.
In the course of his farming life, Quentin Seddon kept no more than a handful of pigs.
they constantly threatened to become more than a handful in every sense, so one sad Saturday he sold the sows with their litters at Taunton market — and since then has dealt with pigs only on paper.
He publishes Farm Brief, a trade newsletter.
The Freedom farrowing system is made by Aco Polymer Products 
To keep up to date on developments in farm animal welfare, join Compassion in World Farming 
Top The Freedom farrowing system 
Above The sow lies against the prop, while the piglet rests safely beneath.
SCENES from A PROVINCIAL LIFE
‘ROOTS ARE WHAT MATTER, AND COUNTRY ROOTS AT THAT.’
JAMES LEE-MILNE PONDERS THE VIRTUES OF STAYING AT HOME
I belong to Hugh Montgomery-Massingberd's ‘lesser stranded gentry’.
Whatever roots I may once have had were cut off years ago when as a young man or old boy I left my father's house to make my way in horrible competitive London.
Although born and bred in the country and reinstalled there for the past 30 years, I fear I am not a proper countryman; London has dished me.
I don't do country things like farming for a living, or swishing through drenched roots, gun in hand, after game birds for recreation.
I do not ride or chase anything.
I don't much like being out of door in the rain or the extreme cold or even the extreme heat — although when the weather is right I hugely enjoy walking aimlessly and observing all about me.
Proper country people don't do this.
I do love being in proper country.
And how lucky I am to be living in Badminton, a beautiful Cotswold village, on the edge of a park in the middle of a great landed estate, with all the amenities provided at my landlord's expense and responsibility.
And yet, am I entirely satisfied with my lot?
No, for I am an alien.
When I moved to Gloucestershire in 1961 I was told by a neighbour to lie low and remember that, although the progeny of an adjacent county (Worcestershire), I would be held a foreigner by Gloucestershire folk for at least 25 years.
By the end of that apprenticeship…well, a tacit acceptance would depend on how I had conducted myself in the meantime.
Although I have passed the allotted span I am, in my own opinion, still that same foreigner.
And I regret it.
That I still feel myself a foreigner is by no means the fault of the neighbours, the true natives.
They are one and all friendly, kind and tolerant — largely I surmise by virtue of my wife and her approachability.
The cause of my foreignness is circumstantial.
I lead a life unassociated with the physical labours that are the proper countryman's contribution to his surroundings and which integrate him with his own creations.
Hence my slight feeling of guilt and definite sense of inferiority.
And yet with each succeeding year both my guilt and inferiority somehow diminish as I witness the old country ways vanish.
The farmers and farm labourers grow fewer in number.
The efforts of the survivors, though prodigious enough, derive less from the sweat of the brow than from the exertions of the machines they direct from on high.
With the present pace of things these survivors may in a generation's time become a picturesque memory like the yeoman's smock.
Instead, unseen operatives may soon be directing sophisticated agricultural implements by  remote control from their firesides.
Already fewer country people seem to be doing fewer country things.
There are longer any hedgers and ditchers.
The erstwhile ubiquitous road men, always in couples, bent double when you were not looking and sucking pipes and leaning on long-handled spades when you passed, were locals you knew and waved to.
In their place a gang of county council officials in yellow plastic jackets comes once a year to do God knows what, a little genteel scraping, and disappears off the face of the highway for another twelvemonth at least.
What hedges still remain are no longer laid but occasionally slashed by a mobile mechanical flail.
Grass road verges have almost vanished, whittled away by the volume of traffic and the inexorable weight of tractor wheels.
I, the armchair observer, lament the cessation of the old skills and crafts just as I deplore the desecration of the open fields by more and more bypasses, pylons, wires, bungalows, concrete, traffic and litter.
If I live to be 110, I shall doubtless feel no more alien than anybody else in the prevailing subtopia because nobody will be working out-of-doors.
Meanwhile I rejoice in the survival of those large, landed properties where life goes on more or less as before.
Comfortable within my landlord's neat demesne, I am cushioned against the uglification of the landscape which offends and distresses me the moment I cross the boundaries.
Would I or would I not have liked to inherit an estate, even one of modest dimensions?
Although there was not much probability in my case, the answer is that I wish I had.
In my old age the very idea of coping with agents, tenants, taxes, VAT, the Ministry of Agriculture, local authorities and demands all along the line, appals.
Nevertheless, in spite of incessant worries (since today's landowner is everybody's aunt Sally), it is a task well worthy of the conscientious squire.
At least he is able, so long as the money holds out, to preserve his own patch of England against the depredations of progress.
The long and the short of my experience is that roots are what matter, and country roots at that.
I doubt whether you can have deep London roots, or Birmingham, or even Stoke-on-Trent roots.
Bath, my nearest large town, has never provided roots.
To me it has always been a city of landladies and lodgers.
Roots may just be retained in small market towns like Grantham, Selby and Chipping Norton, in spite of the tourists.
But if you have the luck to come of country stock then you should never sever your roots, no matter how great the temptation to ‘improve’ yourself, or to inhabit more glorious scenery, or to be nearer a railway station.
By all means go round the world once, work for a year in Sydney and sink a goldmine in Oklahoma, but come home to that beloved castle or cabin at Little Puddington you must.
Better still, never leave Little Puddington at all if you wish to be a wholly fulfilled and creative person.
For let's face it: the best artists and craftsmen in history have been stay-at-homes, and the greatest happiness has often been found in industrious obscurity.
James Lees-Milne's The Bachelor Duke, a biography of the 6th Duke of Devonshire, is published by John Murray at £19.95.
ILLUMINATED PAGES
A TERRACED HOUSE IN TUNBRIDGE WELLS IS FILLED WITH FRUITWOOD FURNITURE AND FOLK ART, THE COLLECTED WORKS OF BILL AND ANGELA PAGE.
BY TEPH WILLIS AND SARAH GRAHAM
Five years ago Bill and Angela Page were faced with a hard but inescapable mathematical fact: 23 rooms into nine won't go.
During the 18 years they had lived in Sion House in Tunbridge Wells they had grown accustomed to its neo-classical spaciousness, but since two of their four children had married and left home it made sense to move to somewhere smaller.
Luckily, they didn't have to search long or far.
Just around the corner from Sion House they found a narrow five-story terraced house  built in the 1840s but impeccably Georgian in every other respect.
Inevitably, though, with 14 fewer rooms to spread out in, the Pages had to part with several cherished possessions.
It was a painful process, but Angela's experience as an antique dealer specialising in country furniture and folk art helped her to accept it philosophically.
‘You feel terribly upset,’ she reflects, ‘but you get used to parting with things.’
She feels that we merely hold antiques in trust.
‘You own things only while you're alive: someone else had them before you and they will pass to somebody else afterwards.’
Angela has been fascinated by antiques for as long as she can remember.
When she was 18 she went to study at the Royal School of Needlework, where she not only learnt how to identify and date historical embroidery, but also became a prize-winning practitioner.
Bill recalls that ‘even on our honeymoon in Norfolk she was busy buying pieces of furniture’.
While their four children were growing up, she put off fulfilling her ambition to run an antique shop of her own.
But once the children reached school age and the family moved to a farmhouse with lots of storage space, Angela began to build up a small trade, learning as she went and advertising in a local newspaper.
She started taking stands at antique fairs in Kent, and at weekends or during school holidays the whole family plus dogs would go on expeditions to Wales, the West Country and East Anglia.
Their quarry was the folk art and country furniture of the 17th, 18th and early 19th centuries.
Angela had always preferred old oak and mellow English fruitwoods to mahogany, and was attracted to country furniture because it was the sort of simple, practical furniture that ordinary people would have had in their farmhouses or cottages.
Wales proved a fruitful hunting ground, for in the late 1960s and 1970s many Welsh farmers were throwing out their old dressers and milking stools, little guessing hoe soughtafter these would become.
In June 1978 Angela took her first stand at the prestigious Arts and Antiques Fair at Olympia in London.
It was such a success that  she decided to concentrate on fairs rather than open a shop.
Bill gave up his job of 20 years as a tea taster and blender, exchanging the daily ‘trundling up to London in a bowler hat for driving about 1,000 miles each week looking for antiques with Angela’.
They buy always from fellow dealers, never at auction, and now exhibit at a dozen major fairs each year.
Angela is on the furniture-vetting committee of almost every fair they take part in, and has also won awards for the Best Dressed Stand at both the June and October Olympia fairs.
Step inside the Pages' home and you soon understand why judges have been impressed.
Their house is a repository rich with the things they haven't been able to bring themselves to sell.
Over the kitchen sink, for instance, hangs an 18th-century näive painting of a farmyard which Angela bought in the West Country 15 years ago.
Folk art wasn't popular then, so Angela couldn't sell it.
‘People want to buy it now, but I can't part with it because I'm too fond of it.’
Pinned to the wall below the painting is her collection of turn-of-the-century kettle holders, embroidered with timely messages like ‘Mind It Boils’ and ‘Forget Me Not’.
The kitchen doubles as a dining room, and the family gathers for meals around a 17th century oak tavern table scored with the marks of games of shove-halfpenny.
A deep larder provides valuable storage space for sacks of dog food to sustain Cormack, the Irish wolfhound.
Named after one of the early kings of Ireland, he is a half-brother of the Irish Guards' mascot.
The much-loved dresser was the inspiration  for the colour scheme that links all five storeys.
Layers of paint accumulated over centuries were carefully dry-scraped away to reveal the original colour, a greeny-grey blue.
Angela reproduced it using John Oliver paints, then spread it throughout the house on doors, banisters, fireplace surrounds — sometimes even ceilings.
The walls are all a warm, pale terracotta.
The previous owner was an actor, but his artistic taste didn't quite accord with Angela's: ‘it was orange and green and tatty and horrible.
So we had to redecorate the house very quickly because I couldn't bear it.’
In the first-floor sitting room the log fire throws a soft light over burnished wood, an 18th-century red-brick doll's house and an antique Persian rug.
The Welsh shepherd's chair on one side of the fireplace has a drawer underneath where the shepherd would keep his pipes; the 17th-century Carmarthen chair on the other side is a particular favourite of Bill's.
High bay windows give a leafy view over the terraced front garden and a sycamore-lined walk where Queen Anne liked to  promenade on her visits to Tunbridge Wells.
Queen Anne figures again in the bedroom one floor up: the massive 17th-century four-poster bed is hung with Queen Anne crewel work, with its distinctive pattern of intertwining leaves and flowers on a cream background.
An old rocking horse beside the window has given countless rides to the Pages' children and five grandchildren.
Angela bought it for £6 about 20 years ago and restored it herself.
Another, smaller, rocking horse is stabled in the bathroom next door.
The Victorian bath was painted Angela's beloved blue and fitted with antique taps found in the Old Kent Road.
On the walls are pictures painted in the 1920s by Angela's uncle, the artist Hugh Browning, together with framed letters from Churchill.
(Angela's father was his bank manager.)
The room at the top stretches from the front to the back of the house and is the domain of the Pages' younger son, Nicholas.
Having read history at Cambridge he is researching the history of The Pantiles and the development of Tunbridge Wells into a spa in the early 18th  century.
His parents' enthusiasm for antiques and the past ‘was bound to have rubbed off’, he feels.
‘I've always had antiques around me.’
Had the Pages' passion been for Lalique glass, the family might have felt constrained to creep about gingerly on tiptoe.
But the country furniture they love was built to last and to withstand the occasional knock.
‘Our home isn't a museum,’ Angela stresses.
‘All our things are country things that have been well used over the years, and we use them all the time, and live with them, and enjoy them.’
And as if to demonstrate this, a band of children and grandchildren suddenly troops in, receiving from Cormack the sort of effusive welcome only a 13-stone Irish wolfhound can give.
Angela Page will be exhibiting at the 1991 Fine Art and Antiques Fair at Olympia from 6–16 June.
(See page 158 for details of our readers' event on 12 June.)
She accepts commissions for decorating houses with country furniture and unusual wall treatments, including painted crewel-work panels.
Above left Angela's favourite farmyard painting, embroidered kettle holders and children's drawings stud the wall above the kitchen sink.
The Prussian blue rectangular tiles came from Rye Pottery: ‘they're all in irregular shapes because they were a discontinued line being sold off cheaply.’
Above 18th-century comb-back chairs of elm and ash are drawn up around the 17thcentury tavern table, which boasts a collection of antique wooden rushlight holders
Left The pivotal dresser, restored to its original colour and bedecked with potatoprinted spongeware from Wales, Scotland and Ireland
Above left The wallpaper frieze in the sitting room came from America and was fearfully expensive, but Angela couldn't resist it because it reminded her of two pictures in her bedroom, of fruit and flowers painted on black velvet.
On the mantelpiece a Victorian whirligig soldier stands to attention — originally he would have been used to scare away birds in the garden.
Above Angela found the 17th-century four-poster bed while on a foray in the Welsh borders 18 years ago, and came upon the crewel-work hangings only a few weeks later in Hastings.
Left The much-loved, much-ridden rocking horse
Above left In a corner of the first-floor hall is an intriguing 18th-century Norwegian wall cupboard.
Its carved edges resemble horse harnesses, while two snakes coil around the top.
It may have been a traditional marriage, gift, given to couples to bring them good luck.
Above In prime viewing position in the bathroom hangs the picture of flowers that Hugh Browning painted as a wedding present for Bill and Angela
Above left The terraced front garden, lush with hostas, roses, geraniums and box.
Above Rear window: Angela decorated the straw heart on the back door with silverpainted canes for Christmas three years ago.
Come Epiphany, she had grown too fond of them to take them down.
Left Angela and Bill Page.
A topiary squirrel keeps a way eye on Cormack.
of PEACOCKS and PURPLE HAIRSTREAKS
BEWITCHED BY BUTTERFLIES: EDWIN MULLINS EXTOLS THEIR BEAUTY, JAMES DRIVER EXPLAINS HOW TO ENGINEER THEIR MAGICAL METAMORPHOSIS
A LEPIDOPTERIST'S LOVE AFFAIR
As a child in wartime London I must have unconsciously sought a hobby that had nothing of death in it — something that was all beauty.
So I bred butterflies.
Butterflies for the daytime, and moths for the night.
I built muslin cages for them, filled rooms with them, drove my family berserk with them.
Once I went to school with hawk-moths asleep on my tie, and was aggrieved to be sent home with ‘those damned bugs’.
It was a magic time, and the magic of butterflies has remained with me.
I would feel deprived to lie somewhere that had none.
The first brimstone of the year is a messenger of spring, and from then onwards I am on the look-out until the very last peacock in October.
Far more than cold and darkness it is the lack of butterflies that makes winter dreary and interminable.
Partly, of course, butterflies' appeal lies in their perfect beauty.
Nothing in this world is so flawlessly lovely as a butterfly's wing: nowhere else is there such perfection of pattern and colour.
Their very names — Apollo, Adonis, Cleopatra — are tributes to that beauty.
True, meadow brown and gatekeeper carry no such echoes.
Or cabbage white.
Yet one of the sights I treasure most in my memory is of a French river in the Cévennes where black-veined whites in their hundreds were floating among falling poplar down in the dappled sunlight.
On the same holiday I came across a sandy bank in a patch of sun — except that the patch was a dazzling blue.
For several square yards the sand was quite invisible for blue butterflies, opening and closing their wings as they drew moisture from a small spring dampening the sand.
I've come to suspect that the spring may have been sewage, having noticed that butterflies, however, beautiful, possess unsavoury habits.
One butterfly I had longed to find since childhood was the purple emperor — very scarce and frequenting the highest branches of oak trees.
Having craned my neck in likely locations for a good many years, I finally discovered it displaying its gorgeous wings over an oil-stain beside my car.
Car oil, so I've been told, is their tipple.
With other butterflies it seems to be wine, often my wine.
When I lived in southern France I used to sit out on the porch and watch the sun go down across the valley.
My children would fill up my glass with indecent haste so that they could watch a white admiral butterfly settle on the rim, which it always did.
So absorbed, or intoxicated, was it that I used to photograph it with the other hand.
Butterflies possess idiosyncrasies that I find curious in creatures with the minimum of brain-cells.
In our garden is a wooden seat that serves the same function as my former porch in France: it catches the last sunlight.
Every summer a butterfly settles there precisely where I want to sit, always in the same place.
Now, butterflies live only a matter of weeks, and yet this has been going on for years.
So how do they know?
Do they pass on some genetic message to their offspring?
On the other hand, butterflies can be intriguingly unpredictable.
On my local common I know which summer birds will arrive, where, and when.
They rarely change.
Three pairs of willow warblers, two whitethroats, two chiffchaffs, one blackcap.
The great spotted woodpecker will nest in this tree, or that, never more than 20 yards apart.
The green woodpecker will peck at the same ant-hills.
The swifts will depart in the first week of August.
But butterflies are never, never the same.
Last summer the common fluttered with holly blues, which I had not seen before.
The previous year it was small coppers; in other summers large skippers and small heaths.
This year brought a further surprise.
One early morning in July the undergrowth beneath the oak-trees sparkled with silver-grey objects.
As I looked closer they began to open their wings, and suddenly it was a though purple brooches had been pinned about the bracken to catch the sunlight.
They were purple hairstreaks.
I understand why people love butterflies.
How could one not?
Their beauty and unpredictability make an irresistible combination.
But I can also understand why people give up trying to identify them.
It's not so much their habit of closing their wings just as you draw close enough to see; it's more their unwillingness to be in any way uniform.
Birds are not like this: blackbirds or goldfinches vary reassuringly little wherever you go.
Not so butterflies.
There are, for example, 46 species of ringlet in Europe.
All much the same to the untutored eye, they bear the names of excited lepidopterists who identified them: Rätzer's ringlet, de Prunner's ringlet, Lorkovic's brassy ringlet — and, in case we grow over confident, false dewy ringlet.
I forgive lepidopterists their sharp-eyed zeal.
I am simply glad that in the modest glades of Barnes Common I can enjoy my peacocks, purple hairstreaks and red admirals, and never have to worry about whether or not I have set eyes on a yellow-legged tortoiseshell or a Higgins's anomalous blue.
Edwin Mullins
FIRST CATCH YOUR CATERPILLAR: A GUIDE TO GOOD BUTTERFLY BREEDING
Though conservation of our most endangered species of butterflies (such as large blue, heath fritillary and swallowtail) is largely in the hands of experts, keen amateurs can still make a valuable contribution to conserving commoner species.
By following a few simple guidelines it is possible to establish a very productive breeding programme.
Fortunately, the easiest species to start with are also among the most beautiful.
With a minimum of equipment the beginner can soon produce clouds of two of the aptly named Aristocrats class of butterflies: the small tortoiseshell and the peacock.
Like most butterflies they share the same basic life cycle.
A fertilised adult female lays her eggs on the right food plant.
(It is important when dealing with caterpillars to realise that many species rely for their survival entirely on one plant growing in the right place at exactly the right time.)
After about a fortnight in the egg the tiny caterpillars hatch out.
They eat almost continuously for a month, pausing only to shed their skins several times to accommodate their ever-increasing bodies.
When the caterpillar is fully grown it usually hangs upside down from a leaf or plant stem, and begins to pupate.
This is the last, and the most dramatic, skin change it makes.
It forms a hard case called a chrysalis around its body, and inside this it is rearranged in a miraculous metamorphosis until, after two or three weeks, it emerges as an adult butterfly.
The best point at which to become involved in the butterfly life cycle is after the eggs have hatched out.
The food plant for both the small tortoiseshell and the peacock is the stinging nettle, so to stand the best chance of finding their caterpillars, start inspecting large clumps of nettles about the middle of May.
At this early stage the caterpillars are fairly easy to find because while still quite small they live inside a silk canopy, which they spin around themselves when feeding on the nettle tops.
It is easy to spot from a few feet away.
The two species are quite similar.
Both have black, hairy spikes sticking up from their bodies, but the small tortoiseshell caterpillars are black and yellow, while the peacocks appear at first to be completely black all over.
Later their feet turn orange.
No one would consider taking caterpillars from designated nature reserves, National Trust property, or Sites of Special Scenic Interest.
You will, however, be doing them a service if you collect your specimens from a field about to be cut for hay, from a hedgerow bordering a field about to be sprayed or a site being cleared for building work.
A good home for the caterpillars is a fish tank.
A glass or plastic one measuring about 18″ × 10″ × 10″ will hold 50 or so full-grown ones: often a single nettle head collected when the caterpillars are only a few days old will contain at least that many.
It is a mistake to be too ambitious to begin with, for when 50 or so near maturity they will require lots of food and it may take some gathering.
The container's transparent sides will give you a fascinating view, but they can also let in the sun and as overheating will kill caterpillars very quickly it is important to keep the tank in a shady spot.
Caterpillars have limited eyesight — they can really only distinguish light and dark.
And as light comes from above (in other words, from outside the tank), some sort of lid is needed to keep the caterpillars from wandering off.
This lid has to fulfil several other functions.
It must allow plenty of ventilation or the condensation that will form inside the tank could not only encourage the spread of disease but also, in extreme cases, drown the caterpillars.
It must be tight-fitting but at the same time easy to remove, for as the caterpillars grow they will consume enormous amounts of nettles.
You will have to put in fresh leafy stalks every day, take out the old stripped stems, and clear out the prodigious amounts of droppings the caterpillars produce.
The last consideration that decides the form the lid should take is the needs of the caterpillars when they pupate.
In the wild they attach their canopies by a little silk pad to the plant's stem, or a leaf: the lid is the obvious substitute for this.
If it is made of a slightly rough material it gives the caterpillar something to get a purchase on.
Incidentally, as pupating involves yet another skin change, when the caterpillars are retreating into their chrysalises, the tank is littered with the bizarre sight of what can best be described as ‘empty caterpillars’.
To meet all these requirements, it is best to make the lid out of the sort of perforated metal used in meat safes.
Muslin is another good choice, but it will have to be fixed to a well-made frame that fits the tank exactly.
The early stage of pupation is the most difficult to manage.
It may take as long as a week for all the caterpillars to make their chrysalises.
If they do take the hint and hang off the lid, take care that they are not knocked off when the nettles are being replenished for caterpillars that are still feeding.
When the majority have formed their beautiful chrysalises, which can vary in colour from bright green to spangled gold, it is a good idea to collect those caterpillars that are still eating and release them into a large clump of nettles so you can concentrate on hatching the rest.
All they need now is to be left alone.
At about the seventeenth day the first butterflies will probably start to emerge.
The splitting of the chrysalis and the slow unhurried unfolding of the brilliantly coloured wings is not to be missed.
At first they seem too creased to give the butterfly any chance of survival.
But left to itself the butterfly slowly adapts to its new shape.
It pumps blood into its wings.
They straighten, then open.
The brilliant colours make even the glossiest illustration seem dull by comparison.
It is the moment when all the routine of the last six weeks, the nettle collecting, the tank cleaning, become worthwhile.
After a few hours the butterflies can be released.
They will usually be happy to climb aboard your finger for the short trip outside and will walk on to whatever leaf, stem or flower you want to transfer them to.
It is important to remember that they were intended to hatch where you collected them as caterpillars.
If it is impossible for you to release them there make sure they are given their freedom in an area with abundant supplies of nectar.
Before trying to hatch other butterflies, or moths, it is essential to read upon on the life cycles of individual species.
Caterpillars of the garden tiger moth, for example, will only make their cocoons inside a heap of dead leaves or garden rubbish.
In some cases the natural conditions are almost impossible to recreate.
There are many species, though, which with a little initial research can be easily reared by conscientious amateurs.
To do so is a service to everyone.
James Driver
Richard Lewington's illustrations are taken from an invaluable reference book, The Butterflies of Britain & Ireland, published by Dorling Kindersley in association with The National Trust at £16.99.
A catalogue containing useful equipment for breeding butterflies is available from Worldwide Butterflies .
The British Butterfly Conservation Society is at Tudor House, Quorn .
Adult female holly blue (second brood) and caterpillar
Adult male purple emperor feeding
Adult female small copper and chrysalis
Adult male purple hairstreak and chrysalis
Adult male small tortoiseshell and caterpillar
Adult male small heath and caterpillar
Adult male gatekeeper (side view) and caterpillar
Adult make gatekeeper basking on a bindweed
Adult male red admiral (underside) and black form caterpillar
Adult white admiral resting on honeysuckle (sexes share similar underside patterning)
Adult male black-veined white (upperside) and caterpillar
Adult male adonis blue feeding on horseshoe vetch
Adult large tortoiseshell basking on a tree trunk (both sexes have identical markings)
Mature white admiral caterpillar and chrysalis
Adult male peacock feeding on buddleia
Adult hutchinsoni comma feeding on bramble
The adult female lays large clusters of eggs…(shown here magnified 15 times)…sometimes wrapping them in bands around twigs.
…Caterpillars gorge for about a month…then undergo a metamorphosis inside the chrysalis…to emerge, with unfurled wings, as butterflies
PUT OUT MORE FLAGS
IRISES PROLIFERATE IN KATE CAMPBELL'S PURPLE PATCH.
BY MIRANDA INNES
Some gardens begin with a dimly remembered phrase from Andrew Marvell, some with the chance discovery of a geriatric ‘Albertine’ clinging to a crumbling wall.
Kate Campbell's began with a raffle.
True, her father and nine uncles and aunts (Irish, all doctors) were serious gardeners, and she had grown marigolds and radishes as a small girl.
So she was predisposed to take an interest in and visit Sir Cedric Morris's open garden day in the first place.
There she found (as Beth Chatto had, too) a garden overflowing with good ideas and benign horticultural plunder from the Mediterranean.
And there she won the Red Cross raffle prize of a collection of Sir Cedric's irises, in all their subtle veined and spotted browns and golds.
now she has an iris mountain, with Sir Cedric's and the many more she grew from seed brought back from America, fenced off from the main garden in her ‘Stalag 13 look’.
But the situation at the beginning was not a simple one: for a start, the interesting and convoluted Grade II listed building in Eye, Suffolk, that Kate and her husband Peter had acquired was distinctly derelict.
(In fact it is Grade II starred because it has been inhabited for more than 1,000 years.)
Its 2½ acres of garden supported a fine crop of nettles (not to mention a voracious population of rabbits).,
growing everywhere except on the large tracts of virgin concrete.
The first job was to scythe paths through the nettles so the children could play without being stung.
Kate's gardening companions consisted of five Afghan hounds and a lurcher.
So Cedric's precious irises had to be confined to a corral for safety, and a great deal of thought had to go into making the grounds of the priory into the fine and eccentric garden it is today.
When Kate and Peter moved there more than 20 years ago, there was a patch of grass in front of the house in which languished an etiolated hybrid tea rose or two.
There were some strange outcrops of rock, a huddle of barns and outbuildings, a line of Irish and English yews, and an 18th-century crinkle-crankle wall.
Peter, who died tragically early two years ago, worked in advertising before being engulfed by his artistic passions: he was a painter and enameller, calligrapher and visionary, all attributes that enrich the spiritual life but require someone else to pay the mortgage.
So Kate nursed and washed up and ran The Stockpot in Notting Hill Gate.
Among their many friends was one Walter Lassally, a young film cameraman they had met in Greece shortly after their marriage, when he was filming The Girl in Black .
When Tony Richardson asked him to film A Taste of Honey , Kate said firmly that he had to get an agent.
Walter replied that he had.
Kate was relieved and asked who.
‘You,’ he answered, ‘because you're always telling me what to do.’
Thus began a lasting, affectionate and occasionally remunerative ménage à trois, as well as Kate's career as cinematographic mother superior.
She marched straight into Tony Richardson's office in her summer dress and sandals, sorted out Walter's money to her satisfaction, and continued to do so for The Loneliness of the Long Distance Runner and Tom Jones , nine Merchant-Ivory films and more recently Ballad of the Sad Café , from Carson McCullers's poignant novel.
The race-track scenes for Steve McQueen's Le Mans were shot near the little French town of Bernay, which Kate had driven through several times.
At that time she hadn't moved to Suffolk; the acquisition of the priory followed later.
Kate bought it thinking it was a piece of straightforward domestic Queen Anne but discovered that, by a bizarre coincidence, it was the mirror-image of the abbey at Bernay — and consequently much older than she thought.
(In fact, part of it is the remains of an 11th-century Benedictine monastery.)
It was only when she moved in that she discovered the coincidence, and did some  research with the British Museum.
In a dig in 1927 the remains of three 17th-century monks, slain by Cromwell, had been found on the site of the high altar; and one of them had the pewter chalice crushed against his heart.
Since Kate, Peter and Walter moved into the house, which incorporates the 12th-century priory walls, a ghostly but very palpable waft of snuffed candles and burning incense has thrice been known to signify benediction on St Peter's day.
At least, this is how Canon Stringer, Kate's other garden mentor, interpreted it: ‘After all, you are St Peter's Priory.
I should think it was a welcoming sign, wouldn't you?’
A small, dapper, decisive man who wore a trilby and glasses, the canon lived in the next village and had a passion for small neat things like himself.
One of them was miniature geraniums, and he bred all those that still win prizes long after his death.
He was ruthless about chucking out weaklings, and Kate now houses his brilliant and vigorous collection in her greenhouse, on behalf of his widow.
It was also Canon Stringer who started Kate off in the direction of old-fashioned double primroses and auriculas.
‘He came across this seed in Cumbria and said: ‘I wonder if we ought to invest in a bit?’.
We bought £25 worth.
I nearly fainted; it was like dust.
I put it in the barn in a seed tray with a piece of glass on top over the winter and the whole lot came up.
I had 6,000 plants!
That's when I thought you could make money out of gardening.
But I'm a natural amateur: I don't want to do a Beth Chatto.’
And, of course, she is a director of Walter Lassally Productions and has to disappear to exotic places occasionally.
She stays on location for a while, to ensure everything is running smoothly.
‘I was in Texas for three weeks out of eight on Ballad of the Sad Café .
I think Carson McCullers, the author, is wonderful.
It was Simon Callow's first film as director.
And Rod Steiger and Vanessa Redgrave are old friends.
But basically my job is Walter.’
Her life is very busy, full of incident and visitors.
Yet she still has time to nurture seedlings, shift earth, make new courtyards, make a rose tunnel along the old aisle and an arbour on the site of the high altar, and create more flowerbeds.
In fact, as is so often the case, she does all these things because her life is so full: ‘Gardening is therapy from the pressures of life.
Generally, when things fall apart and get desperate I just go out into the garden, anchor myself to the earth.
Gardening is how I let things wash over me.’
She plants tightly, which discourages weeds.
The garden is on sandy soil (those monks did not like damp chasubles), and in the accumulated rocks and rubble of the old buildings water simply disappears.
Kate is generous with mulch and compost, which is why everything burgeons so.
Most of the flowerbeds that look as if they've been there forever were in fact made after Peter's death.
Kate dug them in the meadow grass around the trees in the orchard (which has only one fruiting tree), accompanied now by just two huge sentimental wolfhounds, Petra and Titan, which ‘trundle about’ following wherever she goes.
She grows new plants from seed, training things like osteospermum to tumble over the edges of the huge brick tubs built by Peter.
‘They were originally wood, built because the courtyard is concrete.
They kept disintegrating and being fixed.
There were these huge plants in disintegrating tubs, so I said: ‘We must get concrete blocks and put them round the tubs, so they can just fall apart inside’.’
Peter faced them with flint, and now they make a splendid feature, with lots of interesting things at eye level.
Appreciated perhaps by the tonsured, or trilbied, shades of the past.
Left Canon Stringer's miniature geraniums in serried ranks of vigorous clashing brilliance
Above ‘Stalag 13’ protects the irises against marauding dogs and rabbits
Main picture A strange and subtle marriage between euphorbia and one of Sir Cedric Morris's irises
Far right Exotic perfection — a rich and velvety iris that Kate ascribes to her seeds from America
REFORMING THE UPPER HOUSE
PATIENTLY, SLOWLY AND CAREFULLY, JOHN AND ANNIE NETHERCOTT ARE BRINGING A TUDOR HOUSE OUT OF ITS CONCRETE SHELL.
SAM LLEWELLYN SAW THE RESULTS OF FIVE YEARS' WORK
The valley of the upper Lugg is a tree-clad grove in the rounded mountains of that part of Wales still known to its inhabitants as Radnorshire.
In the 16th century, the Great Road from London to the Welsh coast ran along the river's banks, and the sheep of the mountain pastures fed the wool boom of the late Middle Ages.
Nowadays the road is a lane, and the valley is green and quiet.
What still makes it remarkable is the string of timber-framed farmhouses along its banks.
They are closestudded, built before builders started to economise by using square frames and large areas of wattle-and-daub infill.
Their oak skeletons are carved and moulded to express the pride of the 16th-century wool barons in themselves and the rich green lands by the winding river.
Five years ago, the cabinetmaker John Nethercott and his wife Annie stood in the drizzle and gazed at the leprous grey hulk of Upper House, Discoed.
They were looking for ‘a large barn with a house’.
The barn was to be their cabinet-making workshop; their business — making fine furniture to order and restoring early furniture — had outgrown their current quarters.
Upper House stands at the southern end of a deep yard, flanked to the east by the barn and to the north by a Norman church.
The house itself was originally a 16th-century hallhouse with a storied cross-wing.
In the 18th century a further wing was added.
The barn was derelict and the house looked like a lump of mouldy concrete.
But the concrete turned out to be a coat of pebble-dash, and underneath the pebble-dash was a significant-looking series of bulges and overhangs.
John works with English hardwoods so he knew what those bulges might mean.
He started to get excited.
‘The farmer and his wife who were selling it stood in front of this doorway upstairs, sort of half in the way, because it wasn't too tidy.
I looked in round them, and went, ‘tch, tch, what a mess’.
Inside was all this close-studded stuff, and I knew it was a good one.’
The pebble-dash came off.
Underneath was a moulded jetty, close-studding with a herringbone gable, carved flaming torches supporting an oriel window.
It was in terrible condition.
Most people would have run for their lives.
John's excitement increased.
When the Nethercotts shifted their furniture into  the wreckage, they were surprised to discover that the house was considerably bigger outside than in.
Then a chance hole in an upstairs wall revealed an entire late-medieval solar, ‘lined with tin, sealed off from the rest of the house.
There were dead rats, puppies, the lot.’
For five years, the Nethercotts have proceeded with a cabinetmaker's meticulousness.
The roof went on first.
‘It was a magpie collection of asbestos slates and Welsh slates and stone tiles.
We're putting all the stone tiles back on.’
They turn up in dribs and drabs from nearby farmers, £50 worth here, £50 there.
Upper House came out of its concrete grudgingly, like an opal from the matrix.
Behind the Victorian front door frame was an earlier one, with mouldings and sockets for a carved headpiece.
The headpiece was gone and the bottom of the doorposts had rotted away.
John spliced on new sections and carved a new headpiece to fit the sockets.
Then he built a double-skinned oak door and studded it with fat-headed iron nails from the nearby, long defunct Presteigne nail-making machine.
As everywhere in the house, it is hard to tell where the old leaves off and the new begins.
The hall, the earliest part of the house, had the usual 1930s tiled fireplace.
Three grates and half a ton of jackdaw muck later, they were back to the colossal 17th-century hearth.
The floor, square Shropshire flagstones laid on the diagonal, was covered with a typical Welsh sandwich of fertiliser bags and fitted carpet.
The flags are now to be numbered and lifted, and will then be relaid on a waterproof membrane.
The Edwardian stairs were next to land on the bonfire.
The Nethercott workshop built a fine specimen of an oak dogleg chimney staircase, with hanging finials and pierced cutout balusters copied from the one baluster of the 17th-century staircase that remained.
The windows have heavy moulded oak mullions mortised into massive oak sills and lintels, a reminder that in the heyday of the Lugg valley, medieval stone mullions had only recently gone out of fashion.
One of the main problems of timber-framed is the tendency of oak posts to rot at the bottom.
This has given the floors of Upper House an almost alpine tilt.
In the Pink Bedroom the floor slopes 14 inches from east to west.
John sees this as a bonus, for if you drop your pencil while drawing in bed, you know exactly where it has gone.
Downstairs, the comforts are limited to the Rayburn and the hall fire.
Upstairs, life is less spartan.
There is a cherry-wood bathroom, the splendid Pink Bedroom, and the rooms where the Nethercotts' three sons sleep and play — one of which sports the only Velux in the house.
‘It seemed unfair  to make them play in the dark,’ John says.
‘Besides, you can't see it from outside.’
Walls are painted with ‘distemper, with a bit of ochre chucked in’.
This produces early colours that go well with the wax-polished timbers, and accumulates to give the finish a smoothness and richness of texture impossible with more modern paints.
The peeling away of Upper House's grubby skin has exposed dozens of small but fine details which have formed the basis for the workshop's designs.
Under layers of emulsion paint were splendid oak doors, one of which John has copied three times for customers.
‘I reckon it'll take maybe five more years,’ he says.
There is something in his voice that sounds like regret; he likes to be inside the minds of craftsmen of 400 years ago, making the furniture, building the house.
When it is finished, people will stop their cars to gawp.
But you suspect that for the Nethercotts the most exciting part will be over.
Right a friend, Nell Cutler, painted Upper House at various stages in its restoration.
Here, the house as it was when it was bought and, below, the same view three years ago
Main picture The view through the medieval solar as it is at present: ‘It's pretty primitive’
Above John and Annie Nethercott and their three children in front of the 17thcentury fireplace
Below Carved oak buffet in a 17th-century design from the Nethercott workshop
Right A new staircase to an old design Below right Polishing a copy of a walnut veneer chest on a stand.
The original, in the V&A, had ivory toenails on its claw feet; John uses holly instead Bottom The porch is a recent addition, made by John and Barry (from the workshop) in spare moments on Saturdays
Main picture Everything is home-made, from the yew chair and oak chest to the painted wood bird, a copy of a Limoges enamel piece.
Below The workshop in the barn provides ample space for John and his five fellow workers
full COLOUR
A HOUSE BY THE SEA IS A RESTING PLACE FOR WEARY NEW YORKERS AND THEIR TRAVELLER'S TROPHIES.
HESTER PAGE BASKS IN ITS SUMMERTIME HUES
Summer weekends are a colourful occasion for four friends who have pooled their resources to make a comfortable retreat from life in the city.
In their 1890s farmhouse near the sea in Southampton, New York, ‘the beach is the inspiration for everything — the relaxed atmosphere, the decoration, even what we eat,’ according to David Salomon, the guiding force behind what the farmhouse has now become.
Though he does not wear white overalls and wander about with a paint brush in his hand, he insists on calling himself a decorator (Manhattan-English for interior designer).
David designs for the rich and famous; his companions work in the art world.
All avid travellers, they return from their journeys with yet more to add to their exotic collection of objects and furniture.
Markets in Mexico, North Africa, south America and Indonesia have all contributed to a colourful jumble; the tall red whirlygig in the sitting room, for example, comes from Brazil.
They wanted the house to be an informal place, somewhere to relax after a day on the beach.
Somewhere to loll and lounge and enjoy long suppers around the farmhouse table by the light of a paraffin lamp on late summer evenings.
Southampton is a major seaside resort with grand houses along the sea front, but it has retained its old community, with a village atmosphere where the old houses stand.
The house was in bad shape when they bought it and it took six months to finish.
‘The decorating was definitely a test of friendship,’ David says.
‘Gluing fabric on walls was often a night-long business with the help of many pizzas and beers.’
They simplified the house, knocking down walls, adding bathrooms, and opening it up to the cool summer breezes from the sea.
‘New York is so hot and humid in the summer that we often have a full house with friends staying from the city.’
‘There's a lot of method here; it's not as arbitrary as it seems,’ David says of the heady mixture of pattern and texture.
‘I'm always attracted to the same swirling motif, so a certain harmony is inevitable.
The real secret is that if you use enough pattern it simply cancels itself out.’
Ethnic prints teamed with traditional country designs lend a casual sumptuousness to the rooms.
‘I like things to look old and comfortable, not cold and sterile,’ David says.
Fabrics have been used on the walls in all the living areas.
Soft neutral shades create a calm background for Matisse-inspired colours.
Textured seats and colourful woven floor matting add to the hot tropical ambiance.
Collections of painted wooden toys and colourful glass mingle with plain bamboo and bare floorboards.
Buttermilk paintwork offsets the mixture of chair covers in Paisleys, florals and stripes.
Two needlework cushions with tassels designed by David and made by a friend sit happily with a traditional Amish quilt.
Windows are kept simple with sheer white blinds to maximise the light.
‘Everybody has contributed with furniture from their apartments in the city.
We forced ourselves to have clear-outs and the result has worked well.’
One of David's favourite objects is a chair he recovered in floral towelling; the other is the tramp-art plaster-cast mirror frame found on a dump, which now hangs above the fireplace in the sitting room.
(Tramp art is an old American form of folk art in which small pieces of wood are laid together and then a plaster cast taken.)
David cheerfully admits to being ‘very uninhibited when it comes to colour’.
Brightly glazed tiles on the bathroom walls and sitting room chimneypiece, for example, create a startling patchwork of hues.
‘More is more is my theory,’ he concludes.
Above The house's plain exterior gives no hint of the exotica inside (main picture)
Main picture The randomly coloured tiles on the wall and floor of the bathroom are accentuated by strong blue on walls and ceiling
Right A 19th-century French campaign bed in one bedroom is covered with a fringed panne velvet spread.
Paisley fabric on the walls is cooled by the neutral simplicity of a wicker table, sisal matting and a bamboo screen
Above left A tiled mantelpiece with Moorish influences, and Mexican wall sconces
Above right Indonesian batik covers the dining-room table
THE LUTE MAKER
PRACTICE AND PRECISION ARE AS VITAL TO THE LUTHIER AS TO THE LUTIST.
DIANE BELL MET A MAN WHO MAKES MUSIC OUT OF WOOD
From the attic of his home in Malmesbury, Arthur Robb makes lutes.
It is a career he fell into by accident after arriving in Britain from Wilmington, Delaware, on an extended holiday in 1970.
His wife gave him a plywood Appalachian dulcimer, bought from Cecil Sharp House in London, where the English Fold Dance and Song Society is based.
He was grateful — but felt sure he could make a better one.
The only problem was he had never handled a plane or a chisel in his life.
Undaunted he joined a local class and settled on making a lute.
It was not, he admits, the wisest choice for a beginner.
Within a month he had given up frustration and made his Christmas presents instead.
But Christmas over, he reapplied himself to the lute and managed to complete it.
Unfortunately it was not a very good lute, as the assistant in the music shop to which he tried to sell it pointed out at — unnecessarily — great length.
He modified his plans and built another.
The music shop continued to be critical; Arthur continued to chisel at his workbench.
Fourteen months and four attempts later, the shop finally bought a lute — and placed an order for another.
Arthur had become a professional musical instrument maker.
After eight years practising and perfecting he sent off for a plan and made his own Appalachian dulcimer — and it was better than the one he was given.
Now, having completed some 30 dulcimers (and many other instruments), he has refined his designs and can make an even better one.
Lute-making is a slow, deliberate craft to which precision is the key.
Joints have to fit exactly and surfaces are planed to the millimetre or the defects are painfully audible.
But technical skills are not all that matter.
Making a lute involves a fair amount of musical detective work.
The lute's heyday was during the Renaissance and the last solo music for lute was composed by J S Bach around 1720.
After that it declined rapidly in popularity.
By the Victorian period, the only lutes to be found were heavy orchestral instruments called theorbos.
For about 150 years no one made lutes: the tradition of makers had been broken and the skills lost.
Recent interest in early music — classical music played on authentic-sounding instruments — has spurred musicians and makers into rediscovering these skills.
‘You don't just make any lute,’ Arthus explained.
‘You match the instrument to the type of music to be played upon it — 16th-century lutes to play 16th-century compositions and so on.’
To do that he has to consult historical sources — the original instruments existing in museums and contemporary drawings and paintings — and from them work out the construction and draw up a plan.
The result is an instrument that comes as close as is possible in the late 20th century to making the sounds the composers and musicians of the 16th century expected to hear.
Arthur's business has grown by word of mouth and now much of his work comes from private commissions.
Each instrument takes approximately 140 hours to make.
Wherever possible he uses machinery to help speed up the process but this is limited to a band-saw, a lathe and a thick strip of metal known as a bending iron.
Beyond that he has to rely on hand tools — planes, chisels, reamers, scrapers and the odd bicycle inner tube (‘great for holding a psaltery in shape while working on the joints’).
Wood is stacked neatly along one wall of his workroom.
He uses six native woods: yew, cherry, ash, lime, sycamore and walnut  as well as Swiss pine, red cedar and ebony and rosewood from India and Indonesia.
In the past he has used Brazilian mahogany, but he now believes the Amazonian rainforest is more important than replacing his small stock.
He has no favourite wood.
‘All have their different textures — different flavours.
All plane differently, all finish differently,’ he explains.
‘Anyhow, it doesn't really matter what you use so long as you've got the right top.’
‘Tops’ or soundboards are made from just two woods: Swiss pine for the very best instruments, Western red cedar for the others.
The type of wood used elsewhere in the instrument, although not so important, does alter the final tone.
Given identical soundboards, lutes made of cherry and rosewood will sound quite different.
The rosewood produces a lute with a clear, bright tone which demands expert, extrovert playing while the cherry produces a much softer, less showy sound.
Other woods have their own peculiarities.
‘People don't seem to like the look of sycamore at the moment.
It is a very light wood and white instruments just aren't popular.
What they don't realise is that sycamore reacts with light.
Within 20 years the instrument will be brown and by the time it is 200 years old it will be virtually black.’
Because of this colour change, it is foolish to use sycamore as an inlay.
Arthur uses other woods and marrow bones ordered from the local butcher and boiled with plenty of salt to clean and bleach them.
The wood used for instruments has varied through the ages, depending on what was available.
In the late 16th century there was a short period when, rather than the usual 13 ribs, lutes suddenly sprouted anything up to 37 and made of very narrow strips of yew.
This happened at the time when the long bow was finally succeeded by the musket and pike.
Perhaps the two events were not unrelated: it is tempting to think of a Tudor entrepreneur seeing the bottom drop out of the wooden armaments market and so moving into lutes.
Arthur runs evening classes in Bristol and Swindon two nights a week where eager amateurs labour diligently with varying degrees of success.
One student had some ebony so it seemed natural to try a set of bagpipes.
‘The wood turned beautifully,’ Arthur recalled, tactfully refraining from comment on the qualify of the noise produced by the finished instrument.
‘I started my classes mainly because I got lonely sitting up in my workshop all day and because going to a class is how I started.
And it's good to be part of a tradition — makers have always learned from makers.
I met my teacher's teacher once, fairly soon after I had finished my first instruments.
I don't think he was too impressed — I like to think I've improved since.’
Classes are a relaxed, collaborative affair, with much time spent contemplating plans and frequent breaks to discuss the stock at a local wood supplier or how to fake a Stradivarius.
‘I teach people the skills — I don't teach them to work quickly.’
As a result the standard of craftsmanship to be found in some and the level of enthusiasm in all of his regular students is extremely high and the range of instruments produced expanding at the time.
At the moment, Swindon is attempting to overcome the technical difficulties of the hurdy gurdy.
(A more restrained Bristol is concentrating on lutes — presumably still recovering from the bagpipes.)
When it comes to playing, Arthur's favourite instruments are the banjo, harmonica and penny whistle.
But the lute remains for him the most satisfying instrument to make: shaping the huge bowl-shaped backs is ‘kinda wondrous’.
But recently his interest has been caught by steel-string guitars.
‘I really want someone to come along with an order so I can get on and make half a dozen.’
Instruments change when musicians want to produce new effects.
Throughout the Renaissance lute makers were constantly refining their designs.
Then composers began to lose interest in the instrument because it was useless in an orchestra, being just too quiet.
So the urge to innovate ceased and eventually the instrument all but died.
‘I could build an electric lute,’ Arthur continued, ‘but there would be little point: no one is making music for electric lutes.’
In recent years it has been the guitar that has been changing most rapidly.
‘Musicians want to make new sounds so you start adding strings: you get seven, nine, even 11 strings.
Someone else likes playing lead and bass guitars, so you build a guitar with two necks and they can do both.’
Customers have begun coming to Arthur with specific requests for alterations to the design of both guitars and dulcimers. it is a sign that the instruments and their music are very much alive — and that should signify a healthy future for the musical instrument maker.
Main picture For luthier Arthur Robb playing the instrument is a vital part of producing it: this enables him to check the sound quality and make any necessary final adjustments.
Top On the workbench (from left); tuning pegs, a plane, a reamer to taper holes for the pegs, beeswax to lubricate and polish the wood, lute bridges, lute-bridge templates, a saw and a chisel
Main picture (clockwise from top left) Arthur Robb, who has crafted between 60 and 70 lutes, with a mid-Renaissance, seven-course (13-stringed) instrument; Arthur restored guitars up to 200 years old; in a tradition dating back five centuries, the rose motif is carved from the soundboard with a single, sharp knife; strips of yew and sycamore will form the lute ribs.
Top Arthur has a couple of standard plans constructed from extensive historical research but, if the customer requires it, he will draw up a unique, individual design.
Above Planing the lute ribs to a thickness of just 1½mm before curving them to form the bowl-shaped back
JOIN OUR SPECIAL PRIVATE VIEW AT THE ROYAL ACADEMY SUMMER EXHIBITION
On 1 August we are hosting a Private View at the Royal Academy exclusively for Country Living readers.
The evening will enable you to look at the paintings and sculptures in an atmosphere of unhurried calm: quite a contrast to the frantic activity that precedes the show, as veteran exhibitor Fred Dubery explains
PRIVATE VIEW OF THE 223RD R A SUMMER EXHIBITION
On the evening of Thursday 1 August, The Royal Academy will open its doors for Country Living readers to view the exhibition that has become on of the highlights of the London Season.
The Summer Exhibition is the chance of every artist — whether painter, sculptor or printmaker — to show his or her work alongside that of internationally acclaimed counterparts.
The Summer Exhibition Galleries will be packed with paintings and sculptures of every variety.
Don't miss this exclusive chance to view the works of art in blissfully uncrowded rooms.
Join the Country Living at 6.45pm for canapés, and a glass of wine supplied by Torres, after which you will be free to wander through the Summer Exhibition Galleries.
There are a limited number of places available for what promises to be an enormously enjoyable occasion, so tickets at £15.50 will be allocated on a first-come, first-served basis.
Please send sae and your cheques, made payable to Country Living , to Royal Academy Private View .
If you plan to stay overnight in London, turn to Escapes (page 146) for our recommended hotel not far from the Royal Academy.
FRED DUBERY, ROYAL ACADEMY SUMMER EXHIBITOR
I first had a painting included in the Summer Exhibition 40 years ago.
It was one of the most marvellous events of my life and the first time that any of my work had ever been put on public show.
It was then I began to believe I might have a future as an artist.
I have gone on to be exhibited there almost every year.
And although I have since had my own shows in West End galleries in London, the excitement of being part of the Summer Exhibition has never worn thin.
There is nothing quite like it anywhere in the world.
Every February, like thousands of others artists up and down the country, I have to decide which of my paintings to submit to the Royal Academy; you are allowed to send in a maximum of three works for which you pay a fee of £9 each.
Then I work out much I want to sell each work for: my first painting sold for £25, a small fortune then for an art student, and enough for a holiday in Italy.
Now I ask for about £1,500.
In April I make the journey to London from my home in Suffolk, with my paintings carefully wrapped up in the back of my car.
There are set delivery days for artists, depending on the medium they work in.
I drive in through a side entrance of the Royal Academy and queue, surrounded by other artists.
And we wait for one of the small army of art students employed to take our work away.
That is it for six knuckle-biting weeks.
You know that yours are just three out of 12,000 works to be assessed, and that only 1,000 get through.
Having worked on hanging committees, I realise what a difficult task the 14 Academy selection council members have.
They mark each painting on the back with a piece of chalk: ‘X’ for rejected, ‘D’for doubtful and ‘A’for accepted.
It is almost unheard of for anything to be marked with an ‘A’.
Instead, they mark with a ‘D’ many more than they can actually use.
It is then up the Hanging Committee to decide which works fit best into the jigsaw-puzzle of an exhibition they are trying to construct.
Although I'm a Summer Exhibition veteran, my heart sinks when the letter from the Royal Academy arrives.
Rejections are always put very nicely.
They usually say that there simply wasn't the space to fit your work in.
So far I have been very fortunate and have had at least one painting accepted each time I have tried.
The first time I see the exhibition is on Varnishing Day, a week before the Private View.
Traditionally this was the time for artists to add the final touches.
Turner used to change his work when he saw who he was hanging next to.
No one goes to such lengths now, though you do sometimes hear complaints from artists about the position of their work.
But it is always too late; the catalogue will already have been printed.
The Private View used to be the start of the London Season.
Now the first day is more for dealers than debutantes: it is said that 10 pictures are sold every minute.
But there are still some wonderful characters who attend.
I put on a clean collar and go along, happy just to observe.
What I like best is to talk to fellow artists.
There is nothing better than having praise from someone whose work you respect, nothing nicer than being able to pat an old friend on the back and say sincerely how much you like their work.
My painting will remain on show for the next 10 weeks of the summer.
It will be up there with the John Pipers, alongside the Paolozzis.
And the spirit of the exhibition continues long after the works are taken down and sold off.
I receive letters throughout the year from people who have been to the Summer Exhibition wanting to know more about my work.
I will submit works for the Summer Exhibition as long as I can continue to paint.
Interview/Alison Nadel
GABI TUBBS'S COOL AND AIRY SETTINGS MAKE YOU DREAM OF BED IN SUMMER
Floor-sweeping checked curtains are unexpectedly lined with black and white ticking
Above, light diffuses through an off-white Roman blind made in fine waxed calico, lined in white and hemmed in ticking.
The striped are echoed in the cushion covers and bolster
Right, natural ticking curtains are lined in white and bordered in a silk plaid to add the merest touch of bright colour.
Ruched lightly at the top, the fabric is tied into bows over the curtain rod
Scandinavian-style gauzy curtains frame the window; a roman blind keeps out the light
A mass of white gauze and crisp linen reflects the bright clear light of summer
irish HIGH TABLE
JOHN AND GRAEME HALL PROVIDE GUESTS WITH BEEF, EGGS AND VEGETABLES ALL PRODUCED ON THEIR FARM — AND A BUTLER WHO WASN'T.
ELISABETH LUARD DREW UP A CHAIR
Tucked into the green foothills of the Mountains of Mourne, along the coast from County Down's seaside resort of Newcastle, lie Glassdrumman House and its home farm.
The hotel and its newly dug garden are protected from the winds and passing cows by a handsome new stone wall made in the old way — using the enormous smooth round boulders that litter the fields as if a giant's child had grown bored with a game of marbles.
Proprietors Joan and Graeme Hall came here 10 years ago.
‘We moved from Belfast,’ Joan says.
‘We'd dreamt of coming near the mountains and the sea and were out for a drive one Sunday afternoon with that idea in the back of our minds.
Then we saw a ‘For Sale’ sign on the old house about five miles down the road, where our shops and restaurant now are.
We bought it, along with 60 acres, and opened a farm shop for the first three or four years, to sell our surplus.
And then somehow it spread out — first a coffee shop, then a restaurant.
And now the hotel.’
Graeme, a town-bred Yorkshireman, is more at home on the kitchen range than on the prairie.
‘Farming is fine as a life-style,’ he says, ‘but cooking is a necessity.
We realised we had to be able to rely on good raw ingredients — that's why we started farming.’
Joan, Irish and a nurse by training, met Graeme in 1972.
‘He was preaching on a street in Belfast.
There's more of a tradition for that in Northern Ireland,’ she says.
‘Ian Paisley does it all the time and it's considered quite normal.’
The Halls have founded a community at Glassdrumman: Baptist-based and born-again Christian, but unlabelled so that all denominations can feel welcome.
It now numbers some 40 people, as well as the Jersey cows, the Aberdeen Angus bull, the horse, three ponies, and a handful of fecund goats and breeding sows.
The human members of the community are here mainly because out in the commercial world, they had been doing things they did not want to do, using skills they wished they did not have.
A mathematician may find contentment milking a cow.
A scientist may prefer frying bacon for paying customers.
Graham Goodwin, a biochemist who jettisoned a career in molecular biology at Cambridge (‘I can't really explain why; just something missing’), now works around the farm.
Sometimes he deputises for James Barlow, the butler, whose qualifications — his father is a baronet — are as impeccable as his Edwardian white gloves.
Graeme did all the cooing at first but has now turned his saucepans over to his talented young apprentice, Steve Webb.
Initially, Steve cleared tables and washed up.
‘I knew nothing about cooking,’ he grins.
‘Graeme said, put the bacon under the grill and when the fat is transparent, it's ready to be turned.
I graduated to doing the mixed grills.
They became famous: an 8oz steak served with big home-made sausages and black pudding.’
Joan is proud of both talent and talent-spotter: ‘Graeme said that just by watching Steve work you could see he had something, that he instinctively knew how to handle the food.’
Free from the limitations and disciplines of catering college, Steve gets his techniques from books, reinforced with an understanding of the raw materials and an eagerness to experiment.
Our photographer Roger Phillips found some dryad's saddle fungi growing outside the kitchen window.
Steve sliced them up, cooked them immediately and the result was delicious.
He also used the sea-beet Roger had gathered on the shore in a soup, and packed it into an opera hamper for an alfresco supper at a performance of Don Pasquale at nearby Castle Ward that evening.
From hand-churned butter and fresh eggs to delicate salad leaves and edible flowers, the enterprise is underpinned by the farm.
Nicky Brown, the farm manager, was born to the land.
His grandfather farmed 250 acres across the border in County Monaghan.
Nicky has no illusions about organic farming: ‘We made a few mistakes at the beginning.
We had no idea how long it would take to support ourselves or how far back you need to go in the food chain before you can become organic.
We de-stocked to fund the work on the hotel, but we're building the farming up again, and trying to get it right this time.’
The vegetables are all grown organically and the cattle aren't pumped full of hormones.
The farm extends to 120 acres, half owned outright and the other half rented, and most of it is pasture.
‘Ireland's greatest natural resource is grass,’ Nicky explains.
‘Here you need one acre per animal: we concentrate on Aberdeen Angus crossed with the Dairy Shorthorn — which gives a blue-grey, an old breed popular in Ireland.
I can take you down the road and show you my breeding stock in every farmer's field.’
The pace of rural Ireland remains as gentle as the weather.
Joan, responding to the beauty of St Patrick's beloved mountains, reckons she has come home: ‘Graeme gets bored and wants to be off and doing new things.
But it's wonderful for the children to be able to grow up in this beautiful place.’
CHEESE BREAD
This rich, golden bread is simple to make and is ideal for picnics, or to serve with a bowl of soup or light evening meal — along with a glass of red wine.
One of Steve's favourite bread recipes, he admits he got it from his mum!
½ oz fresh yeast
1 teaspoon sugar
¼ pint warm milk
8 oz plain white flour
2 oz melted unsalted butter
½ teaspoon salt
3 oz grated Cheddar cheese
beaten egg to glaze
Cream yeast with the sugar and a little milk.
Put the flour in a bowl, making a well in the centre.
Pour in the yeast mixture, the rest of the milk, the butter and the salt.
Mix to a smooth dough, knead for 10 minutes, the cover with a damp cloth and leave for 1 hour.
Knock back and divide into 24 small balls.
Place them in layers of 8 in a greased bread tin, and cover each layer — except the top one — with grated cheese, reserving a little for the top.
Prove for 1 hour, brush with beaten egg and bake for 30–40 minutes at 425°F (220°C) Gas Mark 7.
Sprinkle on more grated cheese 10 minutes before the loaf is cooked.
FISH BISQUE WITH PRAWNS, MUSSELS AND SAFFRON
Restaurant chefs always have access to marvellous trimmings for their soups.
Steve's fish stockpot contains an exotic mixture of monkfish and salmon bones, oyster and mussel shells and liquor, lobster carapace and heads, and prawn debris.
If you are making the fish terrine (see page 120), the trimmings should yield enough extra stock for this soup — particularly if you supplement it with extra bones and fishheads from your fishmonger.
Serves 4
1 pint good strong fish stock
1 oz butter
1 onion, peeled and chopped
1–2 carrots, sliced
1–2 sticks of fennel or celery, sliced
a few parsley stalks
5–6 threads saffron
1 tomato, chopped (could be the leftover bits from the terrine)
1 glass white wine
¼ pint cream
2 oz cooked, shelled mussels
2 peeled prawns
To finish:
crisply fried croûtons
lemon slices
Make the fish stock with all available trimmings.
Start it in cold water and reinforce with vegetable trimmings (don't use anything from the cabbage family).
Simmer for 30 minutes, then strain.
In another large pan, melt the butter and sweat the onions, carrots, fennel or celery; cook them until they are soft but not coloured.
Add the parsley, chopped tomato and saffron and turn up the heat.
Add the white wine and let it bubble up.
Reduce until you get a thick butter-wine emulsion.
Pour in the stock, bring to the boil and turn down the heat.
Let the soup simmer for 10 minutes.
Remove from the heat, skim and stir in the cream.
Reheat gently to just below boiling.
Divide the mussels and prawns between the plates.
Pour in the soup.
Garnish with croûtons and lemon slices.
DRYAD'S SADDLE OR CULTIVATED MUSHROOMS FLAMED IN BRANDY
Wild fungi (and mature cultivated mushrooms) benefit from a quick flame with alcohol: the brief roasting accentuates the woody flavour.
It's good, too, with big open mushrooms or cultivated oyster mushrooms.
Serves 2 as a starter or accompaniment.
1–2 tender dryad's saddle fungi or 8 oz large cultivated mushrooms
1 oz butter
1 small onion, finely chopped
1 tablespoon brandy
small glass white wine
salt and pepper
Slice fungi and fry down with the butter and onions until all the liquid has evaporated.
Flame with brandy.
Add the white wine and let it all reduce to a shiny emulsion.
A little salt and a generous sprinkle of pepper and you have a feast fit for the queen of the dryads.
GLASSDRUMMAN'S OPERA HAMPER
Castle Ward is a National Trust property on the south shore of Strangford Lough, about 40 minutes drive from Glassdrumman.
Its short opera season has proved so popular that most of the tickets are now taken up by sponsors — including Glassdrumman on behalf of its guests.
As at Glyndebourne, the audience wears black tie and long frocks, and the food from the hampers is served in the pink-and-white marquee in the interval.
The atmosphere is intimate and very Irish; many of the singers are local or have some local connection — with the exception of the hard-to-get tenor.
For our night at the opera, Steve's hamper for four people contained all the following recipes, as well as rainbow trout gravlax and a thrice-risen walnut loaf.
Of course, you may have to provide your own substitute for the impeccable James who serves it.
White cotton gloves would be a start.
BEET AND BROCCOLI SOUP
The Irish weather being a little unreliable even in high summer, a hot soup can be very welcome on a picnic.
The sea-beet Steve used grows wild round the shores of Britain: collect it at this time of year from a clean dune.
Sometimes it is salty, sometimes as bland as chard leaves.
To add extra flavour to the soup, Steve used the trimmings from the broccoli that went into the fish terrine.
Serves 4.
1½ pints homemade stock
8 oz trimmed sea-beet (or chard leaves, spinach or lettuce)
8 oz broccoli trimmings
2 onions (or 1 Spanish onion)
1 oz butter
1 garlic clove, unpeeled
¼ pint white wine
1 large potato, peeled and cut into small cubes
3–4 tablespoons cream
juice of 1 lemon
salt and pepper
Optional garnish: a few cooked peeled prawns or mussels (if you are using sea-beet)
Strain the stock.
Wash and shred the leaves (saving one or two for garnishing).
Chop the broccoli.
Chop the onions finely.
Melt the butter in a large saucepan and throw in the chopped onion and the whole unpeeled garlic clove.
Let them sweat gently in the butter for 5–6 minutes.
Stir in the shredded leaves and broccoli.
Let the vegetables soften over a low heat.
Pour in the white wine and let everything bubble up and cook down.
Remove the garlic; pour in the stock and bring to the boil.
Add the potatoes.
Simmer for about 15 minutes.
Liquidise the soup and then sieve it.
Taste and add salt and pepper, and enough lemon juice to sharpen the flavour.
Reheat and finish with a little cream and shredded leaves.
FISH TERRINE WITH SAFFRON ASPIC
The ingredients for this pretty pink and green terrine are assembled when cooked, rather than baked together.
Steve serves it with a sauce of avocado puréed with a splash of the fish stock.
Makes 12 slices.
1 lb smoked or dilled salmon
1 lb monkfish on the bone
1 lb unshelled scampi (Dublin Bay prawns)
1 pint well-flavoured fish stock
½ oz butter
1 teaspoon chopped onion
6–8 saffron threads
1 oz gelatine
12 oz broccoli
12 oz tomatoes
2 tablespoons finely chopped parsley
salt and pepper
Line a terrine or long loaf-tin with salmon or gravlax slices (not at either end, though, that would be a waste).
Lay the slices up the sides, so that there are long flaps left to be folded over the enclosed the terrine.
bone the monkfish and slice the fillets thinly.
Peel the scampi.
The trimmings from the fish can go into the stock.
Salt the monkfish lightly.
In a saucepan, bring a ladleful of the fish stock to the boil with the saffron.
Put in the monkfish slices and let them poach for 3–4 minutes, until cooked through.
Remove the fish and put it aside to cool.
Add the rest of the fish stock to the saffron stock in the pan, mix in the gelatine, and stir it over the heat until all the granules dissolve.
Sieve it, pressing to extract all the colour from the saffron (or, for a good strong colour, put the lot in a food processor), and set it aside to cool.
How much of the aspic you use depends on how tightly the layers are packed — the gelatine is used at twice the usual strength because the terrine juices will dilute it.
Fry the scampi briefly in a scrap of butter with a little chopped onion.
Divide the broccoli tops into florets.
Peel and quarter the stalks lengthways.
Drop them in a pan of boiling salted water and simmer until tender — 5–6 minutes.
Drain well and cool.
Scald, skin, de-seed and finely chop the tomatoes.
Assemble the terrine.
Pour in the cool saffron aspic as you go, layer by layer.
The cooler the ingredients the less moisture they exude and the better the set.
First layer in half the monkfish, then the parsley, followed by the scampi, the broccoli, the rest of the monkfish and finally the tomato.
Fold over the flaps of the salmon to enclose the terrine.
Put it in the fridge to firm up for 2–3 hours and then remove and leave to set overnight: if you chill everything except the aspic in the freezer beforehand, the terrine will set in half an hour.
TURKEY BREAST LARDED WITH PEPPERS
This is not just pretty picnic food; Steve maintains that the peppers give the bland turkey a piquant flavour.
Remember to slice the peppers into ribbons lengthways: if you do them in the usual way as rings they will be too curved to slide in easily.
Serves 4
1 turkey breast — about 12 oz in weight
3 ribbons of red pepper and 3 of green
1 oz butter
salt and pepper
Skin the turkey breast and lay it what would have been skin-side down on the table.
With a slender sharp knife, make a long diagonal stab in the turkey breast, going with the grain of the meat.
Lift the knife to make a space beneath and slip in a ribbon of pepper.
Repeat five times.
Sprinkle with salt and pepper and dot with butter and wrap it in foil, folding with a double pleat on top and closing the ends to seal in the juices.
Bake at 400°F (200°C) Gas Mark 6 for 45 minutes.
Let the turkey cool before you unwrap it.
Turn it over to slice it.
It's lovely with new potatoes and cranberry sauce.
FILLET OF BEEF MARINATED WITH OLIVE OIL AND ROSEMARY
This simple recipe underlines the fine flavour of the beef from Glassdrumman's own herd.
Make sure the meat is well-trimmed or it will shrink out of shape.
The trimmings can go into a stock for the beet soup.
Serves 4
1 lb fillet stock in a single piece
1 tablespoon olive oil
1 garlic clove, peeled and crushed
1 tablespoon chopped fresh rosemary
1 tablespoon chopped basil
1 tablespoon chopped fresh parsley
1 teaspoon fresh thyme
1 teaspoon freshly milled pepper
Make 6 lengthwise cuts ½ inch deep all round the fillet.
Work the oil and all the aromatics into a paste and rub it into the meat, pushing it well into the cuts.
Leave to marinate overnight.
Roast the meat 15–20 minutes, when it will still be pink.
Let it cool then slice it.
Serve with horse-radish grated into a little whipped cream.
GARDEN SALAD
Here is Steve's mixture from the vegetable and flower garden — the combination varies with time of year.
Young blackcurrant leaves, borage flowers, rose petals can all be included.
Pick over the leaves and flowers for insects.
There's no need to do more than wipe the leaves if you can vouch for their purity.
escarole (frisée)
Webb's Wonder lettuce
Little Gem lettuce
nasturtium leaves and flowers
celery leaves
parsley
thyme
feverfew (go easy — it's very bitter)
heartsease
A NIGHT AT THE OPERA
The Castle Ward Opera season runs from 12 to 29 June .
The usual price for overnight accommodation at Glassdrumman for two people sharing a room, afternoon tea, transport to the opera, opera tickets, butler service and a champagne picnic hamper is £175, but if you quote Country Living when you book you will receive a 10 per cent discount.
A double room without the opera costs £110 for two (includes dinner and breakfast).
Again, quote Country Living when booking for a 10 per cent discount.
For more information about holidays in Northern Ireland ring the tourist board on 071–439 0601.
Above Glassdrumman's picnic hamper with Beet and Broccoli Soup
Main picture Fish Bisque with Prawns, Mussels and Saffron Left Steve Webb with bread made by Irene Campbell, the local master-baker
sparkling FORM
SUMMERTIME MEANS CREMANT, CAVA, BLANQUETTE, PROSECCO AND OTHER CHAMPAGNE ALTERNATIVES, AS ROSEMARY GEORGE EXPLAINS
Champagne is without doubt the world's finest sparkling wine, but it is also the most expensive, and by more than just a few pennies.
The vineyard area of Champagne is now almost fully planted and the greedy grape growers have broken the long-standing contract that determined the annual price of the grapes.
This means that prices have risen considerably over the past few months — a very good reason for looking at alternatives to champagne.
What is unique about champagne is the particular combination of soil and grape varieties.
The method has been imitated all over the world, in places as diverse as New Zealand, Italy, Russia, England, California, Australia, Spain and India, and that list is by no means complete.
In France, too, sparkling wines made by the méthode tradionelle , as the méthode champenoise is now increasingly called, are widespread.
You can find them in the Loire valley, Burgundy, Alsace and other lesser-known regions like Savoie, the Jura and the Aude.
Do not expect these wines to taste like champagne.
The grape varieties are often quite different, as are the climate and soil, so the flavour will vary accordingly and should be judged on its own merits, not as an imitation of something else.
Limoux, a small town in the département of the Aude in southern France, not far from the medieval city of Carcassonne, is the home of Blanquette de Limoux, a sparkling wine that claims an even longer history than champagne.
The Benedictine monks of the nearby abbey of Saint-Hilaire take credit for the discovery, as early as 1531: Dom Pérignon, who is popularly regarded as the father of champagne, was cellarmaster of the abbey of Hautvilliers a good century later.
Blanquette is the local name for Mauzac, the principal grape variety, to which small amounts of Chenin Blanc and Chardonnay can be added to enliven its somewhat flat flavour.
The local co-opérative dominates production with wines like Eric de Cairolle and there are several individual producers, such as Antech and Domaine de Lamoure.
Blanquette de Limoux has a lovely creamy taste, with a full, rounded flavour.
A new appellation is beginning to make an appearance: Crémant de Limoux, which has a smaller proportion of Mauzac, aims to be richer and less rustic than Blanquette.
Maybe the closest French imitator of champagne is Crémant de Bourgogne, for the simple reason that is grape varieties are Pinot Noir and Chardonnay, as in champagne, although it does not contain any Pinot Meunier.
The appellation covers the whole of Burgundy.
In the hamlet of Bailly, a few kilometres from Chablis but outside that appellation , caves that were quarried to provide stone to build the Panthéon in Paris now make impeccable cellars for maturing sparkling wine.
Haughton Fine Wines of Chorley, Nantwich, Cheshire lists 1986 Blanc de Bailly and 1987 Conte de Bailly rosé, both appellation Cremant de Bourgogne and both £7.45 a bottle.
The co-opératives of the Mâconnais are also good sources of Crémant de Bourgogne, especially that from Lugny, which has some delicate toasted fruit and flavours of mature Chardonnay.
The sparkling wines of the Loire Valley, with appellations such as Crémant de la Loire and sparkling Saumur and Vouvray, are customary alternatives to champagne.
I have tried to like these wines, but so often I have been disappointed.
The grape variety used is Chenin Blanc but when it is picked before it is fully ripe, it makes dull, acidic wines, with an off-putting nose that reminds me of wet dogs.
A current exception is the sparkling Vouvray Chevalier do Moncontour, with some light lemony fruit and hints of honey.
More enjoyable is the pure Chardonnay sparkling wine from the Haut-Poitou co-opérative , close to Poitiers, and named Diane de Poitiers, with some light creamy and lemony fruit.
An unusual choice of sparkler comes from The Wine Society with a Vin de Bugey made from an original mixture of Jacquère and Molette — two grape varieties peculiar to Savoie and Bugey — as well as Chardonnay and Aligoté.
Bugey is one of those lost corners of France, a hilly region to the north-east of Lyon, around the town of Bellay, whose only claim to fame is that it is the birthplace of the French gastronome, Brillat-Savarin.
Cava is the Spanish term used to describe sparkling wine made by the champagne method.
The usual source of cava is north-eastern Spain, where the customary grape varieties are the rather neutral-flavoured ones  such as Parellada, Macabeo and Xarel-lo.
However, adventurous producers like Codorníu and Raimat are planting Chardonnay with considerable success, for the wines are rich and leafy with ripe flavours.
However, for traditional cava , Freixenet's cordon Negro in its smart black bottle is hard to beat with its crisp, fresh flavours and the slightly dusty overtones typical of cava .
Dry sparklers from Italy are also improving apace.
Italian specialists Winecellars  operate a countrywide mail-order service.
They represent Carpene Malvolti from the Veneto and can supply its delicious Prosecco di Conegliano, with its delicate lemony nose, and soft yeasty fruit, for £6.95.
It is made by the cuvé close method, with the second fermentation taking place in a tank, rather than the bottle.
As a result, the mousse is not quite as fine as that of its more expensive wine, Brut, Metodo Classico, the Italian term for the champagne method.
This is very stylish, with dry creamy fruit and a soft, nutty finish.
The New World has also turned its expertise to sparkling wine.
Several champagne houses, finding the confines of Champagne too restricting, have invested in sparkling wine production in California, New Zealand and Australia.
California tends to be expensive, offering little saving on the real thing.
There are bargains to be had from Australia, with a particularly good selection in Oddbins, which tempts you to buy more by offering seven bottles for the price of six, for any sparklers over £5.99.
A star at a recent tasting was Schinus Molle for £8.99 (also from Haughton Fine wines at the same price), while a new introduction, Killewarrs Rosé, is soft, fruity and frivolous, especially at £4.49 a bottle.
The most successful bubbly wine from New Zealand is sadly in very short supply.
If you can find it, snap up Deutz Marlborough Cuvée, masterminded by Champagne Deutz in Montana's cellars or, failing that, try Lindauer from Montana which is full and honeyed.
If the exotic is what you seek, you might try Omar Khayyam from India, made from Ugni Blanc, Pinot Blanc and Chardonnay, grown at a high altitude in the Sahyadri mountains near Bombay, and vinified by a former winemaker of Piper Heidsieck.
The quality can be a little erratic: I've had delicious bottles and disappointing bottles.
Still, you will not be at a loss for conversation with such an unusual choice.
For my tastebuds the best way to dilute sparkling wine is with fresh orange juice to make the traditional Bucks Fizz.
There's no doubt that it is wonderfully refreshing on a summer's day, especially if low alcohol consumption is a consideration.
A splash of blackcurrant, or even better, blackberry liquor, adds an attractive tang to your bubbles and, though I have not tried it myself, others recommend elderflower cordial.
I find other fruitflavoured wine-based drinks, such as strawberry or peach, too cloying.
Sparkling red or white grape juice can make an innocuous, though rather sweet, non-alcoholic drink, but an alternative to champagne it is not.
STRAW POLL
TRIMMED WITH RIBBONS OR CROWNED WITH ROSES: ROBERT BURGESS TAKES HIS HAT OFF TO A BEVY OF WIDE-BRIMMED BEAUTIES
OFFER
the CLASSIC SUMMER FROCK £45.95
Reminiscent of a 1930s tea dress, our flower-patterned summer frock will grace any gathering — a garden party, a summer wedding or afternoon tea on the lawn.
With a flattering scoop neckline and tucked short sleeves, it fastens at the front with 10 small buttons from neckline to hem and has a softly swirling eight-panel skirt.
A narrow matching fabric belt covers the gently elasticated waistband, and can be alternated with belts of your own for a contrasting effect.
Made from 100 per cent viscose, it comes in either scarlet sprigged with blue, grey and pink, or black sprigged with white, pink and pale green.
Measuring 48″ from nape of neck to hem, it is available in sizes 12, 14, 16 and 18 and costs just £45.95.
To order, fill in the coupon below.
TOXIC BLOOMS
EVERYTHING IN THE GARDEN'S LOVELY — OR IS IT?
SALLY BIRCH ON THE PERILS THAT LURK IN PLANTS
A toddler's consuming instinct to put everything in his or her mouth can cost a short and innocent life.
You put the bleach out of reach, but where do you hide the honeysuckle?
You know the danger in weedkiller, but what about the weeds?
The average home and garden contains a whole bouquet of botanic hazards and small children are particularly at risk.
But, like most mothers, I didn't take much notice of the dangers until my son, at about 18 months old, nibbled a poisonous plant.
It happened when we lived in Perth, Western Australia.
I do not say that to mislead you into thinking that Australia is a nasty poisonous place and you're safe in good old Britain.
I mention it because general public awareness of accidental poisoning seems higher there than in this country.
Many people live in isolated areas far from medical help, so the National Safety Council of Western Australia issues (free of charge) a poisons chart showing common poisons and their antidotes, along with bright stickers printed with the number of the 24-hour Poisons Information Bureau and a booklet listing some common poisons and the symptoms that might accompany their ingestion.
With these items in the house, I was better prepared than most.
The first I new was Chris's sudden, shocked screaming, with an urgency that made me drop what I was doing and run across the room to the open verandah.
He was rubbing and pulling at his mouth, tears flowing, along with copious saliva.
One hand still clutched a scrap of thick green leaf and there was a large section missing from the handsome pot plant nearby.
He was too young and too distressed to make any sense, so I had no idea how much he had eaten.
Comforting him, I rushed to hone the Poisons Bureau, grabbing the booklet at the same time.
‘What kind of plant is it?’ the doctor asked.
I didn't know.
It had been given to us unlabelled.
It looked like — my eyes scanned the list of strange names, wishing they were illustrated — yes, it looked like the ear of an elephant: dieffenbachia or elephant's ear.
The doctor suggested I give Chris a cold drink or an ice cream, and bring  him into hospital if he got worse.
He also urged me to try to check the identification of the plant.
I had some ice cream in the fridge and treated Chris to a large cone.
I think the remedy was as useful psychologically as it was physically, and his crying subsided, although his lips and tongue were obviously still sore.
I bundled him into the care and zoomed off to the nearby University Herbarium with a whole leaf of the plant.
A botanist spent 10 minutes trying to identify it for me, while I fretted between the reception desk and the child.
Eventually he confirmed my identification: dieffenbachia, also known as dumb cane because its sap, in contact with the mouth, causes violent irritation and swelling which can seriously impede breathing.
By now, Chris was asleep, covered with ice cream and evidently not in danger.
Dieffenbachia is as common a pot plant in this country as in Western Australia.
Few plant labels or house-plant books mention that it is poisonous, or state what effect it can have.
And it is not the most dangerous plant found in the home.
Several of Australia's commonest and deadliest garden plants are familiar house plants in our colder climate.
They include oleander, poinsettia and other members of the Euphorbia family, and the castor-oil plant.
Out in the garden, the risks multiply.
Daffodils, hyacinths, bluebells and many species of lily also contain toxins.
Ivy, foxglove, columbine, morning glory, holly, laurel…suddenly they all have a sinister aspect.
The delphinium — and its close relative, larkspur — contain some of the strongest of botanic poisons.
The leaves, and especially the seeds, can cause vomiting, paralysis, even death.
But flower seeds in pretty packets are often displayed in shops alongside sweets, and within a child's reach.
A recent supermarket promotion offered larkspur seeds with no warning that they are highly toxic.
‘It's up to parents to make sure kids don't eat them,’ a company representative said.
Of course, you may reasonably point out, it is highly unlikely that a child would eat delphinium seeds.
(Just as unlikely as eating part of a dieffenbachia leaf.)
But at home you might put an open packet on a bench in the greenhouse or spill some seeds, or leave them on the grass while you run to answer the phone.
With poppy seeds on bread, sesame seeds on hamburgers and cress seeds sprouting on flannel, how is the parent to know, let along the child?
And what about the seeds of your other garden plants?
Highly poisonous laburnum seeds look like tiny chocolate drops; fairly nasty lupin seeds come in little green pods, just like peas.
The very unexpectedness of plant poisoning is in itself another hazard.
If your child did start vomiting or trembling or gasping for breath, would you suspect that they had eaten delphinium seeds unless they were still holding the packet?
If Chris hadn't been clutching a piece of leaf, would I have noticed a torn house plant? some plants, like the aptly named deadly nightshade, do not reveal their effect until hours after ingestion, by which time it may be too late for effective treatment.
It is lucky that most plant toxins are bitter or unpleasant to taste or smell.
But this cannot guarantee a child's safety.
‘It's so unlikely,’ people say.
‘It wouldn't happen to my child.’
That's what I thought, too.
But how can you know?
The hazards are widespread, the information scanty.
Many poisonous garden plants are familiar; like the Christmas trio of holly, ivy and mistletoe, they are well known by their common names.
Others are less so.
Would you recognise aconite, also known as monkshood?
It is possibly the most dangerous plant in this country, and barely a taste could kill a child.
Even your own kitchen may not be free from risks.
Remember to keep rhubarb that has not been stripped of its poisonous leaves well away from similar-looking cabbage or spinach; remove green parts and sprouting eyes from your potatoes.
And don't forget the fellow who saved all his apple pips and crunched them up as a special treat (apple-pip kernels, like those of plum, peach and apricot, contain tiny quantities of cyanide): he died.
This is not to suggest that you dash out and decimate your garden.
Most cases of plant poisoning are not terminal nor even very dramatic.
‘Poisonous’ does not necessarily mean ‘deadly’.
Symptoms of mild poisoning may include nausea, vomiting and diarrhoea: skin irritation, rashes or swelling; headache; sudden elation or depression; abdominal pains; trembling or giddiness.
All unpleasant, especially to a small child, but usually of brief duration and causing no lasting damage.
Cases of plant poisoning severe enough to warrant hospital admission are rare.
But they do occur, and some of them could have been avoided.
Seed merchants, garden centres and nurseries, and other plant suppliers, should take more responsibility and provide themselves and the public with more information about plant poisons.
Gardens open to the public could also label the most dangerous plants on display — zoos, after all, take care to protect visitors from the tigers, crocodiles or snakes.
Seed packets could carry a simple warning and the familiar skull-and-crossbones motif.
Bright ‘poison’ tags could be attached to pot plants and a warning included on the care label.
Most common domestic toxins — bleach, paint, cleaning fluids, and so on— carry poison warnings and some instructions about first aid.
Why not plants?
WHAT TO DO IF YOUR CHILD HAS EATEN A POISONOUS PLANT
Phone your GP or the nearest hospital casualty department.
They will contact a special poisons information centre and advise you on first aid and medical treatment.
Keep a sample of the plant or seed that you suspect, even if you think you know what it is — and especially if you don't.
Stay calm and keep the child calm: panic speeds poison absorption.
It may be necessary to make a child vomit as soon as possible, by putting two fingers down the throat if you have to.
Do not give a salt solution to induce vomiting.
This out-of-date remedy may be more dangerous than the plant poison.
Syrup of ipecac is sometimes recommended but there is currently some medical disagreement about its use.
(Ironically, it is a plant-based preparation.)
If you live at any distance from medical help, or are not within easy reach of a telephone, it might be wise to add some ‘activated charcoal’ to the medicine cupboard, as it can slow down the absorption of poison.
You can buy it from chemists — some also stock special ‘poison kits’ for emergencies.
But take no action until you have spoken to a doctor.
These plants, part or all of which may cause ill effects, can all be found in this country.
NB this is a rough guide only.
BEAUTY from within
LOTIONS AND POTIONS FOR FLOWER-SOFT HANDS AND PERFECT NAILS, COMPILED BY PAULA McWATERS
HIVED OFF
Bees raised on a hillside of wildflowers produce a fine wax that is blended into a hand cream much sought after in Bath and beyond.
The beekeeper and maker of the cream is Cathy Hobson, whose three hives are in an abandoned graveyard in the fields above Widcombe.
Cathy says: ‘It's a peaceful site with plenty of fresh water nearby.
The rent is paid in jars of honey to the vicar.’
The formula for her Beeswax Hand and Foot Cream  is simple: beeswax, almond oil, distilled water, lavender, boracic powder, Vaseline and liquid paraffin.
It's pleasant to use and makes a good barrier cream.
SOFTLY SOFTLY
Poor circulation can often result in dry flaky skin, especially on the hands and arms.
Two of our testers, whose skin has hitherto proved unresponsive to even the most intensive of creams, have noted a dramatic improvement with Neutrogena's new Norwegian Formula Emulsion .
A creamy glycerine-enriched lotion that smells faintly of cloves, it is easily absorbed and appears to fulfil its promise of keeping the skin moisturised and soft for at least eight hours after application.
We have 150 200ml bottles of Neutrogena Norwegian Formula Emulsion for you to win.
Just tell us what ichthyosis is, and send your answer on a postcard to the address on page 2 by 30 June.
HAND IN GLOVE
Give hands an overnight treat by coating them with a rich conditioner and then donning a pair of lightweight vinyl gloves (such as HandiMates, £1.09 for a box of 10).
Almond oil (90p for 50ml from Boots) is ideal, or you can make an even richer concoction by adding a teaspoon of warmed clear honey to a tablespoon each of almond, sesame and olive oils and half a tablespoon of glycerine.
FINGERTIP CONTROL
What is as soothing as a set of worry beads, leaves your hands feeling warm and energised and could even help pinpoint an imbalance in your system?
Answer: a notched wooden roller that is turned gently back and forth between the palms and fingers for a couple of minutes a day.
Its use is based on the reflexology principle — that there are specific pressure points on the palms and fingers that relate to different organs in the body: any blockage will be felt as a twinge of discomfort in the hand and can be cleared by applying a little more pressure to the roller at that point.
A map of the pressure points is supplied.
Even if you are sceptical about meridians, there's no denying that the roller gives an enjoyable massage.
A SHOW OF HANDS
The Anglo Saxons' solution to chapping and peeling was a poultice of beet, lettuce, coriander, herbs and crumbs mixed with water.
Another recipe relied on lily of the valley, lard and a cup of old wine, which you were advised to ‘pound together in the manner which thou mightest work a plaister, and lay to the hand’.
Elizabeth I, whose delicate long fingers feature so prominently in her portraits, started a fashion for lily-white skin, but we had to wait until the 1880s for the advent of polished nails in Britain.
At first beeswax produced the shine, and by the 1920s colourless or pink varnish had become an essential part of good grooming.
Scarlet talons came into vogue with suntanning, although they were sill considered rather racy until the mid-1930s.
An estimated £51m was spent in the UK last year on nail products; for many people, it seems, a well-turned hand is still incomplete without a coat of lacquer.
RUB-A-DUB-DUB
No self-respecting Victorian or Edwardian woman would have been without a nail buffer, usually made from chamois leather, to ensure that her fingertips were always gleaming.
Even though most of the nail you can see is dead, regular buffing can promote healthy growth by stimulating blood circulation in the lunula (half moon).
The Mavala Natural Shine Kit (£8.35 from leading chemists and department stores) consists of two buffers made from synthetic materials: one with a slightly abrasive surface to remove ridges, and one for polishing.
The resulting smooth glazed finish should last for several days.
To improve condition, try the Ultimate Nail Mask  by Elegant Touch, which contains protein, calcium and vitamin E. Apply at night before bed and peel off next morning.
We noticed a definite improvement in nail texture and appearance after using it.
ESCAPES
A HAVEN IN LONDON AND A RECTORY IN THE VALE OF GLAMORGAN
HAZLITT'S, LONDON
Taking a break from country hideaways, we hunted for a retreat in central London for those of you staying over for the Royal Academy Summer Exhibition treat (see page 150).
If you're out of the Ritz bracket, Hazlitt's is one London hotel which gives you more than just bed and bath for a night at reasonable rates.
At 6 Frith Street, in the middle of Soho, Hazlitt's is a haven for the saturated culture vulture or worn-out shopper.
After a day in the office, even I felt the benefit of the quiet ambience.
The philosophy behind this hotel, according to manager Sture Rydman, is hospitality for the discerning and appreciative.
The outside of the building (three 1718 houses knocked into one) looks like a private house.
Inside, the conversion has barely disturbed the original structure.
Old panelling, creaking stairways and sloping floors remain.
Designer interior decoration has been spurned in favour of a mix-and-match of the old and beautiful; gilt-framed mirrors and prints; oak and mahogany furniture and softly coloured linens.
The 23 bedrooms are named after former residents of Frith Street: the 18th-century essayist and hotel's namesake William Hazlitt; Charles Lamb; and Jonathan Swift.
I slept in the suite named after the 13th Baron Willloughby who lived here in the 1770s.
The bedroom and sitting room were small but cosy and my elegant four-poster bed was luxurious, if a little on the small side for a double.
If you like heavy bedding make sure you ask for an extra quilt.
(I woke up chilly in the morning.)
Each room has its own bathroom and the baths and basins are Victorian and free-standing (see left).
Mundane soap and a tiny towel were all I could fault.
Hazlitt's has neither restaurant nor bar.
Both seem unnecessary for a hotel surrounded by the best in London's culinary stakes but evening drinks can be arranged if requested.
Breakfast is served in your room (good coffee, freshly squeezed orange juice, croissant, but sadly artificial jam).
I went to Hazlitt's sister hotel, The Gore, in Kensington (buzzing, bigger and less personal but still hospitable) for dinner at the Bistrot 190 where chef Anthony Worrall-Thompson creates lavish menus for those who enjoy guiltless eating.
Further details from Jeannie on 071–584 6601.
A night at Hazlitt's costs £132 for a suite, £86 for a double; breakfast is £4.85.
Book on 071–434 1771.
Henrietta Holder
EGERTON GREY, M SOUTH GLAMORGAN
In the entrance hall at Egerton Grey Country House Hotel, a blazing fire hissed its welcome to Wales but no receptionist was to be seen.
‘That is because reception are for Holiday Inns,’ announced the dapper proprietor Anthony Pitkin.
‘I generally hear the door bang and potter down the corridor.’
And here lies the key to Egerton Grey: it is a hotel in disguise.
Egerton Grey was built in the 19th century as a rectory and, thanks to the Pitkins' assiduous antique collecting, it retains the appearance of a Victorian private house.
Here is a handsome Victorian writing table, there a japanned longcase clock.
Elsewhere, tucked away and not at all Victorian, are hairdriers and trouser-presses in abundance.
Each of the 10 bedrooms is individually furnished.
Amid the chintzy prints and fourposters you will find many quirky artefacts.
The biggest of these eccentricities are the baths, splendid six-foot Edwardian ones with their original brass taps and plug holes.
Dinner is served in the panelled dining room.
The menu is fixed but comprehensive: a choice of five main courses, with two meat and two fish dishes and one for vegetarians.
Nouvelle cuisine, Mr Pitkin assured me, has lost its kudos but its style of presentation endures.
My plaited trout with herb sauce, and nectarine mousse with marbled-effect melon syrup were certainly beautiful to behold, though amounts might offend really hearty appetites.
Egerton Grey stands in seven acres of luscious garden, encircled by walled parkland.
There's a croquet lawn, tennis court and the sea a short stroll away.
When it rains visit the nearby folk museum at St Fagans: learn about the rigours of life in the Welsh valleys centuries ago and then retreat to the hotel to appreciate the glories of the past without the hardships.
B&B is £37.50 per person per night; a three-course dinner is £19.50.
Egerton Grey is at Porthkerry  
Vicky Carlisle
MAN, BEAST OR MACHINE?
MORE THAN 600 RUNNERS, 100 CYCLISTS, 22 HORSES AND RIDERS, BUT ONLY JACK RUSSELL: HORSEPOWER, PEDAL POWER, KNEE POWER AND PAW POWER COMPETE FOR SUPREMACY IN A CROSS-COUNTRY MARATHON.
STEVE ASHTON COVERED THE COURSE AT THIS OWN PACE BEFORE STANDING BACK TO WATCH THE RACE
Can a man outrun a horse?
Welshman Guto Nyth-Bran reputedly could.
But was he man or was he beast?
We are told he could outpace a pack of hounds and catch a fleeing fox with ease, and run from Porth to Llantrisant in the time it took his mother to boil a kettle.
Founded on this 18th-century anecdotal evidence, the argument soon degenerates into an inconclusive oh-yes-they-can, oh-no-they-can't shouting match.
Which is why Gordon Green, landlord of the Newadd Arms in Llanwrtyd Wells, decided after refereeing one such ‘discussion’ that it should be settled by an annual race over a 22-mile cross-country course through the hills and forests above the mid-Wales village.
That was 10 years ago, and bookmakers William Hill, who will give you odds of 25:1 against a runner beating a horse and rider, have yet to pay out.
Notwithstanding a single impudent win by a mountain biker in 1989, it would appear that the subject is now closed.
Or is it?
Mid-Wales is horse rider's country, and local pride demands that the horse should triumph over these interlopers.
A course that mixes open pasture, bridleways, forest tracks and country lanes undeniably favours the horse.
There's simply no contest.
Not that this dissuades upwards of 800 competitors from entering the event.
THE DAY BEFORE
If I was to spend race day reporting as a spectator, then the least I could do was arrive early and attempt the course myself.
Unable to synchronise descending bum with ascending saddle or to run more than 500 yards without a coughing fit, I opted for the mountain bike.
‘You can have the Eagle,’ said the man in the hire shop, lifting down an impressively robust cycle, black and menacing in its studded tires.
I wheeled it jauntily out on to the street.
Twenty two miles?
On the Eagle I'd be home in a couple of hours.
As I clicked my stopwatch at the start line it  began to rain.
Welsh rain.
Peering through steamed-up glasses, I couldn't differentiate between a sheep and a hedge, let alone identify the coloured rectangles of the course markers.
Ten minutes later I was lost.
The letters F A R C E began to take shape inexorably in my mind.
The pedals were fitted with toe-traps, which ensured that I landed chin first in whatever caused the front wheel to skid.
And you can imagine what that was likely to be.
The Eagle had 18 gears.
I used three of them: first, free wheel and push.
Mostly the latter.
I couldn't imagine what the others were used for.
I knew I wouldn't get back in two hours when I was overtaken by a hopping rabbit.
Ten miles out, while pedalling uphill through the dripping gloom of a forest, I prayed for some vital piece of bike to snap off and put an end to my misery.
A second later — and I mean one second — the derailleur sheared and jammed in the rear wheel, leaving me pedalling air one moment and swimming in a pile of dead leaves the next.
The Eagle had landed.
Brushing off the leaves, I engaged ‘push’ and began the long walk home.
While coasting downhill out of Abergwesyn, three cyclists in yellow and black wasp suits buzzed past.
I felt a thump on my back and an instant later found myself propelled along the winding lane at close to racing speed, courtesy of Steve, fourth member of the Peugeot team out for a training run.
This was the cycling equivalent of running out of petrol and being towed home by Nigel Mansell.
Back at the Neuadd Arms I discovered that pre-race training for most of the other entrants consisted of downing the maximum number of pints of ale in the least possible time.
If this was truly representative of tomorrow's task then the event would be fiercely contested.
THE START
It wasn't clear who was pedalling whose bike as more than a hundred mountain cyclists advanced in a humming phalanx of brightly coloured jerseys from the tiny square in Llanwrtyd Wells, smallest town in Britain.
The vacated space was then re-occupied as more than 600 runners jostled for a starting position.
Somewhere in the middle I spotted Basil, the rough-coated Jack Russell, and squeezed through for an on-the-spot interview.
‘How do you feel Basil?’
‘Rough.’
‘What do you think the terrain will be like?’
‘Rough.’
Then they were gone, a body of bodies, sweating, spitting and barking into the distance.
Spared that sort of indignity, the 22 horses and riders approached individually for a staggered start.
Such beautiful beasts, with nostrils flared and heads held high.
The horses looked pretty good, too.
With a superior nod to the crowd they cantered off, confident of overhauling the tumblers and clowns within the hour.
THE SCENE AT NANT YR ANNELL
A dull thud of hooves resounded through the valley as the horses checked pace and descended from the pasture on to the  tree-shadowed bridleway that slants down the hillside to the ford at its base.
On the near side the runners and straggling cyclists groaned up the rocky path of the corresponding incline.
These were the food soldiers, the cannon fodder, and the horses were coming through.
‘Horse to your right!’ shouted the leading rider as a magnificent animal powered past the scattering runners, inhaling air with the regular pumph-pumph of a steam engine gathering speed.
Basil trotted past on muddy paws some time later.
‘How's it going, Basil?’
‘Rough,’ he panted.
THE SCENE AT ABERGWESYN
Here is the archetypal mid-Wales upland village, set at a confluence of river valleys among tree-lined pastures and overlooked by forested hills.
An elderly man in flat cap and going-out clothes was leaning against the fence, stick hanging from a crooked elbow.
He denied that he and other local people objected to this annual disruption.
‘But it has become a big thing now, hasn't it?’ he added with evident bewilderment.
The ford had attracted a couple of hundred spectators, perhaps the largest-ever gathering in the village.
While runners staggered and splashed, and cyclists rattled and splooshed, the horses trotted and stopped to drink.
Only Basil swam.
To cheers and aahs he emerged on the far bank, shook himself and set off in dripping pursuit.
VICTORIA WELLS
A strip of turf between tapes and banners in the grounds of the Victoria Wells Hotel proved to be the kindest terrain the leaders had encountered in two hours.
After being cheered over the finishing line they accepted blankets and drinks from their supporters, then wandered about with bemused expressions on their faces.
After three and a half hours the stragglers were still coming through.
One woman runner, already relaxing in a dry tracksuit, took wicked delight in the spectacle.
‘It's great to see all those men coming in behind,’ she confided.
‘One of them was so desperate to stop me overtaking at the ford he lost his footing and fell backwards into the water.’
And as for the betting, the only winners were the bookies.
Local man Ray Jenkins brought The Doid home first in just under and hour and 35 minutes, 15 minutes ahead of local cyclist Tim Davis and 22 minutes ahead of Mark Croasdale, the fastest runner.
I couldn't find Basil at the prize-giving.
They didn't have an award for fastest dog.
Rough justice, I'd call it.
Left to right Pushing through the bracken at nant yr Annell; the briefing before the cyclists set off; outstripping Shanks's pony
This year's Man v. Horse v. Mountain Bike Marathon takes place on 8 June.
Below Basil braving the ford at Abergwesyn; cyclists (top) can avoid total immersion.
A pat on the nose for a four-legged competitor (middle) and a blanket for a two-legged one (bottom)
CASTING OFF
PATRICK DOBBS ON A HOBBY THAT GOT AWAY
Once I was a keen fisherman.
With good luck, a steady hand and a tin of worms I could catch two or three river perch between the bell for school assembly and the first lesson.
Myrecord was six: one for the prayer, four for the hymn and one before the end of the announcements.
Like all true sportsmen, I was a fanatic.
On Saturday afternoons and Sundays I would cycle into the countryside with bait, rod and tackle to explore some new stretch of water, looking for fish.
Dace, roach, perch and chub were my primary quarry.
I disliked going after trout (too energetic) and I've never caught a salmon.
The smaller specimens I returned to the water, but anything over six inches long I fried for breakfast.
I did catch the occasional pike, and to this day there is no fish for which I have such respect.
Everything in the water — other fish, frogs, baby ducklings, even their own young — fear the pike, and so they should.
Their teeth and jaws can inflict such damage that an expert fisherman once told me never to put a finger in even a dead pikes' mouth.
I was just as engrossed in the sport's literature.
I discovered Negley Farson's Going Fishing , and one magic afternoon I unearthed a copy of Izaak Walton's Compleat Angler , which he wrote in 1676.
I was carried away by his reminiscences and anecdotes, his observations on natural history and his descriptions of places I had visited myself.
With the enthusiasm of a boy I thought I had stumbled across one of the great masterpieces of English writing.
Forty years later I am still sure I was right.
The zenith of my angling career came when I was about 15 years old.
One late summer night I hooked a large chubb.
I played him by the light of the moon until he was sufficiently exhausted to be manoeuvred into a bucket on the end of a stout rope.
I took him home in triumph and left him overnight in the porch, intending to record his vital statistics before turning him into fish pie.
By next morning some stray cat had eaten much of his back, so all I could do was measure him.
Twenty-one inches nose to tail.
Some time later a well-known angler, to whom I had shown the remains, was boasting of my catch to a mutual friend who was scornful, regarding anything more than 10 inches long unfit for the table.
‘That boy Patrick,’ Tom Dagnall replied, ‘is a fisherman, not a fishmonger.’
I felt that from such a pinnacle of success my reputation could only decline.
I never went fishing again.
Perhaps I'm spoilt.
I have a stream full of trout not 50 yards from my back door.
I let them swim in peace.
And fishing has changed: it's become institutionalised, controlled by permits, licences and regulations.
It's a commercial business.
I don't want to offend my fisher friends, but is it still worthwhile?
To use an artificial lure to catch a hand-reared fish in a man-made lake seems a funny kind of sport to me.
COLLECTIBLES
TREASURES FROM THE NURSERY
THE TRINKETS OF A SCHOOLBOY'S POCKET ARE THE TROPHIES OF THE OPIE COLLECTION.
IONA OPIE ON HER CACHE OF CHILDREN'S TOYS
Our collection of children's books and toys grew with us and outgrew us until it dominated our lives.
It filled every house we lived in, spilling from every surface, crammed on to beds and shelves.
So in 1959 we moved to a large, ark-like Victorian farmhouse in Hampshire which I share today with our vast collection of children's toys.
But it is an old law of life that no matter how much space you have, you fill it.
My husband Peter and I started our collection when we were expecting our first child in 1945.
We both loved children's books and began collecting nursery rhymes.
This coincided with our decision to work on a book together, so we began compiling what was to become The Oxford Dictionary of Nursery Rhymes .
After that our book collection took off.
We went into it blindly, just hoping that we could earn our bread and butter.
We had no idea we would accumulate one of the finest collections in the world.
We worked non-stop on the books, both writing and collecting them.
We were always at our desks by nine, taking short breaks only for meals and often working late into the night.
We were both the sort of people who just can't let go once they have got their teeth into something.
Our earnings were very small; all our spare money was taken up with buying books, toys and other artefacts like feeding bottles, christening clothes and plastic rattles.
Looking back, I am amazed at our discipline.
We had such great fun collecting the toys because we bought them on days off when we were out on a spree.
On Saturday mornings, doing the shopping in Petersfield, we always found time to go into Woolworth to look at their latest toys.
Sometimes we came across toys in antique booksellers and felt we had to include them too.
As we became well known, people kept things for us or told us of toys they had spotted.
But we mostly seemed to buy toys on the way somewhere to do something else.
It is another of life's 765 secrets that you never do the best things deliberately, you pick your pleasures up along the way, by accident.
For me one of the greatest gifts is the ability to look at things as if you are seeing them for the first time.
This is true of the simplest wooden toy.
It is something of a family tendency to think everything is enormously exciting no matter how ordinary it might appear to others.
My son Robert, since being fascinated by cereal packets as a child, went on to found the Museum of Advertising and Packaging in Gloucester.
For Peter, one of the high dramas was attending auctions.
He loved the tension.
One of his most exciting finds was two different pieces of an 18th-century magnetic toy which were in two different places at the same auction.
He secretly worked out that they fitted together and then successfully bid for them separately.
Although we have some beautiful and rare things like a Queen Anne doll and the earliest-known example of a jigsaw puzzle, the things I love best are the most ordinary, fragile toys — the sort of things you find in a schoolboy's pocket.
We have a wonderful cache of these toys which we picked up in badly run stationers and toy shops.
One shop in the Isle of Man, which never did any stocktaking, unearthed the most wonderful collection of 1920s toys.
Someone told them about us and we were sent a tea-chest full of filthy dirty, celluloid toys.
One I specially like was a clockwork bathing lady who jumps about when you turn the key in her back.
After Peter's death in 1982, we had to find a home for our private collection of 20,000 children's books and comics.
I launched a successful appeal under the patronage of Prince Charles in order to fund the transfer of our collection, and its cataloguing, to the bodleian Library in Oxford.
We are still trying to raise money, though, in the hope that the collection will continue to expand.
So now I have just the toys to keep me company.
Some of them are on display in the billiards room which we converted into a little museum, but others are stored in 2,000 indexed cardboard boxes.
I am still going through them and am constantly surprised by what I discover.
Peter found it therapeutic to go through the boxes.
After his death, I learnt not to shut him out of my life and now I feel a comforting sense of continuity when I go through the boxes and find little notes by him which I have never seen before.
I still add to subjects that are particularly in my line — playground games like marbles, tops and balls — as at the moment I am working on a book  about children's play.
But I have to restrict myself, otherwise I will face the same problem I had with the books — the lack of somewhere to lodge all these wonderful toys.
So I try to stick to things that are cheap and simple, like the French fluorescent skipping rope that I bought last week.
I wasn't sure if it would work so I had to try it out before buying it.
I keep some of the toys on display in working order for my grandchildren to play with.
They love the flying trapeze acrobat who dances and swings operated only by sand.
Another favourite is the zoetrope; they spend hours watching the simplest images move and flicker through the sides of the spinning drum.
I love showing them things, but even when I am alone I enjoy playing with the toys.
It is a right I reserve for all adults and one of the nicest things about being my age is that I can do whatever I like.
My tastes are simple.
I have a wooden Regency garden which I adore setting up and rearranging.
I love wooden toys, especially the doll that a local woman brought into the village antiques shop.
It is utterly charming and so unsophisticated.
Her grandfather carved it from a single piece of pear wood; its arms and legs are made of string, its shirt is just an old scrap of pyjama.
Wooden toys from other countries also fascinate me.
When you see a cheap little bird carved in China you realise that language is an unnecessary part of play.
Although my toys are an important collection, I am wary of them being looked on as investments or high-price commodities like works of art.
That is why when I die I am going to have all my 13 teddy bears burnt with me.
I don't want them to suffer the fate of appearing in an auction catalogue and having the state of their fur criticised.
You see, they don't have very much fur left.
The Treasures of Childhood by Iona and Robert Opie and Brian Alderson is published by Pavilion at £20.
If you want to support the appeal for the Opie toy collection, send a donation to Hugo Branner at 26 Norham Road, Oxford OX2 6SF.
Clockwise from top left An early 20th-century papier-maché lion which growls at the tug of a metal ring; a late 19th-century version of Happy Families; tin soldiers perpetually fighting the Battle of Waterloo; a heads-and-bodies-and-tails book in which the metamorphoses are part of a story; a cottager's doll from a village antiques shop; a fish pond in which the lines are baited with a magnet; a zoetrope, which reveals a series of moving images as the drum revolves; a tin man c.1910 who raises his hat when you pull his string.
MEET THE EXPERTS AT THE FINE ART & ANTIQUES FAIR, OLYMPIA
Join us for Country Living 's first special event at The Fine Art & Antiques Fair at Olympia on Wednesday 12 June.
The Fair, which runs from 6–16 June, brings together under one roof more than 300 of the best antique dealers from all over Britain, specialising in fine furniture, ceramics, silver, textiles, jewellery and a whole range of antiques.
Exclusively for readers, the event will start at 11.15am with coffee, followed by a 30-minute illustrated talk by Lady Victoria Leatham, one of that knowledgeable band of Antiques Roadshow experts.
lady Victoria, curator of the Burghley House collection, will talk about Japanese porcelain: Kakiemon treasures and there will be time for questions before we break for coffee.
We will then have a 30-minute illustrated talk on English Furniture: Baroque to Regency by Graham Child, Director of the Furniture Department at Sotheby's.
There'll be time for further questions, after which you will be free to browse around the Fair.
The price per person is £18.75, which includes the talks, coffee and entry to the Fair plus a glossy 200-page colour catalogue (worth £5).
An optional salad lunch with a glass of wine can be ordered at £7 per person.
To apply for a place, please complete the coupon below (closing date 31 May).
The Fair is open to the public every day from 11am–8pm, except for 6 June (noon–6pm), 10 June (closed all day) and 16 June (11am–5pm).
For general ticket price details call 071–370 8211/8234.
BOOKS
LIFE STORIES
THE FOUR BRILLIANT KNOX BROTHERS, ‘SUBLIME AND RIDICULOUS’ JOHN RUSKIN, AN INDIAN CHILDHOOD: BIOGRAPHIES REVIEWED BY CAROLE ANGIER
People often turn from fiction to biography as they get older, I expect because the real world comes to seem more mysterious and more valuable to them the closer they come to leaving it.
But we all seem to feel that way now, perhaps because our century is dying; certainly more biography and autobiography is reviewed and read today than any other genre.
Any selection of a few new titles, therefore, is bound to be especially arbitrary; I can only plead that I've made it as wide as possible.
First, two extraordinary books in paperback.
Both are family stories, both are brilliantly and movingly written, but their families and their styles could not be more different.
The Knox Brothers is written by Penelope Fitzgerald, now famous as a novelist.
There were four Knox brothers, all born in the 1880s into a Victorian rectory: Edmund, Dillwyn, Wilfred and Ronald.
Ronald, the youngest, was probably the most famous, for his translation of the Bible.
Penelope Fitzgerald is Edmund's daughter and she brings to them all, therefore, the quickened sympathy of family feeling, as well as of her own memories.
From the Ulster Knoxes, she tells us, they inherited a capacity for hard work, academic brilliance, faith and endurance; from the Knoxes' wives, tenderness and a taste for beauty and enjoyment.
But these two sides were not only complementary, they were in conflict.
Like Jean Rhys's fictional Englishmen, these real ones were taught early to rely on reason and suppress their feelings, and this opposition made the struggle of their lives.
All four were extraordinarily clever, given to fantasy and melancholy, and impractical to the point of danger.
All his life Eddie would stop if an idea came to him, even in the middle of the  road; in the First World War shortsighted Dilly tried to become a night-time despatch rider, claiming that in the dark there was no difference between good sight and bad.
Their superb brains and vulnerable hearts took the four in wildly differing, and finally conflicting, directions.
Eddie wrote light verse and became editor of Punch ; Dilly deciphered the Mimiambi of Herodas and then the German secret codes of two world wars.
They were the rational, atheistic two, lost to the evangelical religion of their father.
The other two became priests — and yet still more lost to Protestantism.
Wilfred became a socialist and an Anglo-Catholic; and Ronnie was driven by both his logic and his need for security into Roman Catholicism.
Penelope Fitzgerald tells their story with the insight, economy and drama of a novelist.
She tells it, too, with a Knoxian precision of language, and a Knoxian wit and humour.
In this last, especially, she is a Knox herself, hiding (but thereby evoking) the depth of pain in this gifted, driven family.
Sara Suleri also both celebrates, and yet protects and hides, her much-loved family in Meatless Days .
But she does it not by English wit (though there is wit here too) but by Pakistani poetry.
Penelope Fitzgerald's prose is as clear as glass, and you realise how much she hasn't said only when you stop laughing.
Sara Suleri's is dense and strange, beautiful and baffling: it is an astonishing, sometimes infuriating performance.
The construction of these ‘quirky little tales’(her words) is indirect and circular.
Sentences and stories hint at their subjects before hunting them down, so that you keep having to trust her and follow blindly.
Stories, and the whole collection, circle around the same events, reapproaching and repeating them until we see them whole and she is healed of them: the ‘trying times’ of Pakistan's civil war, the deaths of her mother and best-loved sister.
And inside this indirection lies more indirection: image, metaphor, juxtaposition.
All this means, of course, that Meatless Days is much harder to read than The Knox Brothers .
I had to read most of these shimmering sentences several times before their meaning began to settle; and many, I have to say, never settled at all.
And yet — when they did, it was worth it.
For what shines through this ornate and perhaps deliberately misleading surface is a family as lively and tragic as the Knoxes, a sense of grief as private and clear as Penelope Fitzgerald's.
In the title story Sara Suleri suggests that, as on legally meatless days people thought constantly of meat, so deprived of her dead, she thinks constantly of them.
After reading this book, so do we.
With Anton the Dove Fancier we remain with grief, but return to clarity and simplicity.
Bernard Gotfryd is not a writer but a photographer, and a survivor of several of Hitler's labour and extermination camps.
After more than 40 years, and with the encouragement of people like Primo Levi, he decided to tell his story: and discovered, like Levi, that even after more than 40 years those events were burnt into his memory.
Gotfryd is not as analytical as Levi: he hasn't the same scientific and philosophical skill and passion.
But he is a natural storyteller, and he has several of Levi's other gifts: he is honest and brave, and what he noticed, and therefore remembers, is not himself but other people.
There are stories here of unmitigated horror — the deportation of his mother, the guilt of his father, the death of his first object of desire.
But there are also stories of the saving grace of innocence and the love of a violin.
There are stories of good Germans, and the sad irony that only the good ones, ie the wrong ones, blamed themselves.
And there are, most believable and shocking of all, stories of ordinary people, neither good nor bad, or both good and bad: Ilka, who joined the brothel in Maidanek rather than starve; the Gartners of Linz, who claimed to know nothing though their son was in the SS; Anton the dove fancier himself, a brutal kapo who nonetheless took pity on Gotfryd, and helped him to survive.
But perhaps the most moving after all are Bernard Gotfryd's own feelings, just because he so rarely mentions them.
Thus the ghastly memories brought back to him by an egg; or his feeling, so terrible he does not express it, when 20 years after Maidanek his friend Michael has forgotten his name.
Or his feeling about the opposite, remembering.
‘All these years I've been talking and telling,’ he writes, ‘and I'm not sure if anybody listens or understands me.
I myself am not sure if I understand.’
Wolfgang Kemp's The Desire of My Eyes is something very different: a big, scholarly study of the life and work of John Ruskin, translated from the German.
This sounds very dull, but it isn't.
It is well translated and (mostly) well written.
Kemp is only occasionally boring (for example, on Ruskin's economics, or — breaking the first rule of boredom — on his dreams), and Ruskin never is.
You can't like him, but you must worship, despise and pity him; he is by turns sublime and ridiculous, a giant and a wimp.
Ruskin started writing when he was seven and didn't stop until he was 70; in between he wrote more than almost anyone else in the 19th century, which was not a time of literary reticence.
Kemp manages to give all this a satisfying shape.
Ruskin argued that art must not exist for itself, but for its subject, nature —‘All Great Art is Praise’— and to express and enhance society, so that a worthless society could produce only worthless art, and vice versa.
And he argued, with endless gloomy relish, that England after the Industrial Revolution was becoming increasingly worthless.
The life, of course, was hardly less extraordinary.
Kemp is brief but sensible about the mariage blanc to Effie; he is full, and dismaying, about Ruskin's infantilism, manic depression, and Humbert Humbert obsession with a series of young girls.
It seems that what drove him mad with guilt was masturbation.
Perhaps some things have improved after all.
There's little room left for my last choice,Juniper Hall by Linda Kelly.
This is a startling piece of historical research and imagination, about the flight to England of a group of French aristocrats in 1792–93.
One was the remarkable Madame de Staël; another was Alexandre d'Arblay, who met and married Fanny Burney.
Linda Kelly has made herself so familiar with these redoubtable historical figures that she writes about them as though they were her next-door neighbours.
That makes for great freshness and immediacy, but also, I felt, for banality.
Although the French Revolution was far worse than anything that our other subjects — except Gotfryd — had to suffer, we get little sense of pain from this book.
I hate to say it, but pain may be necessary to art.
Carole Angier's biography Jean Rhys is published by André Deutsch (£17.99)
DISTINGUISHING marques
COUPES, CABRIOLETS, HATCHES AND SALOONS: FRANK PAGE REVIEWS THE LATEST OFFERINGS FROM THE GARAGE SHOWROOMS
Despite the downturn in Britain's car market (300,000 fewer cars sold last year than in 1989), new and better-equipped models continue to drop off the production lines at an astonishing pace.
And of these it is the small-to-medium family cars that sell in the greatest numbers.
Notable in this bracket is the new series of Ford Escort hatchbacks and Orion saloons.
The Escort has been one of Britain's top-sellers for many years and having tested various examples of the latest in the range I have to give a curate's egg verdict.
The improvements are the amount of space inside (thanks to the extended wheelbase) and the more refined suspension.
The disappointments are the continued use of the old 1.4 and 1.6 litre CVH engines (coarse at high revs) and the fainthearted styling.
Still, the new Fords will certainly be popular since they are realistically priced (around £8,000 to £13,000), and there's a nippy cabriolet at £15,500 if you like fresh air and don't mind the expense.
But my favourite Ford, and the best car for the country dwellers, is the versatile five-door Escort estate, especially the GLX 1.6 version.
It combines peppy performance with useful cargo capacity, and is the best-looking in the range.
Rover 's equivalent to the Escort/Orion series is the 200 (hatch) and 400 (saloon) models.
Latest addition to the range is the three-door 200.
It's cheaper than the five-door models and may suit drivers who seldom carry back-seat passengers, or who do the school run and prefer to keep children encapsulated.
For speed freaks, there is a 216GTi variation, powered by a smooth Honda 1.6-litre engine and a match for Volkswagen's sportiest Golf.
Chris Vaughan, a management consultant from Farnham, Surrey, bought his just before last Christmas and has already clocked up thousands of miles.
‘It's very much a driver's car — sporty, yet comfortable,’ says Chris, who often covers 400–500 miles at a go.
‘The ride is firm, but there's no body roll and the engine is just about the sweetest I've ever had.’
Any minus points?
‘Well, I do have power steering and an excellent radio, but I miss having electric windows.
And one other thing: when I take my three-year-old daughter out, the child seat gets pushed sideways by the back-seat cushion, so I have to straighten it by putting a book under it.’
Prices of the Rover 200 three-door cars go from £9,956 to £14,488.
Rover also upgraded the Metro last year, in three- and five-door form.
The new K-series engines are a huge improvement in response and refinement (especially the 1.1-litre), and at least there's a five-speed gearbox.
The suspension has also been transformed and the driving position changed to eliminate niggles about off-set pedals and a steeply raked steering column.
Unfortunately, this has meant cutting into the less-than-generous rear passenger space: so it's fine for two adults up front and children behind, but desperately tight for four adults.
Prices range from £6,620 to £10,585.
Volkswagen 's rival to the metro is the Polo, which appeared in a new design at the turn of the year.
Underneath the skin, it's based on the old floor pan and mechanicals, but it does look better, has more performance, rides more comfortably and boasts better brakes.
Available as a three-door hatchback or coupé, plus a two-door saloon with a boot, they cost from £6,538 to £7,581 and will not disappoint fans of earlier versions.
Kim Hartman, the actress who plays the truly Aryan Helga in the BBC comedy series 'Allo ‘Allo , lives in a small Cotswold village and drives a Polo Boulevard, a special edition of VW's small car, which is equipped with a 1.3-litre engine.
For a magazine feature, Kim, who drives about 30,000 miles a year, was asked to test drive the 1.1-litre version of the new Polo.
‘I found it just as nippy as my car, despite the smaller engine,’ she told me.
‘I like the fact that it's got a fifth gear, which mine hasn't, and it seems so light and airy, with more window area.
I also found it quieter than my car and more manageable.
I felt I could whizz it round the country lanes on school runs and trips up to town.
I also love to visit antique dealers and it's surprising how much you can get into the little Polo; I've had a table and a chest of drawers.’
Further up-market, new cars challenge the dominance of Ford's Sierra and Vauxhall's Cavalier.
First, from the Japanese Nissan company, is the Primera.
This mid-range saloon and hatchback series replaces the trusty old Bluebird and is light years ahead in styling, performance and comfort.
Indeed it was runner-up in the European Car of the Year Award, which is only right because it looks and feels like a European car.
It handles crisply, performs quietly and rides resiliently.
There are 1.6- and 2-litre models in three and five-door hatchback form, plus four-door saloons.
I rate the 1.6 litres best value for money, because they are well-balanced and refined, with a high level of specification (power steering, adjustable steering  column and twin-speaker radio-cassette unit are standard even on the basic L versions).
The 150 bhp 2-litre ZX is the fast and handy sports variation but it costs around £17,000, whereas the 1.65 is in the £10,000 to £12,000 bracket.
Neil Cusforth, who's in the haulage business in Yorkshire, chose the 1.6 Primera and is delighted with it: ‘As soon as I got in I just felt right in it: it's so light and easy to use.’
Neil has travelled 2,000 miles since he bought the Primera at the turn of the year.
‘There's nothing I would change about it,’ he said.
‘Mind you, my previous Bluebird had electric windows and a radio aerial, and this hasn't but those are really luxuries.
I love to show people under the bonnet, because it's immaculate — I can't believe how easy it is to get at everything.’
Fiat has re-entered this market sector, too.
Its contender is the Tempra, a fourdoor saloon version of the hatchback Tipo.
Made with 1.4, 1.6 and 1.8 litre petrol engines, the Tempras are agile performers aimed at the business users' market.
My favourite is the 1.65, which has conventional instruments (I don't favour the digital clocks on some models) plus a sunroof, power steering and central locking.
Good value at £10,208, the Tempra 1.6 has one feature which could be invaluable to country dwellers: it has an enormous boot.
There are cars of similar size but smaller cost.
The Malaysian-built Proton was the success story of 1990.
It's really the superseded Mitsubishi Galant — built in a new factory on the old machinery with low labour costs so prices are attractive, even if the finish is a little rough.
Protons come with 1.3- and 1.5-litre engines in four-door saloon or five-door hatchback form, and in January the engines were converted to three valves per cylinder.
Costs range from around £7,000 to £9,250.
Significant launches since the turn of the year have come mainly from France.
First, the Renault Clio has now reached our market, after its European introduction last year (and triumph in the Car of the Year stakes).
This is the successor to the Renault 5, which won high praise for its refinement and sharp handling.
It is a three- or five-door hatchback that comes with umpteen variations of engine, from a 1.2 petrol up to a 1.9 diesel and, like the new Volkswagen Polo, it has a catalytic converter as standard.
But I was disappointed to find space for back seat passengers as cramped as in the 5.
It's a bigger car, with a longer wheelbase: what went wrong?
Prices in the £7,346 to £9,175 range.
Citroën 's latest launch is the ZX, a new model to slot between the company's ranger.
It is a five-door hatchback of Escort size, with engines ranging from 1.4 to 1.9 litres and four variations of styling.
Expect prices in the £8,000 to £11,000 bracket when it reaches the British market in June.
Cars are expensive tools of our everyday lies, but at least, with so many manufacturers now providing so many different models, the buyer can tailor the choice of vehicle to the usage.
And — this is the significant point — the cars are getting better all the time.
Right: Chris Vaughan with his sporty Rover 216GTi
Left: Neil Cusforth with his high-tech Nissan 1.6 Primera
LETTERS
Do write with views and news of your own country living
PILOT ISSUE
As you can see (right), being stationed in the middle of the Saudi desert doesn't stop me reading Country Living .
Lt Tim Ramsdale, another CL fan, took the photograph during a lull in 848 Naval Air Squadron's activity.
We've been flying here since September, but our wives have regularly sent out Country Living to keep us in touch.
We enjoy all the articles, and the Escapes pages give us ideas for when we get home.
But Philippa Davenport's food articles  enthral us the most: the writing and photographs have us positively drooling.
Though our food is quite good, it is not exactly cordon bleu, so if you have any ideas on how to brighten up service rations, Philippa, let us know.
We're looking forward to the next issue, reminding us of home.
Flt Lt John Adair, Sea King Detachment, Saudi Arabia
END OF TERM?
For goodness sake crack down on the use of the word potager, which does not appear in my dictionary (Concise, Oxford).
It seems to be the new buzz word for your writers.
Remind them that people who actually grow vegetables usually refer to the place where they are grown as vegetable plots, or even vegetable gardens: a bit prosaic maybe but easily understood.
So weed out the awful word — organically, of course!
Frank Wallace, Dereham, Norfolk
Potager describes a particular type of formal vegetable garden planned and planted with a draughtsman's precision to achieve an intricate symmetrical design of beds bounded by clipped hedges and separated by gravel walks.
Where the word is appropriate, I shall continue to use it shamelessly!
Miranda Innes
FIGHTING THE BLIGHT OF FARM BUILDINGS
I have every sympathy with the concern expressed by J M Bale (Letters, February issue) over the design and location of agricultural buildings.
Unfortunately, most buildings built for the purposes of ‘agriculture’ have been for a long time exempt from such planning control as can be exercised by local planning authorities.
However, there is a glimmer of hope.
The Government is proposing to bring the majority of these buildings within the ambit of local authority control.
The proposals are only in consultation form as yet, but they have been welcomed in principle by many bodies, including the Royal Town Planning Institute, to which I belong.
Should they be adopted, let us hope the landscape of the future will not be further blotted by any more of these buildings.
For more information readers can call the RTPl on 071–936 9107.
Christine Matthews 
THE RULE OF THE MOB?
I read Pamela Salvage's letter (February issue) with interest, but her sarcastic final note, of expecting ‘to see in a future issue a mob-capped housewife riddling a coke boiler, enveloped in clouds of ash’ left me indignant.
I may not wear a mob cap, but I rake our coal-fired Rayburn daily and ‘clouds of ash’ is an understatement of the result.
I am not an eccentric exception, and the fact that the coal lorry delivers weekly in our village is an indication of demand.
Ms Salvage should take a look at what real country living involves before assuming such an image would be dated!
Janet Hafner, Stoke, Hampshire
A PRICKLY PREDATOR
Your article on hedgehogs in the March issue reminded me of an incident last summer.
One evening I hear the sounds of a bird in distress, and thinking our cat had seized yet another victim I dashed outside to try to rescue the unfortunate creature.
To my amazement, on locating the source of the sound I discovered not the cat but a hedgehog in the process of killing and devouring a blackbird.
No one else seems ever to have encountered such a sight and I have had difficulty convincing friends of the truth of my tale.
Now I have your article to back me up.
Caroline Desbruslais, Deeping St James, Lincolnshire
WOMEN BEHIND THE WHEEL
In Frank Page's article ‘Danger: Male Drivers’(March issue) it was refreshing to find women being portrayed as safer drivers than men, and likely to show a more adult approach to driving.
I read recently that applicants for the Institute of Advanced Motorists test are in the ratio of one woman to four men, but the success rate shows virtually the same number of women passing as men.
I have taken and passed the IAM test, and have finally put paid to any more irritating jokes about female from my husband and my four sons.
I thoroughly recommend this course of action as a way of improving your driving and putting your badge where your mouth is.
S A Smith (Mrs), Ashbourne, Derbyshire
THE GUILE OF THE GULLS
I enjoyed Brian Redhead's piece on worms in the March edition immensely.
While I agree that worm watching will probably never catch on as a mass pursuit, something well known here in Cornwall is to observe seagulls tap dancing on the lawn after rain.
Their aim is to convince the worms that rain is still falling, so that they will evacuate their burrows for fear of drowning.
And it works!
What would Charles Darwin have made of that, I wonder?
Nigel Owen, Newlyn, Cornwall
MY COUNTRY CHILDHOOD
Rumer Godden
My childhood was as halcyon as it was unusual.
Our father, Fa, was an agent for India's Inland Navigation so that we (our mother, Mam, my three sisters, Jon, Nancy and Rose, and I) lived on the banks of Assam's and Bengal's great rivers, sometimes two miles wide, flowing through land so flat that it seemed to meet the sky all round like an inverted bowl.
If there is any space in me it comes from that sky.
Though I was born in Sussex I went out to India at six months old.
We travelled back and forth between England and India until I was seven when, because of the First World War, we did not leave India for five idyllic years from 1915.
In Bengal our town Narayanganj's river was the Lakya, part of the vast network of the Brahmaputra and the only direct way into town.
There was plenty of life in and on the river: a life of crocodiles and fish, of porpoises that somersaulted in and out of the water, of herons and egrets wading in the shallows, and kingfishers perched on the marker posts.
Steamers sent waves up the banks and naked brown boys jumped into the wash, shouting and laughing.
Ferries, loaded to the gunwales, went from bank to bank: a cluster of buffaloes being washed by small boys lay contentedly in the shallows.
Sometimes a marigold garland from a festival or a funeral floated past, or the corpse of a kid, swollen with the water; sometimes there was a whole dead cow with a vulture perched on it.
The river took them all away.
I suppose ours was a monstrous house, a great, rectangular, pale-grey stucco house, standing on a high plinth that was hidden by plumbago and a hedge of poinsettias.
Stonearched, green-shuttered verandahs ran the full length of the two floors.
The roof was flat, with a high parapet that was cut into loopholes.
Double steps, banked with pots of budding chrysanthemums, led up from the drive.
White-dressed, white-turbanned servants went in and out.
In front of the house was an enormous cork tree covered in white blossom every spring; the flower bed round its base held amaryllis lilies.
Every morning at sunrise and every evening at sunset a flag was run up or down the flagstaff on our roof; it was the company flag but we thought it was Fa's.
Some people would say we were deprived.
There were no European schools in Narayanganj so that I did not go to school until I was 12; Jon was 14.
We were taught at home by Mam's maiden sister, Aunt Mary, who had not been to school herself.
How shocking: but I have always thanked God that I did not have ‘sensible’ parents.
In those days, in the long ‘hot weather’, women and children were sent out of the heat to the hills.
Sensible parents would have chosen a hill station near us, rented a house, and sent us every year to the same school.
Mam chose instead to take us to a different hill station every year so that we travelled the length and breadth of India, from Kashmir in the far north-west, four days' journey by train and road, to the Nilgiri near Simla, and Darjeeling.
We travelled through the scorched aridness of the Scinde desert, lived in the Himalayas facing the peaks of snow, saw cities and mud-walled villages.
We picked gentians and edelweiss in Kashmir and hibiscus and bougainvillaea in our own garden.
We knew palm trees and jungle thorn trees, and the temple frangipani with its fragrant chiselled flowers, as we knew peach, plum, and cherry blossom; and birds from flamingoes, peacocks and the brain-fever birds to bulbuls and hoopoes.
Our house was a mingling of religions: Hannah, the ayah, was a Thomist Catholic; the table servants were Mohammedan; Fa's personal bearer, Jetta, was a Buddhist from Sikkim.
The gardeners were Hindu Brahmins of the highest caste; the sweeper, also Hindu, an Untouchable.
All lived together in contentment.
I suppose things made such indelible impressions on us because we had so little.
In that faraway Bengali town there were no European shops, certainly no bookshops; we had books, but few, so we wrote our own.
All of us wrote; poems and stories poured out of us.
It was a good thing, as Fa said, that the house had so many wastepaper baskets.
Of course it had to end: in March 1920 we sailed from Calcutta.
It was a grey, chill, rainy spring morning when the ship berthed at Plymouth.
Everything was grey, wet and colourless as we stood by the rail watching the luggage being unloaded into the custom sheds.
A sailor set Hathi, a small stuffed elephant on wheels, on the luggage chute; Hathi had come with us because no one could imagine our youngest sister, Rose, without him.
Wearing his scarlet flannel pad, he rolled majestically down the chute to the quay and everybody laughed and cheered.
Jon and I did not cheer, for a cold realisation was creeping over us.
This was the end of our childhood.
Soon even Rose would not want toys anymore.
Rumer Godden (in chair) with her older sister, Jon, and youngest sister, Rose
Rumer Godden's latest novel is Coromandel Sea Change, published by Macmillan at