

SOCIAL SCIENCE RESEARCH COUNCIL
The Social Science Research Council (SSRC) is a body set up by Royal Charter for the promotion of social science research.
Its functions are:
to encourage and support by any means research in the social sciences by any other person or body
to make grants to students for postgraduate instruction in the social sciences
to carry out research in the social sciences
to provide and operate services for common use for carrying on such research
to provide advice and to disseminate knowledge concerning the social sciences.
1 Temple Avenue, London, EC4Y OBD Tel: 01–353–5252
NORTH SEA OIL PANEL
This paper is one of a series produced under the auspices of the North Sea Oil Panel.
The Panel was set up by the SSRC in 1975 to promote research into the social, economic and political impact on Scotland of North Sea oil developments.
The Panel, now in its final year, has sponsored a wide range of enquiries in universities and other institutions.
The results of some of these studies are being published as books or journal articles.
In many instances however an alternative form of publication is more appropriate, and it is to provide such a medium that this series of Occasional Papers has been launched.
F.M.
Martin
The views expressed in this paper are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Social Science Research Council or its North Sea Oil Panel.
COMPOSITION OF THE PANEL
FOREWORD
One of the research priorities established by the North Sea Oil Panel was to take a fundamental look at what is meant by ‘way of life’.
To this end the Panel adopted two approaches:
(1)
a desk-study of the literature combined with intensive fieldwork in three areas,
(2)
a series of seminars on Way of Life.
This publication stems from one of the five seminars that have been held regularly since early 1979 in Edinburgh, convened by Dr Anthony Jackson.
The aim of the seminars was to bring together everyone who had been conducting social anthropological fieldwork in Scotland recently.
In this way it was hoped that informed discussions could be held on how oildevelopments have affected way of life in different parts of Scotland.
The seminar discussions have been wide-ranging and have covered many aspects of way of life, not all of which were directly connected with oil-related activities.
The papers presented to the seminars were essentially ‘work in progress’ reports and should not be read as completed pieces of research.
Nevertheless it was felt that the papers deserved a wider circulation because of their intrinsic interest to a larger audience.
SECTION 1 Dominant Ideologies and Local Communities by Anthony Jackson
It has been observed in connection with North Sea oil developments that the local communities have often been cast in the role of David against the Goliath of the oil companies.
However, recently a spokesman for a well-known oil company claimed that they were really the Davids in this country and that the boot WAS on the other foot' Doubtless, central and local government would also claim that they are simply the servants of the public and not their masters.
Thus the question is raised: what truth lies behind these opposing claims?
We are concerned here with values and the taking of decisions.
At one level we are talking about the way in which planning decisions are actually arrived at ‘in the national interest’.
Who determines what is in the best interest of all?
At another level, there is the question of who should determine major decisions which affect local communities.
The theme of this seminar bears directly on the topic of ‘Way of Life’ since this concept is often used as a weapon in planning enquiry debates to defend the vested interests of the community against perceived disruptive change.
One aim of this particular seminar is to articulate the actual use in public debate of claims that ‘way of life’ is threatened.
There are many such occasions when this phrase is used and these are familiar to everyone engaged in fieldwork.
It would be useful to compare our experiences and to elicit the types of situation when this phrase is used.
We are probably also acquainted with examples where local and national government, large and big business impinge on the local community.
What is of particular interest is the way in which these  activities are justified.
Are these rationalisations taken up by local ‘politicians’ or are they neglected?
Are pressure groups involved?
If so, how are they activated?
What are the motivations of those involved in a dispute which pits the ‘locals’ against the others?
In the context of the UK as a whole, are we right ln assuming that there is such a thing as ‘public opinion’, a ‘general consensus’ which is quantitatively different to ‘local opinion’?
Are our values so different?
Do we not all accept ‘progress’, ‘democracy’ and ‘liberty’?
One possible area of conflict of ideas and values lies in the assumption that we are either rural or urban in orientation.
As the UK is predominantly urban it follows that our dominant ideology must be urban.
If urban values lend support to the industrial economy upon which we all depend today and this is further characterised by competition, unemployment, social welfare, and a sharp distinction between work and leisure then it is possible to see rural values supporting an almost diametrically-opposed set of conditions: co-operation, multiple occupations, kin and neighbourhood help and no separation of work and leisure.
However, is this polarity of values really the case or is it merely a convenient dichotomy for argument's sake?
Is the urban/ rural conflict a myth that divides those who wish to stress progress as against tradition, or correspondingly, the ‘rat race’ to ‘sane humane living’?
If we take the argument one step further we could consider the possibility of dividing the UK into urban and non-urban districts without imputing any value system to such districts.
At one time there were no urban districts — they simply grow up around commercial and industrial interests.
The nascent towns were then locked in position by the expanding communication networks, along which yet other urban areas grew up — like suburbia.
The point is that manufacturing really began on greenfield sites without the benefit of central planning.
Today, we must again set up new industries but we are very concerned about those ‘green fields’.
The development of industry within urban  areas tends to be welcome as it provides employment for those who lose their jobs when older industries become redundant.
As for the regionally-planned green field sites for development, they are usually placed near new urban centres deliberately to provide employment.
Yet when industry wishes to go to a true green field, away from the urban areas, then this tends to attract opposition.
Why?
Do we really care about the view.
Should we listen to the few objections of the few people affected?
Are we to protect them from the social effects of spreading industry about the countryside?
Clearly, high-risk industries need special consideration wherever they are sited, although being well away from high-density population areas may be one of the prime considerations.
One characteristic of modern industry is that it is capital-intensive rather than labour-intensive and hence does not provide much employment.
A corollary of this is that such industries are far from simple to understand and hence they demand experts both to run them and to explain them to the general public, e.g. microelectronics, nuclear stations, oil refineries, etc.
Thus the role of the expert emerges in public enquiry debates, besides the creation of Public Relations Officers to handle such matters.
Another aspect of modern society is the social provision of education, health, welfare and housing besides transportation facilities.
These matters are controlled nationally and locally.
Clearly the urban centres attract most support since cost effectiveness demands this.
Decisions on these matters are as equally vital as industrial location but things are not so clear-cut in this sphere because it is subject to political controversy about the best means of achieving political goals.
In this political struggle it is also obvious that non-urban areas cannot expect to receive equal treatment because politically their numbers are too small to count against the majority, who being concentrated, can receive more social provision at cheaper cost.
Thus, attempts to provide a uniform level of social welfare in rural areas means centralisation of services in schooling, health and housing, which gives rise to migration away from isolated areas.
So the question arises whether we can afford the luxury of giving equal social provision to ‘remote areas’?
Does the dominant ideology win on economic grounds?
These are political questions and have to be answered politically in terms of expediency.
Where does the local community stand in all this?
Are community councils the answer?
What are the rights of a minority in a democracy?
Are our organs of government too crude to deal with the conflicting claims of the myriad small communities that make up the whole?
As anthropologists we tend to regard the larger society from the local community's viewpoint and to see events in terms of the impact that outside influences have upon known individuals.
There is always a danger of overidentification with the people we study and to regard their problems as unique simply because the people themselves see it that way.
Our present discussions should show how false this uniqueness is, that ‘our’ people have more in common than they allow and that, perhaps, their values are not even dichotomous, although their political ideals may be.
The above reflections attempt to cover some of the ways in which values are made explicit at planning enquiries and in the political forum.
If it takes two to make an argument then each side must choose an issue over which some values (ideals?) conflict.
It is precisely the actual point of disagreement that is of interest to us when we can get behind the rhetoric.
Of course then we may find that there is no real conflict at all and that the objective aims of the disputants are rather sordid and mercenary.
However, it is the processes involved in the public debate which should be examined and in which rhetoric forms an important component.
If ideals or values are essentially statements of faith which cannot be logically sustained then much of our examination will be concerned with persuasion rather than with facts in themselves.
It is how the facts are used that should form the touchstone of our discussion.
I assume ‘ideology’ will be used in the loose non-technical sense, of denoting a system of ideas concerning society, held by people.
In this context, dominant means prevailing or the majority view.
I would not wish to get too involved in debating this exact point since one must be aware of its vagueness.
However, the fact is that some people use this notion and that is more important than what it really is.
Perhaps, one may even get some answers!
SECTION 2 Bureaucratic Ideology and the Incomer-Shetlander Division in Dunrossness by Graham McFarlane
In this paper I will attempt to outline some of the factors which have given rise to a social division between ‘incomers’ and the native population in Dunrossness during the first phase (1971–79) of the so-called ‘oil era’in Shetland .
There is a large literature focussing or touching upon the social effects of professional and middle class migrants on rural communities (see, for instance, Ambrose 1974; Connel 1974; Crichton 1964; Forsythe 1974; Harris 1974; Newby 1977, 1979; Newby, Bell, Rose and Saunders 1978; Pahl 1965).
Some of this literature concentrates equally on the general socio-economic processes which have engendered rural immigration and on its effects on local communities: it is obvious that a complete understanding depends on this broader perspective.
Ultimately the origins of the division within the population in Dunrossness lie in the interaction between Shetland, ‘the oil’, and national or international political/economic processes: for the purposes of this paper, however, I will be looking at the factors which are in a sense ‘internal’ to Shetland in general, and Dunrossness in particular .
In doing so, I am only going to ‘bracket off’ the external influences on the local scene: I do not intend to argue that the discussion and analysis can go no further.
Before I begin to examine these ‘internal’ factors, it would be useful to provide a little background information.
Dunrossness is the part of Shetland which has been expected to bear the most immediate social and economic changes relating to North Sea oil developments.
It is the zone demarcated by the local administration as a growth, development and potential problem area.
Changes which are identified here are thought to be suggestive of changes which might take place  in other areas of Shetland as the construction phase of the oil era winds down, and the oil production phase takes off in earnest.
To date, Dunrossness has received by far the largest proportion of the immigration of young professionals associated with various oil-rig servicing industries, based at Shetland's major airport.
The overwhelming majority of these immigrants are pilots, engineers, air-traffic controllers and administrative staff associated with their activities.
The population in the area increased from 1,141 in 1971 (March) to 1,599 in 1978 (June), and the total number of inhabited dwellings increased from 385 in 1968 to 541 in 1978, an increase of 40.5%.
Housing for oil-related workers is considered to be a critical problem for the local administration: the suddenness of demand for housing has necessitated various policies constraining its dispersal, concentration and, most recently, its direction northwards away from the immediate vicinity of the airport.
The ‘traditional’ settlement pattern in the area is varied and developed out of topographical constraint, patterns of land tenure and the exigencies of agriculture.
To this original settlement pattern have been added new housing estates (both local authority and company owned) and ribbon development of privately owned deluxe housing.
Today the chief employer in the area is the airport.
Recent figures from the local council show that there are 529 people currently employed at the airport — 358 immigrants and 171 natives of Shetland.
This represents massive expansion: the labour force in 1968 totalled 9 individuals (7 of whom were classified as natives of the area).
The overwhelming majority of Shetlanders employed at the airport are unskilled, semi-skilled ‘blue collar’ workers.
While the airport is the economic hub of the area, agriculture is still an important part of the local economy.
In fact, Dunrossness has long been considered to be the most fertile and agriculturally productive area in the whole of Shetland.
Most of the agricultural sector is taken up by part-time crofting but, unusual for Shetland, there are tracts of fertile land sufficiently extensive to allow for some full-time farming.
The most  extensive tracts are taken up by five dairy farms.
The word ‘community’ appeared time and time again in discussion with people in Dunrossness.
What is meant by this term?
Perhaps not surprisingly, the term community is used by Dunrossness residents in much the same way as it is used by politicians and social scientists.
Community can have an occupational referent: for example, the pilot community, the crofting community or the community of airport workers.
Community can also be used to refer to various collectivities of people supposedly characterised by distinct ways of life: for example, the Shetlander community, the churchgoing community, the incomer community.
However, perhaps the most important referent of community is geographical: a community is a social whole which is usually anchored in space; the members of a community live and do various things together within some, at least vaguely, definable geographical area.
The study area, Dunrossness, as defined by the local administration is not such an area.
As demarcated by the local authority for planning and research purposes, Dunrossness is not a geographical base for any socially identifiable collectivity.
The term Dunrossness has numerous geographical referents, only one of which, a narrow zone in the centre of the research area, has community characteristics in Shetlanders' eyes.
As far as I could discover, there is no suggestion that the residents in the defined area for our research see themselves as constituting a socially relevant or meaningful whole.
However, within the study area there are a number of small villages, hamlets or neighbourhoods, all of which are attributed community status by Shetlanders.
They are communities in the sense that one has a sense of ‘belonging’ in them, and in the sense that Shetlanders belonging to each are said to be distinguishable by special characteristics in dialect or, less often (and more humorously), by difference in mentality and general attitudes.
Belonging to these communities is different from living within their borders.
‘Belonging’ to these communities is to have been born in them; and/or to have close kin in the area; and/or to have a reputation in them (i.e. to be known as having a certain  character, certain skills and certain beliefs).
If one does not belong one is An incomer.
Here there is room for negotiation.
One can be attributed incomer status in any local community because one does not have close kin in the area, because one was not born there or, simply, because one has not become known in them one can not claim membership in terms of any of these attributes.
Moreover, claims for membership in terms of one criterion can be, and often are, denied in terms of another.
This all applies to Shetlanders as well as to non-Shetlanders.
There is a more inclusive meaning to the term ‘incomer’, this is used in relation to both these small, local communities and, more important, in relation to Shetland as a whole.
The distinction is between those who are natives of Shetland and those who are not: these latter are, in a sense, ‘real’ incomers.
These are often labelled ‘sooth-moothers’ for the sake of clarification.
It is here that the ambiguity about the application of the term ‘incomer’ comes to an end.
As one might expect these ‘real incomers’ are not all the same to Shetlanders.
They have numerous subdivisions, defined along various dimensions.
Incomers are differentiated along a scale of what looks like respectability, along a scale relating to relative permanence of residence and, associated with this latter, along a scale which relates to (something like) social investment in the locality in which they live.
According to each of these criteria, the new residents in Dunrossness clearly stand apart, in Shetlanders' eyes, from all other incomers.
First, the new residents in Dunrossness are different from the construction workers who live in camps situated in various parts of Shetland (including a camp at the airport): these latter are only temporary residents whose residence in Shetland, and whose supposed commitment to Shetland, will end with the end of the construction phase of the.oil era.
Second, both these latter people, and the so-called ‘oilies’ who pass through the local airport on the way to the oil rigs, are much less respectable than the more permanent residents in Dunrossness.
Indeed, both construction workers and ‘oilies’ are usually seen by Shetlanders as potential troublemakers who need to be amused, policed and, above all, contained.
Shetlanders would point to the names and addresses of those mentioned in press  reports of local court cases to provide evidence for their viewpoint.
Shetlanders in the area do divide up ‘their’ incomers, i.e. those incomers who reside in the area.
As applied to the population in Dunrossness, the gross category ‘incomer’ is subdivided along various dimensions.
For example, incomers are differentiated by age, by sex, according to occupational prestige (pilots stand above engineers and air-traffic controllers), and according to place of residence (estate dwellers are supposed to stand apart as more distant from those who live interspersed with Shetlanders).
The broad Shetlander identity can also be broken down into various sorts of identities.
Apart from the distinctions they make in terms of membership in particular local communities, however, Shetlanders are reluctant to categorise themselves into different types of Shetlander.
Most of our Shetlander informants stressed that it was difficult to talk about groups or categories among Shetlanders.
Occupational types, for example, whether crofters, fishermen or merchants, are together presumed to have more in common than they have to divide them.
The most important differences are those to be found between individuals, rather than between groups or categories This seems to imply that the one thing Shetlanders have in common is that they Are All different from one another, and that their common identity as Shetlanders is something that emerges only when they contrast themselves to people from the south.
When our informants were encouraged to think of their own society in terms of groups or categories, the most basic distinction they made was that of sex and age.
The old arc contrasted with the young in a number of ways, for example in their attachment to tradition, access to opportunities, churchgoing or even self-control (the young are presumed to have less than the old).
The distinction between males and females is held to be so fundamental as to be unworthy of comment.
It would appear from the remarks of our incomer informants that for them too, the most readily apparent distinction between types of Shetlanders is along the sex and age dimensions.
Despite all such niceties, however, it remains the case that the Shetlander/incomer distinction remains the most fundamental and basic  distinction in the area.
This is indicated in various ways.
For one thing, these gross categories seem to be the backdrop to a lot of discussions about individual behaviour and personality traits.
For another, although finer distinctions are made among both Shetlanders and incomers, the stereotypes which are said to characterise the sub-divisions of each group do not differ so much in kind as in degree.
That is: given characteristics are attributed to the entire population of Shetlanders and to the entire population of incomers: any differences which exist within the category are differences in degree of applicability.
The sense of division which exists is a comparatively new phenomenon, at least to judge from the life histories and recollections of people living in the area.
It would seem that up until recently (usually this is specified as up to between 2 and 5 years ago) individual incomers (the ‘soothmoother’ type) were assimilated with relative ease into individual social networks centred in neighbourhoods or villages.
There were comparatively few incomers and they were dispersed among the native population (estate building for incomers did not peak until 1976, and none existed before 1974).
Most relations were created out of simple necessity — the need for advice, help with building, renovations and so forth.
Furthermore, many of the first incomers had (and still have) a rather cosy view of life in Shetland, they pursued the meaningful ‘community’: as a consequence, these individuals tended to establish their closest relations with the bearers of Shetland tradition, the older Shetlanders.
These older Shetlanders seemed to create the incomers' links to the community, in the sense that it was they who helped to forge the reputations attributed to these incomers.
Having a reputation, these incomers came to ‘belong’ to communities.
Increased immigration militated against the absorption of new arrivals in existing Shetlander networks; while at the same time it was accompanied by the creation of new networks composed of incomers -incomers found shared interests in what they saw as a frontier zone.
Incomer networks were forged out of relationships created at work in  the new estates and in the local social club, an institution established to help airport workers obtain some of the urban civilisation.
Shift work added to the tenuous links between incomer men and their Shetlander neighbours.
Shetlanders would maintain that in the past individual incomers had to become part of the local community: now they no longer needed to.
In the past, they were willing to participate in local events, stand about and chat with the neighbours and generally act like good neighbours.
The incomers depended upon Shetlanders for socialising and favours, and they had no exclusive networks of their own.
To Shetlanders, the d vision of local society coincided with the creation of incomer networks.
There are various factors which underly this division.
I will look at these in turn.
Land and Housing
As I have mentioned above, the amount of immigration into the area has necessitated the passing over of land for new housing.
The general literature on migration indicates that conflict is likely to be engendered here.
In what ways has it been engendered in Dunrossness?
The image which most Shetlanders present is of new housing springing up everywhere, without any apparent pattern.
Despite the supposed safe-guard of a detailed District Plan, development of housing is presumed to be either totally out of control or else subject to inconsistent or ever changing planning policies.
At the time of our research, Shetlanders seemed to share the view that the area was either in a state of supersaturation with new housing, or else nearing that state.
Those held responsible for this general state of affairs range from the big ‘companies’ to the local administration.
At the time of our research one of the two most widely acknowledged and apparent problems for Shetlanders was one which was formulated in public and private discussion as good agricultural land going for new (incomers') housing.
One could argue that such complaints constitute some kind of rationale for a general feeling that there are too many incomers in the area.
There is no reason to refute this argument: undoubtedly this is a sentiment seemingly shared by many Shetlanders.
However, there is more to it than that: the issue also involves a conflict between Shetlanders' ‘traditional’ attitudes to land and attitudes characteristic of non-Shetlanders, attitudes which are also shared by some Shetlanders (especially some of the young).
Many Shetlanders expressed concern about land being considered not as a resource for production, but as a resource to be treated simply as a kind of nonagricultural commodity i.e. something to be surrendered up from agriculture merely for money.
This antagonism towards the idea that land is a kind of commodity is linked up to a particular view of history: the older and middle-aged Shetlanders, especially, emphasise the importance of safeguarding agricultural land.
Many older Shetlanders lay great stress on a boom and bust theory of history: according to this theory Shetland and Dunrossness have experienced booms in the past, but they have always had to revert to traditional lifestyles and industries when they pass.
Although present developments are seen as both quantitively and qualitively different, they too will pass: what will happen to the land on which housing is built?
Objections that most of the land in question is relatively poor quality land might be accepted, but often the classification on which such estimates are based were challenged.
The argument is often that a classification designed in the South (no matter what alterations exist for Shetland) does not take specifically local conditions and local interests into account.
Local knowledge of the quality of land and its potential is thought to be more important.
Shetlanders see a conflict among themselves over land, a conflict generated by ‘incomers’ almost by the very fact of their presence.
In short, Shetlanders are criticised for selling land.
People are quick to articulate such criticisms in gossip but even here there are constraints.
Given that Dunrossness is experiencing a boom, it is entirely reasonable to make the most of the boom by selling individual plots of land, if that is the only way one can take advantage of it.
People are rarely castigated in public for selling individual plots because such complaints would be counterproductive.
However, it would seem  that selling sizeable tracts of reasonable quality (by local standards) is considered to be the behaviour of speculators and/or simply short-sighted.
Thus, it is a reasonable thing to complain about.
The relations between land and housing has generated conflicts in other ways.
Competition between incomers and Shetlanders over house sites seem to be an important factor.
House sites are seen to be a scarce resource, by both Shetlanders and incomers, basically because the amount of sites given planning permission by the local authority is ever decreasing.
Shetlanders are afraid that they might be excluded from this market — with their higher salaries and various company safeguards, incomers are thought to be willing to make higher bids for scarce pieces of land.
The conflict between Shetlanders and incomers is presumed in turn to cause friction between Shetlanders.
It is not invariably the case that Shetlanders who are selling land, will exhibit loyalty and give preference to other Shetlanders, especially if the other Shetlanders are not related.
Here the behaviour is discussed as behaviour not reasonable for a Shetlander.
Even rented accommodation has been taken up almost exclusively by incomers: company allowances and incomers' higher salaries generally have meant that rents have increased and that incomers tend to be given preference as tenants.
As a consequence, young Shetland married couples seem to presume that their best options are to await council housing or build houses on one spouse's kinfolk's land.
In general, the idea of forming anything more than a temporary joint household with one or other spouse's parents is not seen to be a serious option.
The provision of council housing can be linked in turn to another source of conflict between Shetland and incomers (and to a lesser extent between Shetlanders).
The provision of council housing threatens the interests of many private residents, both Shetlander and incomer.
Generally speaking, however, incomers seem to be more vociferous about the threat such housing presents to the peace and quiet of their area.
Many incomers have a fixed image of rural life which does not include council estates, no matter how small.
Moreover, their image of the  countryside often excludes even new private housing as well.
I have scant evidence to suggest that the problem for incomers is seen as much more than this — there may be a threat to house prices on behalf of non-oil-related incomers (who have no guarantees) but oil-related workers seem to be assured-of recovering their costs if they decide to sell up.
What is important here is the fact that even shared opposition to council housing (manifest in petitions) is usually blamed on incomers to an area.
To many Shetlanders this is often seen to be part of a more general shortcoming on behalf of incomers — their over-riding desire to maintain the status quo in local communities as soon as they are established there.
The conflicts which have developed over land and housing can also be linked up to the very mobility of incomers.
Many of the incomers in resident private housing are still occupationally mobile:(they are still mostly young): many have moved out of their adoptive communities, usually with a sizeable profit, after selling their houses.
The very mobility of incomers is seen as another example of speculation.
Incomers are ‘mercenary’ not least in the sense that they are thought to use Shetland land to line their own pockets.
For their part any incomers see themselves as having made considerable sacrifices to come to Shetland, giving up their homes in the south near friends and perhaps relatives, and facing the possibility that while they are away inflation will ensure that they cannot afford to buy their old houses back again when they return (hence the price guarantees that the airlines are obliged to offer on their employees' houses in Shetland).
They feel that Shetlanders do not appreciate the sacrifices they are making: instead they suspect they are being regarded by Shetlanders as a nuisance not really to be welcomed and as far as possible to be ignored altogether.
They suspect that because they are not really wanted, they are put into estates, overcharged in the shops and given no recreational or community facilities.
Incomers do not understand why, when public attention turns to acres of unused or underused pasture or park, the needs of sheep or the needs of agriculture in the distant future are felt by Shetlanders to be greater  than the incomers' here-and-now needs for housing, shops or recreational facilities.
The conclusion is drawn by many incomers that the arguments about ‘good land’ are just excuses for Shetlanders to assert their control over local society.
This feeling is reinforced by the fact that the community councils, ln which such debate rages, are dominated by Shetlanders and are seen by incomers as existing to serve the interests of Shetlanders only.
Residential Distribution
There is probably some truth in the commonsense view of many informants that the distribution of incomers' residence has an effect upon the nature of social relations between Shetlanders and incomers.
Without doubt, the concentration of some incomers in estates has tended to limit their chances for establishing close social relationships with Shetlanders living nearby.
This seems especially the case in single-employer estates, which tend to become enclaves, small social universes characterised by patterns of restrained sociability such as stage-managed dinner parties for couples and women's coffee mornings.
Of course, these single-employer estates are not closed social fields: indeed, social networks extend outwards from the estates to include other colleagues employed by the same company who live elsewhere in Dunrossness, and perhaps also include a few Shetlanders perceived as having an equal social status.
These single-employer estates are not socially homogeneous, in spite of the fact that all of their residents have connections with the same employer.
Perceptions of relative status or class is seen as one of the factors explaining the formation of small cliques within the estate, and internal divisions, petty antagonisms and jealousies are reflected in gossip.
The formation of cliques is not unexpected, given the fact that the only things which the residents actually do have in common is that of having the same employer and the same degree of occupational and residential mobility.
These estates have a relatively high turnover of residents, as new workers and their families are posted to Shetland, others return to the south and some move into private housing in the locality, leaving the estate to escape from feelings of  social claustrophobia.
A high turnover of residents is also a significant factor in the two multiple-employer estates and, here too people find their closest social associates among their colleagues at work.
As a result, such estates are even more likely to display sharp status distinctions and to be divided into clearly marked cliques.
On a hypothetical scale of integration, multiple-employer estates would rank lower than single company estates.
Residents in both kinds of estate are by and large socially self-sufficient and feel little or no necessity to create close relations with their Shetlander neighbours.
Social networks within the estates furnish mutual aid such as babysitting, the companies look after the structural maintenance of the houses, and most residents have common ideas about what counts as enjoyable socialising which are not shared by Shetlanders; for instance, it was often pointed out by incomers that dinner parties are a novelty to all Shetlanders except young professionals.
It would appear that the only Shetlanders who have reason to go into the estates at all, other than a small number of professional Shetlanders who have incomer friends who live there, are young Shetlander girls who are willing to babysit when most of the women in a social circle are attending the same function, or Shetlanders supplying some domestic service to individual households on the estates.
Until recently the situation was markedly different in those localities where incomer housing is dispersed among Shetlander housing.
As I pointed out above, as the newcomers settled into established communities here and there and one or two at a time, many social relations between incomers and Shetlanders were created from the simple neighbourly needs for advice and help with house repairs and so on.
Yet the image of social harmony between Shetlanders and incomers which was said to exist in certain localities four or five years ago should not be over-estimated.
The majority of the incomers who settled in these localities were young couples who were still committed to a strategy of occupational and residential mobility in order to further their career interests; they were ‘spiralists’, and with only a few  exceptions, their residence does not seem to be permanent.
Social Ranking
The question of social ranking entered into numerous informal interviews and discussions with both Shetlanders and incomers.
This too seems to be a stress point.
Among Shetlanders the ideal, acceptable or usual ways of ranking individuals (and families) seem to be multivarious.
Numerous different scales are apparent e.g. productive skills, industriousness, intelligence, helpfulness, friendliness, modesty, wit and especially for women, religiosity.
Assessments of individuals along any of these scales is an element of the shared local knowledge which develops out of living in face to face (or often back to back) communities.
Despite differences in wealth, or in occupation, Shetlanders assume that evaluations of a person's worth should be a result of his or her behaviour, not according to what an individual ‘has’ or ‘is’.
Apparent claims for superiority made in terms of wealth or occupation are invariably countered (in gossip) by negative assessments along one or more of the other scales.
The ‘toffee nosed’ person might be useless with his or her hands!
Nevertheless, most Shetlanders are perfectly aware of what social class means.
Shetlanders see classes as aggregates of people who are ranked or arranged like layers on a cake.
They are distinguished by various combinations of attributes — occupation, money, manners, education, power, jobs, standard of living, possession of material items.
There is no doubt that Shetlanders' images of social class vary extensively from individual to individual (typically in relation to the ‘things’ which are thought to ‘give’people their class, and the elements which are thought to be consequence of class membership).
However, all Shetlanders seem to agree that classes are tied up with wealth and occupation; and most Shetlanders agree that class is a concept which has greater salience in life outside Shetland and therefore among incomers.
Both incomers and Shetlanders make a basic occupational distinction  between pilots on the one hand, and engineers and air traffic controllers on the other.
Incomers tend to see this in class terms as well— pilots are generally upper crust, while engineers are more down to earth (socially as well as literally') Since many incomer workers are ex-military the distinction is often phrased in military terms: officers and ‘other ranks’.
Those incomers with whom I discussed class agreed that awareness of class is a typically British trait.
They also agreed that classes are aggregates of people who are distinguishable by one or by a combination of the following: wealth, occupation, manners, standard of living, power, material possessions.
As one would expect, incomers took a greater interest in discussing class — class is supposed to go a long way in explaining the membership of given social networks, and in the scope of such networks.
For Shetlanders, it seems that a ‘new’ set of universalistic measures for assessing individuals' social rank has been brought into plan in the study area.
While Shetlanders seem to cling to ranking schemes based on individual reputations, they believe that they are being judged by incomers in terms of class.
In terms of the features which are used to assess class most Shetlanders seem to recognise that they lag behind.
Such notions are manifest in demonstrations of deference in interaction with incomers — especially with pilots.
Not all sections of the Shetland population cling to traditional measures of social ranking with equal tenacity.
The younger age group have taken up conspicuous consumption, presumably as a means of recouping some esteem in terms of the apparently dominant and universalistic class criteria.
However, in perhaps the most important field, employment, Shetlanders (excluding older Shetlanders), do not, as yet cannot, compete with incomers.
Shetlanders seem to assess the good job in much the same way as incomers.
It is defined in terms of wages/salaries, number of perks, capacity for initiative, amount and nature of skills involved, security and the community esteem which might come from obtaining such jobs.
However, the overwhelming  majority of recruits to the best jobs at the airport are recruited, unavoidably it seems, outside Shetland (as yet the Shetland workforce does not have the relevant training or skills).
Not only have the rules of the game been changed, but Shetlanders are handicapped by it.
There is therefore a sense of relative deprivation among Shetlanders.
The general consequence of this is outlined in the literature on urban to rural migration by the middle class.
The natives in the area assert that social worth is not to be defined in terms of such universalistic notions as class, but rather in terms of length of residence i.e. they make ‘rank’ a distinction between the established and the outsiders (see especially Newby, 1977, 1979; Newby, Bell, Rose and Saunders 1978; Pahl 1965).
The Shetlander-Incomer Division: A Self-Fulfilling Prophecy?
Apart from the broad range of socio-economic processes which have brought oilrelated personnel to the area in the first place (which cannot be dealt with here), there are political issues in Shetland which have had a most direct bearing on the emergence of the divisions.
It could be argued that one of the reasons for the social division in the area might be the fact that those in charge of the paraphernalia of research did in a sense predefine conflict in this way.
The idea that a presumption about the future has an effect upon that future is true and obviously commonplace in the social world (see the self-fulfilling prophecy argument): how did it manifest itself in this particular case?
The predefinition is manifest in the first place in the planning literature produced by the Shetland Islands Council, specifically the Shetland Structure Plan published in 1976.
Although the structure plan was compiled mostly by a group of consultants, it was updated by the Islands' planning authority and, since it does bear the name of the Council, one would assume that it mirrors the ideas of the local bureaucracy.
What does this document say about the issues at hand?
In the chapter on Social Change the document makes the obvious point that development in Shetland will create considerable immigration  into Shetland and (less obviously) that there will be two different kinds of immigrants: a temporary construction force and more permanent operational and servicing staff.
The latter concerns me here, since at the time when the data for the structure plan were collected (as now) these workers were concentrated in the South Mainland.
These workers, the plan suggests, will come from urban or suburban backgrounds, they will be part of mainstream urban society and Shetland will be quite new to their experience.
The plan suggests that it would be a delusion to assume that these immigrants would shed their values for Shetland ones.
The plan goes on to set out points made in a social work committee report submitted in 1975, dealing with the likely effects of the arrival of a large number of permanent immigrants.
It details three types of problems for the community.
Let us look in detail at the last of these, since they would seem to be most relevant.
The community problems are:
i.
Lack of confidence in some of the basic traditional values leading to loss of direction and/or discontent.
ii.
Decrease in community help leaving the elderly at risk and thus placing heavier demands on local authority services.
iii.
Misunderstanding of values and life styles of incomers.
iv.
Difficulty of incomers in adjusting to Shetland's isolation, weather conditions and other physical characteristics.
v.
Over-work leading to a reduction of participation in social activities and/or a change in types of activities.
vi.
The effect of population movement on the social structures of outlying areas.
Moreover, the plan specified areas where conflicts were sure to develop.
Quoting from a conference held at Aberdeen in 1973 , the plan points out that community facilities and housing are likely to be the subject of much inter-community wrangling.
Now the plan does point out that there are positive aspects to the arrival of incomers.
However, the only things which are spelt out are that development cannot go on without them, the fact that new skills  will be introduced and the fact that incomers might form a catalyst for the rejuvenation of local voluntary groups.
Most of these views were expressed, in less articulate terms, in numerous informal discussions arranged with members of the relevant departments of the council bureaucracy, prior to fieldwork in Shetland.
The presence of incomers was presented as the most immediate and tangible aspect of the general threat to the Shetland ‘Way of Life’ Although Shetland is reputed to be something of a melting pot, given the many different influxes of people over the centuries (one native council official saw the typical Shetlanders as a bit of a ‘mongrel’), these incomers were presumed to be somewhat different: most of them are here because their jobs brought them here (those who are not here because of their jobs are eccentric!), their stay will be temporary, there are more of them, they represent mainstream and hence dominant ways of life, they regard Shetlanders as peasants or country hicks.
In other words, incomers are likely to be a ‘problem’ to the Shetland community (or better, these incomers are more of a ‘problem’than previous incomers).
The feeling that incomers might be a problem necessitates ways in which one can prove this and attempt to ameliorate the situation.
Hence the creation of social impact/change working groups, and (eventually), the joining of forces of academia with local and national government groupings to sponsor the Dunrossness social change study.
It could be argued that these ideas were deliberately peddled in Dunrossness.
In fact, all the evidence points the other way.
Ironically enough, the planners and policy makers etc., seemed to be aware of the likely unintended consequences of these ideas being handled wrongly.
In the Structure Plan, again, can be found the following perceptive comments:
‘Some of the fears about large-scale immigration could in fact be self-fulfilling, since an antipathetic attitude towards incomers could create the conditions of dissatisfaction and unhappiness amongst immigrants that will cause both a high turnover and disharmony between Shetlanders and immigrants…’
‘Any suggestion that immigrants are being admitted on sufferance only, or that their range of choices, for example about where they live, is bring restricted, is likely to reinforce the unsettling effects of the move to a new environment which they will be making.’
‘Incomers who remain dissatisfied will not remain in Shetland long, and a high turnover amongst incomers could be more disruptive to Shetland than the presence of more permanent residents (SSP: 20).’
It would seem that great pains were taken to ensure that the potential division among Incomer/Shetlander lives would not be spoken about, and that if it was spoken about in a public forum, the arrival of incomers would be made to look less ominous.
This can be gauged from the Dunrossness District Plan, published prior to the Structure Plan.
A new system for forward planning in Britain was established in 1972.
According to this system, Structure Plans are supposed to spawn District Plans: the District Plans are supposed to look at problems set out in the Structure Plan in more depth, and they are supposed to show how general planning policies might be worked out in practice.
Even though the publication sequence got a bit confused in Shetland, one would think that the Dunrossness District Plan should make references similar to those in the Structure Plan regarding incomers and Shetlanders and the possible problems which might arise from their meeting.
This does not seem to be the case.
Practically none of the apparently negative prophecies in the Structure Plan appear in the District Plan.
Social Integration of Incomers and Shetlanders is held to be the aim, and an achievable aim: achievable especially by dispersal of housing (DDP: 28).
References to the ‘incomers’ are phrased in terms of the benefits which they might bring.
Most important, the young incoming population will redress the imbalance in the age structure of the area (DDP: 8–9).
Any threats which the incomers might present to local interests are underplayed.
For instance the report argues that the actual overcrowding and potential greater overcrowding at the school is not so great that it cannot be met with temporary classrooms and eventually new extensions to the school (DDP: 11–12).
Since there is  such a difference between the two documents, and since the Dunrossness District Plan was designed for immediate public consumption (the Structurn Plan had not been disseminated widely at the time of our research, June, 1978 — January, 1979) one could suggest that the tenor of the document reflects the desire to underplay any potential conflicts between Shetlanders and incomers.
This would be in tune with the general desire of the council officials that we as researchers should not set about asking direct questions about incomer and Shetlander relations.
In other words a ‘softly-softly’ approach was established, apparently to avoid the self-fulfilling prophecy.
As with some of the more recent reactions to our report, the simple fact of talking about the relationships between Shetlanders and incomers or, worse, writing about it, was seen as disruptive in itself.
This fits in with the general tendency among much of the elite population in Shetland (and Dunrossness) to avoid raising ‘issues’(this has obviously happy consequences for those who are benefitting most from oil-related developments).
So the policy makers, the planners (and the academics?) all sought to make sure that they did not influence the situation in Dunrossness.
How successful were they?
It is at least likely that they did in fact fail to keep their ideology to themselves.
In such a close-knit community as Shetland (it is still relatively closeknit despite claims to the contrary) it is unlikely that viewpoints could be sequestered away.
Certainly whenever the researchers arrived to arrange their initial series of interviews, several potential interviewees met their request for an interview with queries as to whether we were going to look at ‘how the incomers/Shetlanders are mixing with Shetlander/incomers’.
The inference was that those ‘above’ were testing out their impressions about the area.
It seemed that both incomers and Shetlanders presumed that the researchers did have a clearcut image of conflict in the area and that they were just fiddling about trying to show it, rather than attempting to do something about it (e.g. putting the incomers somewhere else, helping out the incomers for once, etc.).
Let me recap.
The division between incomers and Shetlanders in Dunrossness seems to have been an immediate product of conflicts over land and housing, a consequence of some residential patterns in the area, an outcome of changes in the accepted rules in the ‘status game’ and, perhaps, an inevitable result of policy predictions.
Despite the temptation to see conflicts of material interest (land and housing) as somehow primary causes of the division, and the other factors as secondary in importance, the interaction between these factors would preclude any such simple reductionism.
What is likely to complicate matters even more is the fact that the publication and dissemination of the Dunrossness report (see Byron and McFarlane, 1980) is likely to add further fuel to the processes discussed above; not simply in the sense that the report constitutes a kind of distillation of the processes concerned but, more importantly, in the sense that the report provides a source of rhetoric for future discussion about, and agreement over, what is happening in the area.
We can only await developments.
SECTION 3 The Social Value of Rural Schools: National Ideology, Local Values, and a Regional Decision-making Process by Diana Forsythe.
Introduction
We are asked in Dr. Jackson's discussion paper to ‘articulate the actual use in public debate of claims that ‘way of life’ is threatened’.
I will attempt to do this with reference to the issue of the social consequences of closing primary schools in rural areas .
This is my second Way of Life seminar, so I have missed discussion which may have taken place at earlier seminars over the definition of ‘way of life’.
For my own purposes, I propose to treat as a way of life argument any claim that a particular policy decision would have significant consequences for the demographic, economic or social life of a community, or that it would significantly affect the atmosphere or symbolic existence of that community.
These days, way of life arguments are a common feature of public debate about the value of small rural schools.
However, as I will show, there may be no consideration of way of life when decisions are made about the closure of particular schools.
Thus, the criteria used in planning decisions at the local level may have very little to do with national ideology.
National Ideology
There can be no doubt that the way of life argument is widely felt to be relevant to the issue of primary school closure in rural areas.
Parents, pressure groups, national teachers' organisations, and academics regularly express in print the notion that closing a primary school and sending children down the road to a school in another  settlement may bring about changes detrimental to the way of life of any community whose school is closed.
Consider the following quotations:
(1) From the Association of Head Teachers (Scotland) as reported in the Oban Times (20/3/80):
As well as the educational and economic arguments, there are the other factors of a social nature which the association feels ought to be taken into account when closures are being considered.
In rural areas the school frequently serves as a focal point for the local community — its removal can have a detrimental effect in that it may become increasingly difficult to attract new families to settle, the younger age groups tend to drift towards the neighbouring towns and the average age of the remaining inhabitants goes on rising.
The result is that the community eventually atrophies and dies.
(2) John Cunningham writing in The Guardian (31/8/78), in an article entitled ‘When ‘Save our School’ means ‘Save our Way of Life’':
Country parishes amalgamate and the vicar is seen on Sunday ln three: the village shop is nobbled by the supermarket; the bus service — rationalised and subsidised — becomes more infrequent.
But the  linchpin really falls out of rural communities when village schools are closed.
(3) From a periodical on planning:
For villages already deprived of their public house, general store, pharmacy, and the bus service, the loss of their school represents a final blow to the village fabric.
A school is vital to the persistence of a healthy community, often referred to as the hub, pivot, or lynchpin of village life.
It ensures continuity from one generation to the next,…
The strongest argument for preserving the village school is undoubtedly its role in the community.
(Cooper, 1979, pp.190–191).
(4) J. Martin Shaw, County Planning Officer of Norfolk, notes that ‘schools are widely regarded as the focus of village life’.
(1978, p.97).
(5) A pamphlet called Schools under Threat , designed as a handbook for the organisation of resistance to school closures, asserts that:—
Many schools are the centre of community life.
They provide a base for meetings, social events, the celebration of festivals.
The teachers bring skills to a community and encourage the development, expression and sharing of others' skills throughout that community.
A school acts as a magnet for young people who want to bring up their family in a rural or well-defined small urban environment.
This in turn keeps a community thriving and lively.
A mix of ages and social groups creates a human form of cross-subsidy — voluntary help personal inter-action, with young helping old and all a vital part of a balanced community.
(Rogers 1979, p.33).
An editorial in The Times sums it all up:
In the correspondence in our columns which has followed the report on the decline of village life by the Conference of Rural Community Councils, one factor has increasingly been identified as crucial to the ultimate survival of the village as a community.
It is not the rural bus, post office, shop or pub, important as all these can be in safeguarding a village's identity.
It is above all the school which is felt to embody the idea of the village as something alive and enduring.
Without it young families are reluctant to stay or settle, and the vitality and diversity of village life will almost inevitably decline.
(11/9/78).
I would like to draw your attention to several characteristics of statements of the kind listed above.
First, they are couched in extremely general terms.
They don't refer to particular cases of primary school closure in any particular location.
Rather, they consist of statements about the nature of villages, country parishes and communities.
The view expressed in the cliche that ‘the school is the heart of the community’ is apparently held to apply to rural life in general.
Indeed, the pamphlet called Schools Under Threat makes an even broader assertion suggesting that schools are the centre of many urban as well as rural communities.
The second characteristic of the type of statements given above is that they are stereotyped: the social argument against rural primary school closure generally consists of some or all of the  following assertions:
(a)
Closing the village school causes demographic change: reduced or selective inmigration, increased or selective outmigration, and/or the consequent aging of the residual population of the community.
(b)
Schools are the focus of community life.
By removing the present focus of much community activity and co-operation, school closure will reduce or eliminate such activities in the future and thus destroy the community itself.
(c)
The presence of a school in a community has symbolic meaning.
It represents the enduring nature of the community, its ‘life’ and its future.
Thus, the closure of a school can ‘kill’ a community ln a symbolic sense, reducing it to a scattering of houses with no collective identity.
And finally, these statements are characterised by a conspicuous absence of facts to bolster such assertions.
The authors of such statements cite each other in support of their beliefs, but the criticcal reader is hard put to find reference to any systematic test of their accuracy.
In a year and a half of reading the literature on small schools, I have come across very few studies of any kind which purport to empirically test any aspect of these three assertions.
This handful of studies includes undergraduate theses and quick surveys by local authorities.
Thus, while there does seem to be a widespread belief that primary school closure threatens the way of life of rural communities, this belief rests on assumption and common consensus rather than careful study of the question.
I am not claiming that the belief is wrong, but simply that we have no facts on which to judge the issue.
In short, I think we are in the realm of ideology here, and the rise of the ‘small schools movement’ during the 1970s is probably a reflection of the general resurgence of pastoralism ln popular thought over the past decade.
I have suggested that many people believe that there is a valid way of life argument against closing any rural primary school.
Nevertheless, Education Authorities do close such schools, and have done so in large numbers since World War II.
How do such closure decisions  come about, and to what extent do way of life arguments enter the decisionmaking process in particular cases?
To shed light on these questions, I'd like to take an example from the fairly recent past, considering the factors which one (unnamed) Education Committee took into account in discussing the closure of a one-teacher school which I
A Case History
First, I'd like to trace the steps by which the Education Committee decided to close the school.
The information is taken mainly from minutes of Committee meetings supplied by the Region concerned .
(1)
The Education Committee met in December 1976.
The first item on the agenda was a discussion of how much money could be saved from closures over the next year.
It had previously been estimated that £40,000 could be saved; the Committee decided that this was unrealistic, and reduced the estimate to £25,000.
Next, they considered the possible closure of Village school.
The Director of Education suggested that as the teacher was due to retire soon, consideration be given to possible amalgamation of this school with that at Green Haven , about five miles away.
The combined roll of both schools would be around 30 pupils.
The Green Haven school was a modern building designed as a two-teacher school but presently containing only one teacher with about a dozen pupils.
The maximum travelling distance of pupils from Village would increase from 2½ miles to 8 miles.
It was estimated that closure would result in a net saving of roughly £2,923 per annum.
The Committee noted that the Village parents were strongly opposed to the closure.
But the Director of Education concluded that the educational situation would be much better at Green Haven.
Some members of the Committee moved that the school stay open, on the grounds that short-term financial gain would not be compensated for by the long-term loss to the community.
However, the Chairman moved to close the school and transfer the children to Green Haven, and this motion carried 16 to 7.
(2)
The Education Committee met again the following February.
There was a motion to suspend the Standing Orders in order to reconsider the question of closing Village school.
18 voted in favour, less than the two-thirds vote required, and the motion was defeated.
A proposal to close the school was sent to the Secretary of State and approved, and the school was closed.
(3)
In March, the Committee met again.
A letter from the Secretary of State had arrived withdrawing his approval for the closure in order to allow him to consider views brought to his attention by a Regional Councillor and by the local MP.
The Secretary of State asked for the Committee's comments.
The Councillor in question spoke to the meeting, but the Chairman ruled that the issue of closure could not be raised, as the meeting was considering only the Secretary of State's request for comments.
(4)
At around the same time, the issue of school closure was raised with the Regional Council, which decided that schools should be closed on educational rather than financial grounds.
The Director of Education subsequently produced a written document enunciating this policy.
(5)
At the May meeting of the Education Committee, an amendment to the minute of the December meeting was proposed and adopted.
It contained an acknowledgment that its decision to close Village school had been taken primarily on financial grounds.
(6)
At the June meeting of the Education Committee, the Village Regional Councillor raised the issue again, asking the Committee to reconsider its decision to close the school.
He referred to the new written policy and circulated four letters from parents objecting to the proposed closure.
The Councillor contended  that the Committee had been overinfluenced by the need to make economies and had not given enough consideration to the local view, shown in letters and at a local meeting at which opposition to closure had been unanimous.
He pointed out that Village school's roll of nearly 20 pupils was considerably larger than the number given by the Council's policy document as the minimum desirable size, and moved that the school remain open.
The motion was carried, and the school was reopened with a new teacher.
Let us look at the factors considered during the formal decision-making process.
The Education Committee evaluated Village school for possible closure because the teacher had reached the age of retirement.
Their initial closure decision was made on three grounds, according to the minutes: the expected financial savings of about £3,000; consideration of the good condition and underused capacity of the school building at Green Haven, as opposed to the poor condition of the older building at Village (whose toilet facilities were located in an out-building at the school); and the Director's feeling that the ‘educational situation’ would be better at Green Haven.
No indication is given of what he meant by the ‘educational situation’, and there is no evidence that he undertook any systematic comparison of the educational quality of the two schools.
Nor do the minutes provide evidence of any formal attempt to compare the cost of improving Village school building with the cost of transporting the children to Green Haven, though it is possible that such studies took place.
What is clear from the minutes is that the implications of school closure for the way of life of the community which was to lose its school were not considered.
Some members of the Committee did raise the problem of the ‘long-term costs to the community’ likely to be brought about by the closure of Village school, but this objection was apparently passed over with no request for clarification, consultation, or serious study of the problem.
The Committee also noted, but devoted little  attention to the report of strong opposition to the closure by Village parents.
Those in favour of keeping the school open seem to have finally achieved their goal by manoeuvring their colleagues into an embarrassing position.
This was made possible, in part, by the adoption by the Region of a written policy on closures stressing the desirability of only closing schools on educational grounds, provided that a minimum number of pupils was in attendance.
Unfortunately, I don't know who initiated the move to adopt a Regional policy of this nature, or why a written policy was decided on just then.
But since it had been adopted, the Councillor mentioned above was able to get approval for a motion acknowledging that the Education Committee had voted to close the school on grounds incompatible with its own policy.
He was aided in this manoeuvre by two factors.
First, he had strong support from the local community, who in the course of their campaign to re-open the school had contacted their MP and the Secretary of State.
And second, it appears that the latter withdrew his approval of the initial closure proposal because the Education Committee had not fully complied with government regulations on closure procedure.
The exact way in which they had failed to comply with the regulations is unclear; a representative of the Education Authority told me that the school has re-opened on a ‘technicality’, because the School Council had not been consulted before the closure; people in Village told me that the Education Authority had not consulted anyone in the community before-hand, a bigger breach of the regulations.
In any case, it was open to the Education Committee to take up the question of Village school again, deliberating whether a new closure order could be justified on educational grounds.
However, they dropped the issue and the school is still open.
A Local View
There is a striking contrast between the sweeping statements about the social importance of rural primary schools which (I have  suggested) form part of the ‘national ideology’, and the very low priority given to way of life by this Education Authority in actual closure decisions, at least in the formal record of the Village case.
(Examination of the minutes referred to earlier suggests that the same is true of many other cases of closure in the Region, although the Director is careful now to propose closures on ‘educational grounds’, and to direct that the–parents and School Council be consulted).
In view of this contrast, it is interesting to consider the views of the people of Village, the community which would have been most affected by the closure of Village School.
Earlier this year, I spent three weeks in the community.
Twentyeight people were interviewed, representatives of roughly half the households in the catchment area.
Not surprisingly, I found people extremely concerned about their school, and almost — but not quite — unanimous in their assertion that school closure would damage the life of the community.
The interview schedule included (among others) the following questions:—
Would it make any difference to life in this community if there no primary school in Village?
Would it make any difference to you personally if there were no primary school in Village?
People were encouraged to say as much as they wanted to in answer to these questions, and I later categorised their responses according to the kinds of consequences they envisaged: effects on children, effects on the community generally, and effects on them personally (or their immediate families).
Only two people said that there would be no difference of any kind if there were no school in the community.
Of the rest, twenty mentioned various kinds of community-level effects which I would classify as affecting the local way of life.
None of these way of life effects was seen as positive for the community.
Because of the level of generality of most published statements  about the social importance of rural schools, I am concerned to investi gate in some detail the question of how schools are important to a community.
Therefore despite the very real difficulties of trying to force ‘emic’ data into analytical categories of my own devising, I have classified my informants' communityoriented responses into nine categories of community-level effect.
They are as follows:
1.
Demographic effects: reduced or selective immigration; increased or selective outmigration; ageing of local population.
2.
Economic effects: loss to community of school-related jobs, income, or services; difficulty in attracting workers or keeping workers in the community.
3.
Loss of teacher(s) from the community.
4.
Loss of school building as a location for organised activities.
5.
Effects of school closure on material existence of community.
6.
Effects of school closure on the atmosphere and/or symbolic existence of the community .
7.
Effects of loss of school as a focus for community activities and cooperation, or as a means of bringing people together; loss of the activities themselves.
8.
General feeling of loss or unspecified community effect: people would miss the school, the school is an asset to the community, it would be sad with no children around, etc.
9.
Other community-level effect(s).
Assigning responses to one of these categories was sometimes difficult.
For example, a few informants responded to the questions with images of death: ‘It (the community) would go dead’, ‘The community would die’, and so forth .
During the interviews I tried to probe whether what was meant was the ageing of the population, a change of atmosphere, the community's material demise or what; but on occasion I had to guess at what the informant really meant.
None of the informants from Village mentioned possible economic damage to the community or the loss of the school building as a  location for organised activities.
Each one mentioned harmful demographic effects and the effect of the loss of the teacher to the community.
(In this respect, Village differs markedly from some other Scottish communities included in this study, where informants made much more mention of the possible demographic and economic effects of school closure.)
Only one person suggested that the closure of the school might actually lead to the destruction of the community in a material sense.
‘A shop and a school — they made a village.
And you feel, if the school closes, then the shop, then the post office…’(i.e. a downward spiral).
In contrast, twelve people felt that school closure would damage the atmosphere or the symbolic existence of the community.
This is the context in which the death imagery arose.
‘Yes, definitely, it would kill the community if the school was away.
That's always the death of the community.
It's not easy to explain what I mean.
The closeness of the community would be bound to change’.
‘You feel a place is dead if there's no school in it —there's an air of depression somehow’.
‘It would reduce the place to a scattering of houses.
We haven't much else here.
The school is something solid and permanent’.
‘I feel that without a school you wouldn't have a village’.
Eight people described consequences of school closure which were related to the extent or the quality of interaction and social cohesiveness within the community.
Some people emphasised the importance of activities organised by the school.
’ And all the activities for the children that one can attend — sports days, Christmas parties, the Mod — you can get involved in them along with the children.
The whist drives for the school — you can take part in the preparations.
If there were no school, you probably would never hear of these things’.
Others mentioned the cohesive force of the school as an area of common concern between members of the community.
‘It would be a great gap, a great social gap.
All the the mums talk, they get together.
They're interested in the children and in the little bus that picks them all up.
I think it would be a very big loss’.
‘The school whist gets far more donations than anything.
Everybody's so interested’.
‘It (school closure) would be a bad step for the community.
There would be no centre, no focal point.
The centre would move into Green Haven, but how could that be?
There is no other focal point here — no one church or…(any other other single unifying institution).
There would be nothing.’
One of the eight described the importance of the school for the flow of information through the community.
‘There's an awful lot of things related to the school in a roundabout way.
The children come home with news — someone's been sick, and so on— that you probably wouldn't hear about otherwise.
The children are n source of information about the community.’
Ten informants characterised the effects of a possible closure in terms of a general feeling of loss.
They pointed out that the school was important to the community and that it would be missed.
‘It would be different.
The school has always been here.’
‘I feel as though it would be a great loss.
.. The main difference is that you wouldn't see any children through the day.
Many old people here only experience what they see on the road (out of the window)— they would miss that’.
(i.e. would miss seeing children go by on the way to and from school).
In sum, the majority of Village respondents felt that the local way of life would be damaged if there were no school in the village, and most were able to describe the ways in which community life would suffer through the closure of the local school.
Their answers are more illuminating in this respect than the generalisation of the authors quoted in the first section of this paper.
Members of Village community made use of the second and third but not the first social  argument against school closure listed on page 35, and added a number of other way of life arguments of their own.
However, the scope of the way of life arguments of Village people is much more limited than that of the ‘small schools movement’.
A few Village respondents included broad ideological statements along with their other arguments, but all respondents concentrated mainly on statements about the anticipated effects of the loss of a particular school on life in a particular community.
No respondent generalised on a scale anything like that of the authors cited above.
Two Village respondents stand out from the rest in their disagreement with the arguments I have summarised.
One agreed that the community would miss the school if it were closed, but referred to strong educational arguments for sending the children to a two-teacher school.
In her opinion, the educational benefits to be gained by amalgamation out-weighed the social costs to the community.
The other respondent favoured amalgamation with Green Haven on the same educational grounds (the superiority of a two-teacher over a one-teacher school), but denied that there was a valid way of life argument for keeping Village school open.
‘The local school isn't the centre of the local community in any way.
Apart from the fact that the children go to school there.
The playgroup is in Green Haven, all community activities such as the Youth Club are in Green Haven, school meals come from Green Haven.
Everything comes from Green Haven.
The life of the community wouldn't alter in any way.
Years ago they used to have ceilidhs in Village school, and lots of things, but no longer.
The school is no longer the hub of the community.
If there had been anything at all in Village still, it would have been different.
But everything (is) already in Green Haven’.
Conclusion
Noting the claim of central and local government that they are simply the servants of the public and not its masters, the discussion paper for this seminar raises the question of whose values inform policy decisions which affect local communities.
On the issue of the  social value of small rural schools, it is clear that the anti-closure position of current national ideology is strongly reflected (though in more particularistic terms) in the views of Village community -and that these views played essentially no part in the formal decision-making process by which Village school was closed and subsequently re-opened by the Education Authority.
SECTION 4 Feeling at Home: Dominant Ideologies, Social Boundaries, and Way of Life by Reginald Byron
This essay will take up the theme of dominant ideologies and local communities as a part of the wider methodological problem of how we, as anthropologists, consider the nature of the relationship between the communities we study and the wider world they inhabit.
Our discussions have closely linked dominant ideologies with bureaucracy.
Planners and other bureaucrats we have seen as the spokesmen of the dominant ideology, of rules and procedures, of the interests of the state apparatus and of national policies.
Yet in relation to our local communities, these bureaucrats are part of the dominant ideology only in a relative sense.
Bureaucrats are people too.
What the people who work in a local government planning office do is constrained by a further dominant ideology at some higher level of centrality.
Like our villagers, bureaucrats at every level operate within a commonsense, taken-for-granted world in which they feel at home: their world, as they see it, is one of reality, not of ideology.
Our association of dominant ideology with bureaucracy has tempted us to reserve our notions of way of life for our villagers, thereby reducing bureaucrats and other representatives of the wider world beyond the boundaries of community to automatons, ciphers in depersonalised processes which are unintentionally portrayed as existing merely to threaten the way of life of local communities.
There is, it seems to me, a danger of treating the communities we study as pawns in some cosmic game of micro and macro processes, locating reality in the microprocesses of social interaction we observe in our villages and treating what is our subjects as something that is either less than reality or reality of a different kind or order.
Indeed, this is how our informants may see  it.
To them, the outside world may appear to be constituted of broad, impersonal processes.
Dominant ideologies are just such broad processes: at least, in the context of our discussion, they are abstract conceptualisations of broad processes having to do with the management and allocation of resources, power and authority.
We may view such processes as having effects upon local communities, and search for causal explanations of social behaviour in these broad processes.
This is of course a perfectly defensible approach, but it seems to me a limited one: inevitably one comes up against the micro-macro conundrum.
Sooner or later, one must plump for either the primacy of micro-processes in socio-logical explanation, or for the primacy of macro-processes as in notions of ‘encapsulation’, 'centre and periphery', ‘dominance and dependency’, Marxist theory, and the like.
Usually, one then treats one set of relations as problematic and.simply assumes the existence of the other, as if it were some sort of indeterminate background noise or, more contentiously, assigns truth to one and falsity to the other.
It may be useful to remind ourselves that both levels have reality, but they are, of course, reality to different people.
For every social actor, there will be processes ‘out there’, beyond his own personal experience, competence and familiarity.
He has no means of influencing these processes.
He is merely an object who is affected by them.
He just has to take what comes, and somehow cope as best he can.
At the in which he is involved and does have a part in shaping: these processes will appear to him not as broad generalities, but as a collection of micro-processes, the technicalities and particularities of daily life.
To the planner, planning is just a job, not an ideology.
Yet to another social actor, unaware of these same micro-processes, the daily details of what planners do, planning may be seen as a broad process, a part of a general phenomenon of bureaucracy, of governmental meddling and red tape, a manifestation of the ideology of the Welfare State.
Clearly, social reality is highly situational.
What is one actor's familiar world is another's terra incognita .
One actor's notion of competing, dominant or wrong-headed ideology is another's way of life.
An obvious point, perhaps, but one that is sometimes overlooked for the sake of explanatory convenience.
This is a hazard of taking a single community as the centre of a sociological universe, rarely venturing beyond its conceptual boundaries and, possibly, uncritically accepting the commonsense distinctions of our informants as being sufficient for analytical purposes.
One way round this problem that has been suggested is to complement our village-centred studies of micro-process with studies of institutional or bureaucratic micro-process; to do, for example, ethnographies of the planners as well as the planned, and so to build up a composite picture of the social realities of people in different social niches.
However desirable this might be, in a highly complex and differentiated society such as ours this undertaking would need a very long time given our present methods, resources and interests.
It would also present immense practical difficulties of access.
And, in the end, unless we challenge our assumptions, we may end up with little more than a large collection of inwardlooking occupational ethnographies between which the connections still remained to be demonstrated.
If so, we will have missed the point, which is to show the articulation of inside with outside, of micro with macro.
Such an enterprise may prove both impractical and unlikely to yield any major new theoretical insights.
It might be possible to approach the problem from another angle: specifically to direct our attention to intentional social behaviour in relation to the outside world, to look at the ways that people cope, deal and come to terms with the non-routine, the out-of-the-ordinary, to document the character of the dynamic between the familiar world and the external processes typical of people in different groups, categories, communities and societies.
We might begin by asking: what knowledge do people have about processes beyond the boundaries of familiar reality?
How is this knowledge gained?
How do people recognise unfamiliar processes when they encounter them?
How do they feel their way about on the frontiers of their familiar world?
What resources do they have for dealing with the unfamiliar, and how do they use them?
In other words, what is the nature of social knowledge and  social action in relation to those processes which people define as more or less external to their own experience, to everyday life, to their own construction of social reality?
My initial assumption is that any given member of any given society makes some distinction between his immediate social environment and that which is outside it.
This immediate social environment is merely that in which he feels at home.
Most of the everyday life activities of the actor are performed within its boundaries, and it is fully familiar to him.
Within this environment, he is a fully competent social performer and has an adequate knowledge of the rules and conditions that pertain to his behaviour.
He has at least some degree of control over his immediate circumstances, but even if he is unable to exert control in particular cases, he at least knows that his views and decisions count.
He is able to treat most of the situations and problems that arise in the course of everyday life as matters of routine.
He has either direct, individualised relations with other people in the same social environment, or the means to put such relations on an individualised basis.
In short, it is a social ambient within a more encompassing society which is home-ground, known and familiar.
Such home-ground environments may be bounded in a variety of ways.
For example, it may be possible to distinguish between spatial, technical and social boundaries.
Spatial boundaries may entail geographical remoteness, distance and other natural features which present obstacles to social intercourse.
Or, though the process or institution may be, so to speak, on the doorstep, its accessibility may be limited: what goes on inside a defence research establishment or a Masonic Lodge are obvious examples.
So too in some degree are the internal workings of hospitals, prisons, asylums, factories and offices screened from the public gaze.
Here the boundary is obvious and physical: if it is not a natural feature of the landscape, it is a front door, a gate, a ‘staff only’ or ‘private’sign.
Spatial boundaries may vary in their openness, the degree to which they permit outsiders to inspect the  phenomenon in question, to find out what goes on and to gain thereby a knowledge of it and a competence in dealing with it.
Technical boundaries are the limits of ‘knowing how’, the specialised skills or knowledge necessary to achieve a particular goal, whether it is preparing a dish of zabaglione, filling out a form to obtain an agricultural subsidy or organising a protest strike.
Such skills or knowledge may be more or less specialised, comprehensible, or penetrable to an outsider.
They may or may not be articulated in formal jargon or ‘in languages’ which restrict their currency and mark off the professional status or their  practitioners , as in medicine and the law.
Technical boundaries similarly vary in openness.
Finally, boundaries may be social.
Differences in ethnic identity, race, religion, social stratification, age and sex may be associated with more or less familiar or comprehensible values, attitudes and expectations.
Social boundaries will reside in the actor's conceptualisations of whom, in what degree, it is possible to approach, ask for advice, trust and whom may not be socially ‘reached’.
This is not to suggest that boundaries are always of clearly definable kind, and only one.
On the contrary, a given boundary may entail a combination of spatial, technical and social elements in different mixes.
Moreover, these elements vary in their degree of openness and closure.
The greater the degree of closure, the more impenetrable, distant, arcane, and different, the sharper the boundaries between the everyday experience of the social actor, the category or community and the outside world is likely to be.
The sharper the boundaries, the more likely the dynamic between them will be articulated through more of less formal, institutionalised modes of mediation: patrons, brokers, interpreters, committees, councils and the like.
Contrarily, the more open the boundaries, the greater the degree of ‘all else equal’ in common aims, interests, social acquaintanceships and idioms of discourse, the more fluid the boundary and the greater the likelihood that a working competence across the boundary can be negotiated by the actor himself, from the resources of his own home ground.
For every social actor, category or community, there will be a multiplicity of boundaries at the frontiers of the home ground environment.
The same individual will be more competent in some things, less so in others, and not at all, in still other of the concerns of life which touch him.
In any given category or group, some individuals will have competences not shared by others.
Between groups, categories, communities and societies there will be different mixes and levels of competences in dealing with the outside world which will inevitably affect their conceptualisation of it, the resources available to them, and their response to it.
The number of boundaries of competence that exist for any given social entity may vary: the members of an isolated New Guinea society, all of whom perform virtually identical tasks according to age and sex, will have fewer than the members of a more complex society with a greater division of labour.
Not only may the boundaries of competence vary in distribution and number, they also vary in quality.
Some of these boundaries will be relatively open, some relatively closed, others somewhere in between.
The mix of open and closed boundaries may vary from one society, category, community or individual to another.
The greater the openness of the boundary, the greater the potential capacity to negotiate across it; the greater the number of open boundaries, the greater the potential power available to the social actors to promote a dialectical relation with the outside world, to actively influence the processes, policies and events that touch their lives Conversely, the fewer open boundaries there are perceived to be and the more closed, the more powerlessness and passivity is likely to be manifest in relation to the outside world.
A newly arrived unskilled Mediterranean worker living in a run-down neighbourhood in a Scandinavian city is more likely to feel, and appear, in some significant ways more socially incompetent that a middle-class, professional native living in the suburbs: even though the boundaries for each may be comparable in kind and number, for the skilled and socialised native the boundaries be relatively more open than for the unskilled and unsocialised gästarbetare .
For a Scandinavian tourist visiting a Mediterranean  country, the situation would be reversed, though with probably more trivial consequences.
Thus the openness of the boundaries is highly variable and depends upon the placement and perceptions of the social actors, their knowledge and goals.
Boundedness is not necessarily a quality of the process of institution itself: the same process or institution will not be beyond the boundary to those who are a part of it; to them, it will be a part of everyday experience, while to others, not a part of it, it will be beyond the boundaries of home-ground.
Let us take, as an illustration, the boundaries of bureaucracy.
In a global context, few people in the world today can live out their lives without some awareness of, or indeed direct contact with agencies of state administration.
The most remote tribal areas are now being touched directly by political, educational, medical and economic development programmes and social welfare schemes, with the institutions of state bureaucracy entering the management of local production and consumption and affecting the choices and decisions of individual citizens, creating new boundaries that people must cope with as best they can.
In more complex societies, bureaucracy impinges upon its citizens with even greater frequency and immediacy on a multiplicity of fronts and in numerous different contexts, entering many aspects of production and consumption, perhaps most aspects in ‘corporate’ societies.
Bureaucracy may strike an ordinary citizen as an undifferentiated monolith whose personnel are distant and officious, whose workings are baffling, whose idiom of discourse is unintelligible (perhaps even in another language), personified as a ‘them’, wholly external to the actor's everyday social reality.
Yet, analytically, bureaucracies are highly segmented, both vertically and horizontally, composed of a number of different institutions with different specialisations, clients, idioms of discourse, degrees of autonomy and secrecy, and the like.
The point here is that bureaucracy has no continuous boundary or uniform integrity.
It presents itself to the citizen in many different guises: the payment of VAT on a chocolate bar, a rule against  parking on a yellow line, a maternity allowance.
There is not one boundary but many, varying in kind and degree of openness, each, perhaps, calling forth different competences and drawing upon different resources.
To the political scientist, a bureaucracy may be a system: the roles and relations of its constituent elements may be logically ordered, its coherence demonstrated.
But to the ordinary citizen, it is not a system.
It is, rather, a series of boundaries, of points of confrontation.
The citizen does not require a model of the Inland Revenue, much less HM Government, to pay his taxes.
He needs only the competence to understand and fill out his annual return to deal as effectively with the tax authorities as most other citizens do.
In a similar way, social actors need not have any embracing concept or model of what lies beyond their own home ground.
They may conceive of it in piecemeal fashion, recognising particular boundaries as and when it is unavoidably necessary to do so.
It is not therefore assumed that people have a' consciousness' (false or otherwise) or a system or knowledge about the outside world, but only that they have a more or less adequate collection of competences in dealing with particular instances of it.
So far I have tried to argue that the competences people have in dealing with the outside world vary in kind, adequacy, number and distribution.
Where the boundaries of the outside world are located at any instant will depend upon the social actor's possession and manipulation of a set of competences of varied quality.
The precise location of the boundaries of the outside world will thus differ from one individual, category or community to another.
They may change in location over time.
New competences may be acquired, others may become redundant as the contexts calling them forth change in relation to the situation of the social actor.
The boundaries are woven into social life in uneven texture; they are not a seamless web of uniform warp and weft.
Bureaucracy, for example, interdigitates with the social reality of individuals and communities, penetrating some spheres of life deeply, others not at all : in each, it may be invited, welcomed, kept at bay, questioned, resented, taken for granted, or regarded as a closed book.
The outside world is, for the social actor, the opposite of his own home ground.
By comparison, it is opaque and unfamiliar.
This does not mean to say that he does not have the necessary competence to perform adequately as a member of a wider society, but it is in general a passive competence.
While on his own home ground he knows how to do things, or how to get them done, beyond the boundaries of his home ground he knows, at best, only that he should comply with the rules without necessarily understanding why or precisely what all of the relevant rules are: he may simply go through the motions.
He may have some more or less general ideas about how to go about solving problems without the knowledge and means to solve them himself.
The mystified motorist whose car has gone wrong may know only that it needs repair and that he should take it to a mechanic: his competence to deal with the matter may go no further.
The inhabitants of the outside world exist for the social actor not as persons whom he knows on an individualised basis, but as social types (like mechanics or planners), or indistinguishable collectivities of persons (like bureaucrats, Tories or Dinka) The rules and conditions coming from the outside which in some way affect him are simply taken as given.
Although he may have the option of ignoring them, possibly at some cost to himself, he cannot manipulate these rules and conditions in the same way that he can those within his own sphere of competence.
What is beyond the boundaries of his own home ground is an outside world composed of impersonal structures and processes over which he has no control, of if he does have some control, it is only by virtue of some formal authority vested in an office that he occupies.
It is sometimes assumed that this outside world, composed of external structures and processes, exists at some level above that of the actor's home ground.
It may be more useful to attempt to visualise the relation as a three-dimensional one: some externalities may be above, others below, yet others merely ‘out there’.
To a high-ranking official in a planning agency, the mechanisms of informal help in house-building between rural villagers are just as much an external process as the workings of that agency are to the villagers.
That is to say, the existence of home ground may be assumed not only for the grassroots component of a society, but for all its members.
Our selective emphasis upon locating our research at the grassroots or folk level, for whatever reasons, has perhaps led us to overemphasise our villagers' stereotypical views of society for the sake of analytical convenience, to divide the world into fixed categories of ‘us’ and ‘them’.
In a sense, our usage of the terms ‘way of life’ and ‘ideology’are indicative of this: we have used them as conceptual opposites.
‘Way of life’ we have used to symbolise the familiar, the comfortable, a social world that appears to the actor as natural, without mystery or artifice, in which he feels confident, competent, at home.
It is a world of pragmatic fact that the actor may test for himself.
‘Ideology’, on the other hand, symbolises other people's beliefs and ways of thinking.
Like someone else's religion, one is asked to accept the validity of its ideas on faith; one has not the experience to test their factuality.
Peasant conservatism is just as much an ideology to the planner as the greater public good is to the crofter If way of life is natural and familiar, ideology is contrived and foreign.
Both are opposite statements of difference, of the boundedness of a social world.
In this essay, I have attempted to suggest some ways in which we might look beyond the conceptual dichotomy between ‘us’ and ‘them’, villagers and bureaucrats, to ask how the dynamic of interaction across the boundary is played out.
Are the people we study able actively to deal with unfamiliar structures and processes?
If they are not, why do they consider themselves unable to do so?
If they are able to do so, what resources do they have for dealing with the external world, and how do they use them?
Have they acquired new resources in relation to the external world and new competences in dealing with it: have the boundaries of home ground shifted, expanded or contracted?
Are people more or less ‘in the know’ about the external circumstances which affect them than they used to be?
Have they become relatively more competent in dealing with them, or less competent?
How and why have these changes occurred, and what do they suggest about the nature of the relation between ‘feeling at home’ and the wider world beyond?
SECTION 5 Life in Orkney under the Sewerage (Scotland) Act of 1968 by James Wilson
In 1973, under the direction of the Scottish Development Department, the old County Council of Orkney commissioned a firm of planning consultants to draw up first of all an interim strategy and then a Structure Plan to cope with the consequences surrounding the construction of an oil-terminal on the island of Flotta, and with the possibility of further North Sea oil activity taking place within the county.
Amongst other things, the consultants recommended the adoption of a housing policy to cope with the increasing number of planning applications for private houses which were then coming from recently-arrived oil-workers and newly-prosperous Orcadians, as well as the likelihood of even more applications in the future.
This policy was adopted by the County Council, ratified by their successors on the new Orkney Islands Council, and in time included in the Structure Plan for the islands.
That is to say, it was agreed to recommend that:—
‘…private houses be located in community groups or in established settlements…’
From this simple beginning a great deal of controversy and acrimony emerged.
People soon took sides either for or against what came to be known as the Council's ‘green belt’ or ‘anti-dispersal’policy.
In 1977 a Council planner summed up the development of the argument from his point of view:—
‘Most Orcadians are against planning controls and are against our housing policy.
They have no idea of amenity, no regard for landscape and have scant interest in problems of drainage and water.
The problem is that they are rather too practical in their outlook and are used to doing as they please.’
On the other hand, a leading opponent of the Council's policy argued  that:—
‘The Planning Office have knocked the common man into the ground.
We've always been concerned with self-improvement, slowly re-building and extending our steadings and houses.
Now it seems as though we can't build anything anywhere.
We'll all have to live in their damned council houses.’
In many ways these two opinions sum up the different preconceptions, experiences, attitudes and priorities of the two sides.
The planners' central analysis has remained the same throughout the controversy.
It was first of all made by the Council's planning consultants and then by the Planning Department set up under Local Government reorganisation, a department intended in part to oversee the Council's housing policy and headed by a former employee of the Council's erstwhile planning consultants.
In its purest form their argument is that Orkney is an area where agricultural owner-occupancy, depopulation, and the conservatism of successive local authority administrations have encouraged a tradition of private housing.
It is argued that whilst this tradition continues today it has been accelerated by the arrival of North Sea oil money and consolidated by the housing needs of incoming workers many of whom desire to own their own property.
Thus, the planners maintain that this new demand must be disciplined in some way.
In detail, the Council's planning policy applies to the mainland of Orkney and divided the island up into different zones.
It identifies areas of existing or potential urban settlement where housing is encouraged.
At the same time the policy sets certain limits on house-building in rural areas allowing the erection of houses for agricultural workers, for family members working on a full-time basis on a family farm, and on a one-to-one replacement rule.
Other areas, those of outstanding aesthetic, historic or scientific interest, are regarded as entirely unsuitable for housing developments of any sort.
These same restrictions apply to the siting of council houses but this aspect of the policy has not engendered the same weight of opposition since it does not represent the interruption of an existing right, that is to say the ‘right’ to build private houses almost anywhere.
Rather it means the extension of a longstanding trend whereby council  houses have generally been built in either Kirkwall or Stromness, and in a sense the opening up of new opportunities since council houses are now more readily available than they were before.
In addition, the housing policy does not apply to the outer isles where there is only a limited demand for new housing and where the absence of control is seen as a matter of benign neglect.
The rationale behind all of this contains many assumptions which are perhaps conventional enough in terms of Central Government legislation, planning theory and urban practice.
The planners argue that the centralisation of houses makes the provision of services such as sewerage, water, cleansing, roads and lighting more economical whilst benefitting other agencies such as the North of Scotland  Hydro-Electric Board and the Post Office in their work.
After all, as the planners maintain, government legislation requires every local authority to provide a full range of services and so it is only logical and business-like to plan to provide these things cheaply.
In addition, the planners argue that they have a duty imposed upon them under recent Acts of Parliament to conserve the natural environment of Orkney.
Thus, the planners tend to see themselves as pursuing a policy which is, in terms of Central Government legislation, good professional and local government practice.
All of the planning office staff are incomers from southern urban backgrounds, a fact which means that they have imported certain preconceptions based on their own experiences and outlook on life.
Consequently, they believe that domestic services are a good thing and a necessary part of everyday life and that by encouraging the growth of urban centres they are making a positive contribution to ‘community life’.
Despite recent vicissitudes this notion of ‘fostering community life’ lingers on in the thinking of the Planning Department.
That is to say, there is a belief that ‘village life’ is somehow more appealing and morally superior to living in what, to the outsider, often appears to be the diffuse and isolated style of rural Orkney.
1973 there was only a limited attempt at directing private development within the burghs of Kirkwall and Stromness and there were no restrictions on building in the Landward area of the county.
Indeed, if anything, there had been a decline in the number of obstacles to building new houses.
With the advent of agricultural owner-occupancy in the years after the Second World War and the departure of the landlords or their factors, their authority no longer had to be sought.
Whereas some Orcadians see certain advantages in living in one of the Mainland's urban centres there are many more who appreciate the benefits of building a house of their own in their home parish, not only as a means of maintaining their links with family, friends, and neighbours but as a means of benefitting from cheap family or friends' land for building.
From their point of view living in physical isolation in a rural district is by no means a problem, not only because of the high level of local car ownership, but because they, unlike the planners, do not confuse the idea of social cohesion with the notion of geographical proximity.
When the Council's housing policy was first introduced and applied many people in Orkney were alarmed by its implications.
Nor were they impressed by arguments about services, conservation or ‘community development’.
Most prospective rural housebuilders were prepared to employ cesspits instead of mains drainage and to pay to be connected to the county's ageing but still serviceable water supply system, whilst being content to build their houses alongside existing roads, dismissing any arguments about the aesthetics of ribbon development.
As for cleansing and lighting these were regarded as relatively minor details whose provision was hardly important.
In addition, many local people, regarding the environment as something to be exploited in order to make a living whether as a farmer or as a fisherman, had little sympathy for the idea of landscape protection or conservation.
As for the idea of ‘community’, they argued that the Council's policy would undermine existing communities rather than create new ones.
The controversy built up around particular decisions to turn down  planning applications, with angry scenes in the planning office, complaints to councillors, the involvement of community councils, letters to the local newspaper and the circulation of comment and condemnation by disappointed would-be house-builders.
The growth and formation of public opinion on this matter was in part the work of certain members of the Council and other prominent individuals who took every opportunity to attack the planners' decisions and the activities of the Council's Planning Committee.
These prominent individuals, the populists of island life, cast in, and ready to accept, the role of ‘men of the people’ as a means of acquiring the power denied to them within the more formal mechanisms of local political life, were ready to add housing to their existing concerns.
More generally, the issue became involved with widespread feelings of disquiet over the increase in the ‘visibility’ of local government in Orkney as the Orkney Islands Council, under the impetus of new staff, new problems, new government legislation and new powers began to make itself felt throughout the islands.
Therefore, the objections over planning resonated with other matters concerning bureaucratisation, the preponderance of southern officials within that bureaucracy and the Council's conduct of its meetings and its decision-making.
The leading members of the Council had accepted the concept of physical planning from the very beginning.
Receptive to the idea of ‘doing something’ about North Sea oil and its likely consequences for Orkney, of coping with the practical problems of planning applications, of conducting the old County Council and the new Orkney Islands Council along businesslike lines, and conscious of the growing body of government planning  legislation , they accepted the idea of planned zones.
In any case, the idea of economy and of saving their ratepayers' money appealed to their concept of good management and administration.
All of these points were pressed home on the rank and file of the Council, who also acquiesced.
However, this policy was accepted on the understanding that it would be flexible in its operation and that the Council would provide  alternative sites to disappointed applicants.
As things turned out neither of these two conditions were met.
The Council's newly formed Planning Department, staffed by relative newcomers to public administration, was extremely zealous in the application of the regulations in their strictest sense as a means of establishing both the importance of the planning function and the place of the department within the hierarchy of the Kirkwall administration.
In addition, it proved to be very  difficult for the Council to acquire land in suitable areas to provide alternative building sites for applicants whose first choice of site was unacceptable to the planners and the Planning Committee
The planners, the Planning Committee, and the Council found themselves at the centre of the great deal of public agitation in which the reputation of the Council sank to a very low level.
This agitation was directed principally at those members of the planning office, the full Council, and the Planning Committee who were most closely identified with the housing policy.
They were accused of highhandedness, selfaggrandisement, venality, and of being out of touch with the everyday life of Orkney.
Indeed, the tradition of personal contact between the Council and the public, the accessibility of local government officials, and the identifiable nature of the officials and councillors involved, gave the whole thing a highly personal tone to the point where some of the wider issues were obscured, or else never raised in the first place.
Admittedly, some questions were raised about the democratic nature of Council decision-making and about the circumstances of the introduction of the housing policy.
A number of critics felt that its introduction had occurred through a combination of bureaucratic weight, the complicity of leading councillors, and the malleability of the rank and file of the Council.
In addition, various questions were asked about the applicability of national legislation to local conditions.
However, these matters were pursued by a minority of individuals with some contact with or insight into the day-to-day procedures and activities of the local authority, including a few councillors.
Even the populists raised similar issues but they discovered that there was  greater mileage in personal attacks on the individuals involved in planning.
One focus of discontent did raise the issue onto a more general level when it was argued that it was the southern origins of the planning officials which.were responsible for their unsympathetic approach to Orkney's housing preferences.
This in turn prompted a rather romantic and ideal vision of the Orcadian with his ‘immemorial rights’ to build his house anywhere, seeking to perpetuate the Orcadian ‘tradition’of self-improvement with the acquisition of a ‘modern’style of life within his own part of Orkney, through a process of personal enterprise.
It was said that the planners threatened all of this by placing obstacles in the way of local people in their efforts to fulfil their lives.
This vision of Orcadian self-help was much favoured by the more conservative bureaucratic direction whilst being apprehensive that the policy might discourage private home ownership and lead to more council houses being built locally.
Yet even here, the argument was carried out in terms of particular southern officials and Council chairmen.
Certainly, an attack on southern planning models, national legislation, and perhaps even bureaucratisation was implicit in all of this but the issue of personal culpability clouded and discredited these important points.
Of course, from the local point of view it was logical enough to deal in terms of the individuals involved because that is how the system may appear to work, at least to an uninformed observer, and no doubt the question of personality is an important one.
Perhaps the individuals involved were too obtuse in applying conventional planning models with little regard for local feeling, and they may have been less than adroit in their handling of public opinion.
Naturally, one should not ignore the factor of Central Government legislation which requires any council to implement planning restrictions and to provide services in an economical and rational manner.
However, there is a degree of discretion allowed within this legislation which Orkney's planners were reluctant to employ.
Under pressure and under personal attack, the planners retreated  into a legalistic interpretation of their role, making much of the requirements of various Acts of Parliament most notably The Sewerage (Scotland) Act of 1968 which, they argued, obliged them to service all new houses, something which they could only do by concentrating properties in particular places in order to reduce the cost of such an exercise.
However, it seems likely that they could have given the 1968 Act a more liberal interpretation since it merely requires a local authority to provide sewerage wherever it can but within the bounds of reason and by no means universally.
As the Act states:—
‘The duties imposed…shall not require a local authority to do anything which is not practicable at a reasonable cost’.
This polarisation of attitudes was perhaps unfortunate since there had been signs of a certain willingness on the part of the Department to reconsider the validity of their ideas and to give some weight to the social issues behind the public reaction to the housing policy.
However, as time progressed they took up the argument of legislation requirement and professional competence as a form of self-defence and as a means of maintaining their professional standing not only in their own eyes, but in the eyes of other planners, and in the eyes of their fellow colleagues in Kirkwall.
Indeed, they even dropped the argument about building ‘new communities’ because of the difficulties of making such an ‘idealistic’argument in an atmosphere of conflict.
Furthermore, they were less inclined to state their position on conservation, a notoriously difficult subject to argue in Orkney where farmers are suspicious of attempts to limit their activities and where conservation is so closely associated with Orkney's resident population of English romantics.
The leading members of the Council remained loyal to the planners and to the housing policy for some considerable time.
Impressed by their officials' strictures about the need for obeying government rules and directives as a means of maintaining some notion of good local government and the good opinion of Central Government, with a sense of loyalty and dependency towards their officials, and a feeling  that their own integrity was at stake, they maintained the policy.
Nevertheless, they were not immune to public pressure nor to the machinations of some of their fellow councillors and critics, and the realisation that their policy was not as flexible 85 they had hoped, they started to liberalise it both in its written form and its application to particular cases.
Indeed for a while, at the height of popular discontent, the Planning Committee and the full Council, aimed to accept every planning request except the most out-standing breaches of the rules.
This withdrawal of support for the housing policy was facilitated by the fact that the Planning Department had been ‘abandoned’ by the Councils' topmost officials who were reluctant to share its unpopularity in any measure.
At the same time as this was happening, that is to say between the late to midseventies, the Government announced its ‘fight against inflation’ with all its consequences for local government spending.
In a curious way the planners welcomed these developments seizing upon Government directives requiring the clustering of houses in order to economise on services, simply as a means of defending both their own Department and their backing of the housing policy.
However, and with great irony, it was the Government's cuts which led to the virtual abandonment of the Council's housing policy since the Council decided that whereas it was cheaper to service houses in groups, it was even cheaper and perhaps even permissible not to provide them with certain expensive services at all.
It became increasingly clear that the Council was unlikely to be able to provide services, most notably sewerage, for houses in their new housing centres.
This led to a general disillusionment with house-planning which today means that the Council planning policy is honoured more often in the breach than in anything else.
The fact that the Council's Structure Plan, in which their planning policy is enshrined, has not yet been accepted by the Secretary of State makes these changes in direction all the easier.
The Orkney planning policy failed to please anyone.
It offered local people services, landscape, and ‘village life’, things which  they did not want.
Rather, what they wanted was to go on living and building their properties according to their own circumstances and preferences within their own neighbourhoods.
At the same time, many incoming families, whether oilrelated workers, local government employees, or involved in Orkney's expanding professional and service sector, did want to live in urban centres close to urban facilities with full domestic services.
However, this was not to be since their drains were either late, abandoned, or non-existent, while promises of building sites were made and then had to be broken because of the absence of drains!
In consequence, these people also condemned the planners and the Council.
The other irony here being that these incomers, for whom the housing policy was in part designed, in order to prevent their housing needs from draining the Council's coffers and ‘despoiling’ the Orkney landscape, were in any case content and intent on living in urban enclaves, particularly in Kirkwall.
Even the English romantics with their commitment to conserving rural Orkney were not entirely unreceptive to the vision of bureaucracy confounded.
SECTION 6 Discussion
The theme for this seminar arose directly out of the discussions at the previous meeting on Integration and Immigration.
1.
Jackson outlined a number of points concerning dominant ideologies and raised the question of whether local communities are being out-manoeuvred by powerful outside agencies.
In discussion it was suggested that one could consider the clash of values at the local level in terms of game theory, where ‘ traditionalists ’ were playing the game and were winning whereas ‘progressivists’were not in the game but wanted to change the rules so that they could compete.
This tactic involved borrowing ideas from outside the community to force a change and was a typical ploy for incomers.
However, it was pointed out that some incomers wanted to get into the traditional game but were not succeeding.
The reason for this was that they had a different view of tradition from the locals and this caused them to turn to ‘progressivist’ ideas and to new ventures put forward by planners in order to effect an entry upon the local political scene.
Not surprisingly the concept of dominant ideology came in for some discussion.
It was questioned whether there could ever be a single dominant ideology.
Were not there several dominant ideologies — each ruling over different aspects of life?
If this were the case, would it not be best to tackle them in terms of the theory of games?
It was asked to what sort of phenomena did the notion of games apply?
The answer was simply the rules that enabled one to win.
In this case ideology would simply be a way of loading the dice in one's own favour and hence since the ground rules would obviously vary there could be no way of ever comparing two ideologies.
It was suggested that a dominant ideology was perhaps any widely shared set of ideas that was also powerful (meaning, presumably, those  ideas held by the government).
At present there seems to be a contradiction in these ideas since the current ideology stresses growth policy on the one hand yet at the same time supports the notion of tradition.
Of course it does not follow that all policies are self-consistent.
If we took the HIDB as an example of an institution whose remit is to promote the dominant (i.e. governmental) ideology then it is likely that it will promote economic development and growth policy rather than traditional ideas or social development.
As social engineering is highly suspect then the only way that the HIDB can be accepted is through an economic development programme.
However, as economic planning does not seem to work what possible social development could there be?
Is social development any more than the provision of village halls and recreation facilities?
This is basically economic provision, not social, it was argued since people do not necessarily use new facilities although they cost the taxpayer money.
The HIDB seems to have a fragmented hierarchy of ideologies: on top is the prevailing doctrine of economic development, then there is the Board's own policy of development while at the bottom there a.e the local views.
It was also suggested that the Board had insufficient knowledge of the Highlands and all this made it difficult for them to act correctly.
However, this view was challenged since ideologies are only resources to draw upon and not some kind of categorical imperative that governed decisions.
Equally, one could accuse the Scottish Office of not having sufficient knowledge of Scotland to make correct decisions.
Perhaps the problem lay with the times.
During the 1960's the pastoralist ideology dominated, praising the countryside image and tradition, hence it might have affected the HIDB's own self-image, thus protecting the Highland way of life may have been incorporated alongside their development remit.
As one of the most exposed institutions in Scotland, the HIDB attracted a good deal of criticism whereas planning developments in local government offices often escaped discussion because many of their decisions were ‘hidden’.
It seems, however, the planners in  local government are far more naive than the HIDB.
As an example, in Cambridge the Regional Authority community officers set up co-operatives in the belief that these were ‘natural’ and only lacked resources to succeed.
Their failure is in marked contrast to the success of the HIDB-sponsored co-operatives in the Western Isles.
The trouble with planners is that they often persuaded themselves that they could and should impose their plans on other people.
Paradoxically, community councils are an insidious form of planning since they stem indirectly from the dominant ideology.
Their purpose is to activate local debate but on terms laid down by the dominant ideology.
Thus local views on Sunday observance or prohibition are often disregarded and only views of the more vocal section of the community heeded.
Perhaps only by attacking the dominant ideology can it be transformed since action groups may stimulate a rethinking of the situation.
As an example, the Lewis Association was formed in the 1930's, and it took on a life of its own by promoting research and by issuing booklets.
It thus became part of the local heritage and continued as a source of inspiration.
The trouble with the new community councils is that they have largely fallen into the hands of the incoming middle-class whose views are likely to be coincident with the dominant ideology.
Thus little transformation is to be expected from that direction.
2.
Wilson  dealt with the conflicts that arose in Orkney due to the activities of planners.
Orcadians were used to building wherever they liked since they never equated physical and social isolation.
Furthermore, until the coming of oil the planning regulations had not been rigorously implemented but with the transition to Island Authority status and the creation of the Structure Plan the planners sought to justify their existence.
In this endeavour the planners had support in Council since it was believed that national legislation had to be enforced and the result was that Orcadians suffered delays or refusals in their building applications.
Nobody, apart from incomers, had any wish to live close to each other in planned settlements although the planners thought that clustered housing was both ‘natural’ and economic.
However, financial cuts prevented even those plans from being carried out — so everyone was dissatisfied.
Now planning has reverted to being a subservient and neglected activity, in fact it is a return to the status quo .
This housing controversy aligned Orcadians against both the English and the planners for in this context any non-local was regarded as English and since most planners were also non-Orcadians this meant that all planning policies were thought of as alien.
By and large, planners were associated with incomers in that they wished to control the way things were done,viz to impose rules where there were none before and to replace the old social norms by fiat instead of the usual agreement between households.
In Orkney, the attack on housing policy was at first personal but then it turned against bureaucracy in general which led officials to being very defensive.
After several public meetings to discuss plann-ing matters the bureaucracy were left confounded, much to the delight of the ratepayers who may have only attended for that reason!
Most bureaucrats see the world in terms of categories and problems in quite an impersonal sense and hence they see conservation as a major responsibility of planners, whether the locals want it or not.
However, there are different kinds of planners — the Orcadian planners seem to have been unreceptive to public opinion whereas in Shetland they may have been younger and more immature but they listened to complaints.
Nevertheless, it is unwise to generalise and just see planners as an abstract class of bureaucrats for that is to compound their alleged weakness ourselves.
3.
Forsythe considered the effects on way of life resulting from the closure of primary schools.
Such decisions are ostensibly based on three criteria:—
(a)
financial saving;
(b)
condition of the buildings;
(c)
educational provision.
Regional policy  recommended closure only on the last criterion but there is a discrepancy between national ideology and local educational policy.
The way of life argument was often used against closure since schools were held to be an important aspect of local life since the loss of the teacher and the school building seemed like a sentence of death for the community.
It was claimed that closure would affect the local atmosphere since the school acted as a focus of activity yet there was little mention of any economic loss and no fear of any demographic effects.
Thus the loss was seen as mainly symbolic in that the school was regarded as a ‘natural’ part of the way of life in the community but no particular evidence was used in its support.
In one particular case the Education Committee neglected this way of life argument and only argued the closure on financial grounds (against Regional policy) but they were forced to reverse their decision when the matter was taken up by the local MP.
Clearly dominant ideologies are not equivalent to public opinion since the former are connected with power and may override local concerns.
For the last twenty years or so the State has pursued a ‘large is beautiful’ policy but this has now been replaced by an ideology in favour of the small.
This change may reflect a disillusionment with the cost-benefit approach and the realisation that while this attitude might be helpful in manufacturing industry it certainly did not work in the service industry to which most of the Highlands were exposed.
Thus the swing towards maintaining primary schools today is evidence of a change of heart although this conflicts with the Government's policy of economising at the Regional level.
Such a con-flict is endemic when different policies are applied at different levels of government.
The problem in the Highlands is that the population has radically decreased and hence schools are no longer as viable as they once were.
From the upper echelons this seems to be a case for rationalisation but from below it seems that their raison d'être is being removed with the closure of schools, bus services, etc.
The difficulty is in knowing what local opinion really has to say on these matters.
Is it only incomers who protest at perceived threats or is there a true grassroots feeling about such changes to their way of life?
Research seems to show  that decision-makers often act in complete ignorance of what people think about the matters that are decided for them.
In other words, the dominant ideology carries the day.
4.
McFarlane took up the question of self-fulfilling prophecies in relation to the perceived incomer/Shetlander conflict which the SIC Structure Plan envisaged.
Curiously enough the Dunrossness District Plan avoids mentioning these negative aspects, so was there a conspiracy of silence here?
The question was raised whether academics, planners and policy makers have unwillingly contributed to the realisation of the prophecy concerning conflict between incomers and Shetlanders?
The difficulty with all policy-oriented research is that it begins by defining ‘problems’ and then by investigation helps to create that which lt wishes to observe' This type of research helps to create a cognitive revolution in its subjects and thus produces its expected findings.
This may have always been the case with anthropology but we did not have to live with the results if our field was in Africa or Asia.
Today the problem is different since our ‘subjects’ are literate and can challenge our results.
Again it is we anthropologists who create ‘community’ and talk about ‘social development’but what if we, too, are part of the dominant ideology?
Our responsibility is to filter information so that we do not over-influence the situation and create self-fulfilling prophecies of our own devising.
These problems are difficult to resolve since they are all relative-ly new and we have no ready-made answers.
They bring into focus the dilemmas facing anthropologists who do research in their home territory.
There are two solutions — either one refuses to conduct policy-oriented research in order to preserve one's academic purity or one undertakes the research and risks the consequences which may be that one is over-identified with those who commissioned the research or those investigated.
In the latter case, one's evidence is likely to be discounted by both sides simultaneously, which can be frustrating to the researcher to find himself to be ‘the pig in the middle’.
5.
Byron took up the above theme regarding the relationship between the communities we study and the wider world they inhabit, especially as it relates to complex societies.
Essentially this is a question of how the ‘inside’ articulates with the ‘outside’.
It is of interest to note that half the current members of the Association of Social Anthropologists express an interest in complex societies.
This may be due to financial restrictions on travel but also because of the prevalence today of nationwide state societies in even ‘primitive’ areas so that one can no longer study ‘simple’societies in isolation.
Yet this shift of interest away from‘primitive’ societies has not provided us with a new framework of analysis for we still tend to ‘tribalise’complex societies by looking at the simpler aspects e.g. rural communities only.
It must be realised that the dichotomy: simple/complex only refers to ideal types and not to real societies.
By ‘simple’ we often mean a unified, one-tiered society while ‘complex’means only a many-tiered society.
We often make two assumptions about complex societies:
(i)
that they contain a simple society trying to get out, such as communities, neighbourhoods, etc.,
(ii)
that at the lowest tier there is a substratum of ‘folk’ at the ‘grassroots level’while above them there are no longer folk but only institutions and processes.
If we go to consider the folk as being on the ‘inside’ we then assume that what is on the ‘outside’can only be impersonal processes that just have effects upon people.
This leads us to assume that there are such causes for behaviour and we then seek to know the reasons for this.
Such explanations may be made vari-ously in terms of micro/macro processes, centre/periphery or dependency theory.
The ‘truth’ is then assigned to one level or another yet although these effects may be real, different people will attribute the ‘true’cause to different levels.
Thus the processes that affect ordinary people may be only microprocesses of everyday life.
Thus planners see their own jobs as micro-processes whereas other people regard their activities as macro-processes — part of a wider scheme.
This view may stem from our tendency to take only one community as the basis of  observation.
As anthropologists we are inclined to accept the citizen's point of view and to neglect the bureaucrat's version.
A solution to this problem would be to complement our study of village-based micro-processes with a study of the planners and the plan.
The difficulty here is that this would take a long time to carry out, besides which, there is the problem of access.
We might then only end up with a series of discrete micro-studies that could not be articulated.
There is another approach which considered intentional social behaviour with regard to the outside and makes the minimum assumption that people differentiate the local environment (in terms of group, zone, sphere or arena) from that which is outside.
The problem is to discover how these familiar zones are bounded and how they are crossed.
It was felt in discussion that this proposal was very similar to work done on social borders by Ross (Current Anthropology 16:1, 1975).
The ‘inside’ seems to be everything a person knows and hence the familiar was ego-centred but it was bounded by other members of the group following certain rules.
Another comment was that the distinction: inside/outside reminded one of a kind of depersonalised network analysis.
One would have to look for very strong boundaries if one was going to make this distinction at all.
As we tend to look inwards rather than outwards maybe the boundaries really lay in a shared level of ignorance about the outside world.
If, however, one wished to explore the immediate outside it might be necessary to examine specific aspects in detail.
Thus, for example, in order to understand what is going on at the local outside-level on Lewis, it is necessary to examine the structure of the oil industry as a whole.
From this single example it is clear that an investigation, of the outside poses immense problems since there are so many outside factors to be taken into account.
Summing up, it means that the discovery of social boundaries involves looking simultaneously for areas of shared knowledge and ignorance.
While competence (in Chomsky's sense) may be a possible  criterion i.e. knowing the rules, this is very problematical to establish.
Perhaps simple ‘familiarity’ of the rules and persons involved might be better in defining the inside, i.e. just feeling ‘at home’with things indicates where the internal boundaries lie.