

SOCIETY
POPULATION
The society of ancient Rome had been strongly, though not rigidly, hierarchical: the senators at the summit were immensely rich, and their status depended, in theory at least, on birth.
The kings and kinglets of barbarian Europe commonly knew their pedigrees back to Woden; and any lapse of memory — or the promotion of a man unprovided with ancestors — was quickly remedied by pious invention.
If we look forward again to the great lords of the later Middle Ages, heralds could proclaim their ancient, or moderately ancient lineage, and they carried the crest of their family, or families, on their coat of arms.
But in the period covered by this book society was not quite so hierarchical as before or after; nor did a man's place in the sun depend on the number and dignity of his ancestors.
Many of the great men of tenth- and eleventh-century Europe, indeed, had little idea who their ancestors were.
This is not to say that society was classless.
It was indeed hierarchical: both in theory and practice it made a great difference where a man was born.
But the hierarchy was far from rigid, and it was possible to move a certain distance up and down the ladder; possible, and common.
This fluidity was partly made necessary by a rapid growth in population, and it combined with the growth in population to make the period of this book one of social and economic change such as Europe had not seen since the fall of the Roman Empire in the West.
In one sense it is paradoxical to talk of fluidity in tenth- or eleventh-century society.
The occupations open to a man were, by our standards, exceedingly few, and those open to a woman narrower still.
King Alfred had expressed a traditional division in society when he said that a kingdom must have those who pray, those who fight and those who work.
Even in the twelfth century the majority of the population of any country in western Europe, except perhaps in Flanders and north Italy, were clerics, knights or peasants.
Yet a change had taken place.
These classes had grown and become more diverse; merchants and artisans were more numerous, and their place in economic life far more effective, than in the tenth century.
Increasing numbers, increasing opportunities, and new ideas proved solvents of the old hierarchy; and it is only towards the end of our period that a new type of hierarchy, with ideals and aspirations of a novel sophistication, was beginning once again to build walls round the classes of society.
The rise of ‘chivalry’ meant a stricter code of manners; but it also meant a new snobbery.
These changes will be the themes of this chapter.
Great emphasis has already been laid on the rise in population which took place in these centuries.
Modern historians have for long assumed this rise, and stressed its importance; and yet its nature and the evidence for it have never been properly analysed.
If we wish to map trends in population in the modern world, we can use the statistics provided by a modern census.
We can measure population fairly precisely; we can tell whether its rise was due to the birth of more children or to men and women living longer, that is, to a rise in the birth-rate or a fall in the death-rate.
If the birth-rate is rising, we can discover whether this is due to women bearing more children or having them younger, so that the generations succeed one another more rapidly.
Before 1400  there were no censuses in the modern sense, and at all periods before the nineteenth century it is difficult to find any precise evidence for population.
It has been established that a great rise took place in the English population in the eighteenth century; but its causes are still controversial.
What hope have we of assessing movements in population in the tenth, eleventh and twelfth centuries?
The only national survey of the period, the English Domesday Book, does indeed give figures from which the total population has been deduced (see pp. 29–30).
But Domesday was concerned with tenants and householders, not with heads; it has many omissions; and its arithmetic is often baffling.
What is inferred from it is based almost as much on guesswork as on evidence.
Lacking overall figures for population, we cannot hope to settle problems in detail.
Nor will our evidence tell us anything satisfactory about whether birth-rates and death-rates were rising or falling, still less about whether the age of marriage was shifting.
It is very rarely that we know the age of a bride.
Matilda, daughter of King Henry I of England, was eleven when she married the Emperor Henry V; twenty-six when she married Geoffrey, count of Anjou; sixty-five when she died (see pp. 290–1).
It is hard enough to tell how characteristic these figures were in the twelfth century; impossible to tell how they compared with earlier centuries.
Matilda was the first English princess since the seventh century whose year of birth is precisely known; as for her youthful marriage, this appears to have been becoming commoner as marriage alliances were sought with ever more reckless haste by the great dynasts of the twelfth century.
Henry, count of Champagne and king of Jerusalem at the end of the twelfth century, had been twice betrothed before he won the heiress of Jerusalem: once, when he was five or six, to a lady of two, later on to her younger sister.
The marriage game was played for the highest stakes by kings and emperors and counts; there is no reason to suppose it reached these proportions elsewhere in the social scale.
Among the landed classes men expected to marry young (by our standards) in the Middle Ages and women younger; and probably had done so for  centuries before our period opens.
Yet even on this issue we must be cautious: marriage was an irrevocable step; though death almost as often and as rapidly parted married couples in the twelfth century as it does in the twentieth, a prince might well take careful thought before he threw the dice, just as, even then, a prudent man might spend many years looking for the woman of his choice.
Matilda's uncle, William Rufus (who was far from prudent), never married; her father waited till he had acquired the English throne, and then, at the age of thirty-two, instantly sought the hand of a Scots princess descended from the Old English line.
His comparatively late marriage did not, however, seriously affect the birth-rate; for apart from his three legitimate children, Henry acknowledged over twenty illegitimate children.
In this story we see reasons why a great man might marry early or late, and some of the artificiality surrounding royal marriages.
Similar stories could be told of many European kings, princes and nobles in our period; it is possible to get some notion of the variety that existed among the upper classes.
But we know far too little to generalize the effect of their habits on the population at large, and of marriage among the lower classes we know next to nothing.
Henry I's eldest legitimate child died in infancy: his second, Matilda, died aged sixty-five; his third, William, died aged seventeen in the wreck of the White Ship in 1120 (see p. 290).
From evidence such as this we can build up a picture of a society in which child mortality was common; in which many of the children who survived their first year none the less died before they were twenty, as was still the case down to the early nineteenth century; in which a serious famine or an outbreak of disease might rapidly depopulate a whole region — and yet in which the expectation of life of those who passed twenty was probably not sensationally lower than it is today.
The lay upper classes were warriors and faced the hazards of war; the women of all classes faced the only slightly lesser hazard of childbirth.
Kings rarely died fighting.
One or two English kings were murdered and one died in battle in this period; no French or German king died a violent death.
Most of the clergy and the peasants were not subjected to the hazards of battle, and the higher clergy seem to have been good risks for the actuary.
We know the approximate  age of eight English bishops who were in possession of their sees in 1153: all of them seem to have lived to be over seventy.
Many men and women lived into their sixties, and a few lived to be eighty or more.
A few, indeed, were alleged to have lived beyond a hundred, and it is possible that some of the cases were authentic.
But some were certainly not: anyone of very advanced age could be called a centenarian; precise calculations were rare, or rarely accurate.
It is thus possible to analyse factors in the situation, but not to make general statements about many aspects of the movement in population at this time.
Yet to deny that population rose, over most of Europe throughout these centuries, would be excessively sceptical.
The evidence is elusive and often circumstantial; in sum it is conclusive.
The staple food of mankind in the Middle Ages was bread, and his staple drink ale or water.
In most countries north of the Alps wine was the luxury of the rich, even though most of the wine drunk at this time was what we should call ‘vin ordinaire’; and even communion wine (which had done so much to foster the growth of the northern vineyards) was drunk less and less by the laity in these centuries, until communion in one kind became the rule.
Milk was valued for butter and cheese; fruit juices were the ascetic refreshment of monks and hermits.
The English were already noted for their addiction to beer — a luxury perhaps to the peasant, but a luxury very widely consumed.
While it is true that men's consumption of bread and beer can vary, the quantity of these basic foodstuffs remains a tolerable, rough criterion of the size of a population.
Flour for bread was ground mainly out of wheat and rye; beer was brewed from barley.
Other crops were grown, mainly for cattle fodder; fertility of soil varies; but in general one can say that the area producing corn (and in wine-growing areas, especially south of the Alps, wine) is a rough test of population.
There is abundant evidence to show that in almost every corner of Europe the area under the plough was expanding: villages were growing; new lands were being colonized; marshes were being reclaimed, forests felled; in the eleventh and twelfth centuries the frontiers of Europe were being pressed outwards, and on Germany's eastern frontier, and to a lesser extent elsewhere, new land was being settled by peasants as well as by lords.
The nature of this colonization has already been discussed; what concerns us now is the over-all impression of growth.
The criterion of land under cultivation is crude, and resists refinement: it is exceedingly difficult to say whether in a particular country in a particular decade or generation the rate of growth was steady; in some places at some times there may well have been local and temporary declines.
Such evidence only helps us to see the long-term trend over two or three centuries.
Whatever had happened before or was to happen after, it is clear that the population of western Europe at large was growing between the tenth century and the thirteenth.
How much did it grow?
We cannot tell.
There is another way in which we can inspect the growth of population, and that is by seeing it at work in all the various classes of society.
If we look at the Church we find the numbers of monks and secular clergy growing, especially in the eleventh and twelfth centuries; we also find that more and more of them lived a life of celibacy after the papal reform.
Were they draining manpower from the classes from whom they were recruited?
At the same time towns were growing, and steadily becoming centres of commerce and industry.
Were merchants and artisans increasing in numbers at the expense of other classes?
The answer to both these questions must be no, since wherever we look we find the same signs of growth.
A closer look at this growth will reveal how European society was divided, and how its groups were changing in this period.
Society was arranged in a dual hierarchy, of laymen and clergy.
In many ways the division was the most fundamental in Europe.
The upper clergy were Latin speaking, celibate (at least in principle, after the papal reform), conscious of being members of an international class, owing an allegiance to Church and papacy as powerful as their allegiance to their local lords and kings.
They were educated, in later centuries often highly educated, while most layfolk were illiterate.
The barrier was not, however, absolute: local feeling and local loyalties could be immensely powerful too; and all churchmen had secular relations and friends.
In the lay hierarchy one can distinguish three main grades: kings, princes, great nobles; knights or landed warriors; and peasants.
Within these were many divisions; and the second and third, in particular, obscure one of the great barriers, that between  freedom and unfreedom, to which we must return.
Outside this hierarchy lay another, that of commerce, industry and domestic service, at whose foot, in southern Europe at least, lay a multitude of slaves.
The clergy can be more simply divided, between upper clergy — pope, cardinals, bishops and all those groups from whom popes and bishops were recruited, monks, canons regular and secular, archdeacons, scholars, royal and episcopal clerks — and lower clergy, the parish clergy, the rank and file.
Here too the distinction was not absolute, and hides many other differences; but the bulk of the lower clergy were half educated at best, and led quite a different life from their superiors.
BARONS AND KNIGHTS
These centuries were the age of what is commonly called the feudal society.
Few historical labels are more ambiguous than ‘feudal’, and for that reason I shall use it as little as possible.
Traditionally it has two main uses: by the Marxists to describe the type of society which preceded ‘capitalist’ society; by legal historians to describe a particular kind of legal relationship.
In Marc Bloch's great book,Feudal Society , the word is used to describe the whole range of social customs and organization of the upper classes of society, among whom the feudal bond, in the narrow sense, was powerful.
The feudal bond established in the first place a special relationship between the lord and a man whom we should call a cavalry officer, whom they called a vassal.
It enabled the lord both to recruit a knight and to reward him.
The vassal knelt before his lord, and placed his hands between his: and so became his man.
This was the act of homage.
Then he rose and swore a solemn oath to keep faith, to be true to his lord.
By this act he performed fealty.
These oaths, and the bond they established, had their origin in the relation of lord and follower in the courts of the barbarian chieftains and they had a powerful religious aura, though this did not always prevent them being broken.
‘They are faithful to their lords’, wrote William of Malmesbury of the Normans, ‘but swift to break faith for a slight occasion.
A breath  of ill-fortune and they are plotting treachery, a bag of money and their mind is changed.’
Yet treachery was the greatest crime in the feudal code: loyalty and generosity its supreme virtues.
The lord gave his vassal protection, and rewarded him; the vassal swore to serve his lord.
The special feature of feudalism was that the reward took mainly the form of endowment with land.
Knights were often maintained in their lord's household; but the ‘domestic knight’ was either a young apprentice hoping to receive his reward in due course, or an anomaly, if a rather common anomaly.
A plot or land was reckoned the normal basis of the feudal contract, and this notion was never lost sight of, however common the domestic knight and the vassal who held a money fief might become (see pp. 184–5).
It may seem at first sight that the plot of land, the fief, as it was called, was a reward for service, something granted in exchange for service, which would fall in when the vassal died and be regranted to a new vassal.
It may seem also that each vassal could only have one lord: otherwise the bond would be less personal than it purported to be, and the vassal might be involved in a serious conflict of loyalty.
And the solemnity of the oath may seem to imply that the contract between lord and vassal was irrevocable.
None of these propositions was in fact true.
None the less, they are worth considering, because they help us to understand both the origin and the artificiality of feudalism.
Originally the fief had not been hereditary.
The lord could grant it to whom he would.
But very soon pressure from the vassals — and also, it may be, the simple fact that a good vassal's children were likely to be good vassals themselves — made it common, then normal, and finally an inherent part of the feudal contract that the grant was heritable.
Vestiges of the original life-lease remained.
When the vassal died, the heir paid a ‘relief’, a large sum of money as a kind of entry-fine, before he was allowed to enter his inheritance.
If the heir was a child, he was in wardship to the lord: the lord was his legal guardian and had control of the estates and of the person of the ward until he came of age.
If a vassal died leaving daughters only, or if an heir who was a minor had sisters, they were also the lord's wards, and he could freely dispose of their hands in marriage — freely, but with two provisos.
If they were children, they could be betrothed, but the Church insisted that they retained the right of refusing their consent to the marriage when they grew up.
Social custom made this proviso  almost nugatory.
But it strongly defended the girl from being ‘disparaged’, that is to say, from being married to her social inferior.
It was the complaint of the Empress Matilda that her father had married her, an empress, to a count.
This was disparagement indeed.
Matilda was a widow, not a minor; Henry I, being a king, could dispose of his daughter's hand when her husband died.
But the widow of a vassal was commonly at the disposal of the vassal's lord: so long as her consent was obtained (by whatever means) and so long as she was not disparaged, she could be married to whom the lord chose.
At different times and in different places these matters were regulated by somewhat variable customs.
But on the whole it seems true to say that the minors and the ladies were at their lord's disposal, and that they had little chance of resisting what he did; but that none the less the lords were limited by custom, and even a king would be expected to consult his counsellors when he disposed of an heiress, as Henry I promised to do in his coronation charter.
While the heir or the heiress was in wardship, the lord enjoyed the profits of the fief, and from the marriage of a desirable heiress he might also hope to reap a substantial benefit.
In the ninth and tenth centuries the financial aspect of feudalism was on the whole less important than the military.
The lord valued his land first and foremost as the source of knights.
By the twelfth century he valued it as much as the source of money; and in many cases knight service was commuted in practice for a money payment — for what in England was called scutage.
The need for money made the lord increasingly concerned to turn the fiefs of his vassals to his own financial advantage when he could.
Thus wardship and the control over wards' and widows' marriages became increasingly important.
So likewise did the relief: a strong lord might flout tradition and levy an enormous relief from his vassals.
He was also able to exact other taxes from them, notably the ‘aids’; these were originally considered to be ‘free-will’ offerings to help the lord in difficult situations, but like so many voluntary contributions, they rapidly became customary taxes in many parts of Europe.
In Germany and north Italy it seems that this never happened.
But in France and England, by the early twelfth century, it was generally expected that the vassal would pay an ‘aid’ when the lord was captured in war and had to be ransomed, when his eldest son was knighted, and when his eldest daughter was married.
Some lords were fortunate enough to gather aids on other occasions; many lords had great difficulty in gathering aids at all.
This was especially the case when the relationship between lord and vassal was somewhat remote, either because the vassal was virtually independent of his lord, as were most of the vassals of the king of France, or because the vassal had many different lords.
Even so early as the late ninth century it was recognized that in practice a man might be a vassal of more than one lord, and thus the second of our presumptions was breached.
By the eleventh and twelfth centuries this was no longer an exceptional case.
In 1124 Louis VI, king of France, took a banner from the altar of the abbey church of Saint-Denis to be his standard in the defence of France against a German invasion (see pp. 177–8).
As king, he was the overlord of the abbey; but the standard (the celebrated Oriflamme , which figures in the Song of Roland ) was that of the count of the Vexin, and as count Louis was the vassal of the abbey and the saint.
It symbolized that he was putting himself under the protection of the saint, the patron of his kingdom; but it also revealed the sort of anomaly which had entered the feudal hierarchy.
A king could be the vassal of his own vassal.
Similarly, a knight or baron could hold of several lords.
This naturally reduced the effectiveness and strength of the feudal oath and the feudal bond.
It also raised serious practical difficulties.
If one of his lords was at war with another, which should the vassal support?
To this a variety of solutions were given at different times.
It was commonly held that the first lord to whom he had sworn fealty had the first call on his service; but in some cases it was held that the richest fief gave the vassal his strongest obligation; or again, that it depended on the circumstances, on which lord had the greatest need — a lord must be helped if he was fighting in self-defence, but his claim was less if he was fighting in someone else's defence; or the vassal might be expected to fight on both sides, that is to say, to provide troops for both armies.
Thus it was possible for him to find his own men in the army which he was attacking.
There was much diversity of opinion and of custom.
All were agreed that multiple homage was an aberration, displeasing to God; but we may assume that it was rare for a man to refuse a good gift or a bargain on this account.
The problem was naturally most acute in the lands where feudalism was most highly developed: in northern France and the Low Countries, in England and south Italy after the Norman  conquests, and in Syria after the First Crusade.
It was in these countries, and also in Catalonia, that the most radical solution to the problem of multiple homage was attempted.
A distinction was drawn in the eleventh and twelfth centuries between ordinary homage and ‘liege’ homage.
Liege homage was absolute, or, as the Catalans said, ‘solid’(soliu ); it overrode other obligations.
In England the king claimed that all his subjects owed fealty to him in some degree, and in due course this came to conflict with the possibility of any of his vassals owing liege homage to any but the king.
In the later Middle Ages, both in England and France, the idea of liege homage tended to be overruled by the idea of allegiance to the king.
But in the second half of the eleventh century and in the early twelfth, liege homage was still a new and growing force in France and England: an experiment which was proving widely acceptable as a solution to the intolerable problem of divided loyalties.
Multiple homage might compel a man to break his contract with one or another of his lords.
In other cases a major breach of the contract by the lord would justify the vassal in abandoning his lord.
The right to break fealty, of diffidatio , had ancient roots and was everywhere prized.
Yet the customs surrounding it were never clearly defined.
In the nature of things it could not be regulated by any court.
The court which would normally have taken cognizance was that over which the lord presided; and although it was in the lord's court that the vassal made his defiance, it was usually done, not in person, but by messenger or herald, and the vassal could not at that stage accept any ruling of the court.
Thus when a man's vassals rebelled against him, it is possible to say that they were exerting, in due form, the ancient right of resistance, of diffidatio , or, with William of Malmesbury, that they had proved swift to break faith.
In fact it is far from clear how normal was the solemn act of diffidatio .
The feudal oath was sacred; yet rebellion, justified or not, was very common.
Thus practice and theory were often far apart, in this and in other ways, even in the classical feudalism, feudalism as it was known in the north of France between the ninth and the twelfth century.
The farther one went east from the Rhine, or the farther south from the Loire, the more diverse social custom and land tenure became: and above all, the commoner became ‘allodial’ land, land not held of any lord.
Only in the Norman and the crusading states, colonized in great measure from the homeland of French feudalism, did one find any attempt to live up to a conception of feudalism as coherent as that of northern France.
Everywhere the upper class were warriors; everywhere land was the symbol of status, and, in these centuries, the main basis of wealth.
What one found in the stricter forms of feudalism was an attempt to organize landed wealth more directly and coherently for the recruitment of knights.
In principle a given plot of land produced one knight for a specified length of time each year; to ensure that the service was regular and the responsibility clear, attempts were made — never very successfully, except for a time in England — to keep the holdings intact, to prevent their being divided between younger sons.
Strict feudalism was a highly artificial way of making land produce knights, and it is doubtful whether it ever existed outside the imaginations of historians.
Yet in northern France and England, and to a lesser extent throughout western Europe, feudal and quasi-feudal institutions can be found during these centuries.
In its origin feudalism provided for the recruitment of vitally needed cavalry troops in a society which lacked the liquid money to pay troops in cash.
The knights were never more than one arm of any fighting force; and it is hardly likely that any force of knights was ever recruited entirely by ‘feudal’ means.
At least by the eleventh century every king expected to recruit a part of his army by paying mercenaries, or from knights who received a fee not in land, but in cash; though he did his best to make his great nobles provide contingents for which he did not have to pay, or (at least in the twelfth century) pay him in cash if they did not serve him in person.
As so often, one sees the survival of a social custom long after its original purpose has been wholly or partly superseded.
Freer use of money for recruitment made it easier for kings to recruit armies when and how they wished; and for knights and nobles to lead their lives according to their own inclinations.
But as the men of the upper class were bred for war, as they enjoyed fighting and felt that in war their intimate bond of loyalty to their chief was most fully expressed, the connexion between fief and military service was an unconscionable time in dying.
It was very much alive in England and the French principalities in the mid twelfth century, and if anything on the increase in Germany.
And even in the fourteenth and fifteenth  centuries, when feudal tenure was no longer the key to social organization or, in the main, to recruitment, kings like Edward III and Henry V of England were popular precisely because they led their noble colleagues on warlike adventures.
Yet even in the eleventh century there was something artificial in William the Conqueror's notion of dividing England into about 6,000 knights' fees.
No Norman king in England recruited his knights entirely by feudal service; his army always had a substantial mercenary element in it.
There never were 6,000 knights in England; and it was rare in the twelfth century for more than a thousand knights to gather in answer to a feudal summons.
But the Conqueror's scheme of knight service was the nearest to a comprehensive feudal hierarchy that any European king or prince attempted.
Thus, in course of time, the artificiality of feudal organization was more and more broken down by the use of money, until in twelfth-century England, feudal service was commonly replaced by the payment of a tax, scutage, ‘shield-money’.
This gave both parties greater flexibility, while increasing their dependence on money.
For a variety of reasons the European nobility of the eleventh and twelfth centuries were coming increasingly to need money: to indulge their taste in war, to meet a higher standard of living, to pay for their ever more costly gifts to their friends, their superiors and inferiors, and above all to the Church, to indulge their taste for extravagant building, and to give dowries to their daughters and patrimonies to their younger sons.
War was the traditional occupation of this class.
As young men the members of it were apprenticed to practised warriors, taught the profession of arms; even as children they learned to follow the chase, to hunt boar and stag and wolf, not to mention all the lesser game of the forest; they learned how to handle and appraise a hawk; and in the evenings, in their father's halls, or in the halls of other great lords to whom they had been sent to learn their profession, they listened to the minstrels singing songs of knightly  prowess.
The heroic lay had been the fare of royal and princely halls in earlier centuries; and traces of these, as they survived in Iceland in later times, can still be found in the poetic Edda.
Of early Germanic epics the only substantial survivor is the English Beowulf, probably of the eighth century, whose text presupposes the existence of a large repertoire of lost epics.
Of the minstrel songs of the tenth and eleventh centuries we know exceedingly little.
There is evidence, however, of a steady development in oral tradition between the death of Count Roland in a Basque ambush in 778 and the song about Roland which inspired the Normans as they went into battle in 1066.
Not long after Hastings was written the version of the Song of Roland which is the earliest Chanson de Geste to survive (see p. 164).
From the Chansons and from the provençal lays of the troubadours, we learn a great deal about the aspirations of society of this age.
John of Salisbury tells us that a new custom had arisen in his time that on the day on which a young man was to be girded with the belt of knighthood he went solemnly to church, laid his sword on the altar, and offered himself and his service to God.
The religion of this age was a house with many mansions.
There was a real bond of friendship and understanding between many of the great churchmen of this age and leading warriors; it would be a nice point to decide whether the happiness of St Margaret's marriage to King Malcolm of Scotland (see p. 210) was more or less remarkable than the depth of St Anselm's friendship with Hugh of Avranches, the first earl of Chester, the savage hammer of the Welsh.
Knights who made contact with men of this kind could not but be touched by their qualities.
But one cannot help feeling that the description by the author of the Gesta Francorum , himself a knight, of the capture of Jerusalem in 1099, is a more characteristic specimen of the ‘religion’ of twelfth-century knights.
This curious mingling of piety, enthusiasm and sadistic cruelty is recorded time and again in the vernacular literature of the age — sometimes naively, sometimes satirically, for there were evidently plenty of reflective men who saw the paradox, and pondered on it.
Yet for all their brutality, the Chansons de Geste lay more emphasis on courage, generosity and loyalty as the virtues of the warrior.
Early in the thirteenth century the aspirations of the knightly class were summed up in the Life of William the Marshal , a great man who, had he lived in the twentieth century, might have made his choice between being a high civil servant and a champion professional boxer.
In his own day the two kinds of profession were by no means incompatible.
By his athletic skill William became rich and acquired land, an heiress, an earldom; and in the end wisdom in the council chamber made him regent of England.
His career was exceptional, but it shows what could be done.
William the Marshal was a knight-errant in the first age of chivalry, a great tournament man when tournaments were beginning to be civilized.
Both these developments lie, in the main, outside our period.
The tournament in the early twelfth century was a mock battle little different from the real thing: the highly organized jousting which we usually associate with such an event was only beginning to develop.
The courtly romances of the late twelfth and early thirteenth centuries were considerably more civilized and sophisticated than the Chansons de Geste of the early twelfth century.
There is a profound contrast between the role of Roland's betrothed in the Song of Roland , which is trivial, and of the ladies in the romances of Chrétien de Troyes, who control the action.
Equally striking is the difference between the German  Rolandslied of the mid twelfth century and Wolfram von Eschenbach's Willehalm in the early thirteenth: in the former, the heathen are cattle for the slaughter; in the latter their destiny, their value in God's eyes, are a central theme of the poem.
Wolfram's humanity was exceptional even in his own day (see p. 422); and there was no doubt much that was fanciful and artificial in the cult of courtly love.
But enough has been said to show that the world of vernacular literature in 1200 was a much larger, more diverse, more interesting world than in 1100.
And this must in part have reflected a greater diversity among its patrons.
Loyalty and glory were the themes of the Song of Roland .
Neither was forgotten: loyalty is still the central theme of Wolfram's Parzival .
But Wolfram's idea of loyalty is extremely complex and subtle; the range of human emotions deployed in his poem is astonishingly wide and deep.
Once again, Wolfram was exceptional; but he was a layman, a knight; and he shows what was possible.
Roland had been a warrior at war; the knights of the Round Table found themselves in every possible, and impossible, situation.
The code of military behaviour had come to permeate the whole world of knightly behaviour, not just the field of battle.
Fashion and artistic imagination spread a thick veil of Celtic fancy over the romances; but through the veil we can discern the real human problems of Wolfram and his like; in this respect they follow in the footsteps of the twelfth-century humanists, Abelard, Heloise and Ailred.
The layman of the tenth, eleventh and early twelfth centuries was more remote from our experience and has left no comparable memorial.
The social fluidity of this age is difficult for us to gauge with any precision.
Anglo-Saxon law recognized that a peasant who prospered became a thegn and the thegns were a wide class including folk who would be called knights and folk who would be leading barons after the Conquest.
But it would be difficult to find from the surviving evidence a single case history of this kind.
Our ignorance is profound.
Within the military classes, we can sometimes reconstruct family trees which reveal how wide a range of status was held by men within a single family group.
The letters of Gilbert Foliot, successively abbot of Gloucester, bishop of Hereford and London in the twelfth century, are  singularly revealing, because they show us not only the range of a large family circle, but the strength of feeling which could exist between distant relatives.
Gilbert was a good family man; though conscientious as a bishop according to his lights, he felt bound to help the host of nephews and cousins, who clamoured for patronage, to whatever he could provide.
His father was probably steward of the king of Scotland as earl of Northampton, and so a baron of some standing, but not a tenant-in-chief; Gilbert's brother or nephew rose by marriage into this rank.
His uncles included a bishop, an abbot and one of the barons who was a profiteer from the anarchy of Stephen's reign.
His more distant relations included Miles of Gloucester, a marcher baron who was responsible for Gilbert becoming abbot of Gloucester, and was subsequently earl of Hereford.
His relations also included men of every stratum of the knightly classes; one of them was a domestic knight of a great baron, with no property save his armour.
The whole spectrum of the Anglo-Norman upper classes is included in this single family group.
The barons were comparatively few in number; the Church formally forbade them to marry their sixth cousins or any nearer relatives, and seriously attempted to enforce the prohibition on third cousins; and even though they did not always accept this limitation, it meant that they looked far and wide in their own class for marriage alliances.
This gave the baronage a strong sense of cohesion; but the large families which many of them had, and the opportunities for enrichment and impoverishment which growing population and growing wealth provided, meant that any great man had a large number of poor relations, and that the rungs on the ladder between the poor knights and the great princes were thronged with men moving up and down, sometimes at breakneck speed.
Service to a king or a great lord was often the key to patronage and status.
In England a man who had served as a royal official might end as an earl, as did Henry I's trusted adviser Aubrey de Vere.
This road to promotion was even more conspicuous in Germany and the Low Countries, where the feudal hierarchy was less organized than in England, and where a king depended on his domain servants for administrative and judicial services, and  military aid, far more than in England or France.
These men were the ministeriales , originally unfree tenants; as the nobility became increasingly independent, the ministeriales were promoted to fill their place in the royal service, and they received increasingly valuable patronage and endowment; abbots of imperial monasteries were even forbidden to distribute fiefs to free tenants — they were to be reserved for the unfree, the ministeriales .
In due course many of these became great barons in their own right; but their origin was not quickly forgotten, and served as a constant reminder that royal patronage and service to the great counted for as much as blood and status.
FREEDOM, SERFDOM AND SLAVERY
Just as there were classes of free and unfree warriors, so there were, in every European country, free and unfree peasants.
These formed far and away the largest group in the population of Europe, and it is the evidence that their numbers were expanding rapidly which offers the most substantial proof that the population of western Christendom as a whole was rising at this time.
We have already looked at some of the indications that the area under cultivation was expanding: within the frontiers of old villages, in land formerly waste, in forest and marsh, and on the frontiers of Christendom.
In old villages, the greater bargaining power tended to be with the lord and the larger landowners; the peasantry lost status as they had to sacrifice more and more to find enough land to feed themselves.
In new lands, lords were prepared to offer special advantages to recruits, including a greater measure of freedom.
These factors alone would have made for a rapid shift between free and unfree populations; but in many parts of Europe the relation between them was complicated by local custom and legal variety.
In some the dominance of the lords was strong, in others the tradition of freedom much stronger.
Here and there villages under strict seignorial control sat side by side with communities of free peasants.
Unfreedom varied in its nature: it depended on a wide variety of relationships between lord and man.
The medieval warrior was what some today would call a drone: however necessary his protection might be or might seem to his peasant tenants and  neighbours, and however much the enterprise of individual warriors may have fertilized the economy, he was not personally engaged in making a livelihood for himself and his family.
He had to be supported, and supported in some style, by the labour of the peasants.
In northern France this had been traditionally organized by the institution known as the villa , a country estate of variable size, often more or less the equivalent of a village, where all the land was the lord's; some part of it he let out to tenants, some part of it he farmed directly; but even his own domain was in large measure tilled by the peasant tenants, who held their land in return for services in money, services in kind, and above all labour-services, for a defined amount of work for the lord.
The economy of the villa had undergone so many transformations over the centuries that its nature and workings were subject to every kind of variation.
But in the eleventh and twelfth centuries a village society dominated by the lord, to whom the majority of peasants owed varying degrees of allegiance, of service and of rent, was characteristic of wide areas of western Europe.
These are the institutions which we call the manor or the seigneurie .
In the old villa the labour force had consisted mainly of serfs, or villeins, who were personally free but were tied to the plot of land on which they lived, and to the services it traditionally rendered to the lord, and of slaves, who had no freedom and no land.
By the tenth century slaves were rarely to be found in France or Germany; they were a minority, though still a substantial minority, in England; they were still common in southern Europe (see pp. 84–6).
No satisfactory explanation of their decline in northern Europe has been produced.
It has been suggested that the supply of slaves dried up and that slaves are by their nature infertile, so that a slave population dies out if not constantly recruited; but neither proposition can be defended.
It has been suggested that the pressure of the Christian Church, which always encouraged manumission and discouraged the slave trade, had its effects in the end.
This is not wholly untrue, but it is difficult to accept the view that the French and Germans were decisively more humane in the Dark Ages than Italians, Spaniards or Englishmen.
The voices of churchmen were heard from time to time, perhaps frequently, complaining of the enslavement of Christians, or of the treatment of slaves; but there was no radical attack on the institution as such.
The Church no doubt helped to speed up the decline of slavery; it did not cause it in the first place.
Slavery in the Mediterranean world was continuous from Caesar to Columbus.
As Professor Verlinden has shown, the negro slave was much in evidence at the end of the Middle Ages in Portugal and Spain long before he was exported to the Americas.
In the ancient world slaves had been most commonly used as domestic servants and artisans, and this may well have continued to be true in the Middle Ages.
The use of slaves as agricultural labourers was perhaps not common even in the Mediterranean world in the Middle Ages.
And it is fairly clear that the slaves of northern Europe died out between the eighth and the twelfth centuries by absorption into the larger class of serfs or villeins, personally free, but tied to the soil, retaining certain symbols of unfreedom.
‘Retaining’ is perhaps a misleading word.
Marc Bloch showed that on two estates in the heart of northern France there were in the ninth century only twenty-five servi (slaves or serfs) out of 278 householders; whereas at the end of the twelfth century all but a handful of the population of these villages were serfs; none slaves.
The village community at the earlier date had been diverse — mostly free, but with varying degrees of subjection to the lord, who was the abbot of Saint-Germain-des-Prés.
At the later date, even though the ultimate degradation of slavery had been removed, a majority of the community had lost status.
The serfs had swallowed the slaves, a process made hopelessly obscure by the fact that the same word,servus , often did service for both.
The servitude of the slave and of the serf was hereditary.
No doubt by 1200 all or virtually all the inhabitants of these two villages had ancestors among the twenty-five slaves of 400 years previously.
This could be explained by saying that the lords had insisted that the children of the bond remained bondmen, thus exacting their full rights.
Or it could be argued that the abbots had been merciful: that they had allowed slaves to become serfs.
Very likely there is an element of truth in both suggestions.
We can conjecture that some of the slaves had bought themselves to serfdom; that penury had compelled the free to sell their freedom for bread.
We can guess that both the lords and the village community found a uniform system, in which all the tenants had land of their own, and all worked to till the lord's domain, had its advantages; in particular, that the lords preferred the service of serfs, whose lives they did not have to organize in detail, to that of slaves, who were dependent on them for food and clothing and a roof over their heads.
The documents sometimes distinguish between a slave living in his master's house and a slave with a cottage of his own, but not very often.
We may well wonder whether the ambiguity in the word servus does not hide a fundamental ambiguity running right through the period; and if we had asked the abbot of Saint-Germain, he might have answered that the servitude of serf and slave alike was a small matter compared with man's servitude, since the Fall, to the devil; and that all men were slaves.
But there is more to it than this.
In conditions of rising population, such as we may assume for most of this period over most of Europe, land is scarce and labour plentiful, and the lords may commonly compel land-hungry peasants to accept their terms.
But there may well have been situations in which the boot was on the other foot; and in the centuries before the tenth, the centuries in which slavery was steadily declining, there is no reason to suppose that land was scarce, or that the landlords normally had the whip-hand.
One answer to this problem may be found in the documents which record the surrender of their freedom by substantial peasant landholders in the eleventh century: the landlords bought their subjection for a substantial grant of land; in return, by becoming serfs, the peasants agreed never to leave their plot of land.
The lord's labour problem was solved, in theory, for ever.
Transactions of this kind must make us pause before we condemn all landlords as Gradgrinds, or make too large assumptions about the nature of medieval serfdom.
The landlords of this period often had a bond of sympathy with their tenants in that they too had to struggle for a living, and that their living conditions, especially in the tenth and early eleventh centuries, were not widely different.
There is no cause, however, to cover the lot of the medieval peasant with a romantic haze.
It was commonly, perhaps normally, hard.
Of the incidence of poverty and famine we know comparatively little, but we know enough to be sure that both were common.
The parishes disposed (in theory at least) of quite substantial sums intended for charitable uses, and these were supplemented by the monasteries.
How large they were, and how they were used, we do not know.
In the twelfth century the canon lawyers devised an elaborate, and comparatively humane, legal framework for poor relief.
The Church accepted the responsibility (up to a point) which our own generation has laid on the welfare state.
No doubt its administration was haphazard; no doubt there were many abuses.
But some efforts were made to cope with the problem of poverty.
These efforts would seem pitifully inadequate to a modern social reformer.
But in an affluent society the problem of poverty is fundamentally different from what it is in an underdeveloped economy.
The peasantry on a manor or seigneurie paid rent to the lords in money and in service.
The balance between the two varied according to economic circumstances, and it is very difficult for us to reconstruct the nature of these services in detail over a wide area before the thirteenth century.
But there are copious indications that already in the eleventh century, and perhaps long before, money played a part at least as important as labour.
And one aspect of the decline of slavery is the rise of a class of wage-earning agricultural labourers.
The records tell us continually who holds the land; they very rarely tell us who tills it.
Thus the wage-labourer is a mysterious figure: but there are plenty of indications that he was no stranger in the eleventh century, still less in the twelfth.
He was not necessarily landless: he seems often to have been a smallholder, with land insufficient of itself to support him.
The records tell us a little about the labourers employed by the lords.
They tell us almost nothing about the labourers employed by the more prosperous peasants.
Yet they often make it clear that such folk existed.
Thus all the peasantry needed money to pay  rents, and many needed money to pay for labour by the end of this period.
This is a striking indication of the role of money in European society as a whole; it reveals that even the peasantry must have reckoned, under good conditions, to produce, and to sell in the local market, a substantial surplus.
Since a great proportion of them were engaged in growing corn and other basic needs of life, there must already have been a considerable proportion of the European population who needed to be fed by the labour of others.
MERCHANTS AND ARTISANS
We can list the types of people who depended on peasant labour for their bread, but grew it not themselves; but we can never hope to have any clear appreciation of the numerical strength of each class.
It is clear that in the period between the tenth century and the thirteenth all the categories were tending to grow.
There had long been some specialists, like vine-dressers or fishermen or cowherds or shepherds, who were producing food, but depended on others for their staple diet.
Medieval society also contained a large and growing number of professional warriors and churchmen, ‘those who fought and those who prayed’, who did not till the soil, or engage in any normal form of economic activity.
It also contained an immense number of domestic servants and other members of royal, baronial and ecclesiastical households.
There were artisans, especially in the cloth industry, miners, metal-workers, makers of weapons, shipbuilders, carpenters and stone-masons.
If much land transport was undertaken by peasants as part of their multifarious labour services or to earn a little money on the side, much too, by land and sea, must have been undertaken by professionals.
Finally, there were merchants, the men who organized the markets that enabled the corn or flour or bread to find its way to the hungry, the wool to the weaver, fuller and dyer, the cloth to the man who needed  a new costume, timber to the shipbuilder, timber and stone to the church.
We have already emphasized the value of coins as evidence; among other things they sometimes reveal the number of minters at work in a city, and so give us a hazy but valuable indication of the relative size of the towns of a kingdom.
This is especially true in England.
‘In the last generation of Anglo-Saxon England’, writes H. R. Loyn, ‘there were twenty known moneyers at work simultaneously in London; more than ten at York; at least nine in Lincoln and Winchester; eight at least at Chester; seven at least at Canterbury and Oxford; and at least six at Gloucester, Thetford and Worcester.’
It is clear that money was to be made honestly at this profession; even clearer that forgery and other types of fraud were frequently used by moneyers as short-cuts to wealth.
Many no doubt became substantial citizens; theirs was an important industry.
But of their social status and origin, and their place in the community we know little, and Loyn suggests that the term moneyer (in English mynetere ) may have covered both ‘the gentleman, who farmed the office, and the craftsman working in the mint’.
Savage penalties were meted out broadcast to the craftsmen, which suggests both a low status in the eyes of the king and a low standard of honesty.
Ambiguities of this kind constantly disturb our attempts to describe the social organization of Europe at this time; and behind them all lies a more fundamental uncertainty.
In a great number of cases we do not know how specialized particular occupations were, how many different jobs a single man might hold.
Official statistics in modern Nigeria show a large majority of the population engaged in agriculture; observation, I understand, shows that virtually the whole population is engaged in trade.
In developing economies these two propositions are not incompatible.
It is clear that among the more prosperous merchants in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries there was the first beginning of a tendency towards specialization, in types of goods carried and markets exploited; but growing trade, freer movements of peoples, no doubt enhanced the number of folk who could earn a few pennies peddling or carting.
We know hardly anything of the details of this; once again, our ignorance is fundamental.
As for the great merchants, there has been much argument among modern historians about how they were recruited.
Investigation of town plans reveals that many cities were growing at this time; the records reveal increasing long-distance trade; in the Mediterranean there was a growth of the commerce of the Italian cities so striking that Professor Lopez has labelled it and its northern counterpart ‘the commercial revolution’.
Towns south of the Alps threw up new aristocracies of wealth, the patriciates; north of the Alps many communities of merchants and artisans tried to form ‘communes’, to win their freedom from feudal or royal control and feudal taxes.
How had the new city fathers acquired the wealth and prestige to embark on these schemes?
Were they, as has been asserted, in large measure recruited from chapmen who had made their pile — new men in the full sense of the phrase; or were they, as some more recent historians have emphasized, more often recruited from the sons of local landed families who had taken to trade?
About 1180 the British Walter Map told the story of:
This tale is fiction, but it shows the kind of success story which a twelfth-century Englishman could expect his audience to swallow; and it is probably significant that he set the story in Italy, the land of merchants and wealth.
The rise of Sceva and Ollo is reminiscent of a purely English story of the same century, a true one, of the rise of Godric of Finchale.
He acquired a small capital by scavenging and became a pedlar; then he became a  partner in a ship; and his skill as a sailor and his fondness for travel took him to Scotland and Italy, to Denmark and Flanders.
As his biographer develops the theme of his travels, it becomes difficult to tell whether Godric is more of a merchant or a pilgrim: we find him at Jerusalem, at Compostela and at Rome.
Eventually we find him established as a hermit at Finchale, having abandoned the pursuit of earthly treasure.
The story of St Godric was one of the foundations of Henri Pirenne's notions about the recruitment of merchants in this age.
His critics have pointed out that Godric's is an isolated story, whereas we know of a number of instances in which leading city magnates were recruited from local landed families, in Italy, in England and elsewhere.
It may well be that the sons of barons and knights jostled with Sceva and Ollo in the markets of the twelfth century; and it is likely enough that there were more rich men's sons than poor men's sons wearing the alderman's robes.
It is clear that mercantile capital was often provided by men of means, whether they themselves were active or sleeping partners in the business.
The Italian nobility from the lands about the towns came to dominate both the trade and the government of the cities; but there was space too — not always well recorded — for the new rich.
There was much variety of origin in the merchant class, then as now; and this is what we should expect.
A merchant needed enterprise and capital.
The story of Godric, and all that we know of medieval commerce and transport, suggests that a merchant needed to enjoy adventure and risk for its own sake.
The European economy was being developed and fertilized in this age by men who regularly undertook journeys of great difficulty, risks of unknown dimensions.
Children of parents with means were more likely than the children of the poor to have capital; but enterprise was even more essential, and there is no reason to suppose that this was the prerogative of any group or class in the Europe of the day.
The term ‘merchant’ covers a wide variety: from Sceva and Ollo as hawkers to Sceva and Ollo as men of substance.
In all probability the social origin of the merchants was as varied as their status and wealth, but the patrician clans of the great cities, especially Venice, came to enjoy  long-term security based on a diversity of economic resources.
It was an age in which all classes of society were expanding, in which men from every walk of life who enjoyed adventure and travel could find new opportunities as merchants to invest their talents at a large rate of interest.
Yet whatever they did with their talents, the one thing, notoriously, which wealthy men in the Middle Ages were not permitted to do was to lend their money at interest.
The Church utterly forbade the levying of interest on a loan as usury though always recognizing certain areas, such as money exchange, in which profit was acceptable.
In the later Middle Ages canonists and theologians came to see with increasing clarity some of the objections to this view; and throughout the Middle Ages Christian money-lenders had their ways of evading it.
The commonest evasions, certainly well known in the twelfth century, were the pretence that the original loan was greater than in fact it was, or the securing of a loan by a temporary grant of land; in the former case the difference between the actual loan and the repayment in fact constituted interest; and in the latter the rent on the land might do the same.
But the prejudice against money-lending was a bar to the development of credit and of the money economy in general; and it was singularly fortunate for the Europe of the eleventh and twelfth centuries that there was a substantial group of active and intelligent people who had overcome the prohibition of usury.
Like the Indians and Levantines in modern Africa, the Jews played a vital part in fertilizing the economy of medieval Europe.
As the economy developed, the Jews became wealthier; and although everyone benefited from their presence, few realized the benefit, whereas many felt the pressure of the interest the Jews demanded.
The citizens of the rising towns of the eleventh and twelfth centuries hardly realized what they owed to the Jews, and entirely forgot that Mary and Jesus (humanly speaking) were the kin of their victims.
For the first time in European history the Jews were not only persecuted, they were massacred.
But they still received some protection from folk like the English kings who found profit in them, and especially from William Rufus, who seems quite sincerely to have disliked the Church's intolerance; and the Church itself strongly condemned violent persecution.
By necessity and by choice the Jews were a race apart, the only group entirely segregated from the rest of the community.
From almost every other walk of life a way could be found to the city patriciate; and even the Jew could come there if he would submit to conversion.
A Roman Jew of the mid eleventh century was inspired to baptism by Pope Leo IX, and took the Christian name of Leo.
His son, Peter, was a leading supporter of Gregory VII; and the ‘Pierleoni’ became a substantial Roman family.
One of them became a cardinal, and, in 1130, pope — or, as he came to be reckoned, an anti-pope.
THE CLERGY
Like the world of commerce, the clerical profession offered increasingly varied opportunities to young men with the means, the talents or the vocation to seize them.
It is very likely that a high proportion of the clergy in the tenth and eleventh centuries were hereditary clergymen.
Once again, our ignorance is very great; but wherever we go in Europe, we find traces of what seems to have been a widespread and quite accepted practice, before the papal reform and the insistence on celibacy.
Iceland, with its hereditary bishopric, was exceptional.
But in no part of Europe was it wholly exceptional for an eleventh-century bishop to have children.
Most of these were born, no doubt, before the fathers obtained high office.
But there are plenty of instances of  priests living openly with their wives.
We very rarely know the names of parish priests or cathedral canons in this period.
Lists survive from a group of churches on the Welsh border in the mid and late eleventh century; most passed by hereditary succession.
Lists survive of the canons of St Paul's from the turn of the eleventh and twelfth centuries onwards.
At least a quarter of the first generation were married, and several passed on their canonries to their children.
The founder of Tiron, preaching celibacy in Normandy about 1100, was nearly lynched by the clergy's wives, as had been the archbishop of Rouen, no less, when promulgating a decree against them in 1072.
Sir Richard Southern has made famous the extraordinary story of how the twelve great-great-grandchildren of a tenth-century priest divided a substantial part of the income of Arezzo cathedral among themselves in the late eleventh century.
The tale could go on.
It is striking that much of the evidence belongs to the two or three generations after the papal reform.
But in the second quarter of the twelfth century, among the upper clergy, comes a change; bishops with children and hereditary canons become an extreme rarity.
The lower, parochial clergy seem often to have had wives and children; but the ladies and children of the close, of whom Heloise herself had been one, become a thing of the past.
Celibate clergy there had always been.
The increasing numbers of monks in the tenth and eleventh centuries show that even before the papal reform the life of celibacy had a large number of devotees.
The anxiety of the papal reformers to put all clergy under a rule shows that experience suggested to them that celibacy could only be enforced on monks or folk living a quasi-monastic life.
The monks of the tenth and eleventh centuries, furthermore, had included many of the most intelligent and talented men of the age.
But they had been few in number.
The new orders of the late eleventh and twelfth centuries attracted ever increasing  numbers of recruits.
It is interesting to observe that just at the point when the old sources of clerical recruitment, the married clergy, were taking to celibacy, the supply of clergy did not dry up, it multiplied exceedingly.
In England alone — the only country for which even approximate figures have been worked out — the number of monks rose from about 850 to well over 5,000 between 1066 and 1154.
Much lies hidden behind this sensational growth.
We do not know in detail whence the monks were recruited; but on the whole they seem mainly to have come from the upper classes, and perhaps from the families of substantial town-dwellers.
Peasants, sons could become lay brothers in Cistercian houses, but it was probably not common for them to take the habit as choir monks.
It was possible for a man to achieve social promotion in the Church: if a few bishops were sons and brothers of kings or great lords, many more owed their position to talent and service, not to birth.
The bishops of Norman Sicily were as much parvenus as their Norman masters.
The Conqueror's bishops in Normandy included his half-brother, Odo of Bayeux, and several of high baronial rank.
There was a tendency for the highly born to be preferred to the prince bishoprics of Germany; and in the tenth and early eleventh centuries training to knightly pursuits had been almost a necessary qualification for a successful German bishop.
But in the twelfth century, by and large, whoever could enter the ranks of the privileged clergy could hope for a bishopric; and the ranks of the privileged clergy were open to all who could find patronage, whether because of birth or talent or good luck.
Thus the Church offered opportunities to the ambitious as well as to the devout, although it would be a mistake to regard it as an egalitarian institution.
None the less, the rapid rise in the numbers of monks does have a social implication.
Since we know from other evidence that the warrior and mercantile classes of Europe were not being depleted in this period — on the contrary, were steadily rising — we  can see here further evidence of the rise in population of this age, a rise all the more striking since it could continue and grow in strength even though so many men and women were following a life of celibacy.
A rise in numbers would by itself help to explain why the upper classes were looking for new and wider choice of occupation; it does not go far towards explaining the popularity of Cîteaux.
This problem will be discussed later (pp. 392–3); but it is worth dwelling a moment on the evidence that a life of spiritual adventure, or of intellectual adventure in the rapidly growing schools, was a rival in appeal to the traditional life of hunting and fighting of the European ruling classes, or to the life of mercantile enterprise or travel.
The horizons were opening in every direction.
The man who entered a monastery did so, in principle, for life; there were of course apostates; there were also a number who moved on to a stricter way of life; and a few who were promoted to abbeys elsewhere, or to bishoprics, or even to the papacy.
But most monks stayed, like Orderic Vitalis (pp. 14–15), where their parents or their vocation had placed them.
It was commonly a life of great stability.
In contrast, the secular clerk, the clergyman who was not under a rule or monastic discipline, was often an inveterate wanderer.
Early in life he went from school to school, sometimes half across Europe; then he looked for patronage to give him a livelihood.
This he might find in the service of a bishop; for many bishops in the late eleventh and twelfth centuries were coming to have large staffs of young clerks, who learned the business of ecclesiastical administration and rose to be canons or archdeacons, or were seconded or translated to the royal service.
Through the royal capella of the German kings, or the royal chapel of the Anglo-Saxons lay the path to bishoprics (see pp. 191–2).
The monk-bishop was not a rarity in this period; many of the greatest bishops had been monks.
But they were usually in a minority.
Bishoprics were most commonly the reward for service to one or other important secular potentate.
Bishops, archdeacons, canons, civil servants, monks: these are the men whose lives we may study in the sources, whom we can meet face to face in their own writings, the educated, privileged clergy.
But of the clergy as a whole, they were a minority, probably always a small minority.
On the same occasion on which Orderic was ordained priest by the archbishop of Rouen, there  were ordained 244 deacons and 120 priests.
The majority of these manned the parish churches and chapels of the diocese, or acted as chaplains to great laymen.
Many of them, perhaps, were children of the ladies who had threatened the archbishop's predecessor thirty years before.
Their manner of life and lack of learning were denounced by reformers; but they lived according to their own customs and traditions, and there is little evidence that they were more commonly celibate, or less ignorant, in 1200 than in 1000.
In truth, we know little of them.
In social status they varied considerably.
The better off, or more fortunate, merged into the ranks of the privileged clergy; the poorer were sons of serfs.
They lived the lives of the folk among whom they worked; and this may have helped many of them to make real contact with their parishioners.
In many cases, perhaps, it simply meant that clergy and people were equally barbarous.
The papal reform tended to drive a wedge between the educated, celibate higher clergy, and the rank and file.
But there is every reason to suppose that there already existed that division which makes the Church of the later Middle Ages so strangely resemble a military hierarchy, with the upper clergy as commissioned officers, the rural deans and archpriests as N.C.O.s, and the parish clergy as privates.
The letters written by bishops to their subordinates in the twelfth century rarely give the impression of personal contact with anyone below an archdeacon or a canon.
Thus the Church, for all the opportunities which it gave to men to find new lives and lofty ideals, to transcend the limitations of the age, still, in its main structure, reflected the social organization of the world.
And to women it rarely gave any opportunity at all.
THE PLACE OF WOMEN
It was a man's world.
The opportunities open to women in this period scarcely expanded, may even have contracted.
In 1066 the number of English nuns was a quarter of the number of monks; the number rose rapidly, but even so, in 1154 they were probably less than a fifth the number of monks.
And yet religion seems to have been the only respectable profession open to a woman  other than marriage and child-bearing.
In the upper classes, the girls were at the mercy of their father's dynastic ambitions; they were pawns in the marriage game.
Many women died in childbirth, but it was not so dangerous as the warlike pursuits of the men-folk.
It is very difficult to give any precise figures to illustrate or establish this; but a rough count of the twelfth-century marriages noted in three volumes of the Complete Peerage reveals that among the English upper classes of the twelfth century it was much commoner for a lady to have two or more husbands than for a man to have two or more wives; in the cases noted, almost twice as common (36 to 19).
a There are far more cases in which each party is only known to have married once, but the evidence is so fragmentary that it is likely that the figures seriously underestimate the number of second, third and fourth marriages.
The improvement in medical knowledge and other changes of recent times made marriage a more stable institution for a time than it was in the Middle Ages.
A small proportion of the ladies of the upper classes entered convents; the remainder were married off, where possible, shortly after puberty; in the very highest society they had commonly been betrothed, sometimes more than once, in babyhood.
The lot of a spinster or a widow in such a society was not enviable.
Although the monastic reformers of the twelfth century frowned on the practice of placing children in monasteries, and the Cistercians forbade it, we may be sure that throughout the Middle Ages many nuns were dedicated to religion by the same procedure as they would have been dedicated to husbands — by parental fiat.
There was no lack of enterprise in founding monasteries or endowing them; it seems likely that if spinsters had been a serious problem to the fathers of the age, more convents of nuns would have appeared.
Of the place of women among the artisans and peasants we know almost nothing.
So far as we can tell, the men-folk ruled in every sphere; but it may be that the further one got from the  world of high feudalism the less of a slave the woman became; it is certainly true, in a rather different way, that the Norman Conquest brought both a more complete feudalism and a fall in the status of women.
It may be too that in the lower regions of society women were freer to find at least part-time employment: the distaff provided occupation for almost all, and even if the invention of the spinning wheel may have reduced the opportunities for some, it enormously increased those of others.
There is copious evidence that less reputable professions attracted many women to them; and in the tenth century monogamy was not yet the established practice in parts of eastern and northern Europe; nor, of course, among the Muslims.
But the majority of women in all walks of life looked to make their career as housewives.
For all the subjection, the limitation of opportunity, many no doubt ruled their husbands as well as their households in that as in all ages; great ladies may often have run the estate when the lord was away on campaign.
In a similar way the recluse Christina of Markyate (see pp. 394, 433) succeeded in dominating her circle of acquaintance, which included the abbot of St Albans, from her cell.
We would give much for a few case histories, like that of the fourteenth-century merchant of Prato, of how a medieval household actually worked.
The ladies of our period of whom we know more than the name were almost always ladies of exceptional character or talent, who force themselves on our notice partly at least for this reason.
Yet when all allowance is made for this bias in the evidence, one cannot help being struck by the conspicuous part in our story which was played by the Empress Theophanu, the Empress Agnes, the Countess Matilda, St Margaret, the Empress Matilda, Queen Eleanor — great ladies who rose above the limitations of their sex, as commonly understood, as rulers, as saints or as  viragos ; and the twelfth century would have been greatly the poorer without the life and work of the English Christina, the Hertfordshire anchoress, or of the French Heloise, the Stoic of the Paraclete, or of the German Hildegarde, the mystic of Bingen.
CITIES AND TOWNS
ENGLAND, TUSCANY AND UMBRIA: A CONTRAST
Let us start with a contrast.
All over the south and south-west of England and up into the midlands and the borders of Wales we may encounter ancient hill forts on hill tops or upper slopes, still marked by the visible line of prehistoric ditches.
Many of them were towns before the Romans came; a few remained towns for a generation longer.
But the Romano-British liked to live, or were made to live, in the plains, where water was plentiful and no natural defences hindered the rule of legionaries.
When fortified towns reappeared in later Roman times — or again, long after, in the days of Alfred and his dynasty in the late ninth and tenth centuries — they were sometimes on upper slopes, never, with one  brief exception, on the site of the fortress towns of the iron age.
The exception is Old Sarum, Old Salisbury, reoccupied for a time by folk fleeing from Wilton in the Danish raids of the opening of the eleventh century — and it survived to be the site of a cathedral and a Norman castle.
But even Old Sarum was to become no abiding city.
In the early thirteenth century the canons and the laity left it for new Salisbury on the plain, by the river; and Old Sarum survived only as a castle and a rotten borough.
In Tuscany and Umbria to this day there are countless hill towns of much the same age as the hill forts of southern England — a few of them much older.
But the difference is that all but a handful are still towns.
They range from modest towns like San Gimignano and Todi to great cities like Siena.
In Daniel Waley's admirable Italian City-Republics there is a map featuring some sixty or seventy Italian towns with a history worth recording in the mid and late Middle Ages; of these roughly half could reasonably be called ‘hill towns’, and most of them lie in Umbria and Tuscany.
Waley's book is mainly based on documentary sources and he wisely concentrates on the period after 1150, when sources begin to be copious.
If we wish to explore medieval towns and fathom their history before 1150 we must do so with the spade and the trowel — or else study first their site, their topography and their physical remains.
In one sense, this is not easy, for the archaeologist has done less in the hill towns of Italy than in England.
English hill forts and medieval towns have been extensively excavated in recent years, and a new dimension has been added to our knowledge of them; in this the Biddles have been the incomparable pioneers in their excavations at Winchester — but many other cities have made a major contribution, including York and Lincoln and Oxford.
The early hill forts have been studied by waves of archaeologists almost as numerous as their early invaders.
Less has been done so far in urban Italy.
But in another sense, as any visitor to central Italy may know, if we contemplate and explore these delectable places with historical insight and imagination, the answer lies all about us.
The hill towns of central Italy witness very obviously to two  historical facts: to a continuity of life far surpassing the English towns we have compared with them, and to a love of independence, of a way of life in which turbulence and freedom and constant war were endemic factors.
So powerful and lasting is the urge to live on the summit that it has survived even the arrival of railways and motorways in the valleys at their feet.
The survival of many stone walls and buildings, and especially churches, from the centuries of this book, testifies that even before the mid twelfth century their wealth and pride and religious sentiment were sufficient to beautify them in lasting materials — and often, and especially with the smaller ones, their condition reflects the declining prosperity of later centuries which saved their older buildings from being replaced.
THE ITALIAN CITY REPUBLICS
Let us consider another analogy, this time not so contrasting.
In Greece in the fifth and fourth centuries B.C., before the Macedonian conquest, in the golden classical age, richly documented, we contemplate federations and empires of cities grouped under one of their greater neighbours, Athens, Sparta, Thebes or another.
But behind this there lies a period, obscurely documented, in which there was far greater freedom and equality among the cities — an era brought to a sharp end by the threat of foreign conquest, which drew the Greek cities together in heroic resistance to the Persian invaders — and thus began the process which ended in the effective dominance of Sparta and Athens over their neighbours.
But the beauty and the loving care with which many a smaller city had been built and adorned in the early days of the Greek cities is a vital element in the history of the Greek city, obscurely pointing to a time, not of peace — for in Greece the lion never lay down with the lamb, and neighbouring cities constantly fought each other— but of more equal prosperity.
This was a passage of history hardly known even to the ablest scholars or the twelfth-century Renaissance, and very imperfectly known to those of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries who self-consciously implanted the democratic institutions of republican  Rome and ancient Athens in their own Florence.
Most of the similarities must be the product of time and chance and circumstance; but they are very striking.
In the tenth and eleventh and early twelfth centuries the hand of northern conquerors on Italy was light — occasionally felt in a marked way; but intermittently.
The old Lombard aristocracy was gradually crumbling away except in the far north and the distant south.
A unit of traditional authority survived indeed in the Church; but that rather favoured the independent cities, for with few exceptions each had its own cathedral and its own bishop; often its own patron saint to protect it against its neighbours.
It was the business of the bishop to preach peace — and some of them actually did so; yet a growing spirit of political independence, sometimes accompanying a furious anticlerical urge, limited the power of the bishop once the city had felt and tested its freedom.
In the late eleventh and twelfth centuries city after city set the bishop aside (often with his consent) and established committees of consuls, or some other ruling authority, not perhaps quite democratic — for they represented the powerful citizens, not the polloi — but reflecting a new and vivid aspiration.
The anticlerical feeling was not incompatible with a very active religious sentiment.
In the 1060s Pisa won a substantial fortune in a naval raid on Palermo, still in Muslim hands, and dedicated a handsome part of it to beautifying the famous religious quarter of the city — laying the foundations of cathedral and baptistry and other ecclesiastical buildings.
In the 1080s they rose against the bishop and established a new authority in the hands of consuls.
But they continued to build the duomo and the many lovely churches and monasteries of the city;, for in the eleventh and twelfth centuries, and especially in Italy, a deep religious sentiment and an active anticlericalism often lived side by side, sometimes within the same human breast.
Indeed, we can hardly penetrate the minds of these citizens, but we can very readily contemplate the paradoxical results of their works, and their inspiration.
It was in this period, very roughly between 1050 and 1150, that we can most readily discern the revival of many independent  cities; and it was in the 1150s that the first serious challenge to their independence was mounted by the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa.
There had been many minor challenges, from earlier emperors, and from the popes, and from local bishops and nobles.
But they were unsystematic and not sustained, and form only a minor qualification to the general proposition: it was the concerted efforts of Barbarossa in the 1150s and 1160s which first seriously checked the spirit of independent prosperity.
The magnificent late twelfth-century font in the great church of San Frediano at Lucca shows Pharaoh drowning in the Red Sea; and he and his troops are dressed up much as Frederick and his knights must have appeared to the Lucchese of the 1160s.
It is an ironic analogy, for it foreshadows the emperor's death by drowning on the Third Crusade, many years later.
But more immediately it reminds us that the imperial invaders played the role of the Persians; that Barbarossa's efforts systematically to reduce the cities of the north — and less systematically, those of Tuscany and Umbria — led to the formation of the First Lombard League; and that the long struggle with the Hohenstaufen was one of the preludes to the formation of the civic empires which dominated late medieval Italy.
The history of north and central Italy in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries was dominated by Venice, Milan, Florence and Genoa — even Siena faded into second rank after the 1340s.
But the history of these regions before 1200 is a bewildering, yet deeply fascinating, kaleidoscope of tiny city states.
Frederick was exceedingly persistent in his efforts to subdue the Lombard cities; and cooperation came unnaturally to them; they were used to fighting among themselves, so that some even then allied themselves with the emperor.
In 1167 his army had been decimated before Rome by an outbreak of malaria; and he had been chased over the Alps in humiliating disaster; but still he plotted and planned to return to the task.
No doubt he had many reasons for his ambition to make good the kingship of Italy; and one stares us in the face as we inspect what survives of the twelfth century in them.
They were, by twelfth-century standards, exceedingly rich; and that applied not only to the Pisa of duomo , baptistry and leaning tower — but to many of its lesser neighbours, Volterra, San Gimignano and the rest.
Each city has its own story to tell, and many are very ill-recorded.
That is why I began with the hill towns: for they wear so much, so conspicuously, on their face.
It is exceedingly inconvenient to live on a hill top, especially before modern methods of water supply were devised.
Even if it be true that the Roman system of water supply survived in Perugia and a few other cities into the Middle Ages and has been believed to be better than anything the modern world has yet provided — in most places water was hard to come by and almost as expensive at times as wine.
Yet the citizens clung to their traditional way of life out of custom and love of their cities; and for the very practical advantage it gave them in their favourite pastime of warfare against their neighbours.
It used to be alleged that the Italian cities were born out of conflict between the industrious, mercantile, burghers and the military, layabout nobility of the contado, the territory about them.
The idea of class conflict has been the bane of serious medieval social history; for it obscures the very powerful forces which unite local communities, whatever their social complexion; and because it parodies the nature of medieval conflict.
Just as the citizens of these towns were fervent churchmen and fierce anticlericals almost at one and the same time, so the true relationship of town and country was always one of hate and love.
I have been trying to draw attention away from the great cities, which were quite uncharacteristic of the scene in our centuries, and to focus on the small or middling sort; and here we meet the doctrine so brilliantly established in recent decades by Philip Jones: that the Italian cities were essentially market towns in origin, in which nobles and knights and farmers and peasants had a common interest; very often the knights lived as much in the towns as in their country fortresses or castles.
Very often they were part-time farmers and merchants as well; simple categories of occupation do not work in this sort of society.
Their close bonds of common interest did not lead to peace.
Romeo and Juliet shows us medieval Italy doubly distorted, by the sixteenth-century vision of the author and the fourteenth-century government of a duke; none the less, as a picture of endemic faction and eternal conflict, it is as authentic for our period as for any later.
ROME
But if we are to relate the romantic picture of historical generalization to the hard facts of life as it was lived, we need examples, great and small, of cities at work.
Let us start with Rome and speed northward; we soon find the kaleidoscope turn and dissolve into myriad brilliant and varied colours.
Every city had its own individual story and it is the astonishing variety which makes the story of the urban renaissance of these centuries so fascinating.
Rome was set apart from her neighbours by her ancient fame and lasting prestige — and yet, in these centuries, one cannot but think, far more by the presence of the apostles and martyrs, and of the pope.
It was the chief centre of long distance pilgrimage in western Europe — and even Compostela and St James could never quite compete with Peter and Paul in Rome.
In the late tenth century Sigeric archbishop of Canterbury went to Rome to receive his scarf of office, the pallium of lambs' wool which was the mark of an archbishop; and this seems at that time to have been an immemorial custom of very recent origin.
Its growth was to cause a storm of protest in the next century from archbishops less inclined to travel than Sigeric; but we need not doubt that it arose because Sigeric and his like were delighted to have an excuse to go on pilgrimage, and the diary he has left of his movements dwells especially on the many churches in Rome worth a pilgrim's attention.
It was already a city of churches  beyond counting; and although trade came to it — including trade in the relics of saints — and a little industry, its permanent character was marked by the tourist traffic, of visitors to the shrines of the apostles and the countless martyrs of Rome, and to the papal court.
At the end of our period John of Salisbury wrote his Historia pontificalis , with its centre in Rome and the curia — a chronicle of events seen as they impinged on the eternal city; and he talks much less of pilgrims, much more of diplomatic visits and of litigants.
The curia was taking on a new role, as the centre of a vast network of appeals; increasing numbers from near and far came to Rome in search of judgement.
But the pilgrimages went on, and have never ceased; and there is another element of continuity between the tenth and the twelfth centuries: Rome was a city of turbulence and riots.
Liudprand of Cremona, who hated it, has given the papacy of the mid tenth century a bad name as the centre of local faction and corruption.
John of Salisbury viewed the curia with an extraordinary mixture of reverence, admiration and contempt — very characteristic of intelligent twelfth-century observers; St Bernard of Clairvaux had a very similar view.
And John does not disguise from his readers the violence of the Roman mob, its delight in the heresiarch Arnold of Brescia, who preached, not against the doctrines of the cardinals, but against their way of life — and incited his hearers to social revolution.
The pope was father in God to the Romans, and to all men; he was St Peter in person, the earthly representative of the apostle on whom the fame and fortune of the city most depended; but he was also a petty tyrant — one of the ancient rulers who had failed to go away; the symbol of all that was alien to the new found liberty so loved by the Italian city dwellers of the eleventh and twelfth centuries.
Many of the cities of central Italy were nominally under papal suzerainty — and they sometimes actually obeyed him and paid him tribute; but effective conquest lay in the future.
For the time, the political role of the pope in Rome and the papal states was exceedingly precarious.
Some popes of a militant disposition, such as the great German reformer  Pope Leo IX, tried to lead their own armies to war, but this nearly always ended in disaster.
As a military power the papacy was a failure, and this above all saved the popes from the innate tendency of medieval prelates to become secular rulers.
They were monarchs indeed from the mid eleventh century on, ruling over a monarchy as wide as western Christendom with some very material weapons; but it was a spiritual monarchy in which military power had no hand; and in Rome itself the spiritual monarchy became for ever entangled with the pope's role as the ruler of the city.
Time and again the Romans were stirred by the love of liberty and faction, which is a central feature of the whole urban renaissance, to rise against the pope and send him packing.
But many Romans were also devout Catholics and prosperous hoteliers; and conscience and economic need drove them to summon him back, for the city could not prosper in the eyes of God or man, of Simon Peter or Simon Magus, without the holy father.
The paradoxes of our story are nowhere writ so large as in Rome; the basilicas of San Clemente and Santa Maria in Trastevere were totally rebuilt in the twelfth century — and yet they perfectly express the art and architecture of the fourth century — as perfectly as any Gothic building of the nineteenth century expresses the thirteenth, or fourteenth.
They are striking symbols of the changeless eternal city.
VENICE, VERONA, MILAN
The other eccentric giant is Venice, and for an opposite reason, for it is the only great city of Italy which had no classical past.
It was a newcomer, almost a parvenu, the creation of refugees and pirates.
In the course of time the pirates turned merchants became a great hereditary patriciate, and Venice came to rule a mercantile empire much akin to that of ancient Athens, even in the end to acquire a large contado along and behind the Italian coast — but only after it had depended for centuries on piracy and trade for its food and livelihood.
The early stages of the rise of Venice arc  obscure and ill-documented; but when it comes into the light of day it is ruled already by a duke or doge popularly elected, yet normally chosen from, and dependent on, the great families of the Rialto, the chief island of the archipelago on which Venice is crazily and romantically constructed.
It was only in the mid twelfth century that the growing concentration of mercantile wealth led to the recognition of the oligarchy as the permanent government, which ruled Venice throughout the later centuries of her glory and her decline.
The citizens were assisted by a body of slaves, and their wealth depended on their increasing hold over the trade of the eastern Mediterranean.
Two crucial stages in this were the formation of an alliance with the Emperor Alexius I Comnenus of Byzantium against the Norman empire threatening to spread into Venice's Adriatic and Byzantine Greece in the 1080s; and the role Venice came increasingly to play in the crusading adventures of the twelfth century.
The emperor gave Venice exceptional mercantile privileges, and she began to form the trading posts and colonies — quite in the manner of ancient Athens — which may still be discerned, with Genoese and Turkish towns adjacent, along the Bosphorus.
In marked contrast, the numerous cities to the west of Venice, from Verona, across the Lombard plain to Milan and Turin, were centres of great farming regions and varied industry.
They had declined and revived with their districts; each was closely dependent on its contado; their leading citizens were the warrior lords of the castles of the region.
In the late tenth and eleventh centuries a marked revival of agriculture and country life in Lombardy had ushered in the urban renaissance in its heartland; for it was to be the Lombard cities above all which lured the Emperor Frederick Barbarossa to Italy in the 1150s and 1160s, and whose almost innumerable walls baffled his armies in the long war of the Lombard League.
They were market towns, great and small, with links always close with the country about them.
But they were also cities of great and growing wealth and beauty, noisy, factious places jealous of their independence.
When Barbarossa was driven from Rome in 1167 many of the cities of the Po valley joined together in the Lombard League under the aegis of Milan; and they built a new fortress town over against imperial  Turin, guarding the approach to Lombardy from the west, which they called Alessandria after the emperor's great rival, Pope Alexander III.
But for many cities jealousy of Milan was as powerful as hatred of the emperor's control, and a rival faction formed under Pavia which was for a time loyal to Frederick — a map of the two teams shows in a fascinating way how difficult it was to love one's neighbour in this world of riotous freedom and traditional internecine feuds.
At the point where the river Adige flows down from the north, bringing traffic from the north, from the Brenner pass and Bavaria and Austria, the city of Verona nestled in a pear-shaped bend in the river.
If one enters this part of the town from the west, past the Roman amphitheatre which fell on evil days in the Middle Ages when theatrical spectacles were banned — but has now revived its ancient beauty and a part of its function, as a setting for Aida and her kin — the road leads through a Roman gate, perfectly preserved, into the ancient grid of streets, laid down by Roman town planners in the first century B.C. and little altered.
The Romans, imitating the Greeks of Asia Minor and, nearer home, the Etruscans, thought a grid should have precise right angles, and so the rectangle of streets sits awkwardly in the bend of the river and one has to tack this way and that to cross it to the medieval cathedral and the Roman bridge.
Medieval town planners, as many cities further north bear witness, would have provided a more sensible plan if they had provided one at all.
Once over the bridge one climbs steeply, across the steps of the Roman theatre, now watched over by the stern, ascetic eye of a medieval chapel, to the citadel above, a palimpsest, with a Roman fort at its base, surmounted by a medieval castle which the Della Scala were to dominate after the decline of the commune at the turn of the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries.
On top of all one sees today the lineaments of the Austrian fortress which marks the final phase of the history of Verona before the Italian Risorgimento in the nineteenth century.
Among the cities of the north of Italy, Verona is the supreme revelation of an extraordinary continuity amid the many changes of two thousand years.
Milan by contrast seems at first sight a city of the nineteenth century, the era of its greatest prosperity.
Yet to the searching eye it is full of ancient treasure, none greater than the basilica of Sant'Ambrogio, of St Ambrose.
Milan was always jealous of its measure of independence both of emperor and pope; Milan and St Ambrose was the most active and powerful of all the traditions to rival Rome and St Peter.
Outside the Roman city walls (though in the heart of the modern city) lay a great cemetery area; and here, between 379 and 386, St Ambrose built a basilica over the martyria of two Roman martyrs, St Gervasius and St Protasius; and beside them in his own basilica Ambrose himself was laid to rest.
It has been rebuilt and readorned many times, and most centuries from the fourth to the twentieth — when it had to be largely rebuilt after the Second World War — have contributed to it; it is a supreme symbol of continuity.
But what one now sees belongs chiefly to the centuries of this book, the great church to the tenth and eleventh centuries, the atrium before it — though in form and function preserving the great courtyard of an early Christian basilica, where clergy and laity met before processing into the church for solemn eucharist — is of the early twelfth.
On and off for I, 500 years it has been served by a community of canons; but an eighth-century archbishop implanted monks in its precinct, and the canons failed to depart — so that from that time on for many centuries there were two communities competing for the use of the church, and from about 835 for the golden altar which is one of the supreme glories of Carolingian art.
In the ninth century the monks (who lived on the south side) built the more southerly of the two towers which still adorn the church, and from this tower the bells summoned the faithful to attend their masses and to make their contributions to the monks' support.
This, the canons reasonably complained, was discriminatory.
Meanwhile, in the late eleventh century, Milan became one of the theatres of war of the investiture disputes.
Like many great cities, it fostered within it an active turbulent group of middle and lower citizens, with some local nobles among them, and with a strongly anticlerical flavour to it.
But the anticlerical spirit was turned against the archbishop and the traditional, worldly, married clergy of Milan, not against the church as such, and won in time a measure of support from the reformed papacy.
The attitude of the popes was naturally ambivalent.
They rejoiced in the fervour of the Patarini , as the insurgents were called; and they delighted to find allies in the war against simony and clerical marriage (see p. 437); but they could not condone a consistent stand against the authority of the archbishop.
In 1059 Anselm of Lucca, the future Pope Alexander II, and St Peter Damian put down a riot against the Patarini , but in the same year their chief, Pope Nicholas II, restored the old archbishop to his throne.
In the late 1060s and 1070s Hildebrand, later Pope Gregory VII (1073–85), gave more consistent support to the last and most effective of the Patarine leaders, Erlembald, a noble demagogue; and Milan became a theatre of war between the pope and the Emperor Henry IV.
In the end Erlembald was killed, the authority of a new archbishop restored; and the crisis passed — but not the political role of Milan.
For in 1144 we witness a different disposal of the forces.
Once again the citizens, now politically organized as a commune, were in dispute with the archbishop and the canons.
The canons had built a lofty tower on the north side of Sant'Ambrogio, and the monks and the commune formed an alliance to destroy it.
But for a brief space the archbishop was at peace with both pope and emperor, and this was an alliance even the commune could not withstand.
The canons' tower is still there; indeed the citizens — by a strange romantic gesture — built it yet higher in the nineteenth century; and it stands as a monument to the forces and struggles which made Milan at once a centre of intense parochial jealousies, and of international fame and meaning, in the eleventh and twelfth centuries.
BOLOGNA, GENOA, PISA
South of Milan lies Bologna, a city whose fame lies in another chapter, in the university founded by the students of the eleventh and twelfth centuries, and so we turn west and south to Liguria and Tuscany, where we meet the cities of the seacoast or the great rivers, Genoa and Pisa and Lucca, Venice's main rivals for the maritime trade and the great colonial empires.
Genoa boasted a powerful ancient landed nobility whose surplus wealth helped to  give it the capital for its commercial enterprises; but it also needed to import food and raw materials from elsewhere, and enjoyed a powerful economic motive for becoming a centre of commerce.
Of all the commercial cities of the twelfth and thirteenth centuries Genoa is the best documented, for its marvellous series of notarial registers give us almost a comprehensive view of the sophisticated world of contracts and partnerships, of commerce near and far, which made it the home of a commercial empire stretching from the western Mediterranean to the Middle East.
But these notarial registers start in 1154, the year in which this book draws to a close.
The registers of Giovanni Scriba, the first of the series, show us this world already in being; but as so often in the economic history of the age, light dawns as we say farewell.
In 1063 the Pisans made a lightning raid on Palermo, destroyed some ships and carried off a handsome booty.
Unkind historians today doubt if they really scored a notable success.
But the event was extremely significant, none the less.
First of all, it marked the prestige of Palermo, already one of the largest and richest cities in western Europe — though not in Christendom, for like Cordoba, it was still a Muslim city.
Here Greeks and Muslims and Jews, representatives of the ancient civilizations of the Mediterranean world, had mingled for centuries; and it was a natural entrepot for the spices of the east and a port of call for the Jewish and Muslim traders who linked the western world with India and China.
In the 1060s and 1070s Sicily fell to the Normans, and it was they who eventually captured Palermo in 1072.
Yet another element was added to the civilization of Palermo; and at the very end of our period, in the late 1140s, King Roger II, greatest of the Norman rulers of south Italy and Sicily, created the monument which above all others links us to his world, the royal chapel, the Capella Palatina , Norman Romanesque in architecture, Byzantine in its mosaics, Islamic in its strange and fascinating ceiling.
The Normans were ruthless conquerors, but in their own domains they knew what to preserve; and Palermo remained, like London, the most populous and prosperous city of its region.
Meanwhile the Pisans had carried off their booty and used a  part of it to start the rebuilding of the cathedral, as an inscription in it still records.
Duomo and baptistry are monuments to the wealth of the city and of many Pisans from 1063 till the mid and late thirteenth century, the age of the sculptors Nicola and Giovanni Pisano, whose pulpits are their supreme adornments.
But the concept of the sacred and monumental quarter, which still makes Pisa famous, was born in the 1060s, and further advanced by a similar raid in which Pisans and Genoese joined on the great Muslim city of al-Mahdiyyah in 1087.
The citizens of Pisa by then had recently taken over its government from the archbishop — they had formed the commune of consuls in the early 1080s which was to be a model for innumerable cities in Tuscany and Lombardy and Umbria to follow in the next two generations, the characteristic Italian commune.
The prosperity of the city was now firmly based on its commerce.
The booty did not teach the Pisans how to engage in trade, any more than it taught them how to govern.
These arts they must already in considerable measure have mastered.
But a merchant needs capital to trade with, and a government needs money to spend.
Piracy may be very damaging to trade; but if carried on by the merchants themselves, it can obviously stimulate it.
The greatest weakness of many governments has been the need to tax which always inspires hatred in the breasts of taxpayers.
The citizens of Pisa found, for a time, a convenient means of solving both its needs; and the duomo was (in its creators' eyes) a visible proof of God's blessing on their endeavours.
TODI, SAN GIMIGNANO
We have dwelt too long among the great; for all these cities, vital as their history was for the future, give little help in explaining the extraordinary prosperity of the smaller cities — though the precocious growth of Pisa may have helped its Tuscan neighbours.
For the lesser cities, let Todi in Umbria and San Gimignano in Tuscany act as interpreters.
Though Todi in later centuries was to be a Ghibelline city — and still wears on its face some Ghibelline emblems — it was one of many in Umbria in  earlier centuries which was loosely embraced by the papal umbrella.
In fact the local feudal lords were powerful and ambitious, and Todi seems to have come relatively late to communal independence of the count and the bishop.
Indeed, if the message of its architecture is to be taken at all at face value, it was a city in which the factions did not follow conventional lines at all.
At Siena the town hall and the cathedral, for all their common dependence on civic zeal and wealth, turn their backs on one another.
In Todi, on the enchanting central square high above the tottering streets of one of the most beautiful and inconvenient of all hill towns, a Romanesque cathedral of the twelfth and thirteenth centuries smiles at no less than three town halls, witnesses of civic aspiration from the early to the mid and late thirteenth century.
The prosperity which all these minor towns reveal occasionally has a local explanation: Todi's neighbour, Assisi, was greatly enhanced when it became the burial place of St Francis and a centre of pilgrimage.
But the common story, so far as we can tell, was of a prospering contado helping a few of the citizens to be successful merchants, carrying local market goods and some from longer distances; and if Francis' father had not been a successful merchant trading into France, the saint would not have borne the name he did, nor suffered the intense reaction to his father's worldly values which helped to inspire him on the path to poverty and heaven.
Francis might have more to tell of these towns — of their poor and their beggars — whom he tried to raise from the dull misery of want to accept and bless their lot by enjoying poverty and simplicity as great as theirs.
But that is for another book.
San Gimignano is slightly apart from the other cities of Tuscany in that it seems to have had a relatively small element of hereditary feudal warriors among its citizens or in its contado.
But it joined to the full in the growing prosperity of the late eleventh and twelfth centuries.
Some of its leading citizens acquired great wealth, especially from saffron and wine, and landed property, in the course of the twelfth century, and they displayed their newfound status by building the lofty towers which still make the  skyline of the city so beautiful and so absurd — beautiful especially from a little distance, for the rolling Tuscan hills set off the imaginative colour and the dramatic skyline to remarkable effect.
One of the finest of the towers commemorates Gregorio di Gregorio, a third generation patrician of the early thirteenth century — heir to a succession established at the first high point of San Gimignano's revived prosperity, in the middle of the twelfth century.
These marvellous towers may a little represent the pride of the landlord-citizens or the arrogance of families recently enriched; but they certainly reflect the aspirations of many of the lesser cities in their heyday — and many of the greater too; what is peculiar to San Gimignano is that a group of towers survive.
Towers are to be seen as single scouts or in pairs in Perugia and Bologna; but these are isolated survivors; many an Italian city was once adorned with innumerable towers.
They are not practical instruments of warfare, though they genuinely reflect the factious bellicose tendencies of their builders.
But they are much more akin to many modern skyscrapers: they rather symbolize the social ambitions of their makers — and the comparative difficulty of self-expression on an ample scale in the crowded streets of a medieval city.
Thus the towers represented the wealth and social ambition of the leading citizens, and the turbulent, factious, independent spirit so characteristic of them.
The churches reflect the piety and religious sentiment of the citizens in an age which naturally sought to express civic feeling in religious form.
The walls express the growing independence of the cities.
But what is especially characteristic of Todi and San Gimignano is that their golden age, their period of most notable prosperity, came to an end about 1300, so that we can still inspect cities whose walls and public buildings, though there is an element of Etruscan and Roman in many of them, belong above all to the period from 1050 to 1300.
This was the heroic age of the Italian cities, the period when small cities flourished as much as large, before the giants eclipsed their neighbours.
SPAIN — CORDOBA
It would be very instructive to linger in the islands and on the other shores of the western Mediterranean, and explore the  similarities and differences, for example, in the history of the Catalan and Spanish towns and the Italian.
But we must hurry north, pausing only to observe that the most dramatic survivor from the early Middle Ages, and perhaps the greatest of all the cities of Europe in the tenth and eleventh centuries, was Cordoba, then in its heyday under the caliphate and its first Indian summer.
As a centre of culture, and a meeting place of civilizations, Cordoba remained vitally important through the days when the Jewish philosopher Maimonides was born there in the twelfth century and the Arab philosopher Averroes lived there in the thirteenth; as a representative of a medieval city it is as eccentric as Palermo — indeed far more so; for the cathedral at its centre is a mosque slightly disguised; and the beauty and immense and impressive size of the mosque are constant reminders to the modern visitor that Christendom was a poor relation to Islam, perhaps in many senses, in the period between the eighth and the tenth centuries when it was built.
But as a Muslim city it never aspired to, nor ever achieved, anything like the turbulent freedom of the Italian city republics, at least till much later.
NORTHERN CITIES
North of the Alps we shall rarely meet such continuity and such freedom as in Italy; but the differences have often been much exaggerated.
We used to embrace the comfortable doctrine that the Roman cities of Britain survived as the shells of walled towns — with cathedrals often built within them in the seventh and eighth centuries, but little other semblance of civic life — until English towns were revived in the late ninth century by King Alfred, who enjoyed a vision of urban life which could owe nothing to the English civic scene in which he had been brought up.
The archaeological record seemed to confirm this, for there was a singular dearth of substantial finds or evidence of major structures in most English towns, including London.
In Southampton it is more than twenty years since we learned that there was a major settlement of foreign merchants quite separate from the walled town; and Hamwih seemed for a time a town  apart from others in Britain — though evidently related to the great semi-urban sprawl which has been excavated at Duurstede near Utrecht.
But London was a puzzle; for Bede had told us that in his day it was ‘a mart of many peoples’, a trading centre for merchants from overseas as well as for native traffickers.
But they left mighty little trace within the walls of the City of London.
We now know that the reason for this was that they did not dwell or traffic within the walls; that Lundenwic like Hamwih lay outside, along the Strand or foreshore of the Thames.
In this kind of way, the archaeological reconstruction of early medieval towns is transforming their story.
Late Saxon Winchester is now quite intimately known, and Viking York may be explored by any student or visitor.
Developed techniques of town planning, sophisticated urban growth, have been revealed in many towns in pre-Conquest England.
We do not see here the great wealth and immense development of twelfth- or thirteenth-century Italy — we are, after all, still in the tenth and eleventh centuries; and English towns never achieved the wealth or sophistication of the Italian.
But archaeology has shown us much, and will show much more, of the history of these places before the documents are plentiful — and has cast a long shadow in the process over early medieval Italian towns, where comparable studies are less advanced than in Britain.
We have been shown meanwhile that there was a great deal more continuity in the northern cities than had been supposed; and that the contrast in their sites and situations between the cities of the plain in northern Europe and northern Italy, and the cities of the hills in Tuscany and Umbria, was the result in both cases of a long and complex history, of choices deliberately made and often repeated.
LONDON
London, like Verona, had been planted by the Romans at the critical point in the progress of a great river towards the sea.
London lies at the last point where a Roman bridge could comfortably cross the Thames, where landborne traffic and ships from overseas could readily meet.
The walls the Romans built remained the basic structure of the city walls down to their final destruction in the late eighteenth century, save at two significant corners.
When the old Roman city was revived and became London again, from the late ninth century on, one of its prime functions in the eyes of King Alfred and his successors was as a bulwark against the Danes; his boroughs had a major defensive role to play, and London was the greatest of them — one of the very few cities of this age which came wholly to fill a Roman enceinte.
But after the Norman Conquest the defensive role of cities was ambivalent.
The Normans valued the defensive function no less than the English, but feared it might be turned against them.
So beside every major town they built a castle garrisoned by loyal troops usually under the command of the local sheriff.
Sometimes the ambivalence took an unexpected turn, as when the rebels under Odo, bishop of Bayeux, held the town and castle of Rochester for many weeks against his nephew, King William Rufus, in 1088.
Sometimes the townsmen joined in loyalty against a rebel sheriff.
But London was for ever a sensitive place in the eyes of the English kings, watched with jealous eyes from the White Tower, built by William I at the south-east comer of its defences — and from further off in the great royal palace of Westminster.
At the south-western corner of the city walls two smaller castles were built, Baynard's and Mountfichet, but never allowed to become great fortresses; and they were finally removed from this strategic place by Edward I in the late thirteenth century: by a king whose mighty works at the Tower mirrored his determination to keep the Londoners under firm control; but who greatly expanded the western end and formed a large new enclosure there for the Dominican friars, who could help him to ensure that no hostile presence met him when he came from Westminster to the City.
Blackfriars, as we still call it, may be a monument to Edward's friendship with the Dominicans; but it also marks his determination to avoid the fate of his grandfather, King John, who had been finally driven to agree to the Magna Carta by finding the gates of the City shut against him.
The status symbols of medieval Pisa were the cathedral and the baptistry lavishly decorated with Tuscan Romanesque arcades; and the towers (now lost) of the gentry-patricians, with only the cathedral bell-tower, the famous torre pendente , to remind us of what they were.
In San Gimignano we can still see a few churches and the towers.
In the English towns such towers were forbidden: royal castles and relatively modest city walls presented the military aspect of the town, but the status symbols of the citizens lay much more in a multiplicity of churches.
Their significance was enhanced because they were, or rapidly became, parish churches, centres of worshipping congregations, the common property of natural communities of townsfolk.
A medieval visitor to Cambridge would have passed twelve churches as he walked through the town, roughly a hundred yards apart over a stretch of a mile; and Cambridge was a very modest town.
In London within the walls, besides St Paul's cathedral and (from 1107 — 8) the Augustinian priory of Holy Trinity Aldgate, there were by 1200 some ninety-nine parish churches, one for every 1½ hectares (3⅓ acres) or so.
Granted what we know of the history of the city it is clear that the vast majority, as probably the similar multiplicity in many other English towns, were built between the tenth and the twelfth centuries, and that the multiplication of parish churches was especially characteristic of the eleventh century.
It was not that the folk of London were more pious than those of San Gimignano — both evidently shared in their way in the popular religious revivals of this age; nor that they were less gentrified.
In all probability, many knights and barons joined in building these churches, and the English citizens boasted that they were the ‘barons of London’.
But they were not allowed to build towers, and so churches, which genuinely represented the spiritual aspirations of the age, also fed their sense of personal achievement and of the needs of their communities.
They were the unique public buildings of the age; some were tiny little boxes, in which priest and parish nestled in cosy intimacy; others much larger.
The archbishop of Canterbury, Lanfranc of Pavia — a man who knew the whole world from Rome to London well — built himself an austere but magnificent church beside the great market place, and its crypt still survives, under the Church of St Mary-le-Bow by Cheapside.
It is a little difficult for us, as we wander in the city of London today, to imagine the medieval city or the pride the citizens took in it — it is far easier in San Gimignano or Todi.
But it is a citizen of London who has left us the most elaborate rhapsody which survives from the central Middle Ages on any of the European cities of the day, and William FitzStephen's glowing vision of the London in which his hero, archbishop Thomas Becket, was born, is a startling reminder that Londoners took fully as much pride in their city as did the Italians of their day — just as the fact that the citizens adopted Thomas Becket as their patron saint reminds us that he was martyred for showing excessive resistance to the king.
The love of liberty might be somewhat hampered in its expression, but was as characteristic of the northern cities as of the southern.
NORTHERN COMMUNES — LAON, BRUGES
‘A commune is the tumult of the people, the terror of the realm, the tepidity of the priesthood’— such was the cry of the chronicler Richard of Devizes, as he took shelter in the cathedral priory at Winchester, and contemplated from afar the commune of London of the 1190s.
The terror, rather than tepidity, of the priesthood, it had undoubtedly been in many an Italian city in the late eleventh and twelfth centuries; and even more, perhaps, in the bloody riots in Cologne in 1074 which nearly subdued the pride of the prince archbishop of the city — or the riots in Laon in 1112 which erupted in the murder of the unpopular Bishop Waldric, and gravely shocked both the chivalrous King Louis of France, and his neighbour the English king, Henry I, whose chancellor Waldric had been.
The dates are significant, for they show that the spirit which ruled in the Italian city republics had noisy echoes in Germany and France — all over northern Europe indeed; and that Italy and the northern communes were not so far apart as the  northern monarchs and many modern historians have wished them to be.
Henry and Louis were to witness this again in a greater town than Laon.
In 1127 the count of Flanders was murdered while at prayer in the church of St Donatian in Bruges by the members of a mainly clerical clan to whom he had done disservice; and Henry and Louis intrigued with the local nobles to ensure the succession of a count to their liking.
But quite contrary to their calculations, it was the growing power of the cities which prevailed and ensured the succession of the candidate who triumphed.
Bruges and Ghent had grown from modest beginnings to be flourishing centres of manufacture and trade; and the wealth of London and England indeed were closely linked with them.
For all that we have said about the role of the country districts round — which applies as much to northern as to Italian cities — and the close relation, however ambivalent, of religious aspirations and the development of towns, it is in the end their place in the accumulation of wealth which marks them out in this age: they are at once the symbols and the centres of mammon; in them gathered the moneyers who struck coin and the merchants who exchanged and accumulated it.
TRAVEL
PROLOGUE: JOHN OF SALISBURY
Just after the end of our period, in the late 1150s, the celebrated intellectual and letter writer John of Salisbury recounted his travels: ‘ten times have I crossed the chain of the Alps since I left England first; twice have I travelled through Apulia; I have done business often in the Roman court on behalf of my superiors and friends; and on a variety of counts I have traversed England, and France too, many times.’
It is assumed John travelled first as a student, to Paris and perhaps elsewhere in France; then he travelled countless times to the curia on the business of his master Theobald, archbishop of Canterbury; and from his letters we know of at least two other major pilgrimages he undertook from his exile at Rheims in the 1160s.
So far as we know he was never a merchant, and he never went on crusade, but had he been he would have experienced all the five ways in which travel fundamentally impinged on the folk of the twelfth century; and if we consider the impact made by the wandering scholars and the growing universities, the flow of litigants and diplomats to and from the papal Curia, the countless pilgrims and pilgrimages, the crusades at their most popular, and the commercial revolution upon the world of the central Middle Ages — then a love of travel  and a readiness to travel must be accounted one of the major catalysts of change.
This fact is a trifle obscured for us by the modern doctrine of the holiday.
The word originally denoted the many single days when the labourer might break from his toil to go to mass and celebrate a saint in other, mundane ways; as, in the dull prose of the twentieth century, on a bank holiday.
But the notion that it is one of the rights of man to spend a fortnight, or a month, at Margate, or on the riviera, or in Santander, or Florida; and that it is wrong and immoral and damaging to health to prevent it — this is modern.
So are the means of transport which make it possible.
Yet the reader of medieval literature and letters must be constantly amazed at the degree to which folk with any leisure at all travelled in former times.
Neither then nor now has the urge to travel been universal.
For most there was little opportunity: the peasant rarely saw beyond the group of villages in which he was born; many a townsman strayed only a little further; monks were incarcerated in monasteries for life — and so forth.
But all this only makes the capacity to travel the more striking when we meet it.
MONASTIC STABILITY AND MOVEMENT
The traditional monastery of the Middle Ages was self-contained, a little world on its own, surrounded by its fields and estates and tenants, an oasis in a barbarous desert.
It was of the essence that abbot and monks should be able to stay within its walls unless compelled to travel about the business of the house.
And this is one of the reasons for a fundamental element in the Benedictine tradition: the independence of each abbey from every other: an independence only mitigated in early days by the right of the bishop to visit — where the monastery had not asserted a right to be exempt from the bishop — and, from the thirteenth century on, by the formation of congregations of houses to establish some kind of common action, control and system of visitation.
Needless to say there was always some measure of communication between monasteries, but it was only a modest intrusion into the life of most monks and even of many abbots.
But the monastic reforms of the tenth and eleventh centuries, and the new orders of the eleventh and twelfth, put an end to this  stability.
First of all, ideas, rituals, practices, and reforming monks travelled out from major centres like Cluny and Gorze, Trier and Glastonbury.
In the tenth century the number of houses was still relatively modest, the distances not enormous.
But as time passed numbers and distances grew.
By the late eleventh century the hand of Cluny was felt in houses spread all over the north of Spain and down into Italy, even to La Cava near Naples and over into Sicily, and also across the south and west of Germany in the movement which had its centre in Hirsau.
In some of these places direct contact with Cluny was slight, in some it was frequent; but it was not until the middle of the eleventh century that Cluny began to form an order — a group of houses scattered about Europe owing direct allegiance to her.
At first relations were kept quite close by sending a monk from Cluny herself or one of her elder daughters to supervise the new foundation and be its first prior; and the abbot of Cluny received the professions of all new monks and appointed many of the priors personally.
But as time went on and the numbers grew, more organized arrangements had to be made; and the abbot of Cluny had from time to time to undertake mighty journeys.
By the 1120s and 1130s Abbot Peter the Venerable was visiting Rome on several occasions, and undertaking, in the year 1130, journeys to England and Provence, where he met the pope at Saint-Gilles; and in 1135 to Pisa as well as about France.
The curious union of stability and movement came to a head in the formation of new, austere, but centralized orders in the early twelfth century.
The abbot of Cîteaux enjoyed at first a patriarchal, supervisory role like his brother of Cluny; but in the course of the 1120s and 1130s the machinery of the Order was perfected, and in principle every abbot of the Order went to Cîteaux every year for general chapter, and every abbot visited his abbey's daughter houses every year.
If this had been literally followed, St Bernard himself, as abbot of Clairvaux, would have been constantly on the move.
In fact he never visited England where he had many daughters; there was much delegation.
Even so, he was as much of a traveller as his friend peter the Venerable.
From all this sprang the paradox that orders like the Cistercian — which had set out to revive the old tradition that  many monasteries should be away from the world, set apart, oases in the desert — encouraged journeying and laid on their leaders the obligation to travel often and far.
A later generation was to see Cistercians sent out as missionaries, especially among the heretics of the Languedoc; and the wandering preacher — a very familiar figure in the twelfth century — became in the thirteenth a Franciscan or a Dominican friar.
It was not only by their own internal dynamic that the monasteries fostered travel.
The great abbey churches of the ninth and early tenth centuries had still been, for the most part, modest buildings for their communities alone.
It was only in the tenth and eleventh centuries that it became normal or common for giant churches to be built.
Some had existed from the fourth and fifth centuries on — especially the great pilgrim basilicas of Rome, with St Peter and St Paul fuori le mura in the lead.
But Bede's Jarrow or Wearmouth, or early Reichenau or St Gall, were in comparison extremely modest.
If we contemplate the main abbey church of Reichenau today we see a gigantic church with a vast nave, and this is the product of a new fashion of the late tenth and eleventh centuries.
It came from many sources and for many reasons; but the growth of Romanesque churches in the eleventh and early twelfth centuries was stimulated first and foremost by the flocks of pilgrims who arrived on major festivals and sought shelter and a place to worship in the presence of the high altar of a great church and the shrines of its saints.
It is from these visits above all that stems a remarkable paradox about these buildings.
They were designed to house God, the saints and the early communities of monks and canons who worshipped regularly within them.
But by the time that they were completed the largest space of all was the nave, which might serve various purposes — as a shelter for great processions, as a substantial public hall and meeting place; but above all provided space for visitors and lay worshippers.
PILGRIMAGES TO CONQUES, VÉZELAY, COMPOSTELA
At Agen on the Garonne, not far from Toulouse, lay the relics of a very shadowy Roman martyr known as Faith or Foy.
In the ninth century they were stolen and moved to Conques, where  was a narrow shelf of rock in a remote, retired valley of great beauty in the Rouergue, in the Massif Central; and here was space enough for a hermitage and a small oratory — for Faith, and a few monks to protect and cultivate her.
In contemporary eyes the theft was no wrong, no crime; for it was the saint's own wish — and the happy outcome, and the miracles she came to perform at Conques, proved that there was the home where she wished to dwell.
The monks of Agen thought differently; but no matter.
At Conques she stayed, and a beautiful shrine was made for her which still survives.
A wooden doll was made or found to contain her bones; and round it gold plates and gold wire were set in the ninth century.
In the tenth she was beginning to receive visitors of standing, and a golden crown and jewels were added to her coat.
In the eleventh pilgrims poured through her little valley in great throngs, and money became plentiful in her chests and building fund.
A great church, lofty and beautiful, was built on the shelf of rock; a monastery of size and standing was set about it.
Early in the twelfth century a new tympanum was carved over the west door, showing the Last Judgement — welcoming visitors to horrific scenes of diabolical torture; but also revealing, as doubtless the guides instructed the visitors with particular care, the heavenly hopes of the good, and especially of those who won the intercession of St Faith.
In the same eleventh century which saw St Faith's basilica spring up in Conques, a greater than Faith appeared in Burgundy, in the hill-top monastery at Vézelay.
The abbey of Vézelay was founded in the ninth century and survived until the French Revolution, but its heyday was between 1050 and 1200, as the beautiful abbey church still bears witness.
In 1050 or so the abbot announced that the body of St Mary Magdalene, no less, had been discovered in the crypt.
Then and later there was some murmuring: what was a saint who had lived and died in the Holy Land doing in Burgundy?
‘With God’, was the pious answer of a monk of Vézelay, ‘all things are possible’.
Like Faith, the Magdalene showed that she had come of her own wish by  performing many miracles of healing and other good works; and her church became one of the most popular centres of pilgrimage in Europe.
When St Bernard was instructed by the pope to preach the Second Crusade in 1146 he chose Vézelay for the site of his chief gathering — for it was the greatest centre of tourist traffic in his world; and there again, from the pulpit of the abbey church, St Thomas Becket chose to utter his choicest thunders against the counsellors of King Henry II of England in 1166 — for it was the meeting place of all the peoples of Europe, the ideal centre for a great gesture of propaganda.
But even Vézelay and Conques were not for most pilgrims ends in themselves.
There were three greater for those with the stomach and the energy and the resources and the time to reach them.
The celebrated pilgrim guide of the early twelfth century makes even Vézelay a step on the road to St James at Compostela in north-west Spain.
Try the Madeleine (Magdalene) at Vézelay on your way, says the author, ‘for her love, faults are forgiven, the blind see, the dumb speak, the lame walk’; try St Léonard at Noblat who releases captives; try Saint-Gilles, ‘speediest of all the saints to help the unfortunate and the afflicted’.
Word went round in the seventh century that St James the Apostle had visited Spain, and in the early ninth century a bishop of Padron discovered what he took to be his body.
To the shrine came a trickle of pilgrims, which by the eleventh and twelfth centuries was growing into a flood.
The appeal of St James, and his influence, became for a space immense; his cockle shell a great mark of prestige and spiritual hope worn by successful pilgrims, or those who wished to be thought so, for centuries to come.
ROME AND JERUSALEM: THE CRUSADES
But Vézelay and Saint-Gilles lay on a route to an even more notable city than Compostela, to Rome itself.
In the tenth century it was imagined to be an immemorial tradition that archbishops  wishing to receive from the pope the ‘pallium’, the scarf of lambs' wool which set them apart as metropolitans and gave them their status over the rest of the bishops, should come to Rome in person to receive it.
In due course this became a grievance and from early days, no doubt, it could be commuted for payment in money.
But many archbishops were delighted by the excuse to go on pilgrimage to Rome; and one of the first to benefit from the custom was Sigeric, archbishop of Canterbury (990 — 4), who has left us a kind of diary of his visit — first of the churches in Rome which a pilgrim had especially to visit and to pray in, and then of the stages on his long journey back to Canterbury.
It is calculated to prick the envy of a modern pilgrim: Rome, Sutri, Siena, San Gimignano, Lucca, Borgo San Donnino, Piacenza, Santa Agata, Ivrea, Aosta, the Great St Bernard Pass, Saint-Maurice, Lausanne, Pontarlier, Besançon, Rheims, Laon, Arras, Guînes and the Channel.
Thus archbishops, forging links with the Holy See, and numerous pilgrims, plied this and other routes between north and south, finding the road to Rome.
And beyond Rome lay Jerusalem.
At great councils of the Church at Piacenza and Clermont-Ferrand in 1095 Pope Urban II proclaimed the First Crusade.
Of the speeches he made on these occasions we have such various descriptions it is impossible to be sure what he actually said.
But there can be little doubt that he had two causes in mind, and great probability that he had also a third.
First of all, he was answering (or thought he was answering) an appeal for help and support against the Turks from the Byzantine emperor — the Christian west should sustain the Christian east.
Then he had inherited a romantic faith that one day God's own city, Jerusalem, where he had suffered and died and been buried, would be rescued from the infidel.
And thirdly, his world contained a great number of Christian knights, professional warriors, lords of unrule: if he could but find a holy cause, a just war, God's war, for them to engage in outside the frontiers of Europe, what might they not  achieve, what peace might not come to Christendom?
In Persuasion that devoted aunt Jane Austen observes with a sigh how the Harcourt children from Lyme Regis went to stay at Uppercross ‘to improve the noise of Uppercross and lessen that of Lyme’.
This hope was fearfully and wonderfully fulfilled.
Like so many historical labels, the word ‘crusade’ was not that favoured by contemporaries.
For them it was a pilgrimage,peregrinatio ; and this underlines the major purpose in the eyes of most crusaders — to go to Jerusalem, to secure its freedom from the Turk, to visit the holy places.
The consequence of Urban's call must have amazed the pope as it astonishes us; for he unleashed one of the great movements of peoples of the Middle Ages.
He unleashed much else, a sadistic wave of fury against the non-Christians which started with massacres of Jews in Germany and ended with massacres of Muslims in the Holy City itself.
It is a cruel, tragic story.
But to the historian it must be of the deepest interest.
There can be no simple or single explanation either of the great armies of more or less organized knights or of the rabble of thoroughly disorganized folk who followed the popular leader Peter the Hermit.
A pilgrimage to Jerusalem would have seemed infinitely remote to most adventurous folk in the early Middle Ages.
But like Rome and Compostela it began to be popular in the tenth and eleventh centuries.
There had been a time in the seventh century when Anglo-Saxon kings with many men's death on their consciences went to Rome to die in penitential garb.
From the mid tenth century we hear — at first very occasionally, then rather more often — of great nobles from the west who went to Jerusalem, not to die, but to live a great act of penance.
It was the pilgrimage which acquainted men with the distribution of spiritual treasure in the world; and especially with the notion of the special value and sacredness of Jerusalem.
It used to be said that it was the attempt by the Seljuks to prevent Christians from reaching Jerusalem which led to the First Crusade.
This cannot be sustained: it had always been difficult and there is no evidence that the Seljuks made it conspicuously worse.
The appeal of the crusade was manifold and thoroughly mixed.
There were political motives: some wished (like Pope Urban) to save the Eastern Empire; others wished to disembody the Eastern Empire and carve out principalities for themselves — contradictory motives, perhaps, but both leading to similar activity.
Others, again, wished to defend Europe against Islam; the dukes of Normandy and Lower Lorraine may have been fleeing from their incapacity to rule their duchies.
There were economic motives, for the crusades owed much to the commercial enterprise of the Italian cities.
Most complicated and difficult to analyse were the religious motives, ranging from a direct yearning to follow in the footsteps of Christ to an opportunity to escape the pains of hell.
‘Some hoped to be saved by going; others didn't care if they were damned so long as they found new fields for profit and adventure.
There was something in the Crusade to appeal to everyone.’
The traditional teaching of the Church had been to condemn war wherever possible.
That war was justified where self-defence demanded violent measures few of the fathers had denied; but the consistent effort of responsible churchmen down to the tenth century was to curb the warlike proclivities of the military classes, and, as time passed, to threaten ever direr penalties on those engaged in unholy war.
Even soldiers acting under orders, who were justified by every code of loyalty of the day, were commonly thought to die unhouselled and unprepared if they died in battle.
But as the tenth century was turning into the eleventh we have the first signs of a new outlook.
The destruction of the Ealdorman Brihtnoth and his followers by the Danish invaders of England in 991 was the occasion for the poem on the Battle of Maldon, which is firmly in the tradition of the German heroic lay: it records and assumes the overriding virtue of loyalty between a lord and his followers.
At about the same time the French monk Abbo of Fleury was writing about the death of another English leader who had fallen at the hands of the Danes: Edmund, king of the East Angles, who had been killed in 869.
As a Christian and an anointed king Edmund could not (according to the legend) submit to the heathen Dane; he preferred, in the words of the pagan Horace, ‘to die for his country’.
And so he was killed; and in his death Abbo sees Christian martyrdom.
We are coming close to the idea of war, not merely as something justifiable under certain circumstances, but as something capable of being holy.
In the eleventh century this notion made great strides.
The founder of the papal reform, Pope Leo IX, had been a warrior as well as a devoted bishop before he became pope, and he led his own troops against the Normans in south Italy.
He suffered  defeat, and this particular precedent was rarely followed; but the idea that the papacy should find specific tasks for the military did not die with him.
Its special protagonist was Pope Gregory VII.
Already, as cardinal, he had encouraged Pope Alexander 11 to give his blessing to the Norman invasion of England.
Duke William could claim that he was going to oust a perjured usurper and also to remove from the see of Canterbury an archbishop not recognized in Rome.
So the pope (so a contemporary claimed) sent him a banner which gave the campaign of Hastings, at least in some eyes, the aura of a crusade.
A similar blessing (more obviously defensible) was given to the Normans who invaded Sicily in order to recover it from Islam; and the idea gained currency that the reconquest of Spain from Islam was a holy war.
This idea inspired knights from France to flock to the assistance of the struggling Christian kingdoms in northern Spain; but there was clearly a nice distinction between the attitude of men north of the Pyrenees, who regarded the Muslim as the wicked infidel, as cattle for the slaughter, and the Christians who had lived among them in Spain and who regarded them as misguided fellow-humans.
The distinction is underlined in the career of the Spanish nobleman commonly known as the Cid (see pp. 315–16).
Historically, this engaging adventurer carved out a career on the frontiers of Christendom and Islam without troubling himself much about religious differences: he was happy to ally himself with Muslims when it suited him.
Later legend, however, made him out a Christian hero in the relentless (though not unchivalrous) religious war.
To Gregory VII holy war could be fought against any of God's enemies, whether infidel or Christian.
But war against the Muslim was his dream; and in 1075 he devised a remarkable scheme by which he himself was to lead a crusade to the east, to restore Byzantium after the disaster of Manziken and to recover Jerusalem.
He outlined his scheme in a letter to Henry IV of Germany, whom he fondly imagined would look after the interests of the papacy in his absence, But within a year Gregory and Henry were at war, and Gregory had to divert his ‘crusade, to deal with enemies nearer home.
Gregory's pontificate ended in  disaster; but the papacy and the holy war were rescued by the skill and inspiration of Pope Urban II (1088 — 99).
In 1095 (after previous diplomatic exchanges at a less exalted level) pope Urban received an embassy from the Emperor Alexius Comnenus, asking for help in recruiting mercenaries.
At first sight it might seem that Urban was hardly in a position to provide it; he was without military resources of his own, and depended on such allies as he had to defend him against the Emperor Henry IV, who still refused to recognize him as pope.
By a bold and imaginative decision, Urban not only answered Alexius's call — though hardly in the way he had intended — but roused the enthusiasm of Christendom, restored the credit of the papacy and ruined the prestige of the emperor.
He presided at the councils of Piacenza and Clermont (1095), and preached with fervour war against the infidel, for the defence of Christendom and the recovery of the holy places.
THE POPULAR VIEW OF THE CRUSADES
The crusade was more than the great pilgrimage launched by Pope Urban in 1095; it was part of a larger movement, the expansion of Europe, against Islam and paganism in Spain, all through the Mediterranean, in Syria and the Holy Land, and in the Slavonic countries bordering on East Germany.
In part this was a purely secular expansion, and the usual causes — rising population and prosperity, the plethora of younger sons, and the rest — may be found for it.
But it was also a religious movement: the invasion by Christian knighthood of the infidel world; it aroused the savagery for which war in the name of religion has so often been the excuse.
The religious outlook of the crusaders was more complex and more elusive than Pope Urban's.
Above all, it was ambivalent; and a brief inspection of the obverse and reverse of the coin will help to give us an insight into its meaning.
By great good fortune we are able to inspect the stage which had been reached on the eve of the First Crusade in the pages of the Song of Roland .
The Song of Roland is based, very remotely, on fact: a Breton count of that name was killed by a Basque ambush when Charlemagne was retreating after his quite unsuccessful Spanish campaign of 778.
The details of the legend's  growth are obscure, but it is now known that it was developing steadily in northern Spain and southern France in the centuries between the eighth and the eleventh.
By the late eleventh century it was the common possession of the French-speaking world.
A version of it may have heartened the Normans in 1066; and it is even possible that the earliest surviving version was composed in Normandy.
However this may be, it is both the climax of a long tradition of minstrelsy and in part, perhaps in large part, the work of a poet of considerable accomplishment.
In form the Song of Roland is like a succession of vivid, jerky photographs, like an early motion picture; it is as though the author had set out to describe something similar to the Bayeux Tapestry, depicting the tragedy, not of Harold, but of Roland.
There is a great deal of this kind of description in the Song of Roland , and a great deal more: action, speech and sentiment.
Charlemagne has been fighting for years in Spain, and has almost completed its conquest from the Saracens.
The Spanish king sues for peace, offering to accept Charlemagne's suzerainty.
Two of Charlemagne's leading magnates, Roland and Guenelon (or Ganelon), have fallen out, and Roland suggests that Guenelon should go to the Saracen court to discuss terms with the Muslims; treachery is suspected, and the embassy is regarded as very  dangerous.
Guenelon bears a grudge in his heart, which eventually blossoms into a scheme for revenge.
He makes a secret compact to betray the rearguard of Charlemagne's army as it passes the Pyrenees, and then returns to Charlemagne's court and arranges for Roland to lead the rearguard.
The army sets out on its way to France, and Roland is duly posted to lead the rear, together with the flower of Charlemagne's feudatories, the twelve peers of France.
When the main army is far ahead, and the rearguard is entering the pass of Roncesvalles, it is suddenly attacked by an immensely superior force of Saracens.
Roland's close friend and companion, Oliver, begs him to blow his great horn (the oliphant) and summon Charlemagne back to the scene of battle.
Roland refuses and the rearguard, knowing it is doomed, prepares to fight.
Wave after wave of attackers are routed, and Roland alone kills many hundreds.
But eventually the French are reduced to a small band, and Roland realizes that he did wrong to send his faithful followers to death by his proud refusal to blow the oliphant.
And so, when it is too late, he blows it, and Charlemagne returns; but the blast on the horn, coupled with the fatigue of fighting, is too great an effort for Roland's strength; he bursts a blood vessel or two, and from then on is a dying man.
In this way the author (somewhat naively) avoids the anti-climax of making Roland fall victim to a Saracen sword.
Roland lives long enough to see all his followers die, and also to see the last remnants of the Saracen army void the field in confused rout, and then he dies.
The emperor returns and chases the Muslim host to the gates of Saragossa; defeats them in another battle.
Then, without warning, the Muslims are reinforced by the emir of Babylon (i.e. Cairo), who comes with an immense array from all the states of Islam.
In a final battle Charlemagne is again victorious, and the emir is killed.
The emperor returns to Aachen, and the poem closes with the trial of Guenelon and his death.
‘My life is hard indeed’— the life of the leader of a feudal host, whose business it was to defend and protect his followers; the ruler of fair France,la douce France , whose business it was to protect and govern his country; the emperor of Christendom, whose business it was to maintain the fortress of Christian Europe and to expand its borders.
From these tasks there was no respite for the Christian emperor, the faithful feudal overlord.
The aspirations of the knightly class at its best and the sense that Christendom must go over to the offensive against Islam are nowhere more succinctly expressed than in this poem, written when the Christian reconquest of Spain was well under way, but when the crusades had only just begun, shortly before or shortly after the launching of the First Crusade.
The Song of Roland was the work of a Christian cleric, and his picture of knighthood is idealistic.
Even so, his vision of Christianity is fairly primitive.
It is a fighting religion, which sends its enemies to death and hell; only in the figure of Queen Bramimunde is there a hint of conversion, of a chance of salvation for the heathen.
The author was not interested in Islam as a religion; he gives a grotesque caricature of it.
The theme was always the Christian attack.
Nor is his picture of the clergy a particularly spiritual one: those who pray and those who work are never mentioned, but the cleric who was also a warrior has his place, and after Roland perhaps the most heroic figure of all is the leading ecclesiastic of France, the archbishop of Rheims.
In the Bayeux Tapestry, the Conqueror's half-brother, the warrior bishop of Bayeux, is represented in full armour; out of respect for his office he carries, however, not a sword, but a mace.
Archbishop Turpin had no use for blunt instruments: he wields lance and sword like the rest and the only hint of his ecclesiastical status is his dying blessing on Roland and the fallen.
Turpin is no monk, but he is a Christian bishop: not only is he, as a feudal lord, a part of the military hierarchy of Charlemagne's realm, but he represents the unity of all segments of Christendom in the fight  against the infidel.
It is the angel Gabriel who comes to Charlemagne at the end of the poem, just as Gabriel and Michael — the fighting archangel, whose cult was flourishing anew in the tenth and eleventh centuries — come to Roland to carry his soul to heaven; the poem is definitely Christian, and an attempt to set a religious seal on knightly glory; but the knightly glory has in its turn captured the Church, and harnessed it, in the person of the archbishop of Rheims, to the holy war against the infidel.
Charlemagne represents the universal theme of the poem, and the centre of the loyalties of its characters; and Turpin the place of the Church in its rather crude scheme of Christian idealism; but the central figure is undoubtedly Roland.
In his failure to sound the horn in time there is tragedy, but it is not of a very complicated kind.
The tragedy must rest solely on the simple problem of the relation between his intense loyalty to his followers and to his lord, and his own pride as the supreme warrior.
On a hill looking down towards Spain Roland meets his end; and, although his death is not the end of the poem, it is its climax, and it enshrines almost all that is really great in it.
He laments over his sword, Durendal, fearful that it will fall into pagan hands; he lists the relics in its golden hilt — the tooth of St Peter, the blood of St Basil, some hairs of his lord St Denis (the patron saint of France) and a piece of St Mary's dress.
And so he turns aside under a pine tree, lays his sword and oliphant under him and lies down to die: he makes his confession, holds up his right glove to God and angels come and carry his soul to Paradise.
Thus was God's blessing, fortified by relics and talismans and the flowering of legends, promised to those who pursued the pagans down the dusty road into Spain, or the still dustier tracks of Syria.
But we must not be misled by the atmosphere of religious exaltation: the pagans are, by implication, cattle for the slaughter; the call is not to missionary work, nor even to humane conquest, if such a thing exists, but to slaughter.
In the German version of the poem, written some two generations or so later, this is quite explicit.
We may be sure that many people even in the eleventh century had doubts about this doctrine; just as St Anselm was convinced that the road to Jerusalem which could be pursued within the walls of a monastery was safer and holier than that to Jerusalem itself.
If the heroism of Roland is the obverse of a coin, the reverse is the doctrine of holy war as it impinged on the cruder minds of thousands of contemporaries.
That it impinged as a call to slaughter first and foremost seems only too clear; for the first result of the preaching of the crusade was a fearful massacre of the one species of ‘infidel’ within easy reach.
The lot of the Jews had been an uneasy one for many centuries; now, for the first time, they were massacred in western Europe.
There were, no doubt, special reasons for this.
Those who preached the crusade dwelt on the significance of Jerusalem and on the death of Jesus, and so roused men to fervour against the Jews who had killed him as well as against the Muslims who had captured his tomb; and apocalyptic notions of the time associated the conversion or elimination of the Jews with the liberation of Jerusalem, as a necessary prelude to the end of the world.
But the outcome only serves to emphasize the sadistic element in the popular doctrine of the crusade.
In the eyes of ordinary folk, the crusade was a holy war for the sake of war.
The crusades were preached by the official Church; but the enthusiasm with which the preaching was greeted was due to a wide variety of emotions, of which zeal for a different doctrine from the pope's was one of the most powerful.
The crusade was inspired by many motives, of which one can surely say that the lowest — and perhaps, with less conviction, the highest too — were religious.
Yet the crusading movement in many ways helped to civilize Europe.
It compelled the Church to come to terms with lay society; to find an accommodation between its own ideals and those of the warrior aristocracy; and so, in the end, to civilize that society, as well as, in some respects, to lower its own ideals.
One of the last of the Chansons de Geste was the Willehalm of Wolfram von Eschenbach.
Wolfram may never have seen a Muslim; but he preaches, with outspoken conviction, the common humanity, the common place in God's purpose, of Christian and heathen —‘spare God's handiwork’.
Behind the famous outcry of the converted Muslim princess in his poem lay a century in which theologians had humanized Christian teaching, and Christian and Muslim had met and mingled on all the frontiers of southern and south-eastern Christendom.
MERCHANTS, BOATS AND TRADE
Thus the old tradition of pilgrimage,peregrinatio , spawned or became united to the new kind of military adventure we call the crusade; and the resources of the roads and waterways of Europe and the Near East were strained to the uttermost to meet the insatiable demands of these adventurous travellers.
While many a villager born in so small an island as Britain might pass all his days without seeing the sea, some of his comrades from every European land risked its dangers, courted its excitement — or just found it serviceable for their varied aims.
Of all the travellers of our period those who most affected the lives of large numbers of people, those who travelled most regularly for pleasure and profit, those to whom the sea, the river and the road, were most natural companions, have left the smallest record.
Of the merchants large and small who fructified the markets of Europe we know very little, but we find their traces everywhere about us.
If towns are planned or built with large market-places or whole quarters  allotted to trafficking or to fairs, it stands to reason that they represent a throng of traders.
In Third World countries, even or especially those only slightly affected by western economies, almost all active men and their wives and children are engaged in trade; if we imagine the corn and wool from local sources, the oil and wine from further off, the spices from the Far East and the slaves from heaven-knows-where who filled the fairs and markets of Europe in increasing quantities in the eleventh and twelfth centuries — above all, if we contemplate the great stone buildings and recall the quarries whence came the stone — we can see that there is an immense effort here largely hidden from our eyes.
Here above all, the written source grievously misleads us as to the life of these centuries, unless we supplement it imaginatively from every type of physical remains.
But occasionally even the narrative sources have an important message to impart.
Justly celebrated is the tale of the English monk and hermit St Godric of Finchale.
Born of humble parents early in the twelfth century, he was brought up in the fenlands round the Wash, and early in life wandered among the shoals and quicksands round the mouth of the Welland in search of wrecks and treasure.
With the aid of a small capital thus amassed, he became first a pedlar in Lincolnshire, then a traveller — but it seems to sit on the surface of his story that the motive for his wider travels was not so much the search for gain as the love of travel itself, and the urge to pilgrimage.
First he went to St Andrew's in Scotland, then to Rome; then he engaged in regular trading between England and Scotland for a while; then he became a professional sailor.
He sailed to Denmark and to Flanders, and once again to Scotland; gradually the pilgrim replaced the merchant in him.
To St Andrew's he went once more, and often to Lindisfarne, the original home of St Cuthbert under whose shadow he was to end his days.
Next he set off for Jerusalem, then to Rome again, and back to England and London.
His next journey was to Saint-Gilles and Rome.
Then the wanderer sought a resting place: he became a hermit and dedicated himself to St Cuthbert.
Even now, like so many of the religious of the age, he could not settle in one place for ever; he paid a final visit  to Jerusalem.
On his return he settled at last under the protection of Cuthbert, first in the saint's own resting place at Durham, then in a hermitage under the protection of Durham cathedral priory at Finchale by the river Wear — and the rest of his life is filled with his prayers and visions and miracles at Finchale.
Godric was an exceptional figure, in his enterprise, his success, in the variety of his occupations; above all, in the record of his life.
How many such stories lie hidden from us we cannot tell; but we can be sure that he reflects many of the aspirations of his day: as a merchant on land and sea, in the Baltic, the North Sea and the Mediterranean; as a pilgrim to the shrines of England and Scotland, to Saint-Gilles, to St Peter and to Jerusalem, he accomplished what many others were doing, and far more aspired to.
Finally, the combination of hermit and monk, the union of Finchale and Durham, goes near to the heart of twelfth-century religion.
Thus far Godric's life is a model source.
But it tells us too little of the horses and the mules and the packs he used; it tells us nothing of his carts and his boats; and this is an area of scholarship curiously underdeveloped.
We can contemplate many pictures of large-wheeled carts, for example, and a few scraps of them remain; but the details of land transport are still obscure, though we become ever more aware how much must have travelled on exceedingly inadequate roads.
Yet there is striking evidence that carts and wagons had been much improved, and that bridges were being built in many parts to make it possible for them to go longer distances.
A soft, padded horse-collar was widely used by the twelfth century; this enabled horses to pull a variety of lighter and heavier carts, faster and over greater distances than had been possible before.
Hitherto the older waist-band had tended to slip on to the horse's neck and either throttle him or prevent him from pulling hard; hence the slower and less efficient ox had been generally used.
Technical advance of this kind shows that the cart was being seriously used; bridge-building that roads were not entirely neglected.
Sometimes, it is true, they must have been little more than what Marc Bloch described as ‘l'endroit où on passe’; but one may presume that efforts were made to drain long-distance roads and keep them clear of obstruction; and kings and princes in several countries  regarded the main roads as their roads.
In England any road leading to a port or a market was a royal road, and this indicates that royal interest was not confined to providing roads for the movement and provision of royal armies, but was concerned with trade and markets.
Yet one may also assume that royal interest was more constantly engaged in collecting fines for damage to the king's highway than in ensuring that the damage was repaired.
For heavy goods, especially of timber and stone, it still seems likely that water transport, by river and sea and a little by canal, was cheaper and more expeditious than long-distance travel by road — and that there was sense as well as sentiment, for example, in the devotion the Norman builders showed in England for their native stone from Caen.
The queen of the northern waters in the ninth century had been the Viking longship, well represented by the famous Gokstad ship discovered in Norway.
But this was only one of a variety of vessels, some of them much larger, it seems, used by the Vikings, and it is the accident that they still used them for burials which has enabled a small number to survive — the conversion to Christianity may be said to have deprived us for ever of the best evidence we might have had of medieval navigation as it developed in the eleventh and twelfth centuries.
For all the ingenuity that has been exercised in studying remaining ships and portrayals of ships in the light of expert modern knowledge — in the building and sailing of replicas and all manner of ingenious devices — it still remains true that we are tempted to judge early medieval navigation mainly from a handful of second-hand boats ready for retirement, which were thus thought suitable for burial.
In the twelfth century the development of round ships was going on apace, and the first steps taken towards the mighty cogs of the late Middle Ages.
One day we may hope that the spade and exploration under water will advance our knowledge much further and bring us close to the expanding merchant fleets of the eleventh and twelfth centuries.
THE WANDERING SCHOLARS
We began this chapter with John of Salisbury, scholar, pilgrim and envoy to the papal Curia.
Although medieval students were  often noisy and riotous, the aims of their travels were peaceful, and this sets them at least a certain distance apart from the crusaders.
Yet their motives were thoroughly mixed.
In a similar fashion it was becoming common for quite trivial legal disputes to go to the papal Curia on appeal: this was to transform the very nature of papal jurisdiction and authority, and is a striking example of the cosmopolitan links and assumptions of twelfth-century culture.
We can believe that Roman justice had many advantages: but there is copious evidence that the prestige of the papal courts was not the sole nor the main motive of many litigants.
Considering the difficulties and expense and danger of the journey, it is a striking witness to the love of travel so characteristic of many in that age.
Equally striking is the copious evidence that students flocked, as never before since the decline of the ancient world, to distant centres of learning.
After a lifetime of university teaching I have ceased to believe that the desire to sit at the feet of many masters is a powerful motive with the majority of wandering scholars.
For a few it is immensely strong, and the search for law or a great master at Bologna — for theology and Abelard at Paris — played its part in bringing students to distant schools in the early twelfth century, the first great creative age in the formation of medieval universities.
But there were other motives, of fashion and adventure and the hope of promotion, which are likely to have been more powerful with many recruits.
Many would have echoed the words of the Archpoet of the mid twelfth century:
It would be foolish to suppose that we can penetrate the causes of this striking movement with any precision; but the example of John of Salisbury makes it abundantly clear that the love of  travel, the fashion for wandering, played a major role.
He is all the better as a witness, since one cannot doubt that he genuinely sought instruction.
His twelve years of study and the roll call of the masters of Paris of his day — masters of grammar, logic and theology, professors from England and France and further afield — bear witness to the serious nature of the academic work in which he joined with such enthusiasm.
A great cultural movement like the twelfth-century Renaissance cannot be explained in simple terms: the influences and the inspiration which created it flowed through many channels, some of them deep beneath the ground.
We cannot explore them all.
But the meeting of intellectual endeavour and the Wanderlust , which John of Salisbury so clearly represents, is at least a symbol to us of the channels these influences found.
KINGSHIP AND GOVERNMENT
KINGSHIP
Medieval kingship was a strenuous occupation.
If he played strictly according to the rules, the king had to combine some of the qualities of general, prize fighter, judge and monk.
He was expected to defend his people and to keep the peace, and yet also to provide his warrior barons with suitable exercise.
He was expected to set an example in knightly exercises, and to show a personal example of prowess in war, although he and his enemies were sufficiently prudent to value him more highly alive than dead, so that a crowned king was rarely killed in battle.
He was expected to keep good order; that is to say, to see that offenders were punished, that evil-doers went in fear of him, that disputes over land were settled in an orderly manner; and personally to supervise his royal court.
He was the protector of the Church in his land, and the Church required him to take a keen and personal interest in its affairs.
Daily mass was a minimum for any conscientious nobleman; many kings attended a considerable part of the daily office as well.
And this was only a part of the ceremonial which surrounded the office with glamour and reminded the king's subjects that he was God's anointed — a notion which  inspired them with great awe, when they were not actually engaged in rebellion against him.
Some took their duties more seriously than others.
The biographer of Edward the Confessor shows us (in what is meant to be a panegyric) the picture of a thoroughly idle king, who spent much of his time ‘in the glades and woods in the pleasures of hunting’.
This was the normal relaxation of a king's leisure: Henry I of Germany was so keen a huntsman that he ‘would take forty or more wild beasts in a day’; the Norman kings turned a substantial proportion of their kingdom into game preserves; hunting was the natural sport of a militant aristocracy, venting on animals the energy and spleen left over from fighting their own kind.
It is clear that the Confessor retained his native energy to the end of his life, since Earl Harold built a hunting lodge for him in Wales as late as 1065.
But apart from hunting, he seems to have left the business of government to his earls, although he continued to enjoy the society of churchmen, especially of foreign churchmen, gave his heart to the building of Westminster Abbey, engaged in the royal works of mercy, stood meekly through divine office and mass, and — a special note of conscientiousness —‘at these times, unless he was addressed, he rarely spoke to anyone’.
The biographer says nothing of a king's other chief relaxation, the evening carouse.
It was noted of Henry I of Germany that he was merry in his cups, but never to the detriment of royal dignity; and of William I of England that he was so abstemious that he never took more than three cups of wine after dinner.
Such banquets are portrayed for us on the Bayeux Tapestry, or at least the early stages of them.
As leader of the Church Edward the Confessor played his part, though not perhaps very adequately, since he left on his death an archbishop of Canterbury who was not recognized as such by the pope.
Whether or not he fulfilled his part as judge and lawgiver, it is very hard to say: later generations spoke of the good laws  of King Edward, but we cannot tell if he deserved the compliment.
The two other functions of a king he shirked: he did not lead his armies to war, anyway in his later years, and he did not provide an heir.
The latter was very likely his misfortune, or his wife's.
In that ascetic age he earned a strange renown for his childlessness; it was attributed, rightly or wrongly, to celibacy, and this was regarded as a sign of virtue.
This interpretation was kind to Edward, because it was more normal even then to demand of a king that he produce an heir, and Edward's childlessness unloosed on his luckless kingdom the horrors of 1066.
A king reigned ‘by grace of God’; his monarchy was surrounded by a divine aura.
Yet his subjects had a right of resistance, of rebellion against him, if he failed to rule them justly and to give them due protection.
In practice, therefore, he ruled, if he ruled effectively, by force and fear.
Medieval kingship was an extraordinary mixture of harsh reality and lofty ideals.
They cannot be understood apart.
Edward was fortunate to be able to do only half his job and escape condemnation.
More characteristic was the active Louis VI of France, who succeeded on the whole in being a successful king, but only by the most strenuous activity.
The ideal of medieval kingship is clearly revealed in Suger's Life .
Louis was never free from wars and rumours of wars; time and again Suger notes his constant activity (anyway in the campaigning season) in spite of his immense girth.
With particular pride he notes how in the crisis of 1124, when the king of England and the emperor were allied against him, and Henry V planned an attack on Rheims, Louis put himself dramatically under the protection of St Denis, ‘the special patron and singular protector after God of the kingdom’; how he came to the saint and begged him to defend his kingdom, preserve his person and resist his enemies, as the saint was accustomed to do.
It was the custom when a foreign invader stepped on French soil for the relics of Denis and his companions to be set on the altar, from which they personally conducted the defence of the realm.
And so Louis took a standard from Denis as symbol that he was the saint's vassal (see p. 105), summoned the feudatories of France, and set off to defend Rheims.
It is a nice point to decide whether it was the impression made by this tremendous scene staged by  Suger in his abbey church, or the memory (usually rather rusty) of their solemn feudal oath, which rallied the feudatories of France, even the count of Blois, who was at war with him, to help Louis against the German.
However we interpret the process of causation, Henry V was baffled, not by the bones, but by the big battalions.
So let us start with them.
WAR AND MARRIAGE
Warfare was the means by which the upper classes provided themselves with exercise and occupation, and justified their existence.
In earlier days they had actually earned their living by war and become rich from the plunder they could collect on their annual expeditions.
In the slightly more settled conditions of the tenth century most soldiers were provided with a regular livelihood, and the practical uses of war had diminished.
Some of the shrewder politicians of the period realized this; they saw how inconclusive wars generally were, and attempted to attain their ends by more sensible means.
The history of the English monarchy well illustrates both the importance and the unimportance of war.
It was by conquest that Alfred and his successors created a single English kingdom out of the ruins caused by the Danish invasions of the ninth century.
It was by conquest that the Danish King Cnut made himself the first king of a truly united England in the early eleventh century.
The significance of the battles of Stamford Bridge and Hastings in 1066 hardly needs emphasis; though we do well to recall that it was not so much William's victory, as the fact that the two battles had removed his two most serious rivals for the throne, which made the year so decisive in English and Norman history.
William II, Henry I and Stephen all won the throne by holding rivals at bay, and in each case warfare played its part; in Henry's case the battle of Tinchebrai (1106) enabled him to imprison his elder brother for life and made him secure in Normandy as well as in England (see pp. 289 ff.).
Decisive battles, the death of kings in battle or the life imprisonment of great men were rare events; and against the very exceptional, decisive outcome of the battles of 1066 and 1106  we must set the endless, indecisive campaigns of William I and Henry I on the borders of their French domains; the indecisive warfare of Stephen's reign which led to anarchy in England.
Henry I shored up his doubtful claim by marrying a princess of the English royal line; what Stephen has lost in warfare, Henry II recaptured owing to a series of successful marriages — those of his parents, which united a claim to all the territory of Henry I with Anjou, and his own, which added to these Aquitaine, that is to say, some title to most of southern France.
Henry II spent a large part of a long career campaigning in France; but his wars added very little to what he had gained by marriage.
Nor was the lesson lost on him.
The hectic marriage alliances which he, in common with most twelfth-century potentates, engaged in showed a recognition that marriage was a more reliable weapon than warfare in realizing large ambitions.
It is natural to consider the dynastic marriage policies of this period in the same context as warfare, since both were engaged in by the kings and great nobles for very much the same reasons (see pp. 456–7).
Both were a regular part of the customs of European high society: however little women might be regarded, the queen and the duchess were essential figures in the palace and the castle.
They minded the hearth and provided the heir.
The laws of the Church made a man look outside his kindred for a wife, and the dynasts made virtue of necessity and constructed elaborate alliances by their marriages.
These alliances were similar to the games of dice much favoured at the time: the marriages might or might not be successful; they might or might not have political consequences.
Henry II's inheritance was won by a series of marriages which were politically successful but domestically disastrous.
It is observed elsewhere how his unfortunate mother had been used by Henry I in his immensely grandiose designs.
The designs were brilliantly successful in the long run, but his daughter suffered for them.
Many marriages were more satisfactory than Matilda's alliance with the count of Anjou.
It was universally accepted that no man married merely for love, and many men and women no doubt made the best of the circumstances, and fell in love with their partners.
More often, perhaps, some kind of friendship not closely akin to modern ideas of marriage subsisted between husband and wife, and many men (in particular) were unfaithful.
The political consequences of marriage were frequently cancelled out by other counter-alliances.
On several occasions in the centuries of this book, a single family group ruled over most of Europe.
Their relationships and marriage alliances did not conduce to peace, but they commonly gave the warfare of the period the appearance of civil war, even though the rank and file of the soldiers can hardly have felt the bond which united the leaders on both sides.
Though warfare came increasingly to be in competition with marriage marketing as the chief business of kings, it lost none of its importance in the eyes of contemporaries: the more indecisive it became, the more attached they were to it.
It is remarkable indeed how little understanding we have of warfare in this period; and we shall never know in detail how medieval kings acquired and held their power unless we can find out more precisely how they recruited their armies and led them.
WEAPONS AND RECRUITMENT
The most powerful weapon in twelfth-century warfare was the castle; and the chief development in military technology in our period was in the architecture of castles and the technique of their destruction, and in siegecraft in general.
Nicephorus Phocas had mocked Liudprand of Cremona in the tenth century because western armies consisted solely of knights and knew nothing of siegecraft.
At this time fortifications consisted mainly of earth banks and wooden palisades.
The stone castle was only developed at all widely in the eleventh century, when the large keep, fort and dwelling-house in one, of which the Tower of London is a particularly fine example, came into fashion among men of exceptional wealth.
Even then, most great men had to be content with ‘motte and bailey’, with a mound having a wooden lookout tower on top as a central defensive position, and a large enclosure surrounded by an earth rampart in which living quarters could be sited.
Continued experience of stone fortresses, and contact with Muslim and Byzantine forts on the crusades, provided new  ideas of defence.
If a castle acted as one of a related group it could provide defence in depth: an army could be inhibited from penetrating behind a group of castles by the threat to its communications which they provided, and the danger of attack from the rear.
This was a real benefit, and helps to explain why so many medieval campaigns rapidly declined into a series of fruitless sieges and failed to lead to any deep penetration of enemy territory.
The effectiveness of the castle for the defence of a country was, however, qualified by two circumstances.
First of all, medieval armies were sometimes not dependent on lines of communication: they did not, often could not, live on their own supplies, and reckoned to feed themselves on the land they passed through.
It has been observed that Christian fortresses in Syria on numerous occasions failed to act as any sort of check on the movement of Muslim armies.
Secondly, effective defence in depth presupposes that castles have been sited with this end in view, and that they form a coherent group under unified control.
Practice was normally very different.
Anyone who has visited a number of medieval castles will know how admirable their sites often are: how they command distant views, or river crossings, or are placed in situations of great natural strength.
But in many cases the castle is quite unrelated to other castles.
Many were the results of private enterprise by barons concerned with their own defence and their own private wars.
Even those built on the initiative of a prince or a king were often sited with quite other ends in view.
The planned defensive systems of King Alfred or of Henry the Fowler were primarily concerned to provide refuges for folk whose land was being pillaged; they also provided defence in depth, but it was a secondary consideration.
Castles were also frequently designed as houses for great lords or to be administrative and judicial centres.
Those built by governments seem most commonly to have been placed where they could combine the functions of protecting the local population and housing the official who governed the area.
The chief Norman royal castles were built at the headquarters of shires, and in early days their castellans were often (though not invariably) the royal sheriffs.
But when due allowance has been made for the very various functions of castles, as administrative and social as well as military centres, it remains true that they were formidable military weapons, and that some of the most remarkable technological  advances of the twelfth century were made in the improvement of siege engines and of a castle's defences.
The Romans had been used to the idea of employing rams to push down walls, and catapults to throw stones at or over them.
The rams were revived; the catapults were improved; and the invention of the trebuchet provided a weapon which could throw a large stone for a short distance with considerable force.
More important still were the improved techniques of mining: mines were built under the walls, shored up with timber, which was then burned so that the wall collapsed.
And if the base of the wall could not be penetrated, movable towers were built which could be wheeled up to attack the wall from without; in the longer sieges, such as that of Antioch during the First Crusade, fixed towers were erected over against the walls to harry the defenders and enable a watch to be kept on them.
To counter these tactics, larger and thicker walls were built, walls with much enlarged bases; and in the late twelfth and thirteenth centuries a variety of devices were invented to harry the attacker and make his work more difficult.
In other respects warfare remained much what it had been.
The castle or the fortified town restricted the movements of mobile field armies; in particular, it was effective against the rapid raids of Magyars, with their lightly armed mounted archers, or the Vikings, with their swift ships, who had had the advantage of striking rapidly and ranging far.
Now they tended to find their victims, and the loot for which they came, locked behind strong walls; if they ventured too far, they found garrisons sallying from these fortresses and cutting off their escape.
But the main armies of the western monarchs and princes were still armies of mounted knights.
The chain armour had to be improved to protect the knight against arrows: in western Europe in the eleventh century the powerful crossbow came to be used, and the crusading armies constantly found themselves rained on by showers of arrows from mounted Turkish archers.
But if it came to a pitched battle, the phalanx of heavily armed, well-mounted knights was a very formidable weapon.
It is surprising, therefore, how seldom armies joined in pitched battle in the eleventh and twelfth centuries.
The English fought on foot at Hastings, and although they certainly used horses for transport, they may normally have fought on foot; Henry I's knights at Tinchebrai in 1106 also dismounted, owing to the nature of the battlefield.
Cavalry did not have it all their own way.
But the fact that the crusaders — and western monarchs  in the twelfth century — did not abandon their style of cavalry strongly suggests that the mounted knight was still a very effective weapon, as well as being increasingly the symbol of social status.
An army consisted, then, primarily of knights, with archers and other infantry as auxiliaries of growing importance; and a king also needed to garrison a number of castles and towns if he were to control his subjects and keep his enemies at bay.
For these purposes he could use one of three methods.
In the kingdoms of western Europe there was a traditional obligation on all free men to answer the king's call to arms, the arrière-ban , when the kingdom was attacked: a right which was rarely invoked in our period, since it produced a cumbersome and inefficient force, which could not be kept long in the field.
The English fyrd was used in the Danish wars, but only later, so far as we can tell, as a local militia in emergencies.
The French kings were as yet too weak to use the arrière-ban , if they had wished to, save in quite exceptional circumstances, as in 1124.
The strength of the imperial idea in Germany is illustrated by the special form that the call to the host took there — the duty to attend the king if he went to Rome to be crowned emperor.
For this purpose the memory of the arrière-ban was preserved; but in practice the imperial armies were not usually recruited in so haphazard a fashion.
Already in Carolingian times the imperial army had had a nucleus of fully trained warriors who served their lord in exchange for holding substantial fiefs.
In principle, feudal tenure was the source from which most monarchs and most great lords recruited their armies between the tenth century and the twelfth.
In some countries feudal institutions were not fully developed; in many there were still substantial areas of allodial territory.
In these a method of recruitment which combined some elements of the old arrière-ban and the new feudal bond seems to have operated.
The core of the English armies in the early eleventh century consisted of the housecarles, the personal followers of the Danish king, and some proportion of the thegns, the upper classes, who were recruited by no single formula, but often held by quasi-feudal tenure.
In Germany the dukes and counts — old royal officers now become semi-independent feudal lords — had obligations to produce knights for the imperial army.
But the Saxon emperors reconstructed the army so that many of their troops came from ecclesiastical estates.
Bishops and abbots were expected  to produce substantial contingents.
These consisted largely of ministeriales , tenants originally unfree (see p. 113), who in Germany and the Low Countries were assuming increasing importance, and were to be found most frequently on royal and ecclesiastical territories, improving their status by regular military and administrative service.
The weakness of feudal service as a basis for recruiting an army was that it was hedged round with difficult restrictions.
Normally a knight expected to serve for about forty days a year at his own expense; the terms of his service might also be restricted — when and where he served, and for how long he would stay after the forty days if the king paid him.
The terms of service of the German ministeriales are very imperfectly known, and seem to have been longer; even there, dependence on the loyalty and efficiency of widely scattered bishoprics and abbeys could be cumbersome and inefficient.
To overcome these difficulties, kings made increasing use of money.
They paid their knights to stay beyond their term; they paid mercenaries; and in the late tenth and eleventh centuries we first find evidence of that strange hybrid, the holder of a money fief, or fief-rente .
The fief-rente was a feudal tenure in which an annual rent or money fee replaced the grant of land.
It was used for a variety of purposes; most commonly as a retaining fee for a knight who could be called out whenever the king or lord had need of him.
Sometimes it was no more than a retaining fee; sometimes, like a normal feudal holding, it paid the knight for some period of service.
Normally, the king would expect to pay the holder of fief-rente wages as well; he was thus half way to being a mercenary.
Fief-rentes provided kings with a pool of mercenaries on whom they could call without having to compete in the open market with other war-lords.
‘The strength of a state’ in the view of a Spanish Muslim of this age ‘varies directly as the number of its paid troops.’
But the same writer also showed his affinity with the notions of contemporary Christendom by observing that battles were won by a few renowned knights, and the army which had ‘even one more famous warrior than its enemy must…win’.
These ideas are very revealing: they underline the extraordinary mixture of  military insight and knightly showmanship, gamesmanship even, which governed medieval warfare.
From the mid eleventh century at latest the paid knight and the mercenary became common.
No doubt they had existed before.
That they became common then is a striking illustration of the rapid growth in the money economy in our period.
From the eleventh century on, the old basis of feudal knighthood became increasingly artificial; and it is a strange irony that the Norman kings, all of whom relied in large measure on money to recruit their armies, should have introduced the most complete feudal structure of the old kind into England.
When our period closes both systems were living side by side in uneasy harmony.
Over most of western Europe money was replacing land as the source of troops in the twelfth century.
The notable exception to this was Germany.
It was suggested, indeed, in the late eleventh century, that the Emperor Henry IV should replace knight-service by a tax, and have an army of mercenaries; it is significant that the suggestion was made by an Italian, Benzo of Alba.
Early in the next century, the English Henry I is said to have suggested to his son-in-law, the Emperor Henry V, after the failure of his French campaign in 1124, that he should levy a tax, evidently to improve his army.
Yet mercenaries seem still to have formed only a small part of the German army; the fief-rente was almost exclusively used to supply garrisons for castles and fortified towns; and as the Church and its ministeriales became a less reliable source of troops, the twelfth-century emperors resorted to the practice of strengthening feudal bonds and building up the resources of their own domains.
It is probable that Germany was less wealthy than England in comparison to its size, and that it was easier for Henry I to recruit an army of mercenaries than for Henry V. For whatever reason, the contrast outlived our period.
LAW AND ADMINISTRATION
A king's power depended, then, first and foremost on his capacity to recruit armies and to lead them; it also depended on his position as supreme judge and lawgiver in his kingdom.
What this meant varied greatly from place to place and from time to time; nor can we make any satisfactory generalizations about the nature of  medieval law.
Some writers have held that the essential thing about medieval law was that it was discovered, not made; in so far as it was valid and sound, it was a reflection of divine law; it partook of the nature of what in more recent times has been called ‘fundamental law’.
According to this doctrine, all law must be old and it must be good; if it conforms to both these rules, it cannot be overthrown.
A ruler is bound by the good old law; if he breaks it in any serious way, his subjects can rebel, and by formal process compel him to obey the law.
Medieval law was indeed profoundly conservative, and most medieval vassals took it for granted that the right of resistance was a law which could not be abrogated.
It was invoked against Henry IV of Germany by the Saxons and the southern dukes; and it was to be invoked against the English King John long after our period closed.
None the less, new law could be and was made.
Even allowing that man's capacity to overlook what he does not want to see is almost unlimited, the folk of this age can hardly have failed to observe that new law was being made all the time.
The revival of Roman Law in eleventh- and twelfth-century Italy, and of canon law at about the same time, accustomed men to systems of law in which legislation was normal and easy.
In England the codes of the Anglo-Saxon kings, although they covered only a fraction of the area covered by custom, and although they contained numerous traditional items, involved some new legislation and made little pretence of not doing so.
At the other end of Europe Roger II of Sicily promulgated his codes in 1129 at Melfi and in 1140 at Ariano; they contained much that was traditional, much that was Roman; much that was new; and the idea of making some unity in the chaotic laws of his kingdom was especially novel.
On the whole the royal courts of Europe were more concerned to administer than to define the law: as in canon law, there was no clear distinction between legislative and judicial functions, and so the former was normally hidden in the latter.
The extent of royal jurisdiction varied enormously: at one extreme lay Roger II, the would-be autocrat, uttering absolutist doctrines out of Justinian; or the English king, who, however tied by custom, had effective control both of the king's court, which retained a wide jurisdiction and was capable, under Henry II, of rapid expansion, and over the old popular courts of the shire and, where they had not fallen into private hands, of the hundred; at the other extreme  was the German king, much of whose jurisdiction had been delegated to the ecclesiastical immunities, and equally much was slipping, in the twelfth century, into princely hands; or the French king, who was expected to do high justice to all who came, but received comparatively few callers from outside the royal domain.
The judicial institutions of Europe were governed by a series of contradictions, Jurisdiction and administration were regarded as essentially one process, and the court in which they were carried out was the central institution of any monarchy or principality: the maintenance of justice and law was in many people's eyes the king's supreme function.
Yet the tradition of the Germanic tribes was that judgement should be pronounced by the whole body of freemen, by all the ‘suitors’, all those who had the right and duty of regular attendance at the court; and the jurisdiction of the old royal and popular courts was cut across here, there and everywhere by the numerous feudal courts erected in increasing numbers on the basis of royal grant or mere usurpation from the ninth century onwards, and in the eleventh and twelfth by the appearance of borough courts and town courts of various kinds and courts which merchants set up to handle their own problems, which could hardly be handled by the warrior president or the yokel suitors of a popular court.
Thus jurisdiction was infinitely fragmented; and the confusion was increased by the growing influence and power of the Church courts, which dealt with a large variety of cases, from disputes about marriages to cases involving the clergy's faith and morals.
If a cleric engaged in crime, it could be disputed whether a lay or an ecclesiastical court should try him; if there was a dispute about marriage, which carried with it the inheritance of land and other corollaries, lay and Church courts would both be concerned in it.
Even when there was not a conflict of jurisdiction, there would often be much coming and going between the courts to ensure that the various aspects of a complex case were handled in unison (see pp. 414 f.).
Thus there could be doubt where a case should be tried; there could be, and frequently was, dispute about the competence of courts.
In highly feudalized countries, such as France, one could find, in certain times and in certain parts, something like judicial anarchy.
Yet it remained critically important that every potential litigant should know in what court, and in what manner, his pleas might be heard.
For only in the formal processes of the courts was there any common alternative to the use of force; and in most  European countries throughout the period of this book kings and their officers had the greatest difficulty in preventing might from proving stronger than right: disorder was endemic, justice weak — but none the less sought after and admired for being in short supply.
It will help to clarify the confusion a little if some of the tendencies at work in these centuries are noted.
In the old popular court, the suitors declared the law and gave judgement, or else passed judgement over to God by making one of the parties submit to an ordeal: to being thrown into a pool, for instance, or made to grasp a red-hot iron; if he sank, or was soon healed, he was innocent; otherwise, he was guilty.
In most parts of Europe these courts were waning.
In the north, the courts of barons and kings were ousting them, though even in feudal courts the ultimate authority of the body of ‘suitors’ continued to be widely recognized.
In the south, especially in the Italian cities, the influence of Roman Law, which placed far more power in the hands of the magistrates than of the ‘suitors’, tended to destroy the quasi-democratic character of the old popular courts.
In England alone they survived, because the old courts of shire and hundred were defended by the comparatively powerful and comparatively centralized authority of the English and Anglo-Norman kings.
They survived to be the essential links between the king and the local communities, out of which grew the special tradition of English government in the later Middle Ages, the principle of ‘self-government at the king's command’.
But even in England these courts early lost much of their democratic character.
The power of the suitors was divided between the sheriff or other officer who presided, and the committees or juries which were chosen to fulfil the various tasks of the body of suitors.
The ancestor of the modern jury has been found in a variety of institutions of northern Europe in this period; in truth it seems to be the residuary legatee of the popular courts in general.
By the twelfth century, especially in England, juries could be used to provide information, to answer such questions as: who were the notorious criminals of the neighbourhood?— or, who had held a particular plot of land in the recent past?
By the late twelfth century, even in England, the function of the suitors had been reduced to this: a committee of them provided information to royal justices in a court which had become effectively or actually an offshoot of the king's court.
In two ways the English development is peculiar.
The popular courts survived far longer, and the royal court remained stronger than elsewhere in northern Europe; and in the twelfth century the royal court began to grow in importance, until in later centuries it swallowed the jurisdiction of most other courts.
This lay mainly in the future in 1154; a similar development in France lay wholly in the future.
In France and Germany more and more authority had passed into the hands of local and feudal courts, presided over by local lords and their officials, from which these lords drew ample revenues.
If justice and administration were part of a single process, so were justice and taxation; for assessments to taxation were fixed in court and the fines and other profits of the courts were extremely lucrative.
But the chief function of the feudal court was the regulation of disputes about land.
This was as true in England in early Norman times as in France; and the importance of the feudal courts in this respect was only seriously challenged after the mid twelfth century, by the growing use of the right of appeal to a higher court and by the infiltration of the judges of the higher courts into the spheres of the feudal courts.
In the Italian cities the rationalization of legal chaos had taken the form from the late eleventh century onwards of the revival of Roman Law.
In the Norman kingdom, Roger the Great and his legal advisers attempted an even more ambitious rationalization of the extreme diversity of the legal traditions of his subjects.
It took time for these changes to become effective.
Meanwhile, a wide variety of courts administered a wide variety of laws all over western Europe; and if one asked a man in any part of Europe to whose law he was subject, he might well have answered ‘to my law’— for law was a personal thing, which a man might carry about with him; it bound him to the courts to which his ancestors had been subject, to the laws of those courts, and gave him the privileges which those courts provided.
Closely linked with justice were the other aspects of administration.
In a much governed kingdom like England royal administration included control over the sheriff and other local officers; in some kingdoms it included little more than the issuing of charters and the collecting of somewhat meagre taxes.
Even in England the permanent staff of the royal administration was by our standards absurdly small; though it was no doubt enlarged in real life by the hangers-on who gathered round any large household.
An account of the establishment of Henry I's household  written just after his death opens with the writing office and chapel, still a single department, which organized the king's writs and the king's prayers.
The staff listed consists only of the chancellor, one of the greatest of the royal officers, whose wages were five shillings a day, the master of the writing-office, who originally had tenpence a day, but Robert de Sigillo had made himself so indispensable that he had risen into the two shilling class, and the chaplain in charge of the chapel and relics.
It is clear that Robert de Sigillo did not write all the royal writs himself, although there is no reason to believe that a twelfth-century English king needed a permanent staff of more than half a dozen clerks, sometimes perhaps even less.
The departments which fed the king and organized his armies, and above all his hunting staff, were far larger.
The household of Henry I of England, the most literate of its day north of the Alps and the Pyrenees, the centre of an administrative and judicial system which was rapidly growing, was still a mobile headquarters for a chieftain whose principal business was to hunt and to fight.
In the account of Henry I's household there is no reference to the ‘chancery’; there was no formal institution under this title at this time, in the English or in any other European kingdom.
The office under the chancellor's jurisdiction consisted of scriptorium , chapel and relics.
Since the household was peripatetic, none of these words denotes a room or a building.
But wherever the king was, in one of his palaces or castles, or staying in monastery or cathedral close, or under canvas, space had to be found in which his chancellor and chaplains could do their writing, celebrate mass and maintain the offices of the royal chapel, and preserve the royal collection of relics with due honour and security.
This may seem today an odd selection of duties.
But it was a common arrangement in the eleventh and twelfth centuries.
It derived ultimately  from the household organization of the old Frankish monarchs, more immediately from the household of the Saxon kings of Germany.
The word chapel,capella , means literally ‘a little cloak’; and the cloak from which the word derives was the cloak of St Martin of Tours, after St Denis the chief patron of the Frankish kingdoms.
This cloak was the principal relic of the west Frankish kings of Neustria, and wherever the Neustrian kings were, it went with them to adorn whatever building became for the time being the royal chapel.
The households of early medieval kings were simple affairs; the permanent staff was small.
It was natural and convenient for such writing as had to be done to be performed by the permanent literate officials of the court, the chaplains; and so the tradition arose that royal chaplains could write royal charters.
In fact, a great number of royal charters were not written by royal chaplains, but by scribes of the beneficiaries; and there is grave doubt whether the English monarchs of the tenth and early eleventh centuries employed any professional scribes at all.
Cnut and Edward the Confessor had competent groups of secular clerks permanently in attendance: the chaplains of Edward formed a large, distinguished and cosmopolitan group.
Whether or not they wrote his writs is doubtful.
They certainly performed the other functions of the chapel of the contemporary kings of Germany; and it is doubtless significant that some of them were of German origin.
The Saxon and Salian kings had in their household something approaching a school of clerical servants: never large, but always of great importance to them.
These men were brought up to do the clerical work of the household, to give the king advice, and eventually to become bishops and perform the duties of royal servants as well as of episcopal pastors in their bishoprics.
There was something like a regular cursus honorum : the capable chaplain was provided with endowment in the form of canonries and dignities in this and that cathedral, for which he was expected to  perform little or no duty, and eventually with a bishopric.
A large number, perhaps a high proportion, of German bishops were recruited in this way.
The officials of the chapel were the arch-chaplain or arch-chancellor, its honorific head, who was always an archbishop, and from the late tenth century always archbishop of Mainz, and the chancellor, who nearly always became a bishop and commonly an archbishop.
For Italy the emperors established a separate hierarchy, anyway of titles, for the chapel and the chaplains were much the same wherever he was.
These arrangements were imitated in France and England.
In England the chapel was fully manned in the time of Edward the Confessor (though the title ‘chancellor’ is generally thought to have been instituted by the Normans).
Its close links with the English cathedrals had to wait for the Norman reorganization, which first made possible in England an absenteeism and pluralism on the German model.
But the idea of founding fixed royal chapels in strategic places which could provide incomes for royal chaplains was already formed.
Thus in Edward's time St Martin-le-Grand in London was founded by Ingelric, apparently a chaplain of the Confessor's of German origin, which in fact performed this function, and was almost certainly intended to.
In Edward's day a cursus honorum similar to the German was firmly established.
In Edgar's time most of the bishops had been monks; by the mid eleventh century they were mostly, as in Germany, royal chaplains.
The household of Henry I of England had even closer links with France than with Germany.
As in France, it contained great lay officials called steward, butler, constable and chamberlain, who controlled its military and domestic affairs; and as in France there was a tendency for these offices to become hereditary.
But there was also a tendency in both kingdoms for more and more power to pass into the hands of the chancellor.
For most of the reign of Louis VI the chancellor was his favourite Étienne de Garlande, whose brothers held other high offices of state.
In the 1120s Étienne overreached himself by combining the offices of chancellor and steward, and the pent-up jealousy of his rivals in the court at last won a hearing from the king.
Étienne was removed from his offices ad exiled in 1127.
But in 1132 he was back as chancellor, though he never aspired to the influence of his earlier days, and the more sober ecclesiastics of the court, in alliance with the papacy, managed to keep him out of a bishopric.
The chief ecclesiastical adviser of Louis VI's later years, and of the opening phase of Louis VII's reign, was Suger, the abbot of Saint-Denis, who held no formal office, except during the Second Crusade, when he was regent in the king's absence.
After his death in 1151, the leading place in the king's council was taken once more by the royal chancellor, Hugh de Champfleuri, bishop of Soissons.
In Hugh's hands were concentrated much of the jurisdiction of the royal court, and control of diplomatic affairs as well as the specific duties of his office, the preservation of the royal seal and the issue of royal documents.
After Hugh's dismissal in 1172 Louis VII kept the office vacant for some years: Hugh had been too great a man for it to be wise or safe to raise up a successor to him.
We may be sure that the panache of the French royal chancellor inspired Thomas Becket to make the office equally great in the court of Henry 11, just as it was the quarrel with Becket which no doubt determined Henry 11 to make the office ineffective after Becket had surrendered the Great Seal on his elevation to Canterbury.
For all their grandeur, the chancellors in Germany, France and England in this period were still essentially officials of the household: even in England the royal chancery did not become a quasi-independent department of state until the turn of the twelfth and thirteenth centuries.
Nor were the financial departments in France and Germany in any way independent of the royal household, even though in the nature of things the royal treasury could not be carried round with the king on his travels in quite the way in which the relics were.
But in England the financial department was on the way to becoming a formal institution.
In Henry I's time its senior officials, the Master Chamberlain and the Treasurer, were still commonly in attendance in the household.
But their department, however primitive, was the heir of the treasury which had handled the Danegelds of Ethelred II and Cnut.
Under the presiding genius of Roger, bishop of Salisbury, Henry's most brilliant administrator — said to have been first chosen as chaplain by Henry (whose tastes were different from the Confessor's) for the speed with which he could finish his mass — the English financial departments were achieving something of the efficiency and maturity of their Sicilian counterparts.
The treasury at Winchester was the permanent repository; this was coming to be controlled by the Exchequer, the audit department, to which the sheriffs and other officers came twice a year to deliver the royal  taxes and to make an account of their stewardship.
These accounts were entered on the official ‘Pipe Roll’; and the one survivor of these rolls from Henry I's time, that for 1129 — 30, is far and away the earliest royal account to survive in any European archive; few written accounts were kept in 1130.
The wealth of Henry I set him apart from most European kings; above all it set him apart from his subjects.
Their financial resources separated European monarchs from their people in a thoroughly mundane way; the divine aura surrounding the monarchy provided the celestial counterpart, just as relics of the saints jostled with jewels and plate and coins in the royal treasuries.
DIVINE RIGHT: ANOINTING AND CORONATION
The barbarian kings had been a great source of perplexity to the Christian bishops of the early Middle Ages.
St Paul had taught that the powers that be were ordained of God, and it was generally held that all power, genuinely held, was God-given, that kings were of God's choosing.
Yet one had to admit that the divine selection could take singular forms.
This difficulty was never entirely overcome in the Middle Ages; but the camel had already been swallowed by Gregory of Tours 400 years before our period opens, when after describing King Clovis's engaging knaveries, he added the astounding comment: ‘God…increased his kingdom, because he walked before Him in uprightness of heart, doing that which was pleasing in His sight.’
The Book of Kings and Chronicles, several passages in which are echoed in the dictum, were of great assistance both to the bishops and to the kings; and anyone who wishes to understand medieval kingship should study these books very closely.
The kings they portray were a mixture of human heroism, divinely inspired wisdom and very human failings.
The prophets they portray were at once more civilized than their masters and more closely in touch with the divine will.
A Christian bishop was bound to look in the Bible for precedents for his mode of action; and what he found had  many remarkable analogies with his own predicament.
These precedents did not settle the balance of power between bishops and kings; but they helped to clarify their different functions; and function was a thing of the highest importance in the complex hierarchy of medieval society.
There may seem to be something excessive and paradoxical in this emphasis on a distant precedent as an important key to medieval kingship.
The kings were not simply put on their thrones by churchmen; they were heirs and successors of barbarian chiefs; they ruled by force and fear not by ideals; the fact of politics not the ideals of churchmen were the stuff of their lives.
All this is true; yet it is not the whole truth.
The feudal king was primus inter pares among his vassals, yet he was always much more.
The secular foundations of medieval kingship were slender before the twelfth century.
The survival of a strong monarchy in Germany in the tenth and eleventh centuries, and the fact that a weak monarchy survived in France at all, bear witness to the importance of the Church and of churchmen in the making of medieval kingship.
When a king had been ‘elected’, the Church gave him anointing and coronation.
By the late tenth century these were established practices in most European monarchies.
Otto the Great took special steps to be anointed and crowned king of Germany and emperor; and his younger contemporary Edgar imported a very similar ceremony into England.
These ceremonies set the Church's seal on the election, symbolized that the king was God ‘s choice as well as man's, and that he was set apart for the work.
In the tenth, eleventh and twelfth centuries the kings of France and England were anointed on the head with chrism, the specially sacred mixture of oil and balsam used in the ordination of priests and the consecration of bishops.
This gave their office a quasi-priestly function.
At the turn of the eleventh and twelfth centuries the Norman Anonymous (formerly known as the Anonymous of York) wrote that ‘the king reigns with Christ’, reflecting the common doctrine of the tenth and early eleventh centuries that the king was Christ's vicar, that he was rex et sacerdos , that although he could not administer the sacraments, he ruled over the Church as well as over his temporal kingdom, that all authority was vested in him.
When the Anonymous wrote this doctrine was under a cloud and his writings are a fascinating mixture of the new logic of the late eleventh century and views  of kingship of an extreme conservatism.
Times were changing; the popes had abolished the use of chrism in the imperial anointing, had denied the authority of kings over priests; the time would shortly come when the popes themselves claimed to be vicars of Christ, and interpreted the phrase to mean that in the last analysis all earthly authority was mediated through them, not through kings.
But we must not be confused by this: a wide variety of views had been held on the relations of popes and emperors, bishops and kings, in the tenth century; a wide variety was still held in the twelfth.
In practice, most men thought that each had his own place and function; and though the boundary lines were very variously drawn, most men assumed that it was the duty of regnum and sacerdotium to co-operate in doing Christ's work.
We shall examine the difficulties they encountered in a later chapter (pp. 354 ff.).
None the less, it is broadly speaking true that the Church had exalted the monarch in the tenth century, and abased him in the twelfth; that the Church had taught obedience to him in the tenth century when ancient rights of resistance to a king who broke his subjects' rights and liberties still flourished; and that in the twelfth century Church and people exchanged ideas about the bases for the right of resistance.
In tenth-century France leading churchmen looked in something like desperation for an authority which could restore peace to an anarchic country.
In tenth-century Germany affairs were somewhat better.
But no medieval kingdom would seem even tolerably peaceful to a modern visitor; and it was not until after Otto I's great victory over the Magyars at the Lechfeld in 955 that the fear of invasion and plunder from outside Germany was forgotten.
At the end of the tenth century, the highly organized English monarchy was fighting for its life against Scandinavian invaders.
In these circumstances it was the business of responsible churchmen to lend support to the monarch in every way they could.
There were plenty of cases of unruly or difficult or dissident bishops; but by and large the Church stood by the kings; and in return the kings placed more and more authority and responsibility in the hands of bishops and abbots.
Otto the Great's most faithful duke was his brother Bruno, archbishop of Cologne and duke of Lorraine.
Otto quite deliberately followed the policy of increasing the estates of the Church, and of granting ‘immunities’— that is, of granting to bishops and abbots rights of jurisdiction in their lands which had formerly been vested in the royal  prerogative.
The bishops and abbots were appointed by the monarch, and he was free to choose whom he would; he did not have to accept hereditary succession, as in other royal offices, such as the dukedoms.
The system of government by close liaison with the Church was maintained in Germany by Henry II and Henry III, and under the latter rose to its height.
At the same time in England a similar union of king and Church was maintained by Edgar, by Ethelred the Unready when he was his own master, and by Cnut.
While the liaison of Church and king remained close, these arrangements worked, at the worldly level at least, to the advantage of both; but if the two powers were ever to split, or their interests seriously to diverge, a mass of tensions might quickly be felt.
CHARLEMAGNE AND THE IMPERIAL IDEA
When a man wished to know what a king should be like, his clerical advisers would give him an expurgated account of the careers of King David, King Solomon and King Hezekiah; if a man aspired to be emperor, he might hear a little about Constantine and Theodosius and other imperial figures of the distant past; but he would hear above all about Charlemagne.
Charlemagne was the supreme model for the emperors of this period.
He was, indeed, a model for more than them: the French kings had also inherited his throne, and looked back to him as one of their greatest predecessors.
The Chansons de Geste of the late eleventh and early twelfth centuries centred in the court of Charlemagne; and it was from France that this type of heroic epic spread to Germany.
The notion that there was such a country as France, at a time when the royal authority was very little recognized outside the narrow boundaries of the royal domain, the Île de France, was fostered by the legend of Charlemagne.
In France the legend gave prestige to the monarchy; in Germany the monarchs could make some practical attempt to walk in their predecessors' footsteps.
This they did in a quite literal way: Otto the Great, at the moment of his accession in 936, went to Aachen to be ‘elected’ king of the Franks in Charlemagne's own city; he donned Frankish costume for the ceremony of investiture, was anointed and crowned in Charlemagne's basilica.
Otto III excavated the stone throne of Charlemagne.
Charlemagne's throne, which may still be seen in the basilica at Aachen, gave all the kings of western Europe sooner or later the idea of regarding a throne as an essential symbol of royal greatness.
The events of 936 and the imperial coronation of 962 bore witness to Otto I's determination to be Charlemagne redivivus .
From Otto's time on the ambition to be crowned emperor by the pope was an inevitable ambition for all German kings until long after the end of our period; nor was it ever forgotten that this was in imitation of Charles.
Our period opens with the imperial coronation of 962; shortly after its close, in 1165, Frederick Barbarossa had Charlemagne canonized by his anti-pope Paschal III.
So much is clear; can we go further, and say that Otto himself went to Rome to be crowned in order to complete his pilgrimage in Charlemagne's footsteps, that this was his chief motive?
The point has been much disputed, and we should be wrong to lay exclusive emphasis on Otto's vision of the past.
Even in the realm of symbolism Charles did not provide the only precedent: Otto's father, Henry I, had apparently bought the famous Holy Lance for the cost of a substantial part of what is now Switzerland; and the Holy Lance was viewed as a talisman which would help a king to victory and as a token to be possessed by any candidate to the empire.
It was with Otto at the Lechfeld in 955, and it is still among that part of the imperial treasures which is preserved at Vienna.
In the age of Otto the word emperor could be used, roughly speaking, in four different ways.
Otto's brother-in-law King Athelstan appears to have called himself by a variety of high sounding titles, emperor (if any of the documents are genuine) and basileus , the Greek word for king and part of the official title of the Byzantine emperor (though it is not clear whether the English realized this).
In part this was due to the recent unification of the kingdom; he and his successors were felt to be kings not of one but of a group of kingdoms.
In part perhaps it was a translation of the Old English ‘Bretwalda’, a title attributed to the high  kings of the island from very early days; in part it may have been direct imitation of Byzantium.
It was also due to a barbaric delight in high-sounding verbiage, and probably this was the most powerful reason for its use.
Athelstan was an ‘emperor’(if he was) because he ruled over several kingdoms; the kings of León-Castile in the eleventh and twelfth centuries were sometimes called emperors for a slightly different reason, that they had aspirations to rule over other peoples.
The rest of Spain was held by Muslims, wrongfully, as the Christians saw it; the emperor of León laid claim to the rest of the peninsula.
Otto was lord over many tribes, king of Germany and Italy;, he was concerned, too, to subdue Bohemia, to spread German power east of the Elbe, to convert the heathen of north-eastern Europe; if anyone could challenge the prestige of Byzantium, it was he.
On these grounds he had as good a claim as either the king of Wessex or of León to call himself an emperor; and his great prestige may well have had something to do with it.
But these were not serious grounds for going to Rome to be crowned.
The last person to have the title emperor conferred on him by a pope before 962 had been a minor Italian prince, Berengar I, who had died in 924.
Since the division of the empire by the sons of Louis the Pious in 843, there had been a tradition that the imperial crown went with the possession of the middle kingdom, the kingdom of Louis's eldest son, Lothar.
But the tradition rapidly lost substance as, in the course of the late ninth century, the middle kingdom fell to pieces.
It is doubtful if the claim of the kings of Burgundy and Italy to bear the title emperor had more substance than the fact that they held the north of Italy and the chief routes over the Alps and were therefore in a position to put pressure on the pope.
It is clear that the middle kingdom had strategic importance for a king who wished to preserve German unity; that the Saxon kings had strong practical grounds for wishing to be kings of Lombardy and to hold suzerainty over the kingdom of Burgundy.
Only in this way could they counter the ambition of the dukes of Swabia and Bavaria to rule territories south and west of their duchies and to form separate kingdoms of their own.
Possession of the imperial title clearly enhanced this interest in Burgundy and Lombardy.
Whether they had much bearing on the ambition of Otto and his successors to be emperors may be doubted.
The imperial title had no precise political  significance; it carried great prestige, but it did not, in itself, help to solve any of these practical problems, which the Saxons could solve only by force.