

OTHER THAN HUMAN
THE INWARD LIFE OF PLANTS
Plants, then, are life forms of the water tattwa.
Their subtle energetic matrix, their inward patterning, their instinct, is that of water.
In mental structure, water provides flowingness and sensitivity.
In humans, it is the surging emotionality of feeling.
In its yin aspect, it is the soft receptivity of femininity, of true womanhood.
This is why the feminine nature is generally more intuitive and sensitive.
Astrologers tell us that the water signs are non-confrontational.
They flow around events rather than meeting them head-on.
It may sometimes make them seem indecisive and easily led, but it also bestows qualities of sensitivity, sympathy and empathy.
Being of this nature, plants therefore automatically respond, to some degree, to the emotional and inner qualities of other species.
This we see quite clearly in the example of ‘green fingers’, where plants respond to the intent and good feeling in the mind of the human caring for them.
This does not mean that plants can read our minds, just that they are sensitive to mood and general mental-emotional vibration.
Some folk can make plants thrive in the most unusual circumstances, while with others, plants remain static and unresponsive to the processes of growth and life.
The same, of course, applies to all interactions between living creatures, including human to human.
This principle is also the explanation underlying the famous experiments of Cleve Backster, when he discovered that his house plants responded by changes in their electrical activity not only to actual physical abuse, but also to his mental intention to abuse them.
And that they registered similar changes when other creatures — insects, spiders and so on— suffered pain in their presence.
Emphasizing the power of the inner connectedness of all life forms, especially of those who are attached to each other(as Backster and his plants clearly were), Backster noted how the plants registered the emotional ups and downs of his day in their electrical activity whether or not he was physically present with them .
For he recorded it on his polygraph lie-detector and compared the timings afterwards.
But clearly the plants recorded only Backster's emotional ups and downs — not those of the entire planetary population!
Plants have little specific focus for mind energy, such as we see it in the brain and central nervous system of insects and higher species.
If plants do have a focus for the Life Force, it lies in their roots, for many plants regularly shed some or all of their above ground growth with the cycling of the seasons, regenerating in the next year from their roots.
But many plants, and trees too, can be propagated from stem cuttings, demonstrating the diffusion of the Life Force within them.
All the same, plants certainly act as one integrated life form.
The leaves, roots, stems, flowers and fruiting parts act as one and work together just like the bodies of humans and other species.
With their ‘heads’ buried beneath the soil, thrust into rock crevices, seeking the narrow places in tree bark, or anchored in the muds, sands and stones of countless lakes, streams and oceans, plant life is essentially quiescent.
The mind is almost dormant, only the watery quality remains connected to consciousness.
Outwardly, this gives them a chemical perception of ‘taste’— roots seek minerals and water, while the leaves orientate themselves to derive maximum energy from the sun, ‘stored’ in chemical bonds.
Even their dry seeds await the softening activation of water, sometimes for centuries, before they break forth in growth.
But inwardly they surely feel.
Their presence is even soothing to the scattered and agitated minds of men, who create beautiful gardens as abodes of peace, a refuge from the strains and stresses of life.
 man takes to the jungles, deserts and wild places in search of inward calm and spiritual meditation.
But plants do not think, as we humans do; they are not inwardly connected to akash.
They have no fire, either, so they cannot ‘see’ the electromagnetic spectrum like other creatures do.
Neither, therefore, can they get up and move about.
Their only movement is that of growth, though this is of the most intricate detail and form, a reflection of each individual species' subtle pattern matrix.
To be a plant must be to experience a hazy, quiescent state of consciousness, with focus diffused and little or no opportunity to create new karma.
It is a place of restoration for a soul weary from low  living as a victim of the mind's continuous pulls and indiscretions of previous incarnations.
Or perhaps some plants will always be plants, part of the building blocks of creation.
Plant perception is largely of a chemical nature, a diffuse comprehension and awareness of a chemical reality, combined with an inward sensitivity to the subtle watery tattvic vibration.
Here only watery feelings surround the encapsulated soul.
From their water is derived their sex, nature's way of ensuring variation within a species through the inner patterns encoded within the nucleus of each cell.
For variation and adaptability are essential to survival in a changing planetary environment.
Some folk actually ask the question, ‘Are plants alive?’
One might equally make the query of many humans!
But life is life.
The inward Life Force, surrounded by innumerable sheaths and finally by a patterning of the subtle physical tattwas, creates a form or body of the same essential patterning, which is most wonderfully intricate, dynamic and complex, far more than we observe in a stone, in water or in the relatively simple molecular structure of the air.
The German scientist, Fritz Albert Popp, commented at an Oxford seminar in 1989, that he estimated his cucumber seedlings to carry out about 100,000 inter-molecular reactions per cell per second .
An incredible degree of activity.
And the  levels of activity within their molecules and atoms themselves is even greater.
Yet it is all ordered and organized in the most exquisite manner.
Compared with inert substance, matter comprising the bodies of living creatures is in a super-dynamic state — highly charged, energetically, taut like a tight string, rather than a floppy one, ready for action and reaction.
Such a condition also makes living organisms highly sensitive to their environment, reflecting the characteristics of mind and consciousness themselves.
The building of such complexity requires great energy and so, when the life or soul departs, nothing is wasted and the remaining body becomes the food for other creatures.
Thus the natural economy rolls on.
Only plants (and some bacteria) can live off minerals and simple chemicals.
And they put back nutrients into the soil, too, both directly and by the decomposition of their dead remains through the agency of creatures such as worms, bacteria, fungi, moulds and so on.
Without plants we cannot exist, and without the other species, plants cannot exist either.
The necessary minerals in the soil are recycled from the dead bodies of other creatures or of plants themselves.
Insects, birds and animals are all implicated in the nutritional cycles, the propagative processes and the sex life of plants.
Insects pollinate them, birds and animals carry their seeds in their guts and on their fur and feathers.
Plants consume carbon dioxide, releasing the oxygen that we other species require, completing in our turn the full circle by ‘burning’ carbon and breathing out carbon dioxide.
Even in our own lifetime, within just a few years, the destruction of the Earth's natural forests, as well as man's industry, is increasing the amount of atmospheric carbon dioxide, so subtle is the balance.
How, I wonder, do conventional evolutionists imagine that their primaeval world of pure plant life existed in the absence of all other species?
They say it existed as such for millions of years.
The theory is, of course, absurd, for it takes no account of life itself, the inward jewel of consciousness, around which all forms have arisen, the inner essence that provides the meaning and the understanding.
This is His Creation, His Life, His Being that we are all experiencing.
He is within us and within all forms, the ultimate pattern-maker within every atom, the essence of all life.
His show is continuous, His presence without exception.
He is both far away, yet ‘nearer than breathing, closer than hands and feet’.
Only the ego has to die, for this knowledge to begin to shine through.
SUBTLE LEVELS OF PERCEPTION
Plants, then, are alive — sentient — they perceive and respond to the environment.
And that perception and response has both physical and subtle aspects.
As humans, it seems from experience that we can actually perceive at both these two levels — at the gross physical level, through our outer organs of perception, and also at the subtle, more inward, level.
The two are clearly allied, however, since we can perceive directly through the mental faculty of sight — subtle sight, one could say — as well as via input through the physical eyes.
It is this faculty which sees the subtle physical aspects of the aura, for instance, while in full outward manifestation this faculty is expressed as our physical eyes, which are sensitive to the small section of the electromagnetic spectrum that we call light.
Light, of course, is an expression of our experienceof the electromagnetic energy field itself.
Nowhere inside our brains or eyes has any neuroscientist ever found anything remotely resembling our constant everyday experience of light.
Among humans, at this present time in our history, we have largely lost our ability to perceive directly the subtle aspects of our physical world.
Due to the overcrowding of thoughts, emotions and subconscious patternings, our attention is drawn down from its princely abode between and above the eyes and plays among the tattwas, gross and subtle, of the physical realm.
We are still continuously affectedby the subtle aspects of life, for they are a part of our inward being, but we are often unconscious of this subtle interplay.
As children, we are not taught to use our innate perceptive abilities.
Rather, the purer observation and clarity of the child becomes conditioned by the attitudes and belief systems of the parents, teachers and associates.
The precious gift of consciousness and subtle perception is thus overlainby distrust, doubt, fear and the entire spectrum of human weakness.
The child is even taught, unconsciously, to disbelieve the evidence of his natural  perceptions until, as an adult, he fails to notice the emotional and mental life even of his own close family.
He thus grows up, largely unaware of his own emotions and thought processes.
‘Don't be upset, Mummy,’ says the kind heart of the child.
‘I'm not upset,’ says the mother, thereby throwing the mind of the child into a confusion in which the choices are either to disbelieve the mother or the evidence of the child's own perceptions.
So dependence on the mother leads the child actively to believe in what is essentially a dishonesty on her part.
Similarly, the lack of clear perception among his or her parents, teachers and fellow children leads the child to imitate their behaviour and inward way of being.
The child thus learns to distrust his or her own perceptions — both sensory and inward — moving further and further into emotional isolation, playing out games of egotism and conventional social ritual as a substitute for real life, consciousness and direct perception.
In fact, the effect of many past lives upon the child's mind may already be too great a burden for him or her to have ever possessed much capacity for direct mental perception.
Animals, birds, insects, plants and all lower species do not possess man's akashic linkage in their inner equipment or structure.
They do not carry the double-edged sword of apparent free choice and intellectual ability, to understand or cogitate upon their place within the scheme of things.
Their minds are thus dulled or dormant and suffer a less varied menu of feeling than ourselves.
Compensation, however, is present, for it seems very clear to observation that the  subtle side of their awareness is not so blocked, if at all, as in their human counterparts.
This is the ‘sixth sense’ possessed not only by dogs, horses, dolphins and elephants, but by all creatures, even the plant kingdom, as Backster and others have discovered.
It is true that many of these creatures are aware of ordinary physical sensations beyond our human thresholds.
But within the fields of the subtle tattwas comprising the inner energetic format, matrix or tapestry which makes each creature what it is, each one also possesses subtle perceptive abilities, just as we do.
But such perceptions are limited by the tattwas which are active within their make-up.
This is the secret behind many of the stories about animals sensing the presence of man and other creatures, or of rushing to the help of an injured person discovered by means outside the scope of their more obvious perceptive processes.
This inward presence of life draws all creatures together into nature's whole.
Every creature has this subtle awareness within the ebb and flow of the natural economy.
A herd of deer on the African plains may feed undisturbed when a lioness walks among them, if they perceive that she is only out for a stroll.
Yet when her carriage indicates that she is hunting, one sight or scent will panic the herd into instant flight.
Behaviourists say that the deer can see this in her body language — in her bearing and the way she moves.
But that is only an expression of how the lioness is feeling within herself.
With no image of hunting and killing in her ‘mind’, with no hunger driving her, she does not express such intentions in her actions and demeanour — and the deer pick it up instinctively at both subtle or vibrational as well as gross physically observable levels.
After all, the body language of the lioness is interpreted within the mind of the deer.
All the great hunters and stalkers — whether of white or brown skin — have had the ability to consciously or unconsciously ‘close down’ or quieten their mind and body, as well as to conceal their activity while stalking or awaiting their prey.
This is the hidden side of knowing how to move quietly, an art known to all human communities who live close to nature.
Silent steps but a noisy mind are not true quietness.
Frequently, too, such people have been blessed with the ‘sixth sense’, their quiet mind automatically transmitting the hungry intentions of a hidden tiger   for example, for all creatures are linked at the level of the mind, as well as soul.
We should learn to trust our intuitions, for this is a part of our human heritage.
The stiller the mind, the clearer our perceptions become.
There is no need to go self-consciously looking for intuitions, for then one can be deceived and become the victim of imagination, but such faculties are automatically rediscovered as we learn the art of meditation, of stillness, and true mind control.
Lorne and Lawrence Blair, who lived awhile with the forest-dwelling Punan Dyaks of Borneo, wanted to accompany the Dyaks on one of their hunting expeditions.
But the Dyaks only smiled.
‘You are too noisy,’ they said.
‘You must first become like the forest, a part of the forest dance.’
This means, firstly, in their minds .
Then the body follows suit.
And they added, ‘You would need at least four years just to learn how to breathe!’
Perhaps, too, such inner quietness underlies the legends concerning herbs that make a person ‘invisible’.
Maybe such herbs are natural neural  tranquillizers , no doubt possessing a far more harmonious interaction with life processes than those presently produced by drug companies.
Indeed, lady's slipper, skullcap, valerian and other herbs have long been known by Western herbalists to have such calming effects.
Nature has a solution for everything.
This is axiomatic, for how else is balance maintained over the millennia?
Modern man sees life as separated into compartments, as mechanistic interactions, where consciousness has no meaning.
But life is consciousness and cannot be suppressed for ever.
Everything that exists is one whole within the greater life of the Supreme Consciousness.
If our tunnel vision sees only disconnected fragments, the fault lies within ourselves and  it is in remedying that ignorance to which our main efforts should be individually devoted .
This potential for subtle perception was even demonstrated by Backster's plants.
In one of his experiments, lie detectors were connected to two house plants that had been present in a room at the time of a murder.
Backster had previously shown that his own house plants were capable of responding to a lie by changes in electrical activity as measured by the lie detector.
The staff present in the building at the time of the murder were then questioned individually under the assumption that the plants would register the high level of emotion in any guilty party when he or she was  questioned.
In fact, the plants showed no response to any of those questioned and it was later discovered that the murderer was indeed none of them.
An inconclusive test, though Backster's prior research is of considerable interest.
But the irony is that a human being, with all his potential capacity for understanding, is actually so cut off from his fellow humans that a plant sometimes has better perceptions at the subtle level than he has!
Such perception, and far more besides, is our true human heritage, but in this present age, ‘modern’ man does not employ it consciously, though many of the more simple tribes, living close to nature, most certainly do.
We are so lost in the tangled impressions, thoughts and emotions within our own minds, that we have temporarily lost sight of the subtle.
Actually, plants are not the only creatures that can be better judges of character than many humans, for stories abound of dogs, horses and other creatures instinctively picking up the unpleasant and threatening vibrations from some human and responding with a personally directed snarl or with a well-aimed kick or bite.
Those who ‘have a way with animals’ are essentially kind of heart and wish them no ill — a mental vibration to which both animals and humans respond with trust.
THE LANGUAGE OF THE LOWER SPECIES
The language and communication of all creatures takes place at both these levels, too — the subtle and the gross.
But by language I do not only mean that of spoken words or written symbols.
This would appear to be unique to man.
I refer to all forms of communication.man's conceptual and intellectual ability can become his worst enemy for he even becomes unable to utilize fully his five outer senses, let alone his subtle potential.
We pass so much judgement in our minds concerning the events of a day that we fail to see what is right under our noses.
We fit our perceptions into pre-arranged patterns and belief systems, subconsciously interpretingall that we experience, thereby losing the meaning and the life within the direct experience.
We lose its simplicity, its beauty, its joy, its expression of the inner source.
Then we fail to see the beauty in a leaf or in the clouds.
We miss all the subtle nuances of facial expression and the almost desperate attempts of the natural world to initiate communication with us.
Man communicates by word of mouth and by body language.
Our mind and emotions are automatically expressed in the attitude of our body, our facial expression and our gestures.
Everything we do and say is reflective of our personality and mental-emotional patterns.
Those who are more aware, also become conscious, automatically, of the vibrations or atmosphere of people and places — of the moods, thoughts and emotions of others.
As a good friend of mine once commented, ‘If man could only see his aura, he would never go to war.’
We communicate our inwardness in great waves, all about us, carrying it with us wherever we go.
This is also communication, and it affects others, too, automatically, whether we or they are conscious of it or not.
It is therefore incumbent upon all humans to attempt to control our minds, to pursue some path of mind control, meditation, prayer, yoga or whatever — according to one's inclinations.
Our quality of mind and emotion is more important than the clothes we wear or the knowledge we possess.
If we think that the outer garments are of importance, how much more important, then, is the subtle auric garment with which we surround ourselves and which actually penetrates the minds and subtle structure of others who come our way — human, animal, insect or plant.
Similarly, among the lower species, their communication is by sound, by smell, by sight, by a multitude of strange senses unfamiliar to our human minds, and by gesture and by inward intent.
All of their senses are involved.
The alarm calls, the social noises, the sexual or territorial ‘come-hithers’ or ‘get thee hence’gestures — the whole spectrum of movement — is all a part of their language, a continuous expression of the inward patterns within the subtle tattvic mind configurations comprising each species.
Together with the vibrational communication at the subtle level, all these are going on continuously before our eyes, if we had the understanding to perceive it.
The tiger and the sambur may drink together at the same pool, for there is a sanctity observed by many animals at the jungle water hole.
Or those voracious fish-eaters, otters, have been seen to play in the same pool as the salmon, fish who would normally flee from the presence of such a competent and fearsome predator.
Clearly, they know instinctively when the otter is actually hunting.
It is expressed in the otter's body language.
But why does the otter not take advantage of this sense of security to launch an attack?
Nature is balanced.
No creature is given such complete supremacy as to dominate all others, even man.
‘If all the beasts were gone, men would die from great loneliness of spirit,’ wrote that great American  Indian, Chief Sealth, in his famous letter to the American president, Franklin Pierce.
Creatures have no duplicity, like man.
Their intentions are always clear and straightforward.
Even the trap-door spider with his hidden and camouflaged lair is straightforward and ‘honest’ in his bloodthirsty intentions.
As indeed is the lion, the otter or the domestic cat when they are out a-hunting.
Each creature understands his own kind the best.
Even man understands his fellow humans better than the language of the animals and other creatures.
Our senses and subtle mind structures are different.
The complex touch and pheromone-based social life of the ant is a mystery to the bee.
They have different instincts, different pheromones, different patterns of behaviour, a different mind structure.
They do not interact so very much.
They perceive things according to their own inward nature and outer form.
We may observe the scenting and postural greetings of dogs with whom we live every day.
We may even analyse such behaviour in semi-anthropomorphic terms.
But we cannot smell what the dog can smell, nor interpret such scents, body postures and barks in the way our dog does.
We do not have a mind which is formed like theirs, we do not experience things in the way they do.
The language and the inner mind are part of a whole that makes a creature what it is.
We would understand the bark of a dog, like we do our own language, only if we had the mind of a dog.
Language is only an utterance, an ‘outer-ance’ of what lies within the mind of a creature.
Species, of course, do communicate with other species.
There may even be communicative and behavioural symbiotic links built in.
Even man and dog can become a close team, working together most effectively.
Yet the full range of communion available to fellow members of a species, even between strangers from different parts of the world, does not seem to be normally available across species boundaries.
Our physical bodies and subtle structures separate us, one from another.
Actually, as long as the soul is associated with the mind, we are separated from each other.
But we identify with this physical separation even at a mental and spiritual level, where such separation has begun to dissolve.
No two humans ever communicated to the fullest extent if they did not empathize with the mind of the other.
And no psychological analysis can ever create this subjective sense of empathy.
It may well obscure it.
Similarly with all other creatures of this world.
We will never understand them purely by an analysis of their physical form and  behaviour.
Yet with a quiet, observant and empathetic mind we may begin to see what is before our eyes, before our mind, actually.
But no university degree, or years of analytical research will of themselves open to us this magic door of perception.
This is a gift to a loving and understanding heart.
And to a heart that has earned it, too.
LISTENING WITH ONE'S BEING
Laurens van der Post thinks along the same lines.
In A Walk with a White Bushman, he is in conversation with Jean-Marc Pottiez, talking about communication.
He comments:
What moves me very deeply about primitive peoples is that they still attach an enormous importance to a certain kind of communication which we have lost; and that is that they allow the being of the person they are with to communicate with more than words.
They seem to let the soul of the other person — or the animal — communicate by the way it expresses itself, in the look and in the bearing, in the tone and in the voice.
They allow that part of communication to play an enormous role; whereas we in the West tend to let words play an excessive role.
We forget to listen to the tone and the expression which are used, and these are vital because we tend to use words in a fraudulent manner.
Words demand to be treated with great truth.
We feel it is such a terrible crime in the West to  counterfeit money; but it should be a worse crime to counterfeit words.
We see it in the newspapers and we see it among politicians particularly, who say things they really do not mean, or things they do not even understand….
It is a counterfeit of the spirit that goes on daily, you see, made worse because it has been joined by the visual counterfeit possible in television.
But primitive man guards himself against that by listening in to the being of the person who is uttering the words and by adding this to his evaluation of the words.
Some of those primitive men are so good at this that they can exactly imitate the different animals, and even other human beings.
I am thinking particularly of one of the Bushmen you knew who was so good at imitating a professor .
Oh yes, the professor!
That was a Bushman!
After a while he became more the professor than the professor was himself — just by observing the distinguished man and taking his being into and upon himself…yes, I have never forgotten that.
I remember one occasion also when I was tracking an animal, a buffalo, with a Bushman.
We were tracking it because we needed food very badly.
The Bushman was following it, but suddenly he swerved aside and he went off in another direction and I followed him, although I could clearly see the buffalo hoofmarks leading off in the opposite way.
And then he stopped behind a bush and beckoned me over, and there was an antelope standing ahead, which I shot.
And I said to him, ‘But how did you know an antelope was there?’
He said, ‘Suddenly, following the buffalo, my eyes were full of antelope; and I went where the fullness in my eyes came from, and there was the antelope.’
Do you think they have some psychic power unknown to us?
No, I think we all have it in us, but they take intuition much more seriously than we do.
I remember an occasion, some years ago, when the front door bell rang here and I opened the door and it was my secretary coming for work in the morning.
I looked at her face and she said to me, ‘I've got something to tell you.’
And I said to her, ‘I know what you are going to say — you're going to tell me that the mother of X committed suicide.’
I had not been thinking about him, I had not even seen him for months.
And she said, ‘How did you know?’
But it just fell into me as I stood there with her.
I do not regard myself as clairvoyant, but I think it shows that there are other ways of communicating that are important.
This would not seem strange to primitive people at all.
THE ECONOMY OF NATURE
Creatures see what we call the physical world in so many ways.
And the ability of many insects to see the infrared and microwave emanations of particular molecules or of particular plants, for instance, is intriguing in its wider implications as it relates to the overall balance and economy of nature.
So let us consider it, as an example.
All matter at temperatures above that of absolute zero emits infrared radiation.
This is radiant ‘heat’.
So it is quite possible that the hairs on plants, indeed their entire shape and form, act as tuned aerials, as vibrational emitters and receivers of highly specific wavelengths, in the infrared region of the electromagnetic spectrum.
(For simplicity, we are saying infrared, but actually microwave frequencies are also involved.)
Similarly, the gaseous molecules given off by plants may be smelt by us humans, but can be identified by some insects from their characteristic infrared emissions.
This we mentioned briefly in the last chapter.
Insects who feed off, pollinate or whose lives are otherwise  associated with these particular plants have a corresponding detection system in the structure of their antennae, through which they perceive specific patterning in the infrared, just as we perceive what we call ‘visible’ light, through our eyes.
They are not aware of allsuch emissions, however, from all plants and other creatures — just those with which they have close ties.
They use the narrowest bandwidth radio frequency, transmission and reception yet invented.
And with the millions of insects buzzing, crawling, flying and swimming about, all needing to communicate with their own kind and with other associated species, but not with the millions of other creatures, this would seem to be essential to avoid confusion.
This is a part of the great design apparent in nature.
Imagine what it might be like if, as humans, we had not only the senses of other creatures but the ability to understand these communications as they do.
We would soon be in input overload and go nuts!
Each creature perceives just exactly the right amount of the energetic interactions which comprise the physical universe and its creatures.
Philip Callahan has demonstrated that ears of corn, for example, absorb the moonlight within the humanly visible spectrum, but actively emit it once again at specific frequencies in the infrared.
The corn earworm moth, whose hungry larvae can decimate an otherwise healthy crop, has antennae tuned to these as well as other specific frequencies, with the result that when the female flies about on a clear moonlit night, she ‘sees’— through her antennae — the whole field lit up, like an array of a myriad natural light bulbs.
And perhaps the light from those ears of corn which are in just the right condition for her to lay her eggs, fluoresce in a particular manner, recognizing which from her own inward pre-patterned instincts, she homes in and deposits her eggs.
Now, a Western, Darwinian-style, selfish model of nature — a reflection of man's own attitude to nature — would say that the moth evolved independently of the plant whose leaves it wished its larvae to eat.
But then why didn't the plant evolve so that it no longer attracted that insect?
Surely this would have been the ‘logical’ outcome if nature were so selfish?
But this kind of observation is flawed.
For nature, Gaia, is a whole; created as such and working as such.
Physical nature is the outward aspect, the outward shell, of the great Egg of the Mind, the one Golden Womb of creation.
Integration and wholeness are thus intrinsic.
Seen as a whole, nature is not selfish.
There is enough to share around if no species gets out of hand.
And if it does, its own activity carries within it the seeds of its own self-balancing.
If the food-supply is curtailed by an increase in population, then the population is automatically reduced by that very lack of food.
If man upsets his planetary ecosystem, then he is dirtying his own back garden which will automatically recoil upon him and curtail his activities.
Selfish motivation is inherently negative and is reflected in selfish ways.
And these self-centred ways automatically cause suffering and, ultimately, curtailment of the activity.
If I continually throw rubbish out of my back door, sooner or later I will suffer for that and will have to get out there and clean up the mess, as a matter of survival.
The balance of yin and yang are present throughout the universe and in the natural balance of all creatures upon our planet.
And man is not separate from nature or immune from the consequences of his own actions.
Nature is not selfish in her wider workings.
A plant and its flower may look beautiful to our human eyes, but a plant itself has no eyes with which to perceive itself or its fellows.
‘So what use is beauty to the plant itself?’ the reductionist and materialistic mind might say.
How then, can a plant have evolved beauty?
But its beauty and its form are a part of the total economy of nature.
It lives not for itself alone but as a part of a whole.
Insects which may contribute to its survival will see it one way, man sees it in another, a seed-seeking bird will perceive it in another.
But which is the realplant?
What the plant perceives of itself?
Or the insect?
The bird?
Man?
It is not a question with an answer, for all these ‘realities’ are illusions in the wider sense.
There seems to be no absolute reality in the world of physical forms where every creature sees things differently.
Similarly, those insects possessing an ability to see things through infrared or heat emissions are in an interesting position, for while we humans perceive airborne molecular vibrations as sound, such a creature would have no need of ears, though many do possess excellent hearing, for it may be able to see some airborne vibrations as molecular agitations or patterns.
So while crickets, grasshoppers and cicadas are easily heard by such creatures as ourselves, these same airborne vibrations may actually be seen , as well as heard, by the fellow members of their own species, much as we are able to see the air shimmering with heat as it rises off hot rocks.
And we cannot say that one way of perceiving things is more real than another.
And then, with such apparent integration in nature, how could such a whole tapestry have evolved piecemeal?
How does ‘chance’ give rise to order?
A mosquito may see the scent of our bodies and be attracted thereby.
But in the process of evolution, which came first?
The ability to perceive the scent, attraction by that scent, or the ability and desire to drink blood?
Of what use would just one of these faculties be without the others?
How could a creature so specialized as a mosquito ever evolve?
Their senses, instincts, behaviour, anatomy, physiology, digestion, biochemistry — the whole creature — is supremelydesigned and integrated for its bloodthirsty life.
How could such a creature have ever evolved all these highly integrated facets of its being in purely random steps?
Again, how — if at all— does a mosquito perceive its own high-pitched ping as it closes in on its prey, a sound not uttered as it dances with its fellows in gay abandon in a summer evening's cloud.
Since this warning ping frequently results in its untimely demise, or at least in its loss of a meal, one would imagine that, were a naive perception of Darwinism strictly correct, mosquitoes would have long since evolved soundless flight — like owls, for example.
Of what use to the mosquito, one may ask, is its ping?
From the point of view of natural creation, however, dare we suggest that a not altogether unfeeling God introduced the sound as a warning to its prey, so that in the natural economy, mosquitoes did not have an unfair advantage and that all warm-blooded creatures in mosquito-infested areas were not permanently condemned to a life of itching and scratching!
Similarly, how does a moth perceive the ultrasonic acoustic radar signals of a bat?
Certainly, moths duck and weave in their escape attempts, for which their excellent wide spectrum sight is clearly advantageous.
But do they see the radar signals, too?
And can they — by clever use of wing vibration or other sounds and squeaks, jam the bats' radar by emission of confusing signals?
Indeed, there is a lot going on out there in my garden, which I do not understand.
HIGHWAYS, BYWAYS AND ROAD SIGNS
So all creatures have their own world of physical reality, a world defined entirely by their mind configuration.
One sees evidence of this everywhere.
Sitting at breakfast on the verandah of Bombay's Sun'n'Sand hotel, some while after reading Philip Callahan's Tuning in to Nature, I found myself quietly observing a highway of tiny, high speed ants as they took a specific path to and from their nest under the edge of the patio, gathering up enticing goodies from further down the flowerbed.
As we have said, it is well established in scientific circles that ants and many other creatures, too, communicate by means of external molecular signals known as pheromones.
From Callahan's work, it is clear that some, perhaps many, insects will ‘see’ these molecular communicators by means of their tuned antennae and the laser-like, infrared molecular emissions.
Ants lay down these chemical markers on the road to a food supply so that they and their fellows may know where to go.
But it is a probability that they perceive them, not like a dog sniffing its way along a scent path, but as a motorway, illuminated by very particular lighting signals.
So had these cunning little creatures marked out their pathway to food with a species-specific street lamp system that only they could perceive?
The ‘colour-pattern’ of this illumination quite clearly said, ‘Food — this way!’
In fact, since ants, like other insects, have a variety of these illuminated chemical communicators, each meaning different things, their highways — especially within their nests — must provide them with a variety of ‘colour-pattern’ coding and meaningful messages.
Watching these high speed ants on the Bombay verandah, I was impressed by the fact that ants travelling in different directions upon their highway stopped dead upon meeting, touched each other and then continued upon their way.
Further messages were clearly being transmitted, perhaps confirming the continued existence of the food supply, affirmation of being members of the same colony, and so on.
A truly social and self-supportive activity.
Imagine the myriads of such infrared and other pathways and signals that the various insect species must be utilizing.
Their specifically tuned antennae receive only what is relevant to their existence.
We humans lay out our highways and byways in our fashion and each species does so in theirs, and we mostly remain unaware of each others' very own and personal world of perception.
Our homes, our territories and our pathways are all superimposed and coexistent, the one hardly suspecting or aware of the existence of the other.
Every environment is an economy of such coexistence, a multitude of interrelationships and separations, of symbiosis and selfishness.
It  operates as an indivisible, adaptable whole which finds a dynamically shifting point of equilibrium according to circumstances and the cycles of nature.
All creatures contain, within themselves, their own individual characteristics of mind and being, determining their varying levels of intelligence.
They are, quite clearly, highly organized and know what they are about, though it is difficult for us to reach into their world and see it from their point of view.
But we are given an insight into the limitations of their cognitive capabilities when we observe a spider responding to a vibrating tuning fork by attempting to wrap it up for food.
Or by a robin quite determinedly attacking a bundle of red feathers that it has mistaken as an invader to its territory while ignoring an adjacent and perfectly good-looking stuffed robin, but lacking the all-important red feather flash.
Their instincts are a tight binding of mental or subtle structure and they are constrained to act accordingly.
No man, nor even a dog, a monkey or a dolphin, would be fooled quite so readily as the robin, though we too react according to habituated mental patterns.
Bluetits may be famous for having figured out how to remove the silver foil caps from our early morning milk bottles, to find a creamy delight beneath, but I remember watching with amusement as one of our local bluetits swooped down upon a friend's Mercedes sports car parked in our driveway and perseveringly attempted to remove the central silver disc from the Mercedes logo on the front bonnet.
He came back several times, quite convinced that only a little greater effort would supply him with the treat he had in mind.
Like the robin and the bunch of red feathers, our little friend was clearly unable to tell the difference between a milk bottle and a Mercedes!
Not the sort of mistake you would expect from a mammal or a man.
Clearly there is a difference in the characteristics of the mind possessed by each.
DOGS AND DREAMS
Anyone who has ever kept a dog must have observed its clear indications of a dream life.
Whimperings, body movements, tail-wags, even little yelps are all heard to emanate from sleeping canines.
This is a clear indication of a ‘thought’ life independent of bodily activity.
‘He's chasing bunnies’, we sometimes say, affectionately, not realizing the import of our observation.
The nature of that doggie world of thought is closed to most of us.
The degree of empathy and perception is difficult to muster.
But they, like all creatures, clearly have their own inner life.
They express a wide range of emotions and feelings to which we can readily relate:expectantly waiting for their master or mistress to return home, display of affectionate greetings , or excitement when it comes time to go out for a walk or prepare their food.
I once knew a Yorkshire terrier where even the word ‘walkies, sent him into gyrations of joyous bouncing and tail wagging.
This was followed subsequently by great interest in all the smells and scents of the roadside, even the occasional canine encounter — accompanied by the whole world of doggie communication: nose to nose, nose to tail, side by side, tail and body postures, ears up, ears down — their inward mental structure is quite clearly being expressed in a language and through sense perceptions and actions we do not share.
And when at rest, does man's best friend lie in contemplation of his next act, or of the possible menus for his next meal?
What passes through the mind of a dog as he snoozes with half an eye upon his trusted human companions — whimpering, tail-wagging and yelping in his sleep?
And why is it that dogs have become one of man's closest animal allies?
Why not other animals?
It seems to be because, in their doggie way, they share a similar range of social emotions and behaviour and have a subtle structure in sympathy with their human companions.
Wild dogs and wolves have a strong social bonding within a pack, and to a domestic dog, we humans are probably just a rather special part of their pack.
For in general, we are also social creatures.
I do not mean that they do not differentiate between dog and man, only that we have become integrated into their already existing, instinctive mental-behavioural patterns.
Wild cats, for instance, are not particularly social creatures and these tendencies are displayed in the behaviour of our domestic pussies.
Dogs are generally more expressive of their feelings than their feline protagonists.
Pussies are different creatures, within themselves, more self-contained.
They have different mental processes from dogs.
And one must also remember the effect of previous lives.
It is from the mind energy patterns, the personal associations, actions, desires and so on, which all lie in the mind, that the next life of a soul is determined.
Processes of genetic inheritance are only a part, at the physical level, of a multidimensional formative and creative system at work, but it is the mind which automatically forms the patterns which lead a soul into its new body.
Indeed, the mind actually forms that body and the life's destiny, as we will see.
Returning to our canine theme, dogs still carry with them the same instincts possessed by their wild ancestors, still remaining members of that same species — the wild wolf — even after so many generations of breeding have made them what must be the most diverse species upon Earth.
The herding, hunting, guarding, group companionship and communication possessed by the wolf and many wild dogs of today are almost identical to those same instincts expressed by our domestic dog.
If the materially minded evolutionists were right and mind patterns whether in humans or animals are genetically transmitted as nothing more than expressions of biochemistry, then why do dogs still retain the same instincts as the wolf?
Why, indeed, are they still the same species?
If evolution is simply a matter of selective breeding, then why can we never produce anything other than dogs from dogs, however hard we try?
There is clearly something more to dogs, and all living creatures, than meets the material eye!
And that something is nothing more than their inward consciousness, heavily hemmed in by their subtle and instinctive mental processes.
All who have kept wild animals as pets or got to know them in the wild have come to realize that they each have their own personality and manner of expression, within the constraints of that species’ natural instincts.
But expression of what?
It must be of their inward mental and subtle structure.
The body of a cat when hunting takes on a quite different demeanour to that of the same pussy when out for an idle stroll or with some other intention in mind.
Just like humans, unless we think, we do not act.
A mental activity, shape or pattern is required for the outer action and behaviour to be manifest.
How is it that we have blindly come to think that animals and other creatures have no inner life when their every action tells us that they do?
My father used to train and breed English Springer spaniels as a hobby.
They were trained as gun-dogs unfortunately, but are nonetheless a very affectionate breed.
The trick was always to spot the most intelligent even when they were still puppies.
For my father would keep the best for himself, to train and breed, and sell or give away the remainder.
One judged the pups purely on appearance, behaviour and demeanour, as one would one's fellow humans, becoming quite skilled at it as time passed.
Sometimes one might also set them trivial tasks requiring a certain degree of intelligence to solve some problem, and the more intelligent ones would thus demonstrate their superior ability.
A good  sense of smell and an active intelligence were the factors which made a good dog.
Many a time he commented upon the mental rapport he found with his most intelligent animals.
His most famous champion, Jasper, would even turn and, by his demeanour and stance, ‘tell’ my father that he was not right, when directed to go in a wrong direction in pursuit of some unfortunate, injured but running, bird.
He would stand and just look at his trusted trainer, not moving off as directed.
My father learnt to understand and trust the dog's perceptions.
‘Go on then,’ he would say, coaxingly, and off Jasper would go in the direction he knew was right.
So it is not only the inward patterning of particular species which makes creatures different, but individual members of a species are different, too, and most species can distinguish fellow members of their kind by sight, sound, smell or other senses and probably by behavioural patterns too, just as we do among our fellow humans.
We know people by their walk, their gestures and their general body language.
Each creature has its own karma, its own personal mind patterns, derived from its own past history of previous lives.
These it brings with it to its new life.
It is these patterns which are responsible for the body it now has fashioned, as well as for the individual ‘personality’ of each creature.
INTERLUDE
SEEING WITH THE EYE OF MIND
Through spiritual vision he [the mystic]will see in his mind spiritually all the visible things which are seen by others materially.
And inwardly in his mind and in his thoughts, he will survey all the present creation and the worlds that have passed or are still standing; the years of the world with all the happenings that occurred in it, and the men with their wealth and their power; the revelations of the [spiritual]benefits which were bestowed on the Fathers, and the retributory judgements that took place generation after generation [or ‘birth after birth'], together with all the various vicissitudes which the affairs of the creation undergo.
All these things which a wise man [of the world]sees materially, he strives to investigate in his mind spiritually, through spiritual vision.
He does not see the different plants like an agriculturalist, nor the medicinal roots like a physician, but everything that he sees with his material eyes he secretly contemplates in his mind through spiritual vision.
In this way, the mind is taught and instructed to look inwardly at the spiritual nature [of things], towards the secret power that is hidden in everything and works in everything in an incomprehensible way.
(Simon of Taibutheh, East Syrian mystic, died about A.D. 690.
From:Early Christian Mystics, translated by A. Mingana.)
STRANGE SENSES AND MULTIPLE REALITIES
MULTIPLE REALITIES, MIND STRUCTURES AND PATTERN MATCHING
Despite all our scientific study of the physical world, one can still look with wonder at the panorama of ‘ordinary’ objects and events presented to us by our senses and can still — indeed should — ask the basic question: ‘What is it all, fundamentally?’
And what, too, am I ?
Without an answer to that question, any answer that comes from that ‘I’ comes from a point of ignorance and is thus intrinsically suspect.
All physical manifestation is a dance, an effect, patterns in space giving an appearance of ‘reality’ and linked to our consciousness through our sensory perception.
But, as we have seen, different species have different perceptions.
They are linked into this patterning in different ways, according to their own inward subtle or ‘mental’ structure.
There is thus no absolute physical reality.
The physical world differs for every species.
So some insects perceive infrared and ultraviolet.
Flies taste with their feet, planaria (aquatic flatworms) unerringly follow scents in water, sharks monitor the electrical nervous activity of their prey, knife fish use electrical radar (three-dimensional echo location), electric eels hunt the knife fish by homing in on their radar bleeps, while migrating birds are sensitive to the earth's magnetic field and polarized light.
Dogs find the world a place of infinite aromas; bats, whales and dolphins use acoustic sonar.
Even plants communicate with each other.
What one creature smells, another may sense as heat, while yet another may see it.
Presumably, this is what moths are doing when they fly into a candle and are burnt to death.
They see the heat of the candle which looks like something to which they are instinctively  attracted — perhaps a food plant, or a flower, or a member of the opposite sex.
And too late do they discover that the flame burns and is lethal.
But which is the ‘real reality’?
What we perceive or what another species perceives?
Even among humans we all react differently to sensory, social, intellectual and other experiences.
So which is ‘real’, or do none of them possess any ultimate ‘reality’?
We cannot say that there is a separate, solid, objective world which different creatures perceive in different ways.
Our physical world consists, is entirely made up, of these perceptions.
Even mass and solidity are only sense perceptions.
And the perceptions are subjective, in our mind.
The ‘world’ to another creature is a quite different place.
Yet we cannot claim that our sensory reality is more real than theirs: that we see it the ‘right’ way and that they see it in some less than real manner.
So we are always drawn back to our experience as somehow being involved intimately with what we may thing is an objective experience.
Experience is subjective, whether sensory, conceptual or otherwise, and our confusion only arises when we think we are separate from what we perceive.
In fact, in a gloriously mystical way, we are an integral part of this cosmic energy dance and can only really understand it all by mystic superconsciousness, from within.
The fact that our own personal experience of being alive is different to the experience which all other humans and lower creatures have of us, is a clear and obvious pointer to the mind-nature of this physical domain.
For all such experience — sensory, mental or emotional — is essentially subjective, in our minds.
The apparently outward world, perceived through our senses, is actually of the mind.
Taking this perception to the lower species, we can begin to glimpse how both we and they are constructed, from within-out.
Just like ourselves, the real creature's feeling for itself is subjective, within its own mind structure.
What a fellow member of its same species sees of it, is quite different from what the individual feels about itself.
It is certainly very different from that which other species perceive of it, for the sense organs of different species are constructed differently and perceive things in different ways, as we have seen.
In fact, it would appear that it is the mind and subtle structure of a creature, which — acting as a blueprint — determines the nature and structure of the physical sense organs themselves.
There is a certain wasp, for example, of which the female is flightless.
The male seeks the female, picks her up, and mates with her on the wing, later depositing her where she can lay her eggs.
The male wasp, therefore, clearly knows what shape and colour to look out for.
He is born with that instinct, for no mother wasp ever taught him, nor does he possess the capacity to learn something so fundamental to his existence.
But there is an orchid whose shape and colouring exactly mimics that of his female, flightless partner.
When the male wasp spies it, he wastes no time in the attempt to mate with what he clearly takes to be a female of his own kind.
He is quite insistent in his amorous advances despite the patent lack of response.
Like bees buzzing up and down my window pane, the instinct is too deep for such a creature to see or to reason that he is not getting the expected response.
Transparent glass is no more a part of a bee's mind set than mimicking orchids are to those of a wasp.
They cannot figure it out, and so go on acting out of their inward instinctive patterning.
And the resemblance of orchid to female wasp is not coincidental, for it is the means by which the orchid spreads its pollen to other members of its species.
Without the wasp, the orchid cannot reproduce.
The weight of the wasp upon its lower lip brings down the upper lip of the flower containing the anthers, to dust the wasp's back liberally before his eventual, disappointed departure to another flower, carrying the orchid pollen with him.
The biological engineering is absolutely perfect.
Leaving aside the question of how such a perfect and whole symbiotic relationship could have ever evolved,Darwinian-style and piecemeal, out of‘random fluctuations in the DNA of wasp and orchid’, we are left with the interesting observation that the mind structure, or instinct, of the wasp is organized in such a way that it instinctively seeks this particular shape, for the purposes of fulfilling its urge to mate.
This instinct — along with all the other instinctive and subtle inward facets which make up the creature — then acts as the blueprint for the actual patterning, formation or projection of the physical sense organ and body itself.
The ‘mind’ of the wasp, therefore, seeks the pattern of the female through an appropriately structured sense organ,but the primary experience of the creature lies in its mindand subtle structure.
It is as if the inner mind structure presents a predetermined pattern to the sense organ, through the brain and sensory/motor nervous system, and only that input which relates to the inward pattern is able to gain entry to the creature's world of subjective experience.
In fact, its sense organs and body are only an outward expression of this inward patterning, which we call instinct.
Using computer terminology, sensory perception and motor activity are thus only pattern-matching exercises between the inner mind structure and the outward physical body.
The outer form and the behaviour of the creature are thus always at one — man does not try to flap his arms and fly, any more than an insect seeks out the sex pheromones of another species as if they were its own.
The mind structure — its motives, sense perceptions and instinctive drives — these are all reflected automatically in the outward physical form.
That which constitutes a particular species, therefore, is its inner mind and subtle energy structure, a state which lies beyond the level of DNA.
And this is borne out by the fact that although the outward forms of creatures can be bred into a most amazing degree of variety, as we find in the domestic dog, the inner instincts remain very much the same.
As we have pointed out, from friendly licks to territorial growls and all other social communications, domestic dogs are only displaying instincts still common to their wild ancestor, the wolf.
This pattern-matching exercise of the mind is, indeed, how we humans already live much of our lives.
Emotionally and mentally our mind seeks out the things, people and ideas to which it is already habituated.
The mind operates largely by habit.
Instinct is simply a habit with which a creature is born.
The less the capacity to learn and consider, the greater is the habit instinctive.
The child born under the influence of certain cultural, social and religious thinking, automatically develops those mental traits and will normally seek companionship among like-minded individuals.
Within a community, we seek out for our companions, those whose thinking is similar to our own.
This is easier for us, for it presents less challenge to the habits of our mental and emotional processes.
In this respect, like attracts like.
It is, again, a pattern-matching exercise.
In physics and science, we follow the same procedure, often unwittingly.
We design and perform an experiment, or make observations, according to a preformed set of ideas or concepts in our mind.
These ideas or concepts are called a paradigm.
But although they are only thoughts in our minds, by the very design of our experiments we project these patterns onto the ‘outside’ reality and therefore either fail to see anything else, or are confused when observations do not fit our inward mind patterns and expectations.
I considered this process in some detail in The Secret of the Creative Vacuum , for if our basic premises are incorrect, then all findings based upon such foundations will also be suspect.
And this can so easily be the case, for such premises are instilled into the scientific mind set at an early age, becoming accepted points of  reference, though really they are often nothing more than habits of thought.
So science, too, is conducted mostly as a pattern-matching exercise.
And with the mind, even of humans, behaving in a habituated, instinctive fashion, many an insightful perception or suggestion is rejected out of hand by the deeply engrained, yet erroneous, patterns adhered to by the majority.
Just as a Christian might reject Buddhism without ever studying it or getting to understand the meaning behind the words.
Or vice versa.
So even as humans, what makes us human — our basic inward energetic structure or constitution — is essentially instinctive.
We know how to talk, to walk, to hold things, to think even — to be a human being — without having to figure it out.
Learning is no doubt present, and the higher the consciousness of the creature, the broader the tattvic tapestry, then the greater is the capacity for learning.
But it is all within the basic framework of that creature's subtle and physical structure, within the bounds of instinct.
As humans, we may learn to talk, but the impetus to learn and the capability to acquire human language are instinctively human.
If a chimpanzee and a canary are raised in the same house as a child, neither of these two companions ever learns to talk like a human.
Neither does the child learn to communicate like a chimpanzee or a canary.
All creatures communicate only in the manner to which they are instinctively and inwardly programmed.
The canary goes ‘tweet’ and only ‘tweet’.
In fact, even a duckling raised by a farmyard hen goes ‘quack’, rather than‘cluck’, maybe occasioning some degree of confusion in the hen house!
But a duck always behaves like a duck, whatever his social conditioning, upbringing or training!
But nowhere is there a gene, or group of genes, which makes it quack.
Once could not genetically engineer a duck to make it cluck.
One could say that the duck goes ‘quack’ because his vocal organs will only say ‘quack’, and that these vocal organs are genetically patterned.
This is partially true, but the motivations for saying ‘quack’, the kindof quack a duck makes, the social message that is being conveyed — fear, alarm, pain, surprise, contentment, ‘Come here’, ‘Go away’, ‘Look what I've found’— this all requires a mind behind the larynx to make it express or utter the intent and feeling within the duck's mind, to give the quack the correct inflection and intonation.
No one can make a dead duck go ‘quack’ any more than a dead person can be made to speak.
Mind, as well as brain, are required in both instances.
It is a question of meaning.
Meaning lies in the mind, beyond words — just as one may search for a word to express one's meaning.
The meaning is there in the mind before the word is found.
Meaning is related to mind structure.
The baby never learns to go ‘tweet, because his mind structure has no meaning for the noise.
Neither is he able, usually, even as an adult human, to distinguish the sounds made by individual birds of the same species — though the birds themselves can do this.
MULTIPLE REALITIES AND SENSORY PERCEPTION
Among whales, dolphins and bats, this pattern-matching process can be very clearly observed.
It is even taken a step further.
Generally, the mind, through its sensory indriyas, provides the patterns which — mirrored in the input characteristics and design features of both brain and the physical sense organ themselves — automatically selects and sorts the incoming sensory signals into what the mind is expecting.
It is a multilevel, yet highly integrated, energy system.
In the acoustic sonar systems of these species, however, the mind first patterns the vocal organsto produce highly specific sound signals or patterns.
These then go out into the environment, are reflected back in a multitude of different ways according to the objects encountered, are picked up by the most amazingly refined hearing organs, matched against an inner mind structure capable of interpreting this data as a full and complete three-dimensional world and used as a major sensory means of perceiving their watery or aerial world.
Not to emit and receive these sounds constantly might be our equivalent of the sun's disappearance at night, of someone switching the light off, or of partially shutting one's eyes, though these creatures are also supremely aware of externally generated sounds.
Our human world is a visible one, to which we then associate sounds, smells, tastes and touching.
Probably over 80 per cent of our sensory impressions come through our eyes.
We therefore, quite understandably, make the error of assuming that the world is essentially a visual one.
But for many other creatures this is not so.
In fact, few other mammals are so heavily reliant upon sight as we are, where colour vision would seem to be the exception rather than the rule.
Birds, however, are clearly able to differentiate colours.
Laboratory and field tests have been conducted of course, but a simple look at their often gaudy hues, essential to their behavioural repertoire, is enough  to tell us that they too, perceive fine gradations of colour.
And so too, one imagines, do butterflies and day-flying moths.
Certainly they are often far more colourful than their night-flying cousins.
But even many of these have some interesting hues, at least to our human sight, though just what other creatures perceive of their own or other species is not so easily understood.
As we have seen, flying insects are often particularly sensitive to the electromagnetic spectrum.
Certainly their close association with the coloured patterning and individual shapes of flowers bears witness to this.
Moreover, there is not so much to smell when you are flying high up and away from the scents and aromas that cling to the Earth — or even if, like man, your nose stands at a height of five or six feet, rarely bending towards the ground.
And excellent sight is most important if your world is in the air or your head is more than a few feet above the ground.
Whether you are perceiving the planet from only a few feet up or from around the lofty peaks of mountains and hillsides, excellent sight (or sonar) is almost a prerequisite: there are hosts of obstacles to circumnavigate and far distances to discern if you travel by air!
And you need to be able to find food and companions, too.
The air leaves no long-lived scent trails, like the earth.
The relevance of such multiple sensory realities to conventional evolutionary theory has so far remained unconsidered.
For if our physical reality is largely linked to the mental and sensory mechanisms we possess, then what was the nature of physical reality before life is supposed to have spontaneously emerged — like mice out of soiled linen, as some Victorians thought — from the primaeval muds of ancient oceans?
If every creature perceives a different physical reality, which is the ‘real’ physical reality from which those early acellular creatures are supposed to have emerged?
Our sensory impressions of the reality of mud and ocean constitute the whole of that reality.
It is only for humans that they exist in that way.
Does it make sense to suggest that acellular creatures evolved out of a ‘reality’ which is relative only to a human-style perceptive system of mind and sense organ?
Their perception of the physical world is quite different to ours.
Some folk might say that although ‘red’ is a subjective, mental experience, there is an objective reality which we can measure with our scientific instrumentation.
But our instrumentation is again only perceived, as well as conceived, in our own human minds.
It is related to ourmind structure, not that of other creatures.
No doubt, there is some measure of ‘objectivity’ for humans can actually see how well other creatures are designed for the perception of infrared laser frequencies or acoustic sonar, for example , or for flight, swimming or digging.
But yet we cannot say that this notional world of human scientific description is the more fundamental physical reality to which all creatures relate.
Because of the integral parts played by Mind and consciousness, it seems that any purely mechanistic description of the origins of life and the physical universe, is doomed to failure, for it ignores the manner by which the physical creation and physical bodies come into being as expressions of Mind and consciousness.
These topics are discussed more fully in the last two chapters, on the Formative Mind , and throughout the two associated books in this series,Natural Creation…
Or Natural Selection?and Natural Creation: The Mystic Harmony .
Back in the world of multiple sensory realities, vocalization and dynamic, three-dimensional echo-location are the most fully developed sensory systems of some bats and cetaceans.
This is useful if you fly by night or live in murky waters.
If you have ever watched a bat chase a moth, as both wing and weave through the evening air in amazing aerobatic gyrations, you will know how three-dimensional and accurate is their perception of this world.
But to bats — both in their mind structure and associated sense organs and motor responses — the world is a three-dimensional sonar world — not a visual world.
Their sonar is like a personal sonar ‘searchlight’.
When it is switched off, part of their world is silent, though they will still hear the sounds of many other creatures, especially — one imagines — those of their own kind, their prey and their predators.
Some moths even possess a bat-confusion kit.
When chased by a bat — which they evidently recognize as such — they emit bat-like sonar squeaks, which confuse the bat as to exactly where it (the bat) and the moth really are.
Radar jamming was clearly invented many millions of years ago!
So the world of every creature is different to that of all others, sometimes greatly, sometimes by not so very much.
Taking yet another example, compare the visual fields of man, rabbits and the sperm whale.
When looking directly ahead, man possesses only 180° vision.
We cannot see anything behind us,(see Figure 4.1).
120° of this visual field is binocular — we see the same things with both eyes.
Binocular vision is of great importance, for it is two visual fixes on objects in a three-dimensional world which give us a perception of distance.
Try judging distances in an unfamiliar place with just one eye open, for instance, or notice how much more difficult it is to put your finger on a particular spot when one eye is shut.
For about 30° on each side of this 180° field of view, our vision is monocular.
It is called our peripheral vision .
Here, visual acuity is not so sharp, nor is our ability to judge distances so good.
But this peripheral vision processes input very fast, with visual information reaching the brain and mind more rapidly than from the binocular area.
This is handy, for we can thus spot potential danger and react rapidly to input gleaned out of the corners of our eyes.
And turning our head directly to the source of the new input, we can then decide — if we have time — upon appropriate action.
You can check this out for yourself very easily next time you watch television.
An image on a TV screen is not continuously present, but is relayed as a series of stills, twenty-five to a second.
This is fast enough for our central vision to be fooled into the illusion of a continuously moving picture.
But if you look off to one side and view the television with your peripheral vision, out of the corner of your eye, you will be aware of this twenty-five frames per second illusion: you will see the image flickering.
Man, of course, is fascinated with himself and how he perceives and does things, and many interesting experiments have been designed to test out how our perceptual and motor responses function.
Many experiments have been performed upon other creatures, too.
But unless one realizes that there is a mind structure, including appropriate sensory and motor indriyas at a subtle level, as well as corresponding sense organs and motor functions, such experimental observations remain obscure and lacking in a full understanding and interpretation.
If you are a creature that needs to locate things rapidly in a three-dimensional world, whether as a hunter or for other purposes, binocular vision or ‘binocular sonar’ are essential.
Man can, to some extent, tell where sounds are coming from, though we are often fooled by reflected sounds.
Trying to locate a particular noise in a built-up area, for instance, can be tricky, since sounds are reflected off buildings and appear to come from places other than where they are.
Our three-dimensional appreciation of sound is not so very good.
But with vision it is another matter.
We are not so easily fooled by reflections in lakes or puddles.
We know them immediately as reflections, just as we appreciate shadows cast by objects as they obstruct the passage of light.
Indeed, we unknowingly use the variation of light and shadow in our environment to tell us more of its structure and three-dimensionality.
But sound also casts sonic shadows, though other than noticing that shutting the door can reduce the sound, we do not pay much heed to it.
Additionally, since sound is reflected differently from surfaces of varying density, a good quality ultrasonic sonar would bestow some degree of ‘X-ray’ sonic vision, infinitely more refined than our present day ultrasonic medical diagnostic instruments.
But if your main organ of sensory perception were sound, and you had an excellently organized mind structure and sensory system for appreciating three-dimensionality and structure from sonic input, then the world would be fully perceptible by day or night.
It would make little difference what time of day it was.
An ordinary shut door, for example, would not be opaque to you, if you were one of those species of bat or whale who relied heavily upon detection of sound waves!
Sound would come both through the material of the door itself and around all the edges.
Translated into terms of visual experience, this would be like a semi-transparent door with extra light coming in around all the cracks.
Not only that, but the way the light came around the edges and through the door would enable you to perceive clearly and in three dimensions what was happening on the other side of the door!
‘Hearing’ is not really the right word for this faculty, because we immediately relate it to our own highly specific sense of hearing.
It is sonar ‘visibility’, the term to use is difficult to find, because of our own personal human associations, and because our human language relates to our mental and sensory experiences, not to that of a bat or a whale.
It is as if we were to carry our own sonic searchlight with us.
That is, we could emit our own sound, somewhat comparable to emitting one's own powerful beam of light — something no creature seems to have accomplished so far, though the visibility of pheromones and other substances at all times of the day and night is at least partially akin to it.
To understand what other creatures perceive we have to do the well-nigh impossible.
We have to get outside our human perceptions and enter into another world.
We need to see things through their mind, through theirsensory and motor structures — subtle and gross — not our own.
So these particular species of bat or whale are living and working in a sonar world.
Just watch a bat weave its way through the evening sky and you may begin to glimpse something of the world it perceives.
In water, sonar is essential for long distance perception, for light cannot penetrate more than sixty feet or so.
Those species of whale which feed deep beneath the waves, frequently possess weak sight, just as we humans possess pretty weak hearing and smelling, comparatively speaking.
But their 3-D sonar perception is excellent.
Some of the larger whales, measuring over 100 feet in length, may be quite unable to perceive their own tail flukes visually.
But their acute hearing and sonar no doubt tells them exactly what is going on all around.
A sperm whale, for example, cannot see directly fore and aft, a factor made use of by the mariners of old, who quietly crept up upon them from straight astern or dead ahead.
Their vision scans two quite independent fields of 120° on either side (see Figure 4.1).
Can we imagine what it is like to have two non-overlapping visual fields?
We cannot, because our human mind structure is not formed in that way, neither are our eyes.
Many whales also spend some considerable time swimming on the surface, where good sight is required but where their sonar is of little use.
Clearly they are able to switch mentally between auditory and visual worlds.
No small feat and something quite alien to ourselves, difficult to imagine.
Under water it is mostly a sonic world and on the surface it is mostly visual.
For those readers who are optically minded, you might also like to ponder over the design difficulties associated with a lens system which comes into direct contact with water, where the refractive indices of the organic water-based lens and the surrounding watery medium itself are very similar.
This is why man sees only blurred images under water unless he wears air-filled goggles.
Yet whales and  dolphins can see well, both in water and in air.
An extraordinary feat of biological engineering.
The auditory organs of cetaceans contain immense air-filled sinuses as resonance and receptor chambers, as well as fluid-filled compartments, too.
Both media have differing advantages and disadvantages for generating and receiving sound waves, and cetaceans are designed to reap the best of both worlds.
Sound, for example, travels four times faster in water than in air, a useful bonus for the users of underwater sonar.
Actually, scientists thought for many years that whales had no sense of hearing because they had no external ear lobes like ourselves, a clear example of anthropomorphic projection.
But whalers could have enlightened them in this respect, for they knew that whales possessed acute hearing, the constant ‘twittering’ of the White whale even earning it the name of the sea canary.
But no doubt such observations were considered to be ‘old wives’ tales'.
But ‘old wives’, as well as old sailors, can be great observers of nature and be well worth listening to.
Ear lobes, of course, on a whale would pose problems underwater where streamlining is so important and in any event, they would not perform as efficiently in water as they do in air.
Sound production and hearing in the Bottle-nosed dolphin had been studied more than those of any other cetacean.
Ken Norris and others (see Bibliography) believe that their sounds are produced in the nasal structures below the blow-hole.
All cetaceans draw in fresh air through this nasal orifice down into their lungs, releasing it and drawing in a fresh supply whenever they return to the surface.
So they always have a ready supply of air in their lungs with which to generate clicks and sing songs.
But they possess no vocal chords as man and other mammals do.
So Norris suggests that in a Bottle-nosed dolphin the sonar clicks are produced just below the level of this blow-hole.
The sound is then actually directed and focused by a reflector and a lens, as in an optical system (see Figure 4.2).
Firstly, it is reflected and given direction by the cut-away skull bone, acting as a parabolic reflector.
This beam is then focused by an acoustic lens, the melon, a fatty body situated right in front of the blow-hole and conspicuous by its presence in many cetaceans.
Norris also points out that the complex system of internal air passages would prevent the production and reflection of random sounds — it is important for the dolphin not to confuse itself!
It is certainly verified experimentally that the sonic clicks produced are both highly structured and directional.
So Tursiops is clearly   operating a form of acoustic laser radar.
Something which man has yet to design for himself!
But this is only half the story, for Norris also believes that the lower jaw acts as an acoustic channel or probe for the returning sound.
The laterally located, inner ears of the dolphin are highly sensitive and quite capable of detecting the sources of ‘ordinary’, environmental sounds, thus building up a three-dimensional acoustic ‘world view’.
But sonar echoes received from a narrow beam of sound directed dead ahead would not be so readily received by laterally placed ears.
The sonar system is therefore a superbly designed ‘addition’ to an already acute ‘conventional’hearing system.
Norris points out that the lower jaw of the dolphin and many cetaceans is actually comprised of an extremely thin and expanded sheet of bone, possessing a minimum thickness varying from only 0.1 to 3 millimetres among the differently sized species.
Between its upper and lower layers there lies a cavity, filled with an oily material similar to that found in the melon (see Figure 4.2).
The returning sonar  thus passes virtually unimpeded through the ‘auditory window’, the delicate layer of tissue covering a thin lower mandible, travelling thence along the jaw until it reaches the auditory bulla, an auditory sense receptor lying close to the point of articulation of the lower jaw with the remainder of the skull.
Norris' ideas seem highly plausible and if this amazing and beautiful process is a correct understanding of part of the physical aspects of the dolphin's 3-D sonar system, it also explains why they move their heads from side to side while they are emitting their characteristic echo-locating clicks — they are simply scanning their targets for angular, 3-D information.
It also explains why those cetaceans which produce no sonar clicks also lack a melon and lower jaw modifications.
Many such whales, however, do produce powerful vocalizations and their lack of such structures does not mean that they are not equipped with some other, equally well-designed, auditory and echo-locating system.
The Bottle-nosed dolphin's sonar sense is remarkably accurate.
Emitting clicks containing between 20 and 230 pulses per second, and lasting from around one to five seconds, they are capable of distinguishing different sizes of fish to an accuracy of a few millimetres.
But not all species of dolphin possess such accurate sonar and, indeed, when the water is clear, even the Bottle-nosed dolphin will readily search for fish using only its eyes to guide it.
This does not mean that among those species not possessing Tursiops ’ style of sonar equipment, sonar is not of such importance to them.
It is just that, as always, unless we can get a feel for the mental meaning and perception experienced by a creature in relation to its own world of sensory perception and motor action response, we can never really know how its own particular reality appears to it.
Considering the other sensory systems of cetaceans, they appear to have no sense of smell, for they lack any obvious olfactory organ, olfactory nerve or olfactory cerebral centre.
Sonar, hearing, vision, touch and taste seem to be their major senses.
Fishes, however, do have a highly developed sense of smell, as do many marine invertebrates.
Smells travel well under water, though what the experience of underwater scents may be like is open to imagination.
Since, under water, the ‘scents’ are in solution, smell and taste must be very similar.
Furthermore, whales are supposed to be mammals who returned to a life in the sea — so, if the evolutionary theory contained all the answers, why should they have ever lost what to most mammals is an exquisite and finely tuned sense organ?
Having entered this discussion concerning the sonar world from a consideration of the different visual fields of animals, let us again pick up those threads.
A rabbit has 360° vision (see Figure 4.1), a useful faculty if every predator around considers you good for dinner.
But their range of binocular vision is only about 30°.
However,this is both in front and behind .
In front, this vision will help a bunny exactly locate its next mouthful, as well as accurately assess the character of the terrain and the location of its bolt hole when being pursued or when simply going home for a snooze.
Rabbits often disappear down their holes at great speed and without slowing up, so they clearly need an excellent assessment of exactly where to jump, to avoid bumping into the sides of their front entrance.
But it is the rear-view binocular field which is of particular use in keeping the rabbit safe.
If you have ever watched a rabbit being pursued by a dog you will notice that whenever the dog gets close, the bunny begins to weave this way and that to confound Fido's pounce.
How does he do it?
How does he know where the dog is?
It is through being able to see simultaneously both backwards as well as forwards, without the need to glance over his shoulder.
So, looking forward, he can see where he is going and, simultaneously looking backwards, he can see exactly where his pursuer is and what is the most appropriate avoiding action.
In fact, I have seen pursued rabbits tilt their heads back, no doubt increasing their rear field of view.
But what is it like to possess 360° vision with two, narrow and separate binocular fields?
To appreciate that, you would need to have a rabbit's mind structure, as well as his eyes.
Ducks, too, have 360° vision, with eyes on the sides of their heads, but with limited binocular vision.
Owls, on the other hand, who also have exquisite ‘binocular’ hearing, enabling them to pin-point mice on a dark night, have excellent binocular vision as well, with eyes at the front.
And they make up for a curtailed visual field by being able to rotate their heads through 180°.
In fact, their necks are so mobile that they can keep their heads in the same position while a branch sways in the breeze underneath them.
The body moves, while the head stays put!
A most remarkable feat and quite essential if you are scanning the area for a likely meal.
try, for example, examining the detail of something several yards away while jumping up and down upon the spot.
You cannot see things so clearly.
Similarly, many hawks can hover with their heads almost motionless on the most windy and blustery   of days.
Their bodies move in the wind while the head stays put.
Interestingly, the design requirements of eyes on the side of your head, which is where they need to be for all-round vision, plus the need for excellent binocular vision, leads to the cutaway snout or long face, such as we find in many rodents, including squirrels (see Figure 4.3).
If all you could see were your nose, or the side of your face, nature's design system would clearly have slipped up somewhere.
And this we never see.
Binocular vision, or some other sense with accurate three-dimensional assessment, is essential for catching prey or performing acrobatic feats among the trees.
INFRASOUND, ULTRASOUND AND HUMAN SOUND
Not all biologists accept that insects do communicate electromagnetically.
Some prefer to think in terms of sound signals and the ‘smell’ or ‘taste’of pheromones.
For myself, the evidence detailed in Philip Callahan's Tuning in to Nature does seem pretty conclusive.
Certainly, few entomologists doubt that the amazingly intricate structure of moths' antennae are specific pheromone detectors.
But there is no reason why both these and other sensory systems should not be employed.
There are, after all, many species of invertebrate, of which but very few have been studied in any detail.
It is thought, for example, that the long and feathery antennae of male mosquitoes pick up the specific sound wave patterns generated by a female mosquito who is ready and willing for a sexual encounter.
She vibrates her wings at a particular frequency as she flies, emitting a sound, to which the antennae of the male are exactly tuned, acoustically.
They resonate like the string of a guitar.
Many sounds produced by living creatures, however, lie in frequencies outside our human threshold of hearing and are thus designated as ultrasound(higher frequencies) or infrasound (lower frequencies).
Many creatures use these sounds for communication.
Many of the sounds we hear emanating from insects, for example, are only the bottom end of a spectrum of sound signals much of which lie above the auditory frequencies to which our ears are attuned.
Indeed, such communications are not without the deceivers and manipulators, as in all walks of life.
For some species of spider will blatantly mimic the ‘come-hither’ sound signals and even sex pheromones of female moths, luring lusting males to a dinner party they had not expected.
House spiders have often been reported to appear upon the scene when music is being played.
I have a few which appear on my living room carpet whenever I watch certain TV programmes.
This however is not due to a desire to rock'n'roll but represents an instinctive response to signals interpreted by their mind configuration as a call to food, sex or perhaps just good arachnid company.
Similarly, when a peacock butterfly opens and then suddenly closes its wings, it generates a sonic clap outside human hearing which helps to scare away predators.
Rats and mice even use ultrasonic echoes to determine distances and sizes of objects in the dark — this is one of the reasons why they squeak.
It tells them where they are relative to walls, obstructions and each other.
What we hear as squeaking is only the lower end of a sonic signal mostly beyond the range of our human ears.
Many owls have such a perfect sense of hearing that they can locate and catch small creatures in the pitch dark, landing upon them with the claws correctly aligned to grasp them along the spine.
Cats, too, are sensitive to ultrasonic frequencies and can hear mice and voles in hidden places.
In fact, such sounds may be picked up in their whiskers, resonating like guitar strings, rather than by their ears.
Some creatures are sensitive to infrasound, to frequencies below our normal frequency range.
The kangaroo rat is so aware of such sound that even on the darkest of nights it can hear the approaching slither of a hunting rattlesnake.
And so finely tuned is its sense of hearing and its appreciation of timing that it will go on feeding until the very last minute, only springing to safety after the rattler has launched its otherwise deadly final strike.
Birds feeding on the road seem to wait until the very last minute before zooming off to safety, though inexperienced fledglings normally suffer a high casualty rate on our early summer roads.
It seems probable that the high metabolic rate of such diminutive creatures is a reflection of what appears to us as a high-speed mental appreciation of events.
Or maybe it is simply that a second to them is a vastly longer subjective experience of time than it is to us and other creatures, possessed of a slower metabolic rate.
Elephants communicate with each other almost continuously by emitting infrasound frequencies below our human auditory thresholds.
Infrasound is far more penetrating than ultrasound.
Their large thick ears are clearly required for more than mere show.
Conversely, the wafer-thin ears of many bats act as sound frequency filters allowing all but the most ultrasonic frequencies to pass right through.
Some have hearing which is so acute that they can detect insects as tiny as a midge up to 60 feet away.
Some birds also use low-frequency sound signals for territorial, sexual and other social communications.
In fact, it is possible that the distinctive low-frequency sounds and hums generated by deserts, mountain tops and other locations act as homing beacons.
For such sounds can carry for hundreds of miles.
Under water, the world of sound signalling takes on an additional significance since sound in water travels much further than light, moving a great deal faster than it does in air.
The pistol shrimp possesses one of nature's most innovative designs.
One claw is modified to snap shut with a sonic crack capable of stunning its intended prey.
The effect on nearby fish is devastating.
With its other claw, the shrimp then holds the disoriented fish and fires a  barrage of ‘shots’ at its head before settling down to dinner.
The pistol shot is so loud it can be heard well over half a mile away.
Fish, too, often incorrectly thought to be incommunicative and largely undemonstrative creatures, even ‘sing’, like birds, and communicate territorial, sexual and social signals in the realm of low-frequency sound.
And just as blackbirds perform a public service by letting off a loud ‘chaka-chaka-chaka-chaka-chaka’ whenever they spot a pussy on the prowl (resulting in the mass flight of all their avian friends into the taller trees), so too do squirrel fish, and most probably some other fish, sound off a penetrating and quite identifiable infrasonic burst upon the approach of a predator.
Clearly there is more to such cross-species communication than a merely self-centred ‘survival of the fittest’.
Fishes'’ songs', one should note, do not seem to be nearly so complex as those of birds, perhaps reflecting their lower position on the scale of consciousness and intelligence.
So while the male bi-coloured damselfish attracts his mates by chirping — the sound increasing to a crescendo if a female happens to pass by — there is a species of minnow which purrs, the cod grunts and the love song of the male haddock resembles the sound of a motorbike, a quite unmelodious call which it can sustain for periods of up to twenty minutes.
And, as always, there are the terrorists who prey upon the daily needs and activities of other marine creatures.
For sharks and other large predatorial fishes can hear these infrasonic signals in addition to the sounds created simply by the swimming activities of a shoal of fish.
AS MANY PHYSICAL REALITIES AS THERE ARE CREATURES?
And so it goes on.
Every creature would have a different tale to tell if only it knew how.
Every one has a ‘strange’ perception of reality, all its own.
Many four-legged animals have an intensely strong sense of smell.
Perhaps smell can also be three-dimensional.
Even we humans can tell from which direction a smell is coming.
Or maybe the spectrum of smells is perceived in some way similar to our human perception of colour.
Most mammals apart from man are thought to be unaware of colour, or the differentials between wavelengths in the light to which their eyes are sensitive.
Colour, like all sensory perception, is, as I have pointed out, very much a subjective, mental experience.
The necessary mind structure is required as well as the requisite optical structure.
So do our domestic  dogs perceive smells with the same range of subtle ‘hues’ as we perceive colour?
We certainly do not smell things in the way they do.
Again, one needs their mind structure as well as the nasal physiology and brain organization, to know just how such an experience would feel.
‘Red’ is a subjective mind experience, not an outward experience, and so it is with all sensory experience.
Dogs and many other animals, especially hunting creatures, actually lead with their noses.
Even on dry days they are kept moist, ready to dissolve and transmit the perception of interesting molecules.
If you have ever lived with a dog, you will know how important is his (or her) sense of smell.
They smell each other, the cat, any other passing creature, all their human associates and anything else considered worthy of investigation.
They leave scent messages under trees which then so fascinate other dogs who pass that way.
They live in a world of scents and aromas which we cannot even begin to comprehend.
One whiff of a piece of clothing and the appropriate commands, and off goes Fido, nose to the ground, casting this way and that to pick up the same scent.
Like many other mammals, bats are also particularly well endowed with olfactory receivers and transmitters.
They possess an impressive array of scent glands under nervous and endocrine control, the hormones involved being mostly steroids.
Among the various species, such specialized glands have been found in almost all anatomical locations including the anus, sex organs, wrists, ankles, chest, under their leg articulation, upon their shoulders and back and in a variety of places around the head, face and ears.
Furthermore, faeces and urine are used as markers of individual ‘personalities’.
At least one species of African bushbaby, for example, cups its hands and urinates upon them before setting off into the African night.
The personal scent trail which it thereby leaves provides an easily identifiable highway home.
Much better than a long piece of string!
A marked difference between the sexes in the structure or presence of such glands indicates that some aspects of sexuality are communicated by aromatic means but, as always, one would need access to an individual bat's mind to know how such messages are interpreted and what behaviour results.
The world of multiple scents, like that of three-dimensional sonar is not one into which we humans can readily project our minds.
It is only an extension of our human form of sensory perception.
Man uses his eyes for both long- and short-range sensory perception, but some creatures rely more on one sense for long-range and on  another for short range perception.
Dogs, for example, and many mammals, rely heavily on their noses for close-range perception using their eyes to scan the wider horizons.
If you have ever watched a dog running across a field, unless he is tracking something, he will often run with his nose in the air, using his eyes for long-distance viewing, but as soon as he reaches an area of interest, down goes the nose, far closer to the ground.
Of those bats which use echo-location many also use sight to locate a prey at a distance, but employ their short-range sonar for actually closing in and catching it.
Interestingly, many species of bat seem not to favour flight on moonlit nights, possibly because of the danger from owls and bat hawks.
Their vision, of course, is well designed for use in what we humans call the ‘dark’.
So all around us are individual physical realities, each overlapping the others, each different.
And the difference lies primarily in the mind.
This is true even among humans.
We all see things differently, according to the karmas which determine our own personal mind set.
But these difficulties of understanding are only reflections of the intellect's limitations.
From a higher point of perception, it is all a natural part of the outworking of the greater Mind.
INTERLUDE
OTHER NATIONS
We need another and a wiser and perhaps a more mystical concept of animals.
Remote from universal nature, and living by complicated artifice, man in civilization surveys the creature through the glass of his knowledge and sees thereby a feather magnified and the whole image in distortion.
We patronize them for their incompleteness, for their tragic fate of having taking form so far below ourselves.
And therein do we err.
For the animal shall not be measured by man….
They are not brethren, they are not underlings; they are other nations, caught with ourselves in the net of life and time, fellow prisoners of the splendour and travail of the earth.
(Henry Beston,The Outermost House )
PATTERNS
MOTOR RESPONSE, BEHAVIOUR AND LEARNING
In the main, we have been exploring sensory perception and physical reality.
But that is only half the picture, for sensory perception is always linked to motor response, to outward behaviour.
In the fields of mental energy, these exist as the sensory and motor indriyas, as we have discussed.
And the two are closely interwoven.
There is no point in being able to locate something, either visually or through smell or sonar (whatever your métier), if you do not possess the motor organs and behavioural patterns to deal effectively with that something.
This might be to chase it, grab it, attack it, eat it, live in it, avoid it, leave scent markings on it, make love to it or whatever.
So the sensory and motor indriyas of all creatures are closely integrated within the mind structure of a creature.
Behavioural responses are thus instinctive, automatic, totally appropriate and well-designed, since holistic integration is the nature of all mind-body energy fields.
The sensory and motor indriyas are an integral part of the internal mind configuration of all living creatures.
Their sensory perception as well as their motor responses — their behaviour — are thus totally consonant with their bodily form and function.
They do what they have to do as whole entities, further integrated into the greater wholeness of soul, Mind and nature.
The ability to learn about the environment and even communicate that information to one's fellow creatures, as bees, birds and animals do, is dependent upon the inner completeness of the tattvic tapestry.
But even the one-tattwa'd plants discover where light, food and water are to be found.
They readily respond to these stimuli, though it would be difficult to call it learning.
Their leaves, stems and branches  orientate themselves to the light, while their roots seek out minerals and water.
That all living creatures possess a capacity to learn is apparent from the way they find their way around an environment.
Even butterflies take note of being captured at a certain location and when subsequently released, avoid the area for some while after.
Creatures from bees, butterflies, scorpions and spiders, through fishes, birds, mammals and man exhibit territorial instincts, so they must be able to learn the extent of their territory.
Human trainers of all species appreciate the differing capacity of creatures to respond to training and sometimes to perform antics which they would never perform in the wild, though these are never completely outside their basic behavioural repertoire.
Learned perceptions and actions have to be within the overall confines of a creature's mind structure.
Lions may learn to jump through hoops or sea lions to clap their flippers while balancing a ball on their noses, but lions jump over obstacles in their home territory or laze around under a favourite tree, while sea lions are naturally dexterous, chasing fish with great skill.
But you never saw the king of beasts clap his forepaws nor balance a ball on his nose!
Even new language, new communication signals can be taught.
These may be auditory or of bodily gesture, but neither the response nor the signal will lie completely outside the creature's normal behavioural repertoire.
The trainer's body postures, hand movements and words, whistles or calls are perfectly understood by creatures which are not naturally born with a mind set which includes such words as ‘sit’ and ‘walkies’, or whistles and  halloos !
But among themselves they have signs and sounds which indicate the same activities.
The birds and squirrels in my garden come for food as soon as they hear my whistle, even though the food may not yet have been put out for them.
They come at the whistle, not the sight of food.
Pavlov demonstrated this many years ago.
Body language is important, too.
A calm stance breeds a sense of trust and security, while a threatening pose will make creatures run, just as a dog will cower or a cat will flee merely at the kind of look expressed upon your face, even in the absence of words.
A sharp, aggressive movement of head, hand or shoulders is understood by almost all creatures.
Creatures, therefore, are not disconnected from each other, though only fellow members of a species appear to possess the capacity for the fullest understanding of each other .
But appreciation of subtle energy fields and emanations, as well as visual, auditory, olfactory, gustatory, tactile and other sensations — all these can be a part of a creature's instinctive communication repertoire.
All living beings are linked at a mind level and all behaviour is an utterance, an ‘outer-ance’, an expression of the creature's inner being, just as it is with ourselves.
Such behaviour may be specifically intended as communication or it may be only the natural expression of the individual's mental content of the moment.
But the mind always expresses itself through the body, consciously or unconsciously, just as it does in humans.
A human mind dulled by its own self-absorption may fail to perceive this, but in stillness, this awareness automatically comes into our consciousness, without any effort of intellect or will.
When we begin to understand the nature of the workings of our own minds, then we come to understand the manner of the mind's activity in all other creatures and, indeed, throughout creation, as the primary pattern-maker, the source of all the blueprints, the weaver of the web of energy relationships, the essential formative principle running across the pure face of consciousness.
ADOLESCENCE
Adolescence seems to be as much a matter of mental learning and maturation, as of physical growth.
In man this is very clear, for although a child may be sexually mature and fully grown quite early on in his or her teens, they are still a long way from any degree of emotional maturity.
The time of youth in all creatures is a time for exercising and learning to use the mental as well as physical apparatus with which they have been born, of trying out their preprogrammed patterns.
The basic mind structure will always be there, but even instinctive patterns require training.
The mental, as well as physical, muscles must be exercised.
A bird is born with an ability to fly, yet the mother bird will urge her offspring to take that first flight, calling to them from a nearby branch.
Or a cat will bring home a live mouse to teach her kittens how to catch it.
The kittens know instinctively what to do, they just have to learn exactly how to do it skilfully.
Similarly, a mother cheetah on the African plains will let its young ‘play’ with a gazelle.
Or a human parent will take delight in teaching their child to walk and talk and do so many things.
Play is always geared towards learning, towards exercising the subtle and physical structures.
This is why we should choose toys for our children with some considerable forethought.
One should note, however, that although a mother bird may encourage her chicks to fly by calling to them from a branch some distance away, holding some tasty morsel in her beak as an inducement, all the same, she is not actually teaching them to fly.
She is only encouraging them to use an instinctive faculty they already possess, to develop the already existent, mental and physical muscles.
Perhaps it is this which is so charming in the actions and behaviour of the infants of all species: the freshness and the tentativeness with which the life within explores its new mental and physical apparatus.
The unthinking brashness of the adult expert is altogether lacking in the youngster and our nurturing and helpful instincts are unconsciously aroused, wanting to help the recent arrival become familiar with its new physical overcoat, gently coaxing it into utilizing its full capabilities, like the mother bird calling from the twig.
A creature, therefore, can be taught nothing for which the inner, instinctive potential is not already present as a latent pattern in mind and muscle.
It seems to be a facet of nature that the lower a creature is on the scale of consciousness, the less there is for it to learn, and the more slavishly bound it is to its instincts.
Insects, for example, do not teach their offspring, though wherever there is the ability to move about, there is still a capacity for learning details of the immediate environment.
Bees, for instance, have an elaborate communication ritual — the famous ‘waggle dance’— indicating the exact direction in which nectar is to be found.
But this instinctive patterning is not taught.
No bee teaches another bee how to understand and communicate their language.
They are born with the ability: instinctively and automatically it is a part of their subtle mind structure.
Adolescence in bees may include some learning, though no one but experience appears to do the tutoring.
Generally speaking, the higher the creature is on the scale of consciousness, then the longer is its period of adolescence, and the more is it reliant upon its parents, because the greater is the scope for learning.
There may be some slight variations due to environmental circumstances or the physical size of the creature, but as a general principle, this is true.
Play is also an expression of what is described rather dryly by behaviourists as social bonding.
It means life-to-life, mind-to-mind contact, enhancement of well-being, affirmation of being alive and contending with the vicissitudes of existing in this world.
Among humans, social bonding includes everything from nodding, winking  and shaking hands, to having a good cuddle.
It also encompasses fashions of clothes and social custom.
Other creatures, according to their own instinctive mind structure, have similar social contacts.
It is all a part of life relating to life, mind relating to mind.
Considering the deeper aspects of being alive, one notices, too, that the higher the consciousness, then the greater is the capacity for both love and the awareness of other creatures as living entities.
This arises naturally, because ultimately consciousness in its highest essence is also Love.
So Love and Life are the same thing.
Therefore, the less this inner consciousness or Life Force is hemmed in by an instinctive mind structure, then the greater is the capacity for caring feeling and the more an offspring is capable of learning.
The capacity for learning, the need for tuition and the mental ability of the parents to care are thus all automatically manifested in synchrony.
A beautiful integration within nature's processes, as always.
ANIMAL LANGUAGE AND MIND CONFIGURATIONS
Just as we find animal perception hard to imagine because we have a different mind structure to other creatures, so too do we have difficulty understanding their language.
We do not have the same pre-programmed instincts and mind patterns, the same tattvic constitution, and we thus find it difficult to know exactly what is being communicated.
Some communications are obvious by their very nature or by the response which they elicit — the alarm calls of some creatures which other species automatically recognize, for instance.
Or the barking of an excited dog, the purring of a cat, the bellow of an angry bull, the insistent buzzing of a hive of bees when disturbed.
These communications many creatures can understand in broad outline.
The alarm call of the blackbird or the chattering hiss of the squirrel when a cat walks into my garden tell all and sundry that danger stalks near at hand.
And all creatures who hear it in time take their own appropriate, evasive action.
But we do not readily understand the subtle nuances of meaning and expression which members of the same species can communicate to each other.
Man understands his kind of language.
Whatever the language is, you will find names or nouns for objects, verbs for events, adjectives for qualifications and adverbs for linking these together coherently.
All human languages have these.
Even if we cannot understand the words of a foreign language, at least our minds are all human  such that communication of meaning —human meaning — can take place.
Meaning is thus prior to words and language, it lies within the mind.
Even without verballanguage, we can convey meaning.
But we do not understand the nuances of bird, animal, insect or other creatures, communication, because we do not possess their inward experience of mental meaning.
That is a natural part of being that particular creature, of being surrounded by that particular configuration of mental and tattvic apparatus.
Language, whether verbal, bodily or of any other kind, essentially implies the conveyance of this meaning .
When we speak to dogs, horses, dolphins, chimpanzees or to any other creature, we unconsciously employ gesture, body posture, facial expression, tone of voice, and so on.
All these are a part of the conveyance of meaning.
Among humans, even when we do not understand the words, the manner of expression still tells us a great deal of what is being communicated, especially at a basic level of feeling, emotion and facts of physical life.
It is easy to tell if someone is angry or friendly towards us, even if we do not understand their language.
Words are only essential to put across more abstract concepts and intellectual ideas.
Similarly with communication between different species.
We may not possess the same mind structure, the same subtle energy anatomy and function, but enough similarities are present for some sort of meaning to be conveyed.
Fear, affection, surprise, greetings, farewells, pain, gentleness, aggression — all these and many more are readily communicated.
Even ‘Come here’, ‘Go there’, ‘Sit’, ‘Walk’ and many other sounds made by humans can be linked by the training and learning process to actions and meanings quite familiar to the creature.
But our dog does not understand the word ‘sit’ in the way we do any more than we understand the nuances of his barking in the way that he does.
One could equally well train a dog to sit whenever we commanded, ‘Fly’.
It would make no difference to him.
This barrier becomes intensely noticeable when a member of one species needs urgently to communicate a matter of life or death to a member of another.
Many are the tales of dogs, horses, elephants, whales, dolphins and other creatures who have spontaneously helped man in times of his distress or danger.
Or who have gone to other humans to get help either for their own kind or for others with whom they are associated, human or otherwise.
This all implies a degree of creative intelligence and mind function which we largely overlook.
But then many humans are largely  unaware of their ownmind, let alone that of others.
Certainly it is uncommon for human perception to stretch to an appraisal of the individual character of a dog, a sparrow, a fish, an insect, a plant or an amoeba.
So, like other aspects of behaviour, while the basic capacity for its own particular language is built into the mind structure with which a creature is born, a certain degree of learning ability is inherently possessed by all living creatures.
The more complete the tattvic configuration, then the greater the capacity for learning.
But the essential mental parameters are already set, whether human or otherwise.
The capacity to learn and respond is an essential aspect of life's natural expression.
Life is drawn to life automatically.
The God without seeks the God within, for He is within everything.
Inwardly, all creatures are drops from the same Ocean.
So the jungle creatures may need to learn from experience that the alarm call of the langur and the chital hind denote the presence of a leopard, while the sparrows and small birds in my garden learn from experience that the alarm call of the blackbird indicates the proximity of a prowling pussy.
Birds even have local accents overlain on the basic language patterns with which they are born.
Such birds as starlings, which mimic many sounds from their environments, have been heard sounding off like factory sirens, ice-cream van signals or even police cars in a hurry.
In the English Lake District I have heard them mimicking the curlew, a bird not found in the Cambridge area.
Descartes, who had a vigorously mechanical view about most things, believing the soul to be some largely discarnate entity entirely disassociated from the processes of living, saw animals through that same mind-filter.
He insisted that animals were entirely mechanistic, that their behaviour was entirely stimulus-response based, with no space for any cognitive process.
For Descartes, only humans had souls, animals and other creatures did not.
Darwin, on the other hand felt that if bodies could evolve from one form to the other, therefore the mind could as well, though he freely admitted that he had no ideas concerning the essential nature of mind itself, nor even of life.
These days, there is little doubt that creatures possess a mind structure.
Many conventional behaviourists readily concur with the idea.
The disagreement arises over whether the mind is the product of molecules and electricity or whether it is altogether of a more subtle nature.
A classic example of cognitive processes is that of animal memory and the demonstration of subsequent decisions based thereon.
The  experiment takes many forms, but one of the commonest is to show the animal subject a set of photographs — of trees, of a river, lakes, grassland and so on.
The subject is then shown another set of photos in which some are identical to ones already shown, while others are not.
In addition, the subject is provided with a ‘yes’ button to press if the photo is identical, and is rewarded with a morsel of food if the correct answer is given.
Creatures from pigeons to monkeys have shown themselves capable of performing this task successfully.
Interestingly, the larger the set of photos, then the longer the ‘thinking’ time taken for the animal's response.
Sometimes, as long as a minute passes before the ‘yes’ button is depressed by beak or paw.
But this kind of behaviour is readily observable in all wild and domestic creatures, who soon learn their way around their own territory, as well as learningthe forms, faces, voices, scents and much more which identify their human and other companions.
The squirrels and birds in my garden certainly know me individually.
They will come to the window when they see me to request food — but not to those of my friends who are unknown to them.
Any farmer or keeper of animals has observed this kind of behaviour.
In fact, a good friend of mine, Ruth Dayan, once studied a particular species of ant in the Israeli desert.
This ant spits painful substances at the eyes of any potential trespasser on to its territory, but through slow acclimatization to her presence, the community she studied learnt to accept her presence without fear and therefore without attack.
For many weeks she watched and noted their social behaviour without being spat at.
Whether it was a scent, or a visual or some other aspect of sensory perception.
the ants came to know that the presence of this particular human was not harmful.
Other humans who visited the site, however, were promptly attacked in the time-honoured fashion.
And when Ruth transferred her quiet and gentle attention to another community some distance away, she was herself immediately attacked.
A new process of acclimatization was again required.
This acclimatization, in one form or another, takes place when any living creatures meet.
Almost all creatures have social and courtship rituals which affirm the nature of their personal association with each other, life to life and mind to mind.
Humans shake hands, dogs smell each other, butterflies perform aerial gyrations together and so on .
What is different about human communication is the use of noises as symbols that represent a quite unassociated meaning.
We call them words.
The noises ‘car’, ‘dog’, ‘house’ bear no resemblance to the  item in question, neither do the noises ‘anger’, ‘fear’, ‘contentment’or, meekness' bear any resemblance to the emotional states they are intended to convey.
Even more abstract ideas and concepts such as‘democracy’ seem to be part of a thought and communication process unique only to humans.
For while our dog soon learns to recognize his, owner, s, car or house, and certainly experiences fear and contentment, it seems unlikely that he could understand the meaning of democracy; though he certainly reacts to unjust treatment!
Human language is a faculty bestowed by the formative inner field of akash.
Our language arises automatically from our ability to perceive our place in a world of time and space and — most importantly — to consider the implications of particular actions, that is, the faculties of foresight and discrimination.
Verbs involve an appreciation of time; nouns of objects in space, or of mental concepts and experiences; adjectives of qualities between which we can discriminate; adverbs of associations in time, space and quality.
Examine the content and structure of any sentence in this or any other book and you will observe this same pattern.
But without man's akashic linkage he would not have the instinctive perception of cosmic order enabling such mental processes to exist.
The one comes automatically with the other.
No other creature possesses this akashic integration at a mind level and thus no other creature has anything barely resembling our human kind of language structure.
They simply lack the subtle energy fields or mental configuration in which such an appreciation of physical reality can arise.
Even the work of such pioneers as Sue Savage-Rumbaugh, teaching chimpanzees to recognize lexigrams(graphic symbols), simply underlines the fact that animals can only learn associations with particular sensory stimuli that mesh with their already existing mental structure.
So learning that a particular symbol on a computer keyboard, situated in a particular room, delivers a banana from a feeder, is really the same kind of mental activity as recognizing the shape of a banana plant in a forest and remembering where to find it againthe next day.
But learning does, of course, imply memory and mental activity.
All creatures have a mind, as we have said.
Thus, the pressing of a large computer-linked key identified by a pattern that the chimpanzee has been trained to associate with the availability of bananas, is no more surprising than its ability to associate the presence of bananas with the shape of a banana plant on which the bananas are hidden from view.
Banana plants still indicate the presence of bananas even if the actual fruits are  out of sight.
And no doubt, the shape of a banana is linked in a chimp's mind with its pleasurable flavour, as it is with ourselves.
Our human tendency is to equate the action of the chimpanzee with the human kind of mental process which would lead to our pressing certain keys.
Such anthropomorphism would appear to be unjustified, but it is certainly true that association is most definitely a mental process, whether we are dealing with insects, crocodiles, birds, beasts or humans.
And the extent of these associative and other processes increases as we ascend the scale of consciousness.
Man with his akashic element is the only species capable of perceiving the entire picture, such that, in mystic consciousness, he can even perceive the One in everything.
Like the chimpanzees, the ability of bluetits to learn the complex series of manoeuvres required to release a peanut from a special trick-feeder is no more difficult than many of the activities it learns during the course of its life, seeking out insects and seeds from the most intricate of places, getting itself and its beak into just the right position to extract the desired morsel.
And no puzzle of human design can match the complexity and ingenuity required to build a nest — weaving the moss, twigs, pieces of hair and even lengths of wool and man-made fibres, collected in a myriad shapes and lengths, into a cosy den that no human could ever imitate.
Indeed, rather than attempting to teach a chimpanzee to communicate like a human, it might have been considered easier to teach it to communicate like a dog.
But they can do neither, any more than humans can communicate like dogs or chimpanzees.
The inner mind is simply different in its essential configuration.
No chimpanzee or dolphin has been taught the language of a dog or a human, other than those communications which relate to the basic mental features already common to their minds — territory, comfort, hunger, thirst, sex and so on.
One could not teach a chimpanzee to grow bananas nor a dolphin to farm fish, for these are quite alien to its mind set and require the foresight, the ability to see and plan ahead, which only man possesses.
One might (perhaps) be able to  teach a dolphin to peel a banana, but only if it was incorporated into a sequence of actions required to achieve some goal considered meaningful to the mind of the dolphin — food, affection, play or whatever!
So really, this is no more wonderful than a dolphin learning its way around the complexities of its natural  marine environment so that it may find — and catch — the best shoals of fish.
Similarly, sea lions being naturally and instinctively dexterous may be taught to balance balls on their noses, respond to particular noises made by the audience or their trainer and even clap their flippers, but to them this is only a means of receiving food, affection, social contact and so on— all these being motives, goals and feelings they experience in the wild.
Again, none of the experiments in which chimpanzees have been raised, since infancy, entirely by humans has ever resulted in chimpanzees learning to speak like humans.
Neither their mind structure nor their allied vocal chords can accommodate it.
Interestingly, chimpanzees have been taught to communicate using some basic signs from American Sign Language — a language of gesture and facial expression, both used naturally by chimps living in the wild.
But even then, though it demonstrates the learning flexibility present in a chimpanzee's mind structure, no chimpanzee has ever communicated anything outside the natural instinctive content of its own mind.
this becomes clear when one studies the essential aspects of chimpanzee behaviour and communication, both in the wild as well as after familiarity with human ways.
When chimpanzees were ‘taught sentences’ such as‘Mary give Sarah apple’, using plastic symbols to represent each word, some animal behaviourists, as well as the popular media, always ready for a selling story, thought that a breakthrough had been achieved: that a chimpanzee had been taught to understand grammar — an intricate part of all human, conceptual thought processes, involving human perceptive abilities.
But more careful observation showed that the behaviour was simply an imitation of the trainer's actions, combined with an association of certain ‘symbols’ or shapes with particular things — nothing more than the association of the sight or shape of a banana plant with bananas, combined with a sequence of actions required to pluck the banana or to reach the location of the plant in the wild.
Teaching a creature to perform a particular sequence of actionssimilar to human behaviour does not imply that its mind is then working like that of humans.
The mental activity underlying the actions, still remains radically different.
As the Indian saying goes, ‘If a dog walks through a cotton field, he does not come out dressed in a suit.’
In summary, one can say that one cannot teach any creature to mentally belike any other, since we have no handle by which we may modify the essential mind structure of another creature.
It is  the same with humans.
If we want to understand another person we have to learn how to see things from their point of view.
If we insist that their mind patterns must match ours, then we are doomed to unhappiness and discord.
Similarly, if we force them to outwardly behave like us, ignoring the fact that their inner mind still sees things quite differently, then we are living in a fool's paradise.
But real understanding of the mind of another only comes when we have explored the inner, subtle energy structure of our own mind in deep meditation and mystic transport.
It is an experience , not an analysis .
In fact, were we able to modify the mind structure of another creature, we would find that we had ‘miraculously’ modified the body as well.
Though this is impossible to us as humans, nature does it all the time.
But it requires the death of the old body and the recreation of a new one out of the mind-seeds of the old subtle structure.
This is the law of reincarnation.
We get a new body, mind structure and destiny which exactly matches our mental impressions, desires and tendencies.
Nature is quite exact.
And so the creation continues.
It is nothing but a world of Mind.
Even among the members of a particular species, no two are alike in all respects.
Many, if not all, birds and animal individuals have distinct voices, just as we do.
If they are not a vocal species, or even if they are, their smell or other characteristics may also be different.
If you have ever stood on a sheep farmer's hillside, as I have done many times in the Western Highlands of Scotland, and listened to the sheep calling to (communicating with) each other, you will immediately notice how their intonations are all different, as indeed are their faces.
A mother penguin can find her very own youngster in a colony of several thousand, even after many days at sea, having left the young one to mill around on the ice with thousand of others which to us appear to be identical.
Similarly, gulls and probably all other birds have the mental ability to distinguish their own young, their mates, members of their social group and so on.
A wren sings a song with twenty or more distinct notes per second.
And these notes vary.
Clearly, it has a mind which can actually distinguish twenty notes per second while singing them, also hearing the nuances and variations in both its own songs as well as fellow members of its kind.
There is no point in singing a song indicating your personal territory if the songs of all your fellows sound the same!
If bees can communicate distances and directions, corrected for wind variations, by their waggle dance on the side of the honeycomb, then may not the birds and other creatures be communicating to  each other, in some considerable detail, those things relevant to theirpersonal realities?
Things which we do not have the mind structure and therefore the relevant sense of mental meaning, to understand?
Mostly, as humans, we communicate details of our day-to-day experiences to each other.
Gossip, plans, hopes, fears, problems, desires, and so on.
Even politics, philosophy and science come into the same category.
We talk about the world according to our human mind configuration.
So presumably, other creatures are simply talking and communicating about the world according to their particular mind configurations.
It is limited in comparison to our human potential, but it is nonetheless communication.
Other creatures, according to their own tattvic tapestry, will have communications to make to each other which reflect that inward condition.
So, if man has a mind and consciousness, then so do all living creatures.
The inability to enter into an understanding with them is due to our limitations, our lack of perception as to what we are and what this ‘world’ really is.
THE SONGS OF THE HUMPBACK WHALE
The songs — for such they may truly be called — of the Humpback whale have intrigued and fascinated man for many years.
Such songs, as might be expected, contain characteristics identifying the individual.
there is also considerable repetition of themes.
Each song consists of a constant number of these themes, each theme being made up of a number of phrases.
No theme is ever omitted, but one of the individually distinctive aspects of the song is the number of times that a particular phrase is repeated.
Such phrases may be repeated many times with slight variations in each repetition, so that the phrase at the end of the sequence is quite different to that at its beginning.
Variations on a phrase or a theme are common elements of our human musical compositions.
But what are the Humpbacks saying to each other across perhaps hundreds of miles of ocean?
Humpbacks are thought to be mostly solitary creatures, though such songs indicate that close physical proximity is by no means necessary for social contact of a vocal nature.
Certainly it must help them locate a mate and induce a feeling of social togetherness.
But almost all creatures communicate with their own kind, often — especially among the higher animals — in sheer play and frolic.
And  may that play also include their song, like the playful growls and snarls of puppies and kittens, or even of their parents?
And are some Humpbacks considered better songsters than others?
Are some renowned amongst their fellows for the quality of their underwater ballads and harmonies?
Are they even requested, by suitable cetacean encouragement, to ‘Play it again, Sam’, as an item of pleasurable entertainment for the Humpback population?
After all, a dog or a cat will come for the rub and tickle it so obviously enjoys.
So do Humpbacks have ways of expressing the same request for the repetition of a pleasurable sonic experience?
We may never know.
INSTINCT AND LEARNING
Being equipped with some kind of understanding as to how other creatures are put together gives us an excellent handle for comprehending how and why they behave as they do.
Mind works by habit.
Once established, even man finds it difficult to change his trend of mind, even if he is aware that it is leading to his downfall.
Instinct is simply a pre-programmed mental habit, setting up the pattern for the behaviour of a creature.
It comes along with taking birth into a particular bodily form.
A chick knows how to break out of its egg.
A young herring gull taps its mother's beak to trigger her into regurgitating its next meal.
The young of many species take cover as soon as an alarm call is given.
They instinctively understand the call and know, too, how and where to take cover: some below ground, some by crouching low and mimicking the earth or leaves, others flee to mother's wing or pouch, baby crocodiles take cover in the gentle jaws of mother's mouth.
This behaviour is not learned, neither is its pattern to be found in the DNA.
Despite the breeding of dogs into such a variety of shapes and sizes that an alien visitor to our planet would be forgiven for thinking them all to be different species, yet these miscellaneous varieties all exhibit the same essential behavioural tendencies as their wolf ancestors.
Puppies will herd hens in a farmyard, just as a pack of wolves will encircle an ailing prey.
Licking your companions is a form of social bonding, practised by many wolves and wild dogs, not only by our domesticated dogs.
Barking, whining, snarling and whimpering are all forms of communication practised by Fido's wild counterparts.
Tail-wagging, rolling on their back and exposing their tender neck, the tail-between-the-legs routine, the self-confident bound and posturing of the top dog — all these and many similar body gestures of greeting, submission and dominance are common to many related canine species, whether wolf, hyena, dog or jackal.
Characteristics may be refined by breeding to some relatively small degree, but such behaviour can never be fundamentally altered, any more than a dog can be bred into a cat, or a pigeon into a parrot.
There is a hidden subtle dimension to all creatures that makes them what they are, possessing the basic behavioural characteristics of their species.
Man may learn language and perform many other normal human functions, but the basic abilities to be able to talk, to be a human, these come gratis.
They are our human instincts, parts of the beings we are.
Nobody teaches a spider how to weave its web, a caterpillar how to build a cocoon, or a bird how to find the right building materials and construct its nest.
Nobody teaches a child the actual mechanics of producing word sounds or how to use his mind to think or experience emotions.
These are all parts of deeply habituated mind structures, pre-patterned and pre-programmed, parts of the formative field which underlie the bodies and the instinctive characteristics of all living creatures.
Even man, when living through habituated mental patterns, away from his true princely abode at the eye centre, behaves uncontrollably and predictably.
The thief remains a thief unless he can change his innermost mental habits.
Politicians rarely change sides unless their instinct is purely one of self-preservation, human personalities remain predictably the same.
Criticism and cajolery are of little help in changing the basic trends of an individual's psyche.
A robin will attack a bundle of red feathers, a socialist politician will verbally attack a right-wing conservative, a spider will attempt to tie up a vibrating tuning fork if the tip is placed upon its web.
All are indicative of habituated mind energies.
The less the intelligence of a creature, the more instinctive are the behavioural patterns programmed into it and the less it possesses the capacity to learn from experience.
The greater the linkage of the subtle tattwas into the mind energies of the creature, then the greater its intelligence and the more complete its potential for awareness.
With the patterns within responsible for generating the patterns without, we can clearly perceive the process by which each creature is a whole.
The subtle energies comprising the instinctive mental patterns automatically produce a body and sense organs to match.
They become part and parcel of each other.
The subtle, instinctive mind pattern of an insect may be looking for the particular infrared, pheromone emission which signifies the presence of his lady-love.
His antennae are tuned to receive just that very emission.
It is a pattern-matching exercise.
Mentally or instinctively he is looking for the pattern and his antennae are an outward expression of that inward instinct.
Or he may be looking for a particular foodplant, or flower for nectar, searching for a special smell or a particular electromagnetic emission.
Or he could be following a highway of pheromonal signals laid down by fellow members of his species — a trail leading to food, maybe.
Similarly, a migrating bird could be seeking a particular patterning of the stars or an instinctive orientation to the Earth's magnetic field.
But nowhere in the genes does it say, ‘Fly south, my friend, when the evenings draw in.’
Yet there may be genetic information encoded on the construction of the particular physical sense and motor organs required to perform the deed.
The DNA, the genes, the cellular centre of biochemical ‘intelligence’ and focus, is only a part of the outworking of the process from within to without, of how the subtle energy blueprints become the outer forms with which we are familiar.
SOME MORE INTRIGUING FACTS ABOUT WHALES
Even relative to their body size, cetaceans possess a large cerebral cortex.
This is the outer area of the brain usually associated with the elaboration and co-ordination of sensory and motor function at the physical level and reflecting the content and structure of the more subtle sensory and motor indriyas within the mind of the creature.
The mind functions associated with intelligence (memory, emotion, figuring things out and so on)— instinctive or otherwise — are more central to the life or existence of any creature while the sensory and motor functions are more peripheral.
One does, for example, still have a sense of being, identity, thought, emotion, intellect and memory even in the absence of all sensory input or motor activity.
But in the absence of the central sense of being — that is, in unconsciousness — the sensory and motor functions are quite inactive, even if the sense organs are still conveying messages to the brain.
And, interestingly, this arrangement is reflected in the cerebral cortex being peripheral to the more inward mid-brain, the physical focus of mind and consciousness.
I discussed this phenomenon more fully in The Web of Life .
Whales and dolphins are largely carnivorous, but feed mostly on much smaller creatures — fish, lobsters, krill, plankton and so on, depending upon the species and where they happen to be in the world's oceans.
The Killer whale is an exception, preying on seals, sea-lions and some of the smaller cetaceans — porpoises and dolphins, for example.
Killer whales evidently evince feelings of considerable fear in these creatures for even the usually timid Grey seal has been known to jump right out of the sea, joining a man upon a rock, when Killer whales were about.
Like many carnivores, Killers seem to be adaptable, taking whatever prey is available and are not averse to salmon if they find them massing in an estuary prior to spawning.
Even penguins and other sea birds can be included in the menu.
Since seals, dolphins and porpoises can cause severe damage to fishermen's nets in addition to scaring away the fish, the fishing industry have recently taken to playing underwater recordings of the Killer whale near salmon and pilchard nets to keep away such marauders.
This, however, may result in the seals coming to regard the call of the Killer whale as a dinner gong — with potentially fatal consequences.
But in our present context, it raises the question as to whether the call of the Killer whaler is recognized instinctively by a new-born seal or porpoise or whether it is learnt during adolescence, while in the company of parents.
The individual sounds of other species may not be so readily recognized purely from instinct, though it seems highly likely that the unborn infant, while still in the mother's womb, especially in its latter days, would be able to hear such external sounds and be aware of its mother's response.
Learning may thus begin even before birth.
The general framework of a creature's emotional repertoire is instinctive, not acquired, though the external triggers to emotion may be learnt.
So it seems likely that just as a youngster does not need to learn to be afraid or to feel secure, they also respond instinctively from birth to the underlying mood of the call — like the predatory roar of a lion, the angry bellow of an enraged bull, the contented moo of a grazing cow or the eminently social  bleatings of sheep, keeping the flock together.
Since the call of the Killer whale is no doubt heavily impregnated with its hungry mental intention, these would be understood instinctively and automatically by the young seal or porpoise, since those feelings are also a part of their mind structure.
This would be just like we ourselves can tell when a dog, or any other animal, is feeling in a dangerous mood without understanding the  greater detail of their language.
Such ‘greater detail’ would include things like recognitionof the individual dog by its own voice, the depth of its excitement and so on, just as it would with ourselves.
Feeding behaviour among cetaceans is also of some fascination and there is clearly social co-operation between members of the same species, especially among Killer whales, which tend to hunt in packs, as do lions or wolves, using particular strategies for catching their prey.
This, again, is a mixture of instinct and learning.
Humpback whales have even been seen to weave a snare of air-bubbles — a bubble net.
The Humpback, swimming a little way below the surface, emits a fine trace of bubbles from its blow-hole as it describes a circle or a figure of eight around a shoal of fish.
A glistening screen of these fine bubbles, rising up through the water towards the surface, forms a vertical and enclosing ‘net’ around the fish, like an enormous tube, and the fish being disturbed by it, gather towards its centre.
Moving underneath them, the whale then rises, gulping them down in one leviathan mouthful.
BUILDING A HOME
Have you ever really examined the amazingly intricate construction of a bird's nest?
Each species builds in an individually identifiable fashion.
Some build out of moss and leaves, some weave a hanging basket of grasses and twigs, others play the part of the potter, mixing mud and water to build beneath the eaves of our homes.
Others line their nests with mud, with moss, with leaves, with feathers.
Some dig burrows in sandy banks, others hollow out holes in trees.
Some lay eggs among the stones, so camouflaged you would mistake them for the rocks themselves.
Yet no one teaches these birds how to find their building materials, how to prepare them, how to weave them.
No creature ever deviates from its instinctive mental programming.
The swallow always builds in mud, British song-thrushes always mud-line their nests, the weaver-bird never experiments with alternatives to hanging baskets.
Examining so intricate a nest one wonders how such a thing could be possible.
How can the creature be so clever as to weave with beak and feet alone a tapestry no human fingers, however deft, could ever hope to imitate?
Do we really believe that such an instinct is to be found encoded only into molecular and electromagnetic patterns within the brain?
That such behaviour is somehow encoded into DNA?
A home, for any creature, is a place to live, to shelter, protected from at least some of the vicissitudes of existing in this world.
Man is not alone in his architectural abilities.
In fact his skills are far surpassed in many ways by his lesser cousins.
Creatures from single-celled amoebae, spiders, insects, birds and mammals all build homes or shelters for themselves, often of extremely complex design.
There are amoebae which gather sandgrains of particular sizes — a process clearly requiring a selection procedure, an instinctive ability to make decisions— using them as a protective outer layer.
Some secrete their own granules.
Either way, when seen through an electron microscope, the result is often one of startling and beautiful variety in miniature.
Some species of these single-celled creatures even select and collect tiny grains of sand which, rather than being used in the ‘parent's’ outer shell are collected together internally and passed on to the ‘offspring’when the single-celled organism divides.
There they are immediately employed by the ‘youngster’ in the formation of its new shell.
Even amoebae make provision for their young.
Every creature builds by instinct.
Some learning, some development of skills, may be present, especially among higher animals, but the basic and intrinsic format is always present, instinctively, as a part of the basic mind structure or instinct of the creature.
Even man's dwellings — whether palaces, thatched mud cottages or high-rise blocks of concrete flats are only variations upon the human theme of a ground-based structure possessed of walls and a roof.
We do not build like other creatures, but always like humans.
We have human instincts, not those of other creatures.
The social communities and nests of bees and termites, the aquatic homes of sand grains and sticks built by caddis fly larvae, the webs and traps of spiders, the nests of some fishes, the huge pits over three feet deep and six feet in diameter of the green sea turtle, the ramifying burrows and nesting chambers of wood mice, the holes and domestic quarters of foxes, badgers, moles and rabbits, the amazing engineering feats of the dam and lodge-building beaver — all these and many more tell of an inner instinctive pattern of mental motivation lying beyond the realm of brain cells alone.
When scientists perform experiments which demonstrate that brain damage causes disruption to animal behaviour patterns, this does not indicate that the source of instinctive behaviour lies in the brain.
It only shows that the brain is implicated in the process by which the inner mind structure in the subtle energy fields seeks outward expression.
If we unplug a TV set from the mains electricity, it ceases to function.
But I cannot then say that the real source of electricity is  the socket upon the wall.
A detailed analysis of wall sockets will not reveal the true nature of the electron nor the source of the electrical power.
In fact, however far back I trace the source in a horizontal manner, I never reach an ultimate answer.
Electricity does not arise from the wall socket, nor even from the power station.
No power station has ever created an electron, the source of our domestic electricity.
Even physics does not understand the nature of an electron and electrical charge.
Though our modern technology and civilization is based largely upon our ability to harness the electron, conventional physics still has no real perception of what it is we have got our hands on.
Similarly, a perception that the brain is involved in the outworking of mental processes does not mean that the mind arises from the physical brain.
There is a subtle  hierarchy of inward energies.
The fact that LSD induces spiders to build crazy webs only means that their brain is involved in the outworking of instinctive mind patterns — not that instinct is lodged in the brain itself.
There is no end to the recounting of social ritual, communications, behavioural patterns, sensory perception and motor activity, to be found among the creatures of this physical world, human or otherwise.
Books have been written on just one aspect of one creature and yet have never reached the end of the story.
MYSTERIES OF MIGRATION
Far up in the northern reaches of Canada roam vast herds of caribou, a deer which we in Europe call the reindeer.
Yet, ‘No-one knows the ways of the wind and the Caribou,’ runs the ancient Inuit (Canadian Eskimo) proverb.
Signalled by changes in the weather, great herds of these deer follow ancestral migration routes to sheltered valleys and more ample food supplies.
The routes have been trodden by generation after generation of their kind, for longer than man can remember, with only the slightest variations.
But what instinct, what subtle pattern of mental energy, drives the deer to seek refuge in this way from the advancing winter?
How did the caribou first find their winter refuge?
How is the knowledge transmitted from generation to generation?
One could suggest that there is a learning of the young from the old, that they follow scent markers from a previous year.
Maybe they do, but how was the route first discovered?
How did the first deer know just where to go?
Among birds, the mystery of migration is deepened even further, for the young swallows, born one summer in Europe, fly home to Africa before their parents.
The pattern they follow is instinctive and also specifically geographical.
How can such geographical behaviour be transmitted through molecules of DNA?
DNA is only a partof the total patterning process of a creature, not its only formative mould.
What, after all, patterns the DNA?
For creation is a continuousprocess, a proliferation of being, from within-out.
Some of these caribou have in recent years suffered greatly, at human hands.
In search of hydroelectric power, man has dammed one of the great rivers of northern Canada, flooding the area above the dam, creating swollen rivers where once were fords, used by the migrating herds.
But the caribou knew nothing of man's activities and following the ancient trail they found their way barred.
Clear confusion reigned in their instinctive minds, and while they dithered on the banks, the water rose behind them, cutting off retreat.
Thousands of caribou perished in just the first year of this dam.
Or, consider the lemming, that famous little vole-like rodent and — in particular— the Scandinavian variety.
When their numbers reach a peak, like bees in a hive, they decide to migrate to better pastures.
Many do so successfully, along ancient trails, a knowledge of which is found only in the instinctive mind level of the lemmings themselves.
But some, following one of these ancestral pathways, find that the land stops, unexpectedly.
They find themselves upon a cliff-top.
Like the caribou, they cast about, this way and that, clearly in confusion.
Their mind patterns do not contain a programme to deal with cliffs where once was a continuation of solid land.
After a while, the instinctive urge too strong to withstand, they cast themselves off the cliff into the sea below.
That is no great thing, for the lemmings can swim.
Then off they go, into the wide sea, following the instinctive beacon which tells them to travel in that direction.
In ages past, the land must have been continuous, or at least the sea passage but a short one.
Now there is nothing but the great ocean.
So they perish.
It is not a mass suicide as was previously and naively thought, but a migratory instinct which includes a specific geographical map.
Then there are the ‘freshwater’ eels, who spend most of their life in the rivers of western Europe.
But they are not born there.
Each year, eel larvae, about three inches in length, appear in the salty seas off the European coast.
Here they undergo a most remarkable transformation, a metamorphosis into young, cylindrical elvers which seek out the fresh waters of the rivers and streams.
Slithering through  damp meadows at night, wriggling over rocks and up waterfalls, even finding their way into mountain streams, ten thousand feet up in the Alps — in these resting spots, they settle down and live for many years.
But they do not breed.
For they did not start their life here and their ancient breeding grounds are far away.
The larvae were hatched three thousand miles away in the Sargasso Sea, lying in the Atlantic between the West Indies and the Azores, containing a superabundance of seaweed of the genus,Sargassum.
But their parents were not of European origin.
They come, it is thought, from America.
There, in the spring, they lay their eggs at a great depth and the minute larvae float up to the more surface waters with the onset of summer.
Here, they are taken by the ocean currents into the Gulf Stream, in which three years pass as they slowly drift towards Europe and make their homes in the rivers, lakes and pools, far distant from their place of birth.
But even here the story does not end, for after fifteen or twenty years, the urge to breed and migrate once again comes upon them and down to the river mouths they proceed, slithering over wet meadows by night until they reach the greater river, lying up by day in damp holes, enough water remaining in their gills to enable them to breath.
And when this urge to migrate and breed comes upon them, their bodies undergo some considerable changes.
Putting on weight as fat deposits — food and fuel for the long journey ahead — their entire bodies become covered with mucus in preparation for the miles of slithering travel.
On reaching the ocean, they disappear.
Marked eels from Europe never reach the Sargasso sea, only their counterparts who had taken a shorter journey to the American mainland.
On entering the sea, their anuses close up, rendering them unable to feed, requiring that they live entirely off their own fatty deposits.
But these resources are not sufficient for them to reach their migratory goal and it is assumed that they die before the journey is complete.
There is little doubt that breeding is their intent as they head out to sea, for their gonads have become fully developed.
But what becomes of them is a mystery, for none has ever been found, even in deep Atlantic.
On the face of it, it would seem that the eels could breed in many alternative places, well within their reach.
But the migratory instinct and the geographical pattern seems so deeply etched into their inward mental fabric that their pre-programmed habit rules the day.
Maybe, like the lemmings, the pattern dates back to an era when their goal was closer and the swim was not so long.
The Sargasso Sea is also said to have been the site of the ancient lost island of Atlantis where the eels could have once again found fresh water and been able to feed after spawning in the nearby sea.
For now it seems that even the eels from America spawn, and then die, in the Sargasso Sea.
But, like the lemmings, how does such a geographical knowledge become an inherited ancestral heritage?
And then — as the aeons pass and the continents, oceans, mountain ranges and terrain all drift — why are not so many more migratory creatures found to be wildly adrift in their navigation?
The problem is easily stated: the instinctive mental fabric of a creature is related in specific detail to its environment.
No creature learns its innate skills.
The swallow building nests of mud, the archer fish shooting down flies by spitting water distances of up to fifteen feet —every creature, without exception, has such intriguing inborn capabilities, if we study them.
And just as modern science has no answer to the riddles of human brain and mind function, so too is there no satisfactory answer to the way in which a creature's brain, body and instinct are put together.
Biological science cannot tell us of the mind of a creature any more than it can understand the nature and functioning of our human minds.
Behaviour and DNA are uncomfortable partners, for mind functions cannot be so readily consigned to a molecular coding.
This is riddle enough.
But many migratory creatures have such precise geographical instincts that one wonders just how so detailed a knowledge of local terrain can be transmitted from one generation to another without the involvement of any learning process.
Wafting vague answers about DNA are totally inadequate in the face of such mysteries.
Are we saying that route maps can be encoded into the DNA of just one germ cell?
How?
DNA structure and mental abilities are two radically different things.
Mind is not to be found in molecules any more than the works of Shakespeare were to be found in his genes.
The only conceivable answer is that there is more to life than molecules; that behind the sensory level of experience, we are dealing with a complex and dynamic tapestry of Mind energy.
And that within that Mind — of which all individual minds are a part — there are ‘laws’, processes and relationships, the ramifications of which we have barely glimpsed.
Outwardly, we see only the effects, the image on the screen, of this vast sea of Mind.
The patterns and rhythms of the sensory realm  are only reflections of more fundamental attributes of Mind.
Even the cycles of this world are also of the greater Mind.
If therefore, there were cycles within the greater Mind itself, geared towards a regulation and administration of life upon our planet, then we can begin to see how enigmas such as apparent geographical inheritance can be understood.
And how, as the continents and oceans shift and slide, so too are creaturely minds and instincts automatically adapted, for they are all linked to that same sea of shifting Mind.
So could there be, in the Mind itself, an autumn when old habits are shed and a springtime when old growth is renewed and new shoots flourish?
Just as we have the ebb and flow of seasons, each with its own appointed purpose; just as the rest of night follows the activity of day, so too could there be vast seasons of the Mind, spanning aeons, which hold the world in balance, removing dead wood, and vitalizing and renewing harmony between all forms?
This is an interesting subject, tackled more fully in Natural Creation …
Or Natural Selection?, but is introduced in the next short chapter where we take a brief diversion to present something of the vast integrated cycles by which life is maintained upon our planet.
CYCLES AND SEASONS
NATURAL CYCLES
Time is a window through which we spy the world, And being engrossed in our present moments, we fail to grasp the significance of the time behind and the time ahead.
We live in the moment and the greater cycles of nature span periods too vast for us to contemplate.
Yet they are as important to life here as night and day, as winter and summer, as birth and death.
But how do we get some feel for spans of time stretching into millions of years?
It is difficult enough to envisage our own advent and demise.
If time were as a looped conveyor belt, endlessly revolving, with past, present and future all existing simultaneously, our constrained human view would be of just one thin sliver across this belt.
How then could we ever understand the nature and functioning of the whole belt?
The narrow view is that of our individual human mind.
But the greater Mind is the creator of time and to reach the level of the Universal Mind within oneself is to view the whole conveyor belt, turning simultaneously.
That is a far off mystic goal, perhaps, but let us at least attempt to stretch our minds, looking briefly at just a few of these cycles, and of the  indispensable parts they have to play in the maintenance of planetary life.
Mystics of past and present have written that there are seasons, at the physical level, in the manifested power of the Life Force, the Creative Word.
Just as springtime possesses a vibrancy of fresh life unsurpassed by any other season, just so — say the seers — is there an ebb and flow of the Life Force, but spread out over vast aeons of time.
On a time-scale which may not coincide exactly with our present scientific calculations of geological time, they say that the cycle  commences with a period of 1.7 million years when the power of the Life Force is immeasurably stronger and more evident in physical affairs than it is today.
The harmony is such that man is even said to live, in a much etherealized condition, for 100,000 years.
In the Sanskrit Puranas , this age is called the Sat yuga where ‘Sat, means ‘truth’ and ‘yuga’has the same root as our word ‘age’.
It is thus the age of truth, the age when life is clearly seen for what it is and man knows his role in the totality of things.
Opinion is replaced by experience and direct perception.
This may, at first sight, seem like too much to swallow, though even the Greeks and Romans of the classical era also entertained such ideas, derived from their own mystics.
But the power of this strong life-giving vibration is said to wane slowly over a 4.32 million year period, until man even forgets that he is really alive and conscious.
It is through this phase that we are currently passing.
Modern scientific man thinks that he is no more than a chance arrangement of dust and water, of molecules — though he may acknowledge that the atoms and molecules, indeed all life forms, are highly ordered and organized!
But the materialistic view has no idea as to how this dynamic complexity in form and function comes into being and is maintained.
‘Self-organization’ is the current buzzword!
Yet no-one can say whence this perpetual motion and apparent ‘self-organizing’ capability has arisen.
So the clarity and vibrancy bestowed by the immanence of the Life Force during a Sat yuga declines, giving way to ages of progressively lower consciousness, until we reach the Kal yuga , where we find ourselves today.
‘Kal’ means time, death, Universal Mind or the Negative Power.
Here, all life is at its lowest ebb and man has lost all sense of direction.
The Divine purpose of life is almost entirely forgotten and he spends each lifetime self-centredly chasing after vanishing mirages.
The condition of the physical universe deteriorates.
Even the spiritual values of life are held in little esteem.
Ultimately, the balance becomes intolerable until, in what must be akin to the most incredibly vibrant springtime one has ever experienced, the world is flooded once again with the power of the Life Force, of consciousness, of universal spirituality, devoid of ritual, dogma and the outward trappings of religion.
Whether this change comes about within one year, over a thousand year span, or perhaps over the weekend — I do not know, though geologically all such time-spans are short periods.
But it is said that the Kal yuga gives way to the Sat yuga when the manifested power of the Life Force has reached its lowest ebb.
One wonders, then, what must be the effect of such an influx of fresh vitality upon biological processes?
Do we have here a key to understanding how lemmings, eels and other creatures gained their instinctive knowledge of the changing planetary geography?
Perhaps at such times there is an opportunity for a general biological and genetic reorientation?
The density or grossness of physical life being relaxed, the more subtle components become capable of realignment to the prevailing circumstances, all within the formative and integrating influence of the greater Mind.
One thing is certain — that a Darwinian-style, materialistic and linear, reductionist thought process cannot begin to describe, let alone explain, the integrated, complexly woven cycles and patterns of behaviour and physiological process that we see around us.
Nature is replete with cyclic processes.
Our reductionist, analytical thinking attempts to form them, conceptually, into discrete linear pathways, but nature knows nothing of such superficial imaginings!
She is one integrated whole.
It is our minds which are divided.
It is out of this divided and constrained perspective that we have developed the materialistic theory of evolution and try to fit everything into the confines of such a bleak and narrow view.
Our limited perception of time has difficulty in imagining events and cycles dating back just a hundred years, yet archaeologists have germinated and grown wheat from grains four thousand years old, discovered in the tombs of the Egyptian  Pharaohs .
Bacteria which normally divide and reproduce themselves every twenty minutes can also form themselves into environmentally resistant spores capable of lying dormant, even entombed in rock, for maybe millions of years before a change of circumstance permits their release with continued growth and reproduction.
How can a cycle covering such an immense time-span have ever evolved out of random mutational steps?
One whole phylum of creatures, the rotifers , seem to fit into no known evolutionary tree at all.
They appear, like miniature miracles, in any pool of water, however transient it may be, complete with wheels or crowns of cilia, minute beating hairs which function equally well for both finding food and for locomotion.
When the pools dry, the rotifers turn into minute particles of dust, wrinkled and desiccated, awaiting the next rainfall.
They honour no geographical boundaries and the same species are found in the pools of Africa, Asia, America and Europe.
These spores have even been found high up in the atmosphere at 50,000 feet.
‘For instant rotifers, just add water,’ comments Lyall Watson, in Supernature, adding that there seems to be no reason why these desiccated specks should not fly higher, even finding their way into space.
Perhaps indeed, he suggests, this is where they came from, born through outer space from some other planet, in some other star system.
How does one study the life cycle of an organism that may live for millennia, or even cross the galaxy?
How little do we know of nature's processes and how much we assume.
Truly, William Blake put it most succinctly: ‘A fool sees not the same tree that a wise man sees.’
Perhaps then, since we know of long-term biological cycles such as these, there are other cycles hidden in nature, beyond the span of single lifetimes, that include the intrinsic ability of living creatures to adapt to environmental conditions presently absent from our planet.
Indeed, does every creature, given the constraints of a changing environment — plus the biological loosening of periodic Sat yugas — have the capacity to change?
just as the ermine changes it coat for winter; just as the seed can lie dormant for thousands of years; just as the bacteria and the rotifers can live in their desiccated time capsules for perhaps longer than we can ever envisage, awaiting a change of outer circumstances for the tiny living specks of dust to take on another form — just so, perhaps, may the living forms we know so well have secrets tucked away within them that only the rolling of the aeons can reveal.
The axolotl, the tadpole of the South American tiger salamander, is famous in the zoology textbooks for breaking with tradition and possessing the capacity to reproduce sexually while still retaining its aquatic larval form, including its external gills.
But under little understood conditions of environmental change, its offspring can lose their gills, developing into the land-dwelling adults.
In the lakes near Mexico City, at a height of 6000 to 7000 feet above sea level, it never ventures into adult form.
Specimens up to a foot in length have even been recorded.
Though in such a cycle, who is to say which is the adult and which the juvenile?
In this form, it then remains, and when the rains return, it instinctively remembers it watery home and there lays its eggs, for the cycle to be repeated.
For many years, scientists thought the watery and land-dwelling forms to be separate species .
It was only when some axolotls in captivity in the Jardin des Plantes in Paris bred, and their young lost their gills, becoming the well-known tiger salamander, that their secret was revealed.
Now the change to the land-based form can even be induced in the laboratory by an energetic vibration playing the role of a key in the biological tapestry.
It is a molecule we call a hormone.
Then there are the wet and dry season forms of some tropical butterflies which are thought to develop according to the temperature of the larva and pupa during their development.
In the case of Melantis leda , according to work done by Lt-Col. N. Manders, it is the temperature two to three weeks before the butterfly emerges from the pupa which regulates the form in which the handsome butterfly will emerge.
This, effectively, constitutes a biological prediction of the rainfall and conditions with which the butterfly will have to contend during its adult life.
An interesting piece of biological foresight, no doubt requiring many physiological modifications.
And how we must wonder: how could such an intricate tapestry have evolved according to a linear process, involving only ‘chance’ as the driving factor?
So if species have a capacity for adaptation to small-scale environmental change built in, could there not be other potential changes hidden within the mosaic of form and function, both subtle and dense, we call a species?
Changes which may not manifest even for millennia, until circumstances warrant it?
Digressing momentarily, it is interesting that those creatures which pass through various metamorphic stages, however different these outward forms may be, remain of essentially the same ‘psychological’ nature throughout their cycle.
Given that the essential inward mental nature is present before birth, this is as one might expect.
Thus a dragonfly and its larva are both voracious eaters of their fellow creatures.
Butterflies and their caterpillars are mostly vegetarians, the one munching leaves, the other sipping nectar.
And — most amazingly — even the seeds of the insectivorous pitcher plant — which traps its prey in pools of chemically laced water on leaves sporting a glissading escarpment of downward-pointing hairs and narcotic-laced nectar — even the tiny seeds of this plant trap prey by means of slime and poison, then digesting the surrounding mulch of decaying creatures as they germinate, forming into seedlings and plants.
In all cases, the inner mental being of a creature is similar throughout its life cycle, though expressing itself through different outward physical forms as it metamorphoses.
But were creatures nothing more than their physical overcoats, why should they not be docile vegetarians in one stage and voracious prey-catchers in another?
Natural cycles there are in abundance, then.
They can take many forms.
And many, surely, that our human tunnel vision is unable to perceive.
Ice ages, tropical ages, spiritualized eras, wet, dry, hot, cold, high, low — all these and many other uncharted cycles, our Earth must  have undergone, and will undergo, over the millions of years of its existence.
The individual duration of one man's life spans just a fraction of a cosmic second in these dense, material vibrations.
Then he, too, requires a brief respite from corporeal entombment.
Perhaps the pause is only long enough for his mind to find and form a new, fresh and appropriate body in which to continue on the mental outworking of the karmic dance.
Or maybe, the soul that has striven to rise above human weakness is given a brief, or longer, sojourn in some higher, astral sphere — until the effects of such aspirations are outweighed by the desires of the mind for more life experience in this denser, physical world.
Perhaps, too, the darker minds, full of rancour and disharmony, anger, lust, egotism, greed and intense attachment to the things of this world, takes the hell it experienced in physical life into its own world of mental hell when deprived of the physical form.
For where else would a hellish mind go after death, than to a continued experience of its own hellish thoughts and dreams?
But this, too is not forever, and then the soul takes physical birth once again.
Though not, maybe in human form, but wherever the causal justice meted out by the Mind itself, may find its just fulfilment.
What does man know of these longer aeons?
But one thing is sure.
Man and creation are more than flesh and rock.
There are more powers than chance and pure mechanism, underlying this great cosmic drama.
Even the surface of our planet is recycled in the most remarkable of ways.
Its surface moves and folds, slips and slides, in a shifting patchwork of continental and oceanic slabs.
The Himalayas, whose rise began maybe 50 million years ago, are still climbing heavenwards at an average rate of seven millimetres per year, double the speed of their advance ten million years ago, though such rates are by no means constant.
Yet, running through them, the still more ancient river Indus had existed for millions of years before their rise.
And cutting down through the rising rock, the Indus carries away from the Himalayan region five million tonnes of earthen debris every day.
This mineralizes and fertilizes the flood plains below, as it slowly and inexorably finds its way to the sea.
To these lands below, the Himalayas are a seemingly endless source of water, fertilizer and much else besides.
Over the last 1.5 million years, our planet has been in the grip of an ice age.
Every 100,000 years or so there has been a ‘temperate window’ when the ice has receded for seven to ten thousand years.
Then the ice has closed in again.
In the temperate zones, lying just outside the  ice-bound regions, when the minerals drain into the sea, the soil is depleted and less vegetation is supported.
Then — says one of the theories — due to natural feedback processes affecting the climate, the ice again advances, the glaciers grinding the rock for remineralization of the topsoil in the next temperate window.
Night is required by plants to store the energy collected during the day.
All creatures need sleep to replenish their energies for the next awakening.
Winter is a necessary counterpart to summer, to concentrate and rest after the months of feverish activity.
The dry seasons and the wet, the hot and the cold, all these are essential in the ebb and flow of nature's processes.
Just so, perhaps, are ice ages the long winters, the scourers of the planet, the deep sleep required for nature's recovery.
Then life retreats to the equatorial zones, though there is little doubt that the ice-bound regions of such eras are far from devoid of life, any more than the Arctic and Antarctic zones are today.
But ice ages or no, millions of years of erosion will slowly flatten the planetary mineral heaps we call mountains.
Not too fast — not too slow.
The release is just right.
But from where do new mountains, new planetary mineral repositories arise?
If the land is all eroded into the sea in a matter of a few million years, how does the system keep on running?
And what prevents the oceans from becoming so thick with minerals, like the Dead Sea, that no marine life can be supported?
The answer is to be found in the life forms themselves.
Small sea organisms bind these marine minerals into their body structures, which then fall to the ocean floor upon their death.
So continuous is this precipitation that it has earned itself the name of ‘marine snow’.
There the sediment accumulates over aeons, cleverly preventing the toxic over-mineralization of the sea, while at the same time providing the material for the rocks of future continents and mountains as the planetary surface gets recycled.
Man takes little account of such greater cycles.
When his fields are starved of minerals through self-indulgent agriculture, he tries to impose his own will upon the land.
But pouring fertilizers on to the fields does not help the situation, for the processes of nature are too complex to be so simply overridden or adjusted.
Fertilizers are short-term exploiters, a reflection of man's mind, his greed for financial profit.
For the plants man sows also depend upon microbes within the soil for their growth and existence.
Microbes and bacteria play an integral part in the food cycle.
Their activity is put to good account by plants, just as we and other animals eat the plants or even other animals and creatures.
Without bacteria, moulds and fungi, we would all be wading around in undecayed vegetation many miles deep.
Not only that, but there are at least fifty known forms of bacteria which decompose rock into minerals.
They have been particularly studied in the decay of old stone mansions, castles and other human monuments.
Nature is so complete a system.
These tiny creatures take the very rocks and stones as their food, releasing the valuable minerals into the soil upon which plant life may flourish.
But pesticides and fertilizers kill these microbes, turning fields into clinically sterile areas.
The decaying mulch of good old manure and compost, full with a myriad bacteria, is required for a healthy soil ecosystem.
The food we receive from plants grown upon these sterile patches is deficient in nutrient content and vibrational life energy.
The degenerating planetary ecosystem becomes reflected in man's health.
Degenerative diseases such as cancer and AIDS become rife.
This is the natural process of nature's cyclic activity, the ebb and flow within time, space and the energy patterns of the creation.
To push a huge rock to the edge of a precipice requires tremendous effort and work.
But once balanced there, it can be pushed over with just one finger.
The energy required to move that system into a falling phase is very little.
Once a system has been pushed too far out of equilibrium, it takes just a little further input for a period of turmoil to ensue, followed by a new equilibrium.
These threshold phenomena are an integral part of nature's processes.
From the apparently indivisible quanta of physical energy, to the boundaries between the solid, liquid and gaseous states — the manyness of the energy patterns is prevented from becoming one homogeneous and ill-defined spectrum by threshold effects.
Such clearly defined patterns are to be seen in both social and political, as well as all other systems.
Similarly, with our world ecosystem.
We are poised on the edge.
But it is not man's activities alone which can be held to account, for man is also a part of the natural ecosystem.
Man is only responding to the greater cycles of nature.
So the mysteries of migration routes, which prompted this brief foray into the biological and geological past, is only one of a myriad miraculous facets of nature, of the greater Mind, that tells us of the great planetary drama in which life has existed, maintained within such finely balanced parameters, for hundreds of millions, if not billions of years.
This chapter ends with some brief comments on the nature of knowledge — scientific and mystic.
Then in the next chapter, we tell  some tales of the close kinship between man and beast, of contact between human minds and the minds of other living creatures.
Finally, in the last two chapters, we talk at length of the greatest pattern maker of all, the power that weaves the one tapestry of nature, the greater or Formative Mind .
SCIENCE, KNOWLEDGE AND MYSTIC CERTAINTY
The insistence upon rational objectivity in science actually arises from an honest perception that we humans are capable of a high degree of self-deception.
Lacking the certainty that arises from inner, mystic experience, we have a predilection to replace genuine knowledge with dogma.
We therefore attempt to overcome this tendency by what we feel is the honesty of ‘objectivity’.
At a human level, knowledge or science is supposed to be a pure objective description of experience, derived either directly from our senses or from instrumental extensions thereof.
Such pure objectivity, however, does not exist, for our sensory or instrumental experience is meaningless without interpretation , which is carried out within our own minds.
And our minds are heavily conditioned and circumscribed by habit, by what we have been taught to think, and by  subconscious emotion, human weakness and social environment or circumstance.
We see things within the context of what we are subconsciously programmed to see, through glasses tinted strongly with the colour of our inward, unconscious mind.
This is as true of scientists as of any other group of humans, some would say more so.
Even ‘objective, experiments are devised according to certain thought patterns and beliefs.
Man's ideas do not chart a steady progression towards some ultimate philosophical or scientific truth.
Mostly, they go round in circles, reflecting only the idiom of the day.
In the context of history, no mundane ideas last for very long.
It is only the basic spiritual truths which surface time and again, expressed through different idioms.
Not so long ago, Western man believed that the Earth was flat, that the Earth was the centre of the universe, and that God had created the Earth in seven days according to a literal interpretation of a creation myth given in an old Jewish book.
Scientifically, one can observe that the concepts of a geocentric universe and a flat Earth are fallacious, though there are still those who would disagree.
Such observations would appear to be quite objective and true and I would agree.
But these truths were by no means self-evident at  the time of their first suggestion, when they were not so readily acceptable.
However, there are those theories that have their basis in a totally materialistic and mechanical belief system , not observation, and which interpret the evidence to prove the theory, ignoring or glossing over the anomalies.
Such theories include the conventional model of evolution, Big-Bang models of the origin of material substance, the concept that life is a by-product of biochemical complexity, that mind and thought are to be found at the physical level of molecules and electromagnetism, and so on.
While human conceptual and even observational knowledge always carries with it an element of doubt, mystic knowledge is possessed of certainty, of direct perception and experience, quite undemonstrable to others.
It is, however, immediately regarded by the fortunate experiencer as being of an altogether higher and more real nature than ‘normal’, everyday experience.
Just as, when awakening from a dream, we automatically recognize its illusory reality and its creation from within the recesses of our own mind.
You will find personal descriptions of such mystic experiences in my other books while an entire chapter in Natural Creation: The Mystic Harmony,is devoted to descriptions of mystic or semi-mystic experience.
Thankfully, this mystic certainty brings with it a deepening understanding of the ways of our human mind.
This makes one quite comfortable with the fact that those who have never had such an experience will doubt its very existence and possibly even the sanity of those who experience it.
One begins to see why people think and behave in the way they do.
Increasingly, one sees the Mind underlying all forms.
Yet the inherent authenticity and force of such mystical experience are the heritage of all and within the potential grasp of all human beings.
Indeed, I believe that inklings of this understanding, ‘Intimations of the Infinite’, are experienced by many of us at least once in a lifetime and are available to all if we can simply open our hearts to the inward life which is calling us, but is obscured by the continuous dazzle and activity of our own superficial minds and senses.
Our lucid moments, those times when the shadow seems to fall from off the face of our inward confusion, these are the times when we are drawn closer to God, to our inward Source.
They are the most real times of our entire life.
Let no one,(not even yourself), ever convince you otherwise.
INTERLUDE
INTELLECT
The more we live by our intellect, the less we understand the meaning of life.
(William James)
Intellect is very good to live by in this world.
We know the ways and means to spend our life comfortably with the help of intellect.
But intellect does not lead us to the Lord.
We have to leave the intellect in order to follow that path.
What we require is practice and faith.
I do not say an intellectual man cannot follow the path.
Intellect is a barrier in our way, no doubt, but we have to pierce this barrier with the help of intellect.
Unless the intellectual man is convinced that the path is right, he will never follow it.
He can never have faith in the Lord as long as his intellect is not satisfied.
But once his intellect is satisfied, he does not need intellect to follow that path.
What we need then is faith and practice.
(Maharaj Charan Singh Ji,The Master Answers)
NATURAL COMMUNION
MAN, MIND AND CREATURE
Man can understand man.
Or at least he has the potential to do so.
Even if we meet with fellow humans from other parts of our globe where the spoken and written languages are different, the common, basic sense of meaning which we carry in our minds is enough for us to communicate through gesture and signs and to know that, should we care to, we can learn each other 's language.
With other creatures, their communications are largely a matter of instinctive patterning.
A dog never learns to go ‘Woof’, or a cow to go ‘Moo’.
They do so automatically even if raised on a bottle, by humans.
It is as much a pattern of their inner being as is tail-wagging or chewing the cud.
But whether man's inward mind patterning, which provides him with the capacity for verbal language, is underlain by a subtle and universal language of meaning to which we all relate when using verbal language, is an interesting possibility I discussed in The Web of Life .
Certainly, there is a basic mind structure in humans which we all recognize in each other while noting the absence of its full expression in other creatures.
But in the Kal yuga, through which we now are passing, the age when mind predominates, man has largely lost consciousness of his inner centre of focused attention, the eye centre, and remains scattered in the world displayed to his mind by the five senses.
Man has thus lost contact with direct perception of his own inward mind energies and lives almost unconsciously, away from his true inner centre.
Many of his natural mental capabilities such as telepathy and clairvoyance have therefore been submerged by the incessant activity of his lower nature, to the extent that folk even perform laboratory experiments to see if such faculties actually exist.
One might equally well undertake trials to see if we are really alive!
But the real laboratory for all such experimentation is within our own body, in the inner areas of mind and soul.
And the technique is called meditation.
Telepathy is not a sensory phenomenon.
So to attempt to prove the existence of telepathy by the analysis of data acquired by sensory perception will always leave room for doubt.
After all, there is no sensory evidence for the existence of thought, either.
But do we doubt the existence of thought?
Thought is a mentalexperience, not a sensoryexperience.
We observe the results of thought everywhere, but not thought itself.
Similarly with all aspects of mind — emotion, intuition, memory, intellect and so on.
So man communicates with man, but by word of mouth, rarely mind to mind.
Thus we have suspicion, confusion and misunderstanding, for the mental meaning underlying words varies, as do our habituated beliefs.
And when it comes to other creatures, we are increasingly at a loss.
Their inward minds possess different energy configurations to ours.
Yet fellow members of a species can understand each other with the greatest of ease, while we may not even have the senses to perceive their communications to each other, let alone understand them.
We cannot see or smell pheromones, for example, in the way insects and other creatures can.
We have no mental conception of what it is like to perceive the world through antennae.
We are unable to hear the ultrasonic radar signals of bats, let alone interpret them with the intelligible rapidity which they can.
We do not derive the same sense of meaning from a bee's waggle dance as its companions do.
We hear the haunting sounds of the Humpback whales as they communicate under the sea, across vast distances, but understand little or nothing of what is passing between them.
Even with those creatures we assume to be our closest animal relatives, the chimpanzees and the great apes, we are forced into interpreting their signs and signals according to our own mental patterns.
Such communications may clearly show signs of similarity to our own human allocation of emotions and feelings — anger, affection, dominance and so on— but of how a chimpanzee actually feels anger, we have little comprehension.
When, among humans, there are outbursts of anger or fighting, then such emotions normally leave a residue of resentment, of ill-feeling, which can take some time to subside or disperse.
But Jane Goodall and others have reported that among chimpanzees, the enemies of the morning will be playmates of the afternoon.
Very different from  man's condition.
No doubt this is all a part of nature's design to keep the community together, but of how a chimpanzee's inner mind is structured, and of how they feel, we have little notion.
Most humans, after all, have never successfully applied the scientific techniques of meditation to their own minds, including many of today's ‘gurus’.
So until we have fairly set out upon that road, how can we really hope to understand the inner beings of other creatures?
Their outward behaviour,as observed through our mind and senses, however —not their's — does result in some fascinating incidents and this chapter is devoted to the discussion of some of these.
Other aspects were discussed in previous chapters.
WHALES, DOLPHINS, TIGERS AND DOGS
Many are the tales telling of the intelligence and concern shown by creatures of the animal kingdom.
And there is no doubt that some of these animals live lives of great awareness, and of emotion, too.
When we see such intelligence and feeling among creatures which outwardly resemble ourselves — chimpanzees and other primates — we accept and can recognize it far more readily than we do among more alien creatures such as whales and dolphins.
For apart from being equipped with eyes, head and body, dolphins and whales bear little outward physical resemblance to ourselves.
Yet there is no doubt that they have an active, social life, full of real and caring communication, carried on in a language quite alien to our own experience of mind and meaning.
Many people, for example, will have seen the film of the Greenpeace anti-whaling efforts putting their little inflatable craft between the angry whalers and the hunted whales.
And when they got into difficulties in the rolling ocean waves, the whales came to their rescue.
This may seem strange to us, but even among social insects, and certainly among birds and animals, there is a tremendous awareness of suffering, of danger to life and of mutual support in times of difficulty.
Bees and wasps will attack en masse when their community is threatened.
A bee sting emanates a powerful pheromone, perceived by other bees from a distance, which acts as an immediate and instinctive call to arms.
Fish, reptiles, birds and mammals all protect their young and often each other, with great vigour, when danger threatens.
Social species will frequently surround and protect a wounded or younger member of their clan, regardless of who the parents are.
Wherever there is social connection and association, then creatures respond to each other.
Many are the cases of dogs, horses, bullocks, elephants and other creatures protecting the humans who are a part of their social group.
Dogs, in particular, have been trained for this work — an extension of their natural instincts to protect the pack.
Jim Corbett tells just such a tale in his Man-Eaters of Kumaon, and since his lead-in to the episode also tells of the mental abilities of creatures other than man, it is worth quoting in full.
In the story, Jim Corbett is describing his hunt for the Chowgarh tigress who killed at least 64 human beings between 1925 and 1930 before their first and last meeting took place.
This, in fact, is a relatively small total compared to the hundreds which some man-eaters killed before they were themselves removed from the earthly scene.
The villages mentioned are in the Kumaon region of the Himalayan foothills.
On the road I had taken when coming to Dalkania there were several long stiff climbs up treeless hills, and when I mentioned the discomforts of this road to the villagers they had suggested that I should go back via Haira Khan.
This route would necessitate only one climb to the ridge above the village, from where it was downhill all the way to Rainbagh, whence I could complete the journey to Naini Tal by car.
I had warned my men overnight to be prepared for an early start, and a little before sunrise, leaving them to pack up and follow me, I said good-bye to my friends at Dalkania and started on the two-mile climb to the forest road on the ridge above….
The path wound in and out of deep ravines, through thick oak and pine forests and dense undergrowth.
There had been no news of the tigress for a week.
This absence of news made me all the more careful, and an hour after leaving camp I arrived without mishap at an open glade near the top of the hill, within a hundred yards of the forest road.
The glade was pear-shaped, roughly a hundred yards long and fifty yards wide, with a stagnant pool of rain-water in the centre of it.
Sambur and other game used this pool as a drinking-place and wallow and, curious to see the tracks round it, I left the path, which skirted the left-hand side of the glade and passed close under a cliff of rock which extended up to the road.
As I approached the pool I saw the pug marks of the tigress in the soft earth at the edge of the water.
She had approached the pool from the same direction as I had, and, evidently disturbed by me, had crossed the water and gone into the dense tree and scrub jungle on the right-hand side of the glade.
A great chance lost, for had I kept as careful a lookout in front as I had behind I should have seen her before she saw me.
However, though I had missed a chance, the advantages were now all on my side and distinctly in my favour.
The tigress had seen me, or she would not have crossed the pool and hurried for shelter, as her tracks showed she had done.
Having seen me  she had also seen that I was alone, and watching me from cover as she undoubtedly was, she would assume I was going to the pool to drink as she had done.
My movements up to this had been quite natural, and if I could continue to make her think I was unaware of her presence, she would possibly give me a second chance.
Stooping down and keeping a very sharp lookout from under my hat, I coughed several times, splashed the water about, and then, moving very slowly and gathering dry sticks on the way (as the local Indians might do), I went to the foot of the steep rock.
Here I built a small fire, and putting my back to the rock lit a cigarette.
By the time the cigarette had been smoked the fire had burnt out.
I then lay down, and pillowing my head on my left arm placed the rifle on the ground with my finger on the trigger.
The rock above me was too steep for any animal to find foothold on.
I had therefore only my front to guard, and as the heavy cover nowhere approached to within less than twenty yards of my position I was quite safe.
I had all this time neither seen nor heard anything; nevertheless, I was convinced that the tigress was watching me.
The rim of my hat, while effectually shading my eyes, did not obstruct my vision, and inch by inch I scanned every bit of the jungle within my range of view.
There was not a breath of wind blowing, and not a leaf or blade of grass stirred.
My men, whom I had instructed to keep close together and sing from the time they left the camp until they joined me on the forest road, were not due for an hour and a half, and during this time it was more than likely that the tigress would break cover and try to stalk or rush me.
There are occasions when time drags, and others when it flies.
My left arm, on which my head was pillowed, had long since ceased to prick and had gone dead, but even so the singing of the men in the valley below reached me all too soon.
The voices grew louder, and presently I caught sight of the men as they rounded a sharp bend….
After my men had rested we climbed up to the road, and set off on what proved to be a very long twenty-mile march to the forest Rest House at Haira Khan.
After going a couple of hundred yards over open ground, the road entered very thick forest, and here I made the men walk in front while I brought up the rear.
We had gone about two miles in this order, when on turning a corner I saw a man sitting on the road, herding buffaloes.
It was now time to call a halt for breakfast, so I asked the man where we could get water.
He pointed down the hill straight in front of him, and said there was a spring down there from which his village, which was just round the shoulder of the hill, drew its water-supply.
There was, however, no necessity for us to go down the hill for water, for if we continued a little further we should find a good spring on the road.
His village was at the upper end of the valley in which the woman of Lohali had been killed the previous week, and he told me that nothing  had been heard of the man-eater since, and added that the animal was possibly now at the other end of the district.
I disabused his mind on this point by telling him about the fresh pug marks I had seen at the pool, and advised him very strongly to collect his buffaloes and return to the village.
His buffaloes, some ten in number, were straggling up towards the road and he said he would leave as soon as they had grazed up to where he was sitting.
Handing him a cigarette I left him with a final warning.
What occurred after I left was related to me by the men of the village, when I paid the district a second visit some months later.
When the man eventually got home that day he told the assembled villagers of our meeting, and my warning, and said that after he had watched me go round a bend in the road a hundred yards away he started to light the cigarette I had given him.
A wind was blowing, and to protect the flame of the match he bent forward, and while in this position he was seized from behind by the right shoulder and pulled backwards.
His first thought was of the party who had just left him, but unfortunately his cry for help was not heard by them.
Help, however, was near at hand, for as soon as the buffaloes heard his cry, mingled with the growl of the tigress, they charged onto the road and drove the tigress off.
His shoulder and arm were broken, and with great difficulty he managed to climb on the back of one of his brave rescuers, and followed by the rest of the herd, reached his home.
The villagers tied up his wounds as best they could and carried him thirty miles, non-stop, to the Haldwani hospital, where he died shortly after admission.
When Atropos, who snips the threads of life, misses one thread she cuts another, and we who do not know why one thread is missed and another cut call it Fate, Kismet or what we will.
For a month I had lived in an open tent, a hundred yards from the nearest human being, and from dawn to dusk had wandered through the jungles, and on several occasions had disguised myself as a woman and cut grass in places where no local inhabitant dared to go.
During this period the man-eater had, quite possibly missed many opportunities of adding me to her bag and now, when making a final effort, she had quite by chance encountered this unfortunate man and claimed him as a victim.
By this time, the tigress must have come to know the particular scent, as well as stance, of her hunter and probably recognized him, even when dressed up as an Indian woman.
As we have said, animals are superbly aware of the way a mind is reflected in body posture and there is no way that the hunter Jim Corbett could have concealed his alertness and readiness for attack, whatever disguise he adopted.
Then, too, the subtle contact of mind to mind, of life to life, is probably more a part of the tigress than the average man.
Many hunters and men moving close to nature have commented on this sixth sense, warning them of danger.
Corbett also makes an interesting comment concerning tigers' sense of smell, which has a bearing on their natural instincts — man not being the natural prey of tigers.
Tigers do not know that humans beings have no sense of smell, and when a tiger becomes a man-eater it treats a human being exactly as it treats wild animals, that is, it approaches its intended victims up-wind, or lies up in wait for them down-wind.
The significance of this will be apparent when it is realized that, while the sportsman is trying to get a sight of the tiger, the tiger in all probability is trying to stalk the sportsman, or is lying up in wait for him.
The contest, owing to the tiger's height, colouring, and ability to move without making a sound, would be very unequal were it not for the wind-factor operating in favour of the sportsman.
It is unlikely, of course, that a tiger actually thinks, as humans might — with our almost non-existent sense of smell —‘Which way is the wind blowing?’
And then, sticking a wet finger in the air, ‘I must get downwind.’
It would seem more likely to simply be an automatic adjustment according to their immediate sensory experience and instinctive intent.
Rather as one might almost unconsciously adjust the position of a book to get the best light from a bedside lamp without ever really thinking of angles and directions, so must the tiger get himself into the most appropriate location vis-a-vis the three-dimensional world of scents known to both himself and his normal prey.
Similarly, the fact that the tiger is unable to figure it out from our behaviour that we have practically no sense of smell, demonstrates how instinctive and preprogrammed are their mental functions.
On yet another attempt to kill the Chowgarh tigress, Corbett relates the following intriguing incident.
The tigress had recently been seen in the area and Corbett was very much on the alert.
For the next fourteen days I spent all the daylight hours either on the forest road, on which no-one but myself ever set foot, or in the jungle, and only twice during that period did I get near the tigress.
On the first occasion I had been down to visit an isolated village, on the south face of Kala Agar ridge, that had been abandoned the previous year owing to the depredations of the man-eater, and on the way back had taken a cattle track that went over the ridge and down the far side to the forest road, when, approaching a pile of rocks, I suddenly felt there  was danger ahead.
The distance from the ridge to the forest road was roughly three hundred yards.
The track, after leaving the ridge, went steeply down for a few yards and then turned to the right and ran diagonally across the hill for a hundred yards; the pile of rocks was about midway on the right-hand side of this length of the track.
Beyond the rocks a hairpin bend carried the track to the left, and a hundred yards farther on another sharp bend took it down to its junction with the forest road.
I had been along this track many times, and this was the first occasion on which I hesitated to pass the rocks.
To avoid them I should either have had to go several hundred yards through dense undergrowth, or make a wide detour round and above them; the former would have subjected me to very great danger, and there was no time for the latter, for the sun was near setting and I had still two miles to go.
So, whether I liked it or not, there was nothing for it but to face the rocks.
The wind was blowing up the hill so I was able to ignore the thick cover on the left of the track and concentrate all my attention on the rocks to my right.
A hundred feet would see me clear of the danger zone, and this distance I covered foot by foot, walking sideways with my face to the rocks and the rifle to my shoulder; a strange mode of progress, had there been any to see it.
Thirty yards beyond the rocks was an open glade, starting from the right-hand side of the track and extending up the hill for fifty or sixty yards, and screened from the rocks by a fringe of bushes.
In this glade a kakar was grazing.
I saw her before she saw me, and watched her out of the corner of my eye.
On catching sight of me she threw up her head, and as I was not looking in her direction she stood stock still, as these animals have a habit of doing when they are under the impression that they have not been seen.
On arrival at the hairpin bend I looked over my shoulder and saw that the kakar had lowered her head, and was once more cropping the grass.
I had walked a short distance along the track after passing the bend when the kakar went dashing up the hill, barking hysterically.
In a few quick strides I was back at the bend, and was just in time to see a movement in the bushes on the lower side of the track.
That the kakar had seen the tigress was quite evident, and the only place where she could have seen her was on the track.
The movement I had seen might have been caused by the passage of a bird; on the other hand it might have been caused by the tigress; anyway, a little investigation was necessary before proceeding farther on my way.
A trickle of water seeping out from under the rocks had damped the red clay of which the track was composed, making an ideal surface for the impression of tracks.
In this damp clay I had left footprints, and over these footprints I now found the splayed-out pug marks of the tigress where she had jumped down from the rocks and followed me, until the kakar had  seen her and given its alarm-call, whereon the tigress had left the track and entered the bushes where I had seen the movement.
The tigress was undoubtedly familiar with every foot of the ground, and not having had an opportunity of killing me at the rocks — and her chance of bagging me at the first hairpin bend having been spoilt by the kakar — she was probably now making her way through the dense undergrowth to try to intercept me at the second bend.
Further progress along the track was now not advisable, so I followed the kakar up the glade, and turning to the left worked my way down, over open ground, to the forest road below.
Had there been sufficient daylight I believe I could, that evening, have turned the tables on the tigress, for the conditions, after she left the shelter of the rocks, were all in my favour.
I knew the ground as well as she did, and while she had no reason to suspect my intentions towards her, I had the advantage of knowing, very clearly, her intentions towards me.
However, though the conditions were in my favour, I was unable to take advantage of them owing to the lateness of the evening.
I have made mention elsewhere of the sense that warns us of impending danger, and will not labour the subject further beyond stating that this sense is a very real one and that I do not know, and therefore cannot explain, what brings it into operation.
On this occasion I had neither heard nor seen the tigress, nor had I received any indication from bird or beast of her presence, and yet I knew, without any shadow of doubt, that she was lying up for me among the rocks.
I had been out for many hours that day and had covered many miles of jungle with unflagging caution, but without one moment, s unease, and then, on cresting the ridge, and coming in sight of the rocks, I knew they held danger for me, and this knowledge was confirmed a few minutes later by the kakar's warning call to the jungle folk, and by my finding the man-eater's pug marks superimposed on my footprints.
What all this indicates is that creatures — human or otherwise — are aware, are conscious, of danger to life and limb.
And that all creatures have a mind.
The behaviour of the buffaloes, the kakar, of Jim Corbett himself, and the hunting plans of the tigress all tell us this in no uncertain terms.
We see this all the time in the behaviour of the life forms in our gardens.
The sparrows fly away when a marauding pussy appears on the scene.
They mentally appreciate the arrival of danger and act accordingly.
There is a mental process underlying all actions in all creatures, just as there is with man.
Yet, somehow, because the mind of another creature is such alien territory to us, we find it difficult to accept that such mental activity and subjective sensory awareness , really is going on.
It is intriguing, of course, to speculate upon the intelligence of creatures so apparently alien to ourselves as tigers, whales and  dolphins.
Yet familiarity may be blinding us to equal intelligence expressed by animals far closer to home.
A collie dog I know, who lives with my neighbours, has an old semi-deflated toy football which she never tires of carrying to the feet of any human who will kick it, for her to gallop off, retrieving it and placing it once again near one's feet.
She stands off expectantly to one side, limbs and body ready for an instant gallop or spring, her eyes focused upon you in an attempt to induce an endless repetition of the game.
There is no doubt of her mental motivation or desire to simply play and exercise, to express what she feels in her mind is the most natural of things to do.
We get quite used to our domestic dog actually bringing us sticks and balls so that we may throw them for our four-legged companion to retrieve.
We are not amazed at their motivation and intelligence when they eagerly look up at us, willing us to throw the ball or the stick.
And there is no doubt of their thorough enjoyment of the game.
We even join in the playful antics of our puppies and kittens.
But our curiosity is aroused when we see such alien creatures as dolphins and whales going through similar routines.
Our dogs are affectionate, interested, playful, forgiving, loyal, intelligent, spontaneous, creative and much more besides.
They even have a language, so most definitely they possess a mind structure.
And so, too, do all creatures.
This is where behaviour, instinct, cognition, awareness, sensory experience, memory, learning, all their other faculties are lodged.
How could we ever have believed otherwise?
THE CHIMP AND THE GORILLAS
Reference to chimpanzees and apes has been made here and there throughout the preceding chapters and it seems appropriate to relate just one example of their mental processes in these pages.
This is taken from Sue Savage-Rumbaugh's book,Ape Language .
Sherman and Austin were two chimpanzees who had been trained to use a computer keyboard in which the keys carried lexigrams (geometric patterns) which related to items (e.g. JUICE, SWEET POTATO) or simple activities (e.g. GIVE, GET, CHASE).
One day the following incident took place.
Two teachers were working with Sherman and Austin on locations.
In the course of this training, one teacher would go to a specific location (sink, outdoors, playroom, etc.) while the second teacher remained with  the chimpanzees by the keyboard.
The chimpanzees were asked to label the location of the teacher who was moving about.
During one of these trials, Sherman refused to label the teacher's location, saying ‘Collar’ instead.
He then walked out of the room and directly to the area where the collars the chimps had to wear outdoors are usually kept hanging on the wall.
‘Collar’ was thus often used as a way of asking to go outdoors, and after saying ‘Collar’, the chimpanzees would often go search for them and put them around their necks while pant-hooting in anticipation.
On this particular occasion, Sherman saw no collar hanging in the usual spot, and so, after looking carefully, he then walked to the toy shelf (where the collars are sometimes inadvertently left) and searched through the toy bins.
After a one-minute search, he noticed the National Geographicmagazine which he had been looking at with the teacher earlier in the day.
Koko, the signing gorilla, was the main feature in this issue.
When Sherman found this issue on the shelf, he tapped the pictures of Koko with his hair standing on end (pilo-erection) and swaying back and forth bipedally.
He then picked up the magazine, spied his collar on the floor and returned to the teacher.
He held out the collar to the teacher with one hand and pointed to a picture of Koko with the other.
When the teacher said ‘Yes, go outdoors,’ Sherman repeatedly uttered high-pitched barks of excitement and started running around and around the lab with the magazine.
Going out-of-door was, of course, the most favoured activity of Sherman and Austin and it was not unusual for Sherman to be excited about going outside.
What was unusual in this case was that even in his great excitement he still carried the photographs of Koko and pointed to them repeatedly as he looked toward the teacher, who nodded and said ‘Yes’ to Sherman.
The teacher knew that Sherman was combining the presentation of the collar and Koko's picture to communicate something rather specific but was uncertain as to what.
The teacher also knew that when she answered Sherman's request in the affirmative he appeared to be extraordinarily pleased.
As the teacher put the collar on Sherman he continued to point at the picture and bark very loudly.
Outdoors, he continued to carry the picture while walking bipedally, and he headed directly for the gorilla quarters which were located near the adult-ape house on a hill behind the language lab.
On a few previous late evening occasions Sherman had been allowed to go to this area and view the gorillas, an event which both scared and thrilled him.
However, in general, he was not allowed to go there since his presence excited all of the large apes housed there and interfered with any research that might have been going on.
Generally, if Sherman tried to lead his teacher towards this area, she would refuse to allow him to go.
The closer Sherman got to the gorilla housing area, the faster he ran, the louder he barked, and the tighter he held the pictures of Koko.
Thus  Sherman's intent and expectancy became clear to his teachers.
From his point of view he had asked to go to see the gorillas and he had been told ‘Yes’.
However, the teacher had not initially understood the request completely and the acquiescence with regard to going outdoors had led Sherman to believe that he could also go see the gorillas.
When it became apparent to the teacher that Sherman was intent on proceeding to the gorilla area, it became necessary to say ‘No.’
As Sherman saw the teacher stop and point in the other direction, he dropped to a quadrupedal stance, put down the National Geographic , stopped vocalizing completely, lost his pilo-erection, and appeared completely dejected.
He showed no further interest in the magazine or in being outside.
Although Sherman had not used the keyboard, he had certainly made a combinatorial request.
It had involved the use of a symbol and a photograph to produce a novel communicative request to go to a very specific location, and one that he could not request at his keyboard alone.
The marked change in Sherman's demeanour when he realized that his request was not going to be granted was dramatic.
His immediate discarding of the magazine at this point further supports the view that he had indeed been intentionally using the magazine to communicate his desire to go and see the live gorillas.
It is important to point out that Sherman and Austin had never been taught to use photographs as a means of requesting to go to locations.
Moreover, this particular photograph had been brought to the lab only that day, and no one had ever coupled it with any sort of training.
Within the context of our discussion, this incident speaks for itself.
MAN MEETS BEAST
Many naturalists and others are well aware that the content of one's own mind determines the way in which not only members of our own species react to us but also those of other species, too.
Let me quote, here, from Allen Boone's delightful book,Kinship With All Life .
Boone's inspiration came from his personal experiences as temporary ‘keeper’ of the amazingly intelligent German shepherd dog, Strongheart, who became a Hollywood ‘film star’back in the 1950's.
It was Strongheart's manifest mental activity which opened his eyes to the mental process present in all living creatures.
It is not only man and animal who are closely connected, mentally, at a subtle level, but all creatures, including man and man, or man and woman.
When folk harbour ill feeling, intolerance, criticism or prejudice in their minds against anyone, these vibrations emanate from them, impinging — mostly unconsciously — upon the minds of those against whom they feel mentally at odds.
This happens even in the absence of their bête-noire, but is more concentrated whenever there is direct personal contact.
Then the sparks can fly, and if neither party is really aware of the power of their own minds as the true architect of such situations, anger and emotion will rule the day.
Thus, in a family situation, for example, if one member entertains negative and unfriendly attitudes towards another, then whenever they meet there is likely to be trouble.
The apparent cause of an argument may be quite trivial, but the deeper cause lies in the often  unconscious attitudes of one or both parties.
Fortunately, the reverse is also true.
For the one who encourages nothing but genuine feelings of peace, love and goodwill to all his fellow creatures, generally finds that peace and harmony follow him wherever he goes.
Love brings out the very best in both ourselves and others.
‘Everyone is a very nice person all the time, if we only adopt the most loving and positive of attitudes towards all our fellow human beings,’ as a great man once said.
However, returning to Allen Boone's story of the rattlesnakes:
This excerpt really says a great deal.
Whether man or beast, we are all of the same essence, we all have a soul.
Rather, we are souls.
And all souls are one in the great ocean of the Supreme Consciousness, the Lord.
Soul is the same as consciousness or Life.
The same essence of life is within all creatures.
What names you give it are irrelevant.
Around that soul, we have our mind.
This separates human from human, and creature from creature.
But all the same, these minds are drawn from the great ocean of the Universal Mind.
They are of a similar subtle energy or material, just as our own bodies are.
So when, in our mind, we feel kindly disposed to our fellow creatures, human or otherwise, then they also feel kindly disposed towards us.
The subtle vibrations of our mind  reaches out and touchesthe minds of all others.
In this way, too, the angry man draws the discord he subconsciously craves down upon his own head.
The lustful person puts out strong sexual energy and attracts the same, while the peaceful and loving heart finds himself automatically with those of a similar disposition.
We both find and create in others that which we consciously or unconsciously have in ourselves.
There are many tales of naturalists who have gone to some place in search of a rare species, only to find that a member of that very species floats down out of the trees on gentle wings to besport itself before his amazed eyes, or appear in whatever appropriate manner to his appreciative gaze.
This was the experience of the chaplain from my old school, a man from whom I learnt many secrets of the natural world on hiking trips through the mountains and lakes, sea shores and high cliffs of the English Lake District.
His name was Mr Moule and, being a reverend, was promptly christened, ‘Holy Moly’ by all the children.
He found many rare species of bird, plant and insect upon his rambles, and understanding man's destructive nature, he told very few folk the location of his finds.
He even came across a restricted locality where lived a colony of what must have been a new sub-species of the extremely rare, Small Mountain Ringlet butterfly, for they were at a much reduced altitude to their normal haunts, and altogether smaller than the regular species.
Knowing of my interests, he showed me the location, but preferred the continued existence of the species to the mild fame which would have accompanied his reporting the discovery in some scientific journal.
And though I have not been there at the right season for many years, for all I know they live there still — a small, brown, undemonstrative little butterfly, not immediately noticed by an untrained eye.
On another occasion, Holy Moly set off in his Morris Minor hoping to see the rare Purple Emperor butterfly in some southern oak wood.
This magnificent insect, as well as being rare, frequents the tops of oak trees, rarely descending to the forest glades, so binoculars are normally required to catch a sight of it.
It does, however, have a penchant for glistening muddy puddles and shiny motor cars.
But not every car.
But now, with the car hardly parked and before the good reverend could open the door, down from the trees swooped a resplendent male Purple Emperor.
Alighting upon the bonnet (hood, if you are American), in full view through the windscreen, it opened its wings to their fullest extent, remaining there before the grateful gaze of this gentle man who walked with God and loved the creatures of His natural world.
So the naturalist, walking with a peaceful heart and a quiet mind sees many things.
Creatures often seem to have gone out of their way to find him and display themselves to him.
Yet the hunter, walking with gun on arm, thoughts only of killing and murder in his mind and his intent clearly expressed in his body language, is shunned in fear by all creatures who can.
This makes good sense, you will agree.
PLANTS THAT TALK
Nature may be beautiful but there is little doubt that Darwin was right when he observed that only the fittest survive.
There is much cooperation, co-existence and mutual dependence — but there is also dynamic and ruthless competition.
Nature's battles rarely erupt into war, yet they contain some of the most intricate and complex of defensive and predatorial designs.
For life lives upon life: what is life to one is dinner to another!
Even plants know how to attack other creatures and defend themselves.
Many insects and their larvae eat the leaves of plants, and in recent years a complex skein of plant-insect interactions have been glimpsed.
Some insects, for example, emit a pheromone as an alarm signal, warning other members of the same species of impending danger.
But we also find that certain plants cleverly emit the same pheromone, and the insect flies away without molesting it.
Pheromones are complex molecules requiring a continuum of energetic interchange through many ‘stages’, for their formation.
For insects to have evolved, by chance, not only the ability to emit these chemicals on sight of danger, but also simultaneously to interpret the chemical as a messenger of alarm, would seem to be an impossibility.
The biological and physiological complexity required for molecular recognition either ‘directly’ through the senses of ‘smell’or ‘taste’, or ‘indirectly’through appreciation of their modulating effects upon electromagnetic energy, is quite amazing.
The antennae and associated cellular structures are 100 per cent accurate and yet amazingly  intricate.
It requires a far finer tuning that that of any ordinary human radio to be able to pick up specific molecular electromagnetic emissions, or to sense a pheromone in any other way.
The complex shape of the aerial — the antennae — has to be perfect.
And then, the myriad interactions in the biochemistry and physiology of nerve and brain must somehow be integrated to perfection.
Surely, such a thing could never have evolved in tiny steps by chance mutation?
Moreover, such ‘evolution’ by chance mutation has no goal in mind.
So if natural selection of random mutations were truly the driving factor underlying change among the creatures, why is nature not riddled with biological imperfections at a biochemical and physiological level?
Why are there no half-formed sense organs or biochemical networks, with a few links still missing?
However, this is a subject we return to with full attention in Natural Creation…
Or Natural Selection?
So plants, quite naturally, have the ability to protect themselves from predators, just as all other creatures do.
Some emit poisonous gases which kill or temporarily paralyseany insects who attempt a meal.
This gaseous emission may be constant, but frequently it comes entirely as a response to a predatorial nibble.
But while this method keeps many plant-eaters at bay, there are always a few creatures who have the design capability to deal with the toxins.
No creature in this world is left without some enemies.
This is a natural part of the outworking of the karmic law of the mind.
The common European weed, ragwort, for example, contains various alkaloids — poisonous to most insects and animals alike.
Yet the red and black cinnabar moth has caterpillars which, while they are happy to eat innocuous weeds such as groundsel, are also ragwort specialists.
These clever little yellow and black-banded caterpillars actually store the alkaloids in their own bodies, giving them a bad and poisonous taste to any would-be predator.
And not only that, but they pass on their chemical deterrent through the pupal stage into the adult moth itself.
The bright, but differing colours of the moths and caterpillars are warning signs, too, easily recognized by any insectivorous creature in search of a meal, and readily learnt should the first warning not be enough.
Again, how could the ability to eat a ‘previously’ toxic plant, ever be evolved ?
The biochemistry required to deal with alkaloids is not a matter controlled by one or even two gene patterns in the DNA.
It is a vastly complex process and unless you get it right in one, you will never live to tell the tale, to get it right the next time, in order to  ‘evolve’ the skill!
So how could a species slowly and randomly evolve the ability not to be killed outright?
And so the story continues.
Every creature has its own tale to tell.
The leaves of cabbages, mustard and some other brassicas contain toxic mustard oil, similar to the deadly mustard gas.
But along comes a cabbage root fly, whose larvae feed on the roots.
The female fly lands on the plant and tests it for ‘taste’, first with ‘taste-buds’ on her feet and then with her proboscis.
If the plant checks out successfully, she jumps lightly to the ground and lays her eggs — not in the roots — but in the soil.
And when the minute grubs hatch, they are immediately attracted, through some as yet unidentified sense organs, to the scent of mustard oil emanating from the roots.
And by untaught instinct they know that that means food.
One creature's poison is another's meat.
Then there is the common bracken, a fern which covers the hillsides in many areas of Europe.
The sheep wisely leave it alone and most bugs do, too, for it contains two chemicals which, when mixed together in a creature's stomach, make cyanide.
A deadly cocktail to be avoided by most organisms.
But not so the saw-fly larva and certain other specialist feeders, who possess the biochemistry to handle the toxic diet.
Indeed, bracken also contains other unpleasant substances, terpenes, which, like the cinnabars and alkaloids, are harvested by the saw-fly larvae and stored in their bodies, making them unpalatable to predators.
Yet saw-fly larvae are actually pretty omnivorous.
So one wonders why they should have the ability to eat such a normally poisonous diet when there are so many other foods they can eat.
And how could such a specialist, even unnecessary, sideline have ever evolved?
But perhaps the pièce de résistance  are the trees that ‘talk’.
It has been observed that the individual leaves of many trees, when damaged, increase their internal quantity of various tannins, thus making themselves unpalatable to further would-be nibblers — whether insects, cattle, deer or other species.
The effect, however, lasts only for about twenty-four hours, for tannin manufacture (say the botanists) consumes a considerable amount of plant energy and resources.
And there is no need for a creature to keep on running when the chase is over.
But the onset of tannin production is very rapid.
Sometimes within just a few minutes of the arrival of leaf-eating creatures, the tannincontent is up to levels which make not only the leaves under attack,but all the other leaves of the tree toxic or at least unpalatable.
This limits the degree of possible  grazing or nibbling and explains why deer and cattle, for example, will eat just a few mouthfuls from each tree before moving on.
A co-operative arrangement which keeps the trees healthy and prevents the animals from killing off their food supply.
The immediate assumption is that there is a chemical communication between leaf and branch all over the tree, and this possibility is borne out to some degree by the character of leaf and caterpillar battles in other species.
There the caterpillar first cuts all the leaf veins leading back to the main stalk before settling in for a dinner which it hopes cannot then be communicated to the neighbouring leaves.
But this cannot be the whole story, for David Rhodes and others have discovered that this communication can even take place from tree to tree , where there is no root or other physical contact.
Now it is known that ripening tomatoes ripen faster when placed together on a window ledge, because they produce ethylene gas which stimulates their neighbours to faster and synchronous ripening.
Do plants, then, also communicate by means of airborne pheromones or in some other, perhaps more subtle fashion, as well?
This is an amazing scenario.
It means that similar — perhaps even dissimilar — species of plants and trees, growing in a group are in constant communication with each other.
It makes one look again at the plants in one's garden and wonder what secret messages are being passed in ways too subtle for our human senses to grasp.
For if they are able to communicate danger (what greater danger to a plant can there be that something destroying its leaves or roots?), one wonders what other signals are they able to pass between themselves?
The phenomenon of companion planting — growing different species near each other because they thrive better — is well known, though there is frequently no known reason why this should be so.
I have also noticed many times in my garden, how some strong-growing ‘weed’ appears to intimidate those plants who were previously growing there.
They recoil away as if the intruder were unpleasant to them — something more than simply shading them from sunlight.
Yet plants often thrive when the same species are massed together.
They they do not recoil from each other, but blend together in one mass.
So do such ‘predators’ of the plant kingdom emit unpleasant plant pheromones or some other disharmonious vibration, some subtle energy or perhaps some electromagnetic (e.g. infrared or microwave) oscillation, to disturb and ‘attack’the plants whose space they wish to overrun?
After all, their species-specific infrared radiations are detectable by insects — either as ‘visible scents’ from flower and leaf and  root, or from the leaf and hair structures behaving as frequency-specific aerials or from other biophysical processes which we do not understand.
So why should the plants themselves not communicate with each other by these same means?
Trees and plants do project different subtle atmospheres around them, as Dr Bach discovered when he used come of their flowers to produce remedies  containing their subtle vibration.
If humans can feel this, then why not the trees themselves?
The feeling under an old yew tree is quite different to that which one experiences beneath a chestnut, a willow or an oak.
These are the subtle mind currents which emanate from all living creatures and constitute a part of their aura.
If you have never experienced this, try it out for yourself one day when your mind is calm and you are not with companions who will ridicule you or otherwise disturb your peace of mind.
Reasonable inner quietness is essential for awareness of the subtle.
Every soul takes birth in a form appropriate to its mental qualities — its desires, impressions and entanglements from previous lives.
These are expressed in the outer form and ‘life-style’ of the creature — whether plant, tree, insect, animal or man.
The mental vibrations are also expressed in the aura which every incarnate being has around it.
In fact, it is this mental or auric vibration which shamans and herbalists feel when deciding which herbs are appropriate for which people and which condition.
For the mental vibration is directly expressed in the biochemistry and ‘life-style’ of the plant.
By observing the whole plant — gross and subtle — by listening with their mind as well as perceiving with their sense, nature's secrets can become known without the need of costly research laboratories.
Nature is perfectly balanced.
Everything that happens is by design and purpose.
Nothing is out of place.
From the wider point of view, this even includes man's disharmonious activities, for nature knows how to keep her own balance and even the disharmonies of a century are a very small matter in the context of the ages.
No species is inviolate, else the individuals would live indefinitely — a soul forever entombed in the same body; and this is not the purpose and meaning of life.
Life lives on life — or rather physical bodies live on physical bodies — in a closely woven tapestry of creation, preservation and destruction.
But the harmony of the whole is always maintained, though there can be changes of emphasis.
But just as the overall form of our body remains the same, despite the constant replacement of  the atoms and molecules of which it is made, so is the overall form of nature maintained as identifiably the same old physical universe, though the pattern may alter markedly over the course of time.
But the real source of interplay is at the inner, formative levels of Mind and life.
And that is the subject of the remaining chapters.