

HARDY PERENNIALS
The Right to Protest
JOHN ALDERSON
The rise and maintenance of liberal democracy in Britain owes much to protest, both lawful and unlawful.
From Magna Carta, conceded in 1215 to protesting barons by a reluctant monarch, down to the present, the contribution of protest to the commonwealth provides a lengthy roll.
As Sir John Harrington said in the sixteenth century:
Treason doth never prosper;
What's the reason?
For if it prosper
none dare call it treason.
Equally it has to be acknowledged that misguided and failed protest has added to the sum of human misery.
The unredressed grievances and protests of the Commons against the King, the Civil War, the end of the divine right of kings, the Great Reform movement in the nineteenth century, the founding of the trades union movement, and the suffragette movement of later years, are amongst the salient protest movements of our democratic pedigree.
The unwritten constitution and the established Church are amongst the progeny of protest.
And the very word has named a whole religious movement.
Not content with protest in the homelands, the spirit spreads and joins similar movements worldwide, so that dissidents protesting against tyranny become our modern heroes and heroines.
This is the bright side of protest.
The positive.
And this is the side with which this essay is concerned.
The relationship between rights and power is worthy of note.
Politics being concerned with the power to govern there is a constant tendency, a need perhaps, for governments to seek an accretion of  power.
This may in turn induce protest from subjects whose activation of any right or freedom to protest may make the task of governing more difficult.
On the other hand rights or freedoms to assemble, to process, and to exercise freedom of speech offer a safety valve.
This acts as an insurance against driving protest below the surface where it may take on more sinister forms.
In seeking to acquire protection against arbitrary power and undue repression, subjects, particularly vulnerable minority groups, need to be constantly sensitive to the use of this and other rights.
In fact the great universal struggle for human rights is to be seen against the background of human suffering brought about by excessive state power, its abuses and corruption.
The taming and harnessing of power is one of the tasks of protest.
But reason requires that protest itself needs to spring from and to recognise a liberal sentiment, since romantic revivalist passion and the protest which its enthusiasm engenders can be inimical to both the interests of the individual and free social cooperation.
In his book Power , written before the Second World War (1938), the late Bertrand Russell warned that ‘To admire collective enthusiasm is reckless and irresponsible, for its fruits are fierceness, war, death, and slavery.’
There are two ways in which consideration may be given to the question of the right to protest.
When it be proved that there is no legal right to protest in Britain, for example, there still remains the need to consider the existence of a moral right to do so.
To some there may be occasion to place a moral principle above a legal one.
This of course is the stuff of which martyrs are made, leading to sacrifice for a cause or causes in both religious and secular society.
Vladimir Bukovsky informs us in his book To Build a Castle (the story of his life as a dissenter) that for reading poems in Mayakovsky Square in Moscow, he and his friends were arrested by the KGB.
‘We perceived the Manifesto of Man as a summons to resistance,’ he says.
‘I'll go out on the square and into the city's ear.
I'll hammer a cry of despair.’
His arrest was the beginning of his twelve years in prison, labour camp, and psychiatric hospital.
The price of one man's protest.
Others of course fared worse.
In Western democracies such as Britain the protester may also be in conflict with the rule of law.
This conflict is illustrated by the question of conscientious objection in war time.
Pacifists of both  religious and secular persuasions place their moral right to protest against the taking of life above their legal duty to wage war and to kill.
The same moral principle and reasoning lie behind much of contemporary protest against the manufacture, possession and threatened use of nuclear weapons.
Since some people regard them as the ultimate madness and evil they deem it to be their moral right to break laws, mostly in a non-violent manner, as a form of protest.
It is even persuasively argued by people such as George Delft, in Humanising Hell , that the manufacture and possession of nuclear weapons is itself contrary to international law.
If this be true, it is argued, then governments have compromised their own moral position and therefore are morally at least in no better position than protesters who contravene laws.
It is always a matter of surprise for people who belong to nations with written constitutions to discover  that whilst the British enjoy many freedoms their constitution is not a written one.
Where written constitutions speak of positive rights the British tradition is to speak in negative terms.
For example, whilst there is an obligation in law on A not to interfere with B's freedom to pass along the highway, this of itself does not confer a positive right on B, though the effect may be the same.
Thus, a public assembly to protest, which on the face of it is lawful, becomes unlawful if it obstructs B's so-called ‘right of way’.
That there are different ways of looking at such constitutional niceties is amusingly illustrated by a story S.E. Finer reports as once going the rounds of Soviet-controlled Eastern Europe:
In England everything that is not prohibited is permitted.
In France everything that is prohibited is permitted.
In Germany everything that is not permitted is prohibited.
In the USSR everything that is permitted is prohibited.
Not only is there no guaranteed right in English law to protest but neither is there any guaranteed right to hold a public meeting.
If we do not have such rights then, it may be asked, what do we have?
It would be more accurate to say that although we do not have a right to such things we do have freedom to do them.
We have that freedom because the law has not taken it away, though it does limit its  exercise.
As we shall see, meetings and processions are subject to restrictive laws and police powers.
From time to time our freedoms can be diminished, extinguished, or subjected to a variety of controls.
This is particularly the case where freedom to protest in public places is concerned.
Freedoms are not likely to be enlarged under the British tradition since from the outset it is the notion of complete freedom which the law seeks to modify.
Even the famous Speaker's Corner in Hyde Park in London is subject to ministerial regulation, and the same applies to Trafalgar Square, another well-known venue for popular protest.
It is of interest to note that both venues were designated as public meeting places following outbreaks of public disorder and public clashes with the police when people were seeking to demonstrate and protest publicly in central London during the nineteenth century.
Freedoms may also be suspended by Emergency Regulations promulgated by the Privy Council during a national emergency.
Freedom of movement which may impede emergency operations may be suspended, property may be commandeered, and rationing of food, fuel and power may be imposed.
The law therefore does not confer an explicit right of protest but it circumscribes our freedom to do so, and what is left can be enjoyed.
The notion of freedom may permit of degrees therefore; whereas right is a right or it is nothing.
It is in the exercise of freedoms that we become aware of attracting obligations.
When the law imposes obligations it does so by seeking to balance conflicting claims.
Thus the freedom to act in a given way, e.g. to protest, attracts an obligation in doing so not to disproportionately interfere with other persons' freedoms or with society's interests.
When, for example, in a trade dispute pickets seek to persuade fellow workers who are not on strike to join them they exercise a freedom; but should they obstruct the workers' freedom to pass, the balance of the mutual exercise of freedoms is disturbed.
That of course is to express what can be a complicated legal matter in a simple way, but in highly charged and volatile situations the maintenance of such a balance by the police and trades union officials is not always easy.
So far we have been concerned to consider the question of the right or the freedom to protest, but the question may be raised as to whether there is a duty to protest.
Her Majesty's Parliamentary Opposition have of course a duty to oppose the Government of the day as part of their constitutional function.
But can it be said that such a duty lies on individuals and groups?
There may not be a legal duty but what about a moral one?
It is in this context that minorities who may feel that their causes are not adequately represented in Parliament wish to use their freedom of protest to draw attention to their plight.
Civil rights protests of various kinds provide examples of this need.
But is there a duty?
Consider what might happen if one lived in a society where through apathy nobody ever protested about anything no matter how obnoxious the laws became.
Such a society might soon become an appalling one when judged against civilised standards.
Equally if one lived in a society where everybody was constantly protesting against the smallest governmental peccadillo life would become intolerable.
In other words if there be a moral burden to protest it should be well aimed, and be for proper reasons, difficult though this may be to define.
But it can hardly be denied that there is a moral duty to protest when a society is governed unfairly, unjustly, or in a corrupt or slipshod manner.
It may be argued that in parliamentary democracies the people can protest every five years or so by casting their votes in the election of a new government.
In practice however it is possible to have a permanent majority which can deny the protest votes of minorities who are unable to bring about their desired changes.
When this situation exists the freedom to protest outside the parliamentary system is of great importance to such minorities.
Many people consider that the failure adequately to protest at the rise of European Fascism in the 1920s and 1930s was a failure of moral duty, whilst others point out that protesting was a highly dangerous business which led to imprisonment, to torture, and to death.
In the Epilogue to his great biography of Adolf Hitler, Alan Bullock comments: ‘The Germans, however, were not the only people who preferred in the 1930s not to know what was happening ad refused to call evil things by their true names.’
In various ways the British, French, Italians, the Poles and the Russians all failed when seeking ‘to buy Hitler off or use him to their own advantage’.
This example of failure to protest may seem too vast in the context of life in Britain in the 1980s and the many smaller, separate issues which now generate domestic protest.
Perhaps however it is only a matter of degree.
The Public Order Act of 1936 was passed by Parliament to control political rallies and marches by the British Union of Fascists and the counter-demonstrations which such rallies provoked.
It was an historic statute since for the first time it provided a statutory power for the banning of marches and processions of protest and demonstration.
The common law had largely been concerned with action to restore order after disorder had taken place.
The new and controversial power was a preventive one.
The police were empowered to direct and to route processions, but a ban could only come from the Home Secretary.
Where a chief police officer believed that a march would cause serious disorder which would not be amenable to control he could seek a ban through the local authority to the Home Secretary.
In London the Commissioner of Police applied directly to the Home Secretary.
There was no power to require meetings and marches of protest to be notified to the police, though most organisers did so.
During the 1970s and 1980s there were numerous protest marches which ended in widespread public disorder, and in two cases in fatal injuries.
The police more often came under physical attack and began to respond with a steadily escalating counter-violence.
It became necessary to review not only police training and equipment but also the law.
Following disturbances in Southall, London, in April 1979, when Asian youths assembled to protest against a National Front political rally during the general election, and when a New Zealand demonstrator was killed, some alleged by a blow from a police officer, the Home Secretary set in motion a review of the law.
Stimulated by a Green Paper (Cmd 7891) in 1980 and a White Paper (Cmd 9510) in 1985 the debate attracted considerable interest.
Proposals were made to give new powers to the police to control protest, as well as other processions and assemblies, and for the first time to require organisers to inform the police of their intentions in advance.
In 1986 the new Public Order Act came into force.
Protest movements had to face some reduction of their freedoms.
As Professor D.G.T. Williams has pointed out, differing philosophies on this question of demonstration were expressed in debate.
What  he calls the ‘disruption’ and the ‘safety valve’philosophies.
Assemblies of protest, it was said in the House of Lords debate (Lord Beloff), should receive less support than in the past.
Freedom for people to move around without interruption, it was said, was ‘of infinitely greater importance than guaranteeing the right to hold public meetings and to march in procession’.
On the other hand the advocates of the ‘safety valve’ view (Lord Scarman, and others) believed that
our society has become so complicated and our representative system of government so remote to many fellow citizens, that there has to be an alternative way of expressing dissent other than the constitutional way of doing it through representative government.
It may make for easier government and public convenience to restrict the tradition of marching and assembling for protest, but it would be a dangerous and a foolish idea to believe that public protest can somehow be laid aside as belonging to a bygone age.
The scale of injustice, cruelty, and tyranny in the world in 1988 cries out for continuing protest of various forms including the democratic and peaceful marches and assemblies which in the 1960s helped to achieve greater civil rights in the USA and in many other nations, whilst the same phenomenon, sometimes more disorderly, hastened the end of U.S. participation in the Vietnam War.
The duty to protest is as undeniable as the need.
Although there is no statutory right to protest by procession and assembly in their domestic law, the British have such a right under the European Convention on Human Rights.
Drawn up within the Council of Europe, the European Convention on Human Rights was signed on 4th November 1950 by the British and other member states and came into force on 3rd September 1953.
The Articles which are germane to the subject being discussed here are Articles 10 and 11.
Article 10 holds that
Everyone has the right to freedom of expression.
This right shall include freedom to hold opinions and to receive and impart information and ideas without interference by public authority and regardless of frontiers.
(Had this kind of European provision existed in the 1920s and 1930s it might and probably would have made it much more difficult for the Fascist and other extreme forms of government to take hold.)
The second positive right in this context is that provided for by Article 11.
It holds that
Everyone has the right to freedom of peaceful assembly and to freedom of association with others, including the right to join trade unions for the protection of his interests.
Of course the right is restricted to ‘freedom of peaceful assembly’, and further the rule of law must have its place as is enacted by paragraphs 2 of Articles 10 and 11.
Article 10(2) requires that ‘since it [freedom of expression]carries with it duties and responsibilities’ it
may be subject to such formalities, conditions, restrictions or penalties as are prescribed by law in a democratic society in the interests of national security, territorial integrity or public safety, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection of health or morals, for the protection of the reputation or rights of others, for preventing the disclosure of information received in confidence, or for maintaining the impartiality of the judiciary.
Article 11(2) carries a similar proviso.
It will be seen that under the European Convention an adequate balance is sought between the right to protest and the right to govern.
Protesters who break the law for their cause have to accept their torment as good martyrs have always done!
Another point of interest in both Articles is the reference in the sub-sections (2) to the question of the interests of national security and public safety, for this brings us to consider the question of ‘subversion’ in due course.
It has been held by the European Court of Human Rights that freedom of expression (Article 10) constitutes one of the essential foundations of democratic society, one of the basic conditions for its progress and for the development of every man (judgment of the Court of 7 December 1976, Handyside Case, Series A, No.24).
It is also held that freedom of expression is applicable not only to information or ideas favourably received but also to those that ‘offend, shock or disturb either the State or any sector of the population’.
The European Commission on Human  Rights was of the view that seeking to persuade members of the armed forces to disobey military orders which rendered a particular person liable to prosecution for ‘incitement to disaffection’ properly justified a prosecution under Article 10, paragraph 2 of the Convention.
In this case the person concerned was a pacifist, and pacifism as a philosophy fell within the ambit of freedom of thought and conscience protected by Article 9, but it was held that the protester was not manifesting her belief in the sense of Article 9 (Report of the Commission of 12 October 1978, Application No. 7050/75).
In another case under Article 11 the Commission recorded: ‘The freedom of assembly is a major part of the political and social life of any country.
It is an essential part of the activities of political parties.’
It found that the prohibition of public meetings for political purposes, the requirement of permission from the police authority to hold such meetings in private and the authorisation of the military authority for the holding of indoor lectures were not consistent with Article 11.
Under this particular case the Commission held that the unfettered right of allocation of these authorities went towards creating a police state (Report of the Commission, 5 November 1969, Yearbook 12, p.170).
There are also a number of cases where the Commission has held that the banning of meetings and procession for a restricted period because of fears for public safety, such bans being under the democratic laws of a State, were not in contravention of the Convention.
Powers given to the authorities under the Public Order Act of 1986 are clearly within the provisions of the European Convention on Human Rights Article 11.
The extremes in controlling freedom of protest are to be found in those states which are very authoritarian, dictatorial, or totalitarian.
Elsewhere there are varying degrees of control.
In 1985 the Home Affairs Committee of the House of Commons published the findings of their inquiries into the Police Special Branch.
Protesters and their organisations may fall to the covert scrutiny or surveillance of the police through Special Branch (and M15).
The Home Office guidelines on the work of a Special Branch are published in the Select Committee Report of 1985, from which it will be seen how protest by individuals and groups might bring them to Special Branch attention:
A Special Branch gathers information about threats to public order.
Such information will enable the Branch to provide assessments of whatever marches, meetings, demonstrations and pickets pose any threat to public order and help the officer to determine an appropriate level of policing.
It also
assists the Security Service [M15, M16]in defending the realm against attempts at espionage and sabotage or from the actions of persons and organisations whether directed from within or without the country which may be judged to be subversive to the State.
It is this concept of ‘subversion’ which poses problems.
The Home Office Guidelines on Work of a Special Branch define ‘subversion’:
Subversive activities are those which threaten the safety or well being of the State, and which are intended to undermine or overthrow Parliamentary democracy by political, industrial or violent means.
There is no reference in this definition to the law.
To be a ‘subversive’ therefore one does not have to be in breach of the law.
There are two parts to ‘subversion’ as w ill be seen.
It must threaten the safety or well-being of the state (but what does that mean?) and actions must be intended (constructively as well as directly?) to undermine (change?) parliamentary democracy by political (lawful?), industrial (lawful?) or violent means.
Various combinations of the elements of the definition of subversion can result in lawful protesters being subject to Special Branch surveillance and records which in turn may result in injustice, for example public service careers may be damaged, government contracts denied and so on.
Some of us believe that efforts should be made to define subversion in terms which would involve illegal activity as opposed to nuisance, inconvenience, and the like.
Undercover police encroachments on lawful protest and protesters are undesirable and unnecessary, it is felt.
The following suggested definition was put before the Home Affairs Committee by myself:
For the purposes of civil policing, subversive activities are those activities directly or indirectly involving criminal  conduct, which threaten national security, or which are calculated to overthrow or undermine parliamentary democracy and the institutions of the state.
In his report into what is known as ‘the Profumo Affair’ in 1963, Lord Denning was of the view that the term' ‘subversive’should relate to ‘people who would contemplate the overthrow of government by unlawful means’.
In other words the protest would need to involve activity which, it could be fairly held, the protesters should have known was against the law.
If not, then it is no business of the police to maintain files, to intercept telephone calls and to examine mail, all of which are part of the government's business when laws are broken or threatened, and only then, under the very restrictive provisions of the law.
This then is a convenient place to turn to consider the wider role of the police in relation to protest.
Protest which involves marches, processions and static demonstrations and meetings are almost always likely to involve the police.
London being the capital city is always likely to be the stage on which protest both national and international is carried out.
But in the most unlikely of places the announcement that a nuclear power station, a motorway, an institution for criminals, and so on is to be built, is likely to result in protest which requires police assistance, and sometimes law enforcement.
It cannot be stressed too strongly that the police in a democracy have a positive duty to facilitate the enjoyment of freedoms.
That is why the police have to secure the free passage of the highway, to assist industrial pickets to enjoy the right to communicate to workers, to protect public speakers who may arouse indignation or worse, and so on.
Freedom to protest in public would be less meaningful if the police were not committed to ensuring that it was unimpeded within the Queen's Peace.
It is salutary to be reminded that during its early years the processions of the newly created Salvation Army were often the subject of violent attack from other protesters, sometimes hooligan groups, who formed a counter-force called the Skeleton Army.
Troops were called out and the Riot Act was proclaimed in Worthing in 1884.
Earlier in Weston-Super-Mare Salvation Army leaders had been arrested for proceeding with a march contrary to a ban placed upon it by the local magistrates.
The inability of the police in small provincial towns to protect Salvation Army processions from violent attack seemed a characteristic of the times.
A more contemporary example of this problem facing the police when they have to decide upon the choice between seeking to ban a procession or to protect and facilitate its progress is well illustrated by the events of Saturday 13 August 1977 in Lewisham, when the National Front marched through the busy streets in a provocative manner, much to the distress and anger of local residents, particularly those belonging to ethnic minorities.
The police faced a dilemma.
Were they in the interests of freedom to follow tradition and protect and facilitate a march, albeit odious in its characteristics, or were they to seek a ban under the Public Order Act 1936?
In the end the police decided not to seek to ban the march but to police the route and to provide protection for the marchers against the violence which had been threatened by opposing factions.
The Lewisham Council went so far as to apply to the High Court for an Order of Mandamus requiring the Commissioner of Police to seek to have the march banned.
The application was refused.
Here was a march for political purposes with racial characteristics and though legal and provided with police protection, it was to become the subject of great protest before it began.
Once it began the protest turned from non-violent to violent attack.
Over 3,000 police officers were deployed.
The violent attacks on the police by the counter-demonstrators who used bottles, bricks, and other assorted missiles resulted in a large number of casualties.
Two hundred and seventy police and sixty members of the public were uninjured.
Writing in his memoirs,McNee's Law , Sir David McNee, Commissioner of Police at the time of the Lewisham affair sets out clearly the dilemma which faces the police in these matters.
He was sufficiently influenced by the Lewisham events to seek a ban on similar marches in the months that followed.
Under the provisions of Part H of the Public Order Act of 1986 the police have been given greater powers in the regulation of processions and assemblies.
These new statutory powers, which are not without their doubters and critics, are in addition to those which already exist under the common law.
In future those wishing to organise a procession in protest are obliged to supply the police with written notice of their intentions at least six days before the event.
The Act describes public processions intended ‘to demonstrate support for or opposition to the views or actions of any person or body of persons’ or ‘to publicise a cause or campaign’or ‘to mark  or commemorate an event’as requiring notice to the police.
There are some exceptions to the general rule.
Spontaneous procession leaving no time for notice may be exempted but there are some imponderables yet to be clarified in practice.
The idea behind the notice is to give the police and others such as highway authorities time to plan routes and supervision to avoid undue disruption of day-to-day use of public highways.
It is of interest in this connection to note that Lord Scarman, who was not in favour of similar provisions in his report on the Red Lion Square disturbances in 1978, expressed a different view following the Brixton disorders in 1981, when he included recommendations in his report that the Public Order Act of 1936 should be amended to include ‘a requirement of advance notice of a procession to the police’.
Sir Robert Mark, Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis (1972 — 1977), had always advocated the need for the police to have adequate notice of processions in public places and included such a suggestion in evidence to Lord Scarman at the time of the Red Lion Inquiry.
But the Public Order Act of 1986 goes further than either Lord Scarman or Sir Robert Mark had envisaged by giving new powers to the police to impose conditions on public assemblies as well as on processions.
It has always been regarded as desirable that the police should be seen as taking no particular stance regarding political activity and that they should not be placed in a position where decisions of a party political nature are concerned.
The decision to impose conditions on public assemblies therefore will have to be handled by the police with particular sensitivity when political passions are involved.
It is compatible with the order-maintenance function of the police that they should have power to regulate both public processions and assemblies, and the 1986 Act refines their powers to do this.
It speaks of ‘serious public disorder’, ‘serious damage to property’, ‘serious disruption to the life of the community, and intimidation’(the latter with strike picketing in mind) as justifying the imposition of conditions.
As with so many of these police powers which impinge on the rights of protesters to freedom of speech and assembly the high quality of police understanding and reasonableness is crucial to success.
There will always be occasions when conflict of view between protesters and the police will arise.
When this does happen so much depends on the attitudes of the court for the safeguarding of freedoms which are nowhere written down as  such.
Failing these safeguards then public opinion is the final court of appeal.
It is a measure of the tension and complexities of our contemporary society that the police have gradually been transformed from a universal corpus of ordinary police officers performing all manner of general duties, including public order maintenance, to one which now in part approaches the quasi-military-order police model of continental Europe and elsewhere.
As the plural society of the 1960s developed its many-faceted nature and the ethnic diversity of the inner city neighbourhoods became marked, the perceived need to protest increased.
The Civil Rights Movement fuelled by the Martin Luther King protests on behalf of black U.S. citizens touched a chord in the feelings of oppressed people in many countries.
In the United Kingdom the Roman Catholic and Republican minority of Northern Ireland took to the streets in protest against the injustices meted out to their kind by the Provincial Government and condoned in Whitehall (see Cameron Report 1969 Cmd 532).
Protest attracted violence to which it reacted with sometimes devastating consequences.
The police and the Army were caught up in a public order crisis which continues to plague us and which has given rise to the most damaging terrorist campaign.
The training and equipping of the police in Northern Ireland to respond in quasi-military fashion was later to serve as a model for police on mainland Britain.
The international furore over the excesses of the war in Vietnam found expression on the streets of London and elsewhere in 1968.
The police resisted the temptation to abandon by now traditional methods of using ordinary foot police without special equipment to maintain order in such places as Grosvenor Square where in 1968 tens of thousands of protesters sought to lay siege to the U.S. Embassy.
Violence was kept to a low level indeed, by international standards of the day and by present-day British experience.
Writing in the Sunday Times on 27th October 1968 about the Grosvenor Square demonstrations, Miss Mary Macarthy suggested it was ‘a unique improbable event, something to cherish in our memory book, for, short of Utopia, we shall not see it again’.
Plastic shields were first issued to the British police following injuries from the throwing of missiles at the 1976 Notting Hill Carnival.
Later, following riots in St Paul's (Bristol), Brixton, and  other cities in 1980 and 1981, military-style helmets and flame-proof uniforms were issued to police formations, and following the riot on the Broadwater Farm Estate in Tottenham, London, in 1985 the police were equipped with plastic bullets, C.S. gas and armoured vehicles, which had proved the mainstay of Britain's colonial police and Royal Ulster Constabulary riot formations.
Britain now has a quasi-military police potential for dealing with violent protest.
These changes in our institution of police can bring little satisfaction to those who had come to believe that the British had found some special formula for dealing with control of public protest.
Perhaps it all goes to confirm that a democratic society will inevitably get the police it deserves as it responds to new pressures.
No consideration of the right to protest would be complete without special reference to the traditional form of industrial protest through picketing and demonstrating.
After more than a hundred years of the recognition of industrial picketing as a democratic mechanism the official Code of Practice issued by the Department of Employment says: ‘There is no legal ‘right to picket’ as such but peaceful picketing has long been recognised as lawful.’
The Code itself imposes no legal obligations and failure to observe it does not by itself render anyone liable to proceedings.
In the light of the misunderstandings and bitterness which can affect all the parties involved in an industrial dispute, it is perhaps regrettable that no attempt has been made adequately to define the legal rights of workers involved in such disputes.
Too often it is left to the police and union officials to work these things out in a hostile environment where clear thinking is at a premium.
The Code of Practice on Picketing seeks to outline the law.
Sections ‘B’ and ‘C’outline the provisions of the civil and criminal law respectively and Section ‘D’describes the role of the police in enforcing the law.
The Code also gives guidance on good practice on the conducting of picketing.
In most cases the officials of the unions involved and the police arrange matters amicably, but there are notorious cases where feelings of injustice and unfairness run so high that violence is in attendance.
The miners' strike of 1984/5 was without doubt one of the most important and serious disputes of its kind for at least sixty years, that is since the General Strike of 1926.
In the context of the right or the freedom to protest it merits special attention.
It began as a protest  against the alleged peremptory nature of the decision by the NCB to close some working coal mines which were said to be uneconomic.
It was the first major industrial dispute to test the Conservative Government's industrial legislation, or at least potentially to do so.
In the event the National Coal Board decided not to invoke the powers provided by the Employment Acts of 1980 and 1982.
These two Acts provided, amongst other things, powers to fine trades unions and to sequestrate their funds should they fail to control picketing and protest within the limits set down.
The legislation sought to restrict picketing of a place of work to those who were employed there.
Secondary picketing, that is people picketing premises at which they were not employed, could be in breach of the civil, not the criminal, law.
The police were not competent to enforce the civil provisions, which required that employers should do so.
The National Coal Board having decided not to do this, control of the protest fell more and more to the police and to the criminal courts.
This in turn drew many striking and picketing miners into conflict with the police over the rights and wrongs of conducting protest during industrial disputes.
It no doubt increased the degree of violence between the pickets and the police.
A typical argument would be along the following lines.
Some hundreds of striking miners would turn up to picket and to persuade working miners to join them.
The Code of Practice on picketing provides that organisers should ensure that ‘the number of pickets does not exceed six at any entrance to a workplace; frequently a smaller number will be appropriate’.
Miners complained that the police were unfairly restricting their traditional rights and in any case that the police had no responsibility for enforcing the civil law.
The police on the other hand argued that their task was to uphold the law, to keep the peace, and to facilitate the entry of non-striking miners into workplaces; mass picketing was obstructive and intimidating, both of which could give rise to arrest and charge for criminal offences.
Sometimes violence took place, which only added to an already bitter situation.
At the peak of the strike in June 1984 some 10,000 pickets massed against a very large force of police at Orgreave in South Yorkshire.
Protest had taken on dimensions never seen before as mounted and riot police in their new formations and with their new equipment clashed with pickets, resulting in many injuries and arrests.
From the early days of the strike there were allegations and  counter-allegations concerning freedom of assembly, procession, and protest, which caused the National Council of Civil Liberties to constitute an independent inquiry.
Their terms of reference were —
To inquire into and thereby establish the fullest possible account and the civil liberties implications of the role of the police, the police authorities and the criminal courts in the events arising from and relating to the NUM dispute which began in March 1984 (see NCCL Report 1984).
The evidence which the Inquiry was able to gather and to consider indicated that the events had dislocated the constitutional arrangements for police accountability and that there now existed a need for a fundamental review of our police system.
It appeared to some that somehow the police had been left to solve or to break the strike by impeding the exercise of the rights of persuasion and protest aimed at bringing out the miners who were still at work.
Others were of the view that the police were properly protecting working miners and ensuring their freedom of passage.
As in all such complicated and protracted events, both had right on their side at times which only served to perpetuate feelings of grievance.
This was a protest in which many tens of thousands of miners and their families suffered greatly for their belief in the rightness of their protest.
It may be rightly concluded that it was a sad affair.
The story of this episode in the industrial life of the country, of its police and courts, and of the many side issues involved, is far too complicated and lengthy for fuller treatment in an essay of this kind, but it is a story nevertheless of immense importance to the tradition of the freedom to protest and of other freedoms.
The growing body of literature on the subject should be referred to for more detailed treatment.
The Public Order Act of 1986 does not specifically refer to picketing or industrial disputes at all but merely, makes general provisions which might apply to such issues.
The police discretion and powers under the legislation already referred to will, as usual, bring industrial protesters and pickets into a relationship with the police and it is on that relationship that the quality of freedom to protest and its scope will be worked out.
That it should be worked out fairly is as important for the police as for the protesters since the police in their non-public order role, for example in the normal course of investigating and detecting crime, require the cooperation  and help of people similar to those whose freedoms to protest they are not only to control but to control fairly.
The wise use of police discretion and the genuine effort not to go too far in their protest on the part of the pickets and demonstrators is the formula for resolution of this aspect of conflict.
That protest is of the essence of true democratic activity is axiomatic.
There is little problem in getting agreement to such an assertion.
It is on the capacity of an institution or of a society in its political traditions and mechanisms to successfully manage protest that so much depends.
A protest can extend from a lone voice on a box at a street corner to a riot or even to a civil war.
Whether the former degenerates into the latter sometimes depends on the skill and with which early protest is handled.
Certainly there is an abundance of examples in history to illustrate that failure to redress genuine grievance in its early stages has called for a very heavy price indeed later on.
Even in contemporary Western democracies, a government so powerfully entrenched that it may not feel troubled by the agitation of its enemies, detractors or of its powerless minorities, may court the danger of violent reaction.
Terrorism has been described as the protest of the powerless and we have witnessed a handful of idealistic youth hold the world's mightiest nation at bay through selective hostage-taking.
Nor will the banning of protest avail without ruthless determination to silence the brave.
We have witnessed dissenters bring international opprobrium upon powerful nations too, and gradually force them to relax their denial of freedom to protest.
How a nation safeguards the freedom of the meanest and least powerful of its people to protest, and how, it goes about redressing the just grievances of those and of others, will determine in part its degree of civilisation and its right to a place in the pantheon of nations.
As for the people, they are constantly challenged by the need for eternal vigilance and by such sentiments as those of Edmund Burke in his speech on arrival at Bristol on 13 October 1774:
The only liberty I mean, is a liberty connected with order; that not only exists along with order and virtue but, which cannot exist at all without them.
Obscenity: Manners and Morals in the Media
JAMES FERMAN
‘We had fed the heart on fantasies
The heart's grown brutal from the fare.’
W.B. Yeats
‘Meditations in Time of Civil War’
In most fields, the criminal law deals only with the outer limits of the permissible.
Editorial standards in the media operate for the most part well inside those limits, with the criminal law invoked chiefly against publications which have as their primary function the exploitation of those limits through material traded as ‘forbidden fruit’.
In a free society, the regulation of such material is always problematic, with social mores shifting from generation to generation — and not always in the same direction.
In Britain in the early days of cinema, prosecutions were brought not for obscenity, but for breaches of licensing conditions, and when certification became the rule in 1923, legal actions ceased for half a century until sex suddenly became a burning media issue in most Western countries.
The Obscene Publications Act 1959 had exempted theatre, cinema, and broadcasting from the provisions of the Act, since all were subject to formal regulation by public authorities.
The extent to which British society has, until recently, found such institutions congenial derives largely from an unbroken and perhaps originally feudal tradition of social networks and obligations which were imposed on and accepted by all members of society, whatever their status.
Voluntary codes of practice are still widely accepted in Britain, and public authorities like the BBC, the  Independent Broadcasting Authority, the Cable Television Authority, the Advertising Standards Authority, and the British Board of Film Classification (the BBFC) have for many years been entrusted with responsibility for media standards.
American institutions are more legalistic, adhering to principles enshrined in a written Constitution where all rights derive from the fundamental principles of liberty and equality.
In Britain, it has seemed natural to refer to a third guiding principle, fraternity, which derives from the communal or associative traditions of British society.
Far from being mere pious aspiration, the principle of fraternity carries great practical implications, finding direct expression even in the law of the land.
Lord Denning has written that the whole of the English law of criminal negligence, and indeed the biggest change in civil law this century, derives from the commandment to love thy neighbour enunciated by Lord Atkins in 1932, when he ruled that, even if a man cannot love his neighbour, he must still refrain from harming him, and that in law his neighbour was anyone who was so closely and directly affected by his actions that he ought to have had that in mind when he acted.
The English law of negligence is based on the principle of fraternity, which in turn has its roots in the English common law.
It is unsurprising, therefore, that the statutory approach to obscenity should also be grounded in our civilised concern for the obligations we owe our fellow men.
The test of obscenity laid down in the Obscene Publications Act 1959 derives from the common-law offence of obscene libel, which rests on
whether the tendency of the matter charged as obscenity is to deprave and corrupt those whose minds are open to such immoral influence and into whose hands such a publication might fall.
[Hicklin (1868)]
Parliament discarded the phrase ‘those whose minds are open to such immoral influence’, with its overtones of whether or not a gentleman would let his servants read such and such a book, since the words ‘deprave and corrupt’ already carried the sense of ‘immoral influence’, together with a tacit assumption that writings or other works of the imagination could have the effect of tending to make men wicked.
This is still the essence of the test, according to which 
an article shall be deemed to be obscene if its effect or (where the article comprises two or more distinct items) the effect of any one of its items is, if taken as a whole, such as to tend to deprave and corrupt persons who are likely, having regard to all the relevant circumstances, to read, see or hear the matter contained or embodied in it.
[section 1(1)]
A defence is provided in section 4(1) of the Act for cases in which ‘it is proved that publication…is justified as being for the public good on the ground that it is in the interests of science, literature, art or learning, or other objects of general concern’.
When, in 1968, a new Theatres Act swept away the censorship of plays by the Lord Chamberlain, it was replaced with the 1959 test of obscenity, but added a qualifying provision that no case could be brought without the consent of the Attorney General.
The public good defence for performances which were proved to be ‘in the interests of drama, opera, ballet or any other art, or of literature or learning’ omitted the words ‘or other objects of general concern’, thereby rejecting the so-called ‘therapeutic defence’according to which pornography was claimed to be ‘psychologically beneficial’to some persons ‘in that it relieves their sexual tensions and may divert them from anti-social activities’.
The Court of Appeal had ruled that whether or not such material might be ‘beneficial to those who were sexually repressed or perverted or deviant’ did not make its publication ‘an object of general concern’, since otherwise any form of pornography could be defended on the ground that it was beneficial to some people, if not to the public at large.
This distinction soon proved acceptable to juries, who were increasingly inclined to acquit matter which depicted or described apparently normal, healthy or pleasurable sex between consenting adults.
It was films depicting behaviour which seemed perverse or deviant which were seen as more suitable for private therapy than for public consumption, since the possibility of harm to at least a proportion of the wider public could not be ruled out.
The European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms, to which the United Kingdom is signatory, enshrines the right to freedom of expression, but acknowledges the extent to which its exercise carries with it duties and responsibilities, including the ‘prevention of disorder and crime’ and the ‘protection of health or morals’.
It is fair to say that  the British obscenity test is one of the few in the world which attempts to focus specifically on the ‘protection of health or morals.
Since harm was the guiding principle, section 2(4) provided that‘a person publishing an article shall not be proceeded against for an offence at common law…where it is of the essence of the offence that the matter is obscene’.
But this protection would not be available to theatre, cinema and broadcasting, since all had been specifically excluded from the provisions of the Act.
The theatre was given its own legal status in the Theatres Act 1968, but the anomalous position of the cinema was not revealed until 1975, when the President and Secretary of the BBFC were charged with aiding and abetting an indecent exhibition, namely the showing by Classic Cinemas Ltd of the Swedish sex-education film Language of Love .
The magistrate dismissed the case against Lord Harlech and Stephen Murphy on the grounds that they had acted in good faith and with due care and attention to the issues involved.
The error, if such it was, was an honest error of judgment, but Classic Cinemas Ltd were committed for trial at the Old Bailey to determine whether the film itself was indeed grossly indecent.
This same charge had first been brought against the sequel,More about the Language of Love , which was refused a certificate by the BBFC but granted a local ‘X’ by the GLC.
A charge of public exhibition of indecent acts or things had not been brought for 100 years, since a showman was convicted of keeping a booth on Epsom Downs for the purpose of an indecent exhibition.
The Law Commission, in reviewing such cases, said that to the extent that they ‘disclose a consistent principle, they seem to indicate a species of public nuisance, where to do the act is enough to constitute the offence, and innocent motive is irrelevant’.
The More About the Language of Love case,R v. 
Jacey (London) Ltd and Others (1975), demonstrated clearly that showing a film on licensed premises could be indicted as an indecent public exhibition.
Indeed, the judge had directed the jury's attention to the final minutes of the film, which depicted a couple making love in explicit anatomical detail, some of which was photographed in close shot.
If this is not grossly indecent, he asked, you may be led to wonder what is.
The jury took twenty minutes to return a verdict of guilty.
A year later, in R v. 
Classic Cinemas Ltd ex parte Blackburn , the jury considered the film's predecessor,Language Of Love , and returned an acquittal after only seventeen minutes.
The case had  taken two weeks at the Old Bailey, the first devoted to legal argument before the jury was sworn.
In this case, the question of mens rea was crucial, the defence arguing the relevance of the BBFC's decision to refuse a national certificate in 1970 so that the film could first be assessed by a representative sample of local licensing authorities who were more closely in touch with community standards.
When elected councillors were given the chance to judge the film, 127 councils voted to approve its exhibition to adult audiences, whilst seven went so far as to permit entry to 14-year-olds.
Thus, when the film was resubmitted to the Board in 1973, it was classified ‘X’(18) for nationwide release, with only a few scattered councils maintaining their ban on local screenings.
At the Old Bailey, the defence argued that after such painstaking tests of public taste, their clients must have had an honest mind in relation to its subsequent exhibition.
The test of outrage was also considered, and was countered by evidence that in the two years from July 1973 to June 1975, the film had been shown in 475 cinemas before an audience of approximately one and a half million people without a single complaint to the police or any local authorities until the present case.
This, it was argued, failed to meet Lord Simon's definition of outrage in Knuller v. 
DPP (1972), that ‘outrage in public decency goes considerably beyond offending the susceptibilities of, or even shocking, reasonable people’.
The lack of protest was accepted by the jury as proof of the lack of outrage.
The verdict ultimately turned on the test of indecency formulated by Lord Reid in the same case: ‘indecency includes anything which an ordinary decent man or woman would find to be shocking, disgusting and revolting.’
Comparable judgments used terms like ‘lewd’, ‘offensive’, ‘recognised standards of propriety’ and ‘the ordinary modesty of the average man’, all of them largely subjective responses to behaviour which is legal in itself, but which becomes unacceptable when viewed by others.
These are all, in effect, tests of manners, not morals, since propriety is a measure of the appropriateness of public behaviour to a particular time or place.
The relevance of such a test to works of art, particularly literature, which deals with private, not public behaviour, is hard to see.
‘If art teaches anything,’ said Joseph Brodsky, the expatriate Russian poet in his Nobel Acceptance Speech of 1987, ‘…it is the privateness of the human condition,’and this privateness is maintained  even when the experience is reenacted in public, or semi-public, surroundings.
Indecency is a singularly inappropriate test for regulating dramatic depictions of intimacy, particularly where the audience has expressed a conscious choice to view the performance through the purchase of tickets.
It is reasonable, of course, for communities to impose limits on the circumstances of public or semi-public performance, provided there is also a degree of privilege attaching to performances for which the public has made an informed choice.
Classification by audience age has proved an acceptable limitation to impose on a cinema audience, and may also warn of the type of experience on offer.
But such protection derives from licensing conditions which are stricter than those in the theatre, where shows like Oh, Calcutta!had to rely on advisory ‘adults only’ notices at the box-office.
It is unsurprising that the cinema should have sought legal parity with the theatre on questions of obscenity, which it did in a petition forwarded to the Home Secretary by the BBFC in 1977 on behalf of the Cinema Consultative Committee, which comprised delegates from the film industry and from all the associations of local licensing authorities in Great Britain and Northern Ireland.
The local councils had seen the legal implications of common-law indecency in the writ of mandamus awarded against the Greater London Council for granting a local ‘X’ certificate to the film More About the Language of Love .
The Law Commission had strongly recommended in its 1976 Report on Conspiracy and Criminal Law Reform that cinema films should be brought within the scope of the Obscene Publications Act, since Parliament's supposition that ‘such exhibitions…are most unlikely…to be prosecuted’ had already proved unfounded.
The Commission had taken much of its case from the evidence of the BBFC, differing only in proposing that the private exhibition of films on domestic occasions should not be subject to criminal sanction provided that no person under 16 was present and no charge was made for the exhibition or for anything provided in connection with it.
If the 1959 Act had proved itself suitable only for the control of sexual depictions or descriptions where the question was one of manners rather than morals, then the recommendation of the Commission might have been acceptable, since sex between consenting adults in private was no longer a matter for the British criminal law.
But the Board was concerned far less about the private  use of ‘blue movies’ as an aphrodisiac than about the increasing taste for sadism and other ‘bizarre practices’in films and about the worrying influx into Britain of child pornography.
Were such matter to find its way into the domestic blue-film market, the Board argued, it could have a very real tendency to deprave and corrupt, not just those of 16, but of any age, who had been encouraged to view such material in private.
At the very least, we urged, the age of exemption should be raised from 16 to 18.
When the Commission's proposals were incorporated into the Criminal Law Act 1977, the Board took pains to convince the Home Office that the viewing of films in private could as easily become a social activity, with some persons at greater risk in a private flat than in a public cinema.
As a result, no exemption was provided in the 1977 Act for private showings of films in domestic dwellings.
Instead, the amendment simply deleted the proviso excluding cinema films from the range of publications caught by the 1959 Act, which already extended to anything ‘containing or embodying material to be read or looked at or both, any sound record, and any film or other record of a picture or pictures’.
The words ‘or other record’ became crucial with the growth of the video industry, when the ‘deprave and corrupt’test was used with great effect to stem the tide of what became known as ‘video nasties’, where viewing in private was no defence.
The Board also succeeded in 1977 in persuading Ministers that, since the deprave and corrupt test would be applied by the BBFC in assessing the suitability of films for exhibition to the public, those same films should not suffer ‘double jeopardy’ in the sense of being subject both to censorship through prior restraint and also to the risk of private prosecutions for obscenity.
The result was a consent provision like that of the Theatres Act 1968, whereby no proceedings could be instituted except by or with the consent of the Director of Public Prosecutions (the DPP).
Interestingly, no similar safeguard has yet been considered appropriate for the video industry under the terms of the Video Recordings Act 1984.
Although law reform was at hand, the government found it politic in 1977 to set up a Home Office Committee on Obscenity, Indecency, Violence and Film Censorship under the Chairmanship of the Cambridge Professor of Philosophy, Bernard Williams.
This distinguished Committee conducted the widest-ranging review of  the subject ever undertaken in Britain, and among its conclusions published in November 1979 were two far-reaching proposals:
(1)
that save where persons under 16 have been exploited for sexual purposes or persons of any age have been made to suffer actual physical harm, sexual depictions should no longer be subject to the criminal law; and
(2)
that violent and sadistic sexual depictions on film constituted such a major social problem that film censorship even for adults should continue.
This later recommendation surprised many who had expected a liberal/academic working party of ‘the great and the good’ to turn their backs on the idea of retaining a paternalistic and arguably outmoded system of adult censorship.
But if some members of the Williams Committee had started out with such an attitude, a look at the evidence seemed to have converted them.
Indeed, so firmly did they reject the view that adults should be given the right to choose their own cinema entertainment —‘whatever turns you on’, as the saying went — that their Report marked the beginning of a historic swing of the pendulum away from what can now be seen as the libertarian heyday of British media law.
After the Williams Report, it was very hard to argue convincingly for a laissez-faire approach to screen entertainment.
The advent of video confirmed the need for vigilance, but it was Williams who marshalled the evidence, and did so in cogent terms:
We should make the point that the violence we have seen on film (from films refused a certificate, or cut before the film could be certified) far exceeds in nastiness anything likely to be seen on television.
It is not simply the extremity of the violence which concerns us: we found it extremely disturbing that highly explicit depictions of mutilation, savagery, menace and humiliation should be presented for the entertainment of an audience in a way that appeared to emphasise the pleasures of sadism.
Indeed, some of the film sequences we saw seemed to have no purpose or justification other than to reinforce or sell the idea that it can be highly pleasurable to inflict injury, pain or humiliation (often in a sexual context) on others.
[Williams, para 12.10]
In such circumstances, it seemed surprising that the Report  should recommend the repeal of the Obscene Publications Act and consequent decriminalisation of all forms of publication other than those narrowly defined as causing actual harm to performers, whilst urging for films, and films alone, the continuation of an administrative system of prior restraint.
Even more surprising was the Committee's rejection of the ‘deprave and corrupt’ test, since the selling of the idea that sadism can be highly pleasurable, as described above, or the reinforcing of that idea in those already attracted to it, must surely epitomise what was intended by the phrase ‘deprave and corrupt’, at least as that test is interpreted by the BBFC.
In its evidence to Williams, the Board had strongly supported the statutory test of obscenity because of its unique relevance to the sort of films which were repeatedly found most pernicious.
Sadly, the Board was virtually alone in this support, and to understand why, we must return for a moment to the sixties, when the test was used almost exclusively to curb the spread of erotica.
The Williams Report offers a compendium of disenchantment with the 1959 test based on a decade or more of misinterpretation.
Thus in R v Stanley (1965), Lord Chief Justice Parker explained the meaning of the terms ‘indecent’ and ‘obscene’by suggesting that they both convey the same idea, ‘namely, offending against recognised standards of propriety, indecent being at the lower end of the scale and obscene at the upper end’.
This sliding-scale approach might still have relevance to the Post Office Act, on which that case turned, but it has little to do with obscenity as defined in the 1959 Act.
Nor, in our view, has Lord Parker's observation, that ‘an indecent article is not necessarily obscene, whereas an obscene article almost certainly must be indecent’.
Certainly, when videos celebrating rape and sexual torture were brought before juries under the deprave-and-corrupt test, questions of indecency as measured by degrees of visual explicitness proved immaterial.
Whether or not genitalia were seen, either in long shot or close-up, was far less to the point than whether the sexual behaviour displayed was criminal in itself and yet presented solely for the purposes of sexual arousal.
Even in the sixties, the words ‘a tendency to deprave and corrupt’ had led the courts from manners to morals.
Lord Justice Salmon tried to elucidate the sort of tendencies that might be caught, such as‘(1) to induce erotic desires of a heterosexual kind, or (2) to promote homosexuality or other sexual perversions, or (3) drug-taking, or (4) brutal violence’.
The range was wide, but only the first two attracted much notice, the Arts Council Working Party pointing out in 1969 that since these were not crimes at all, how could it be ‘a heavily punishable crime to ‘induce’ these particular non-crimes?’
If obscenity laws were really about sexual conformity, their Report continued, then ‘no Royal Commission could…draw an intelligible line between what is acceptable and what is not acceptable…[nor could]such a Commission find any evidence that anyone has been corrupted or…depraved by pornography’.
The 1959 Act was a law ‘to regulate the evolution of private mores’, said the Report, begging the question of what particular weight was to be given to this word ‘mores’.
Were ‘mores’ matters of serious concern to the community, for example, and what significance ought they to have in a court of law?
Mr Justice Stable told a jury that the words ‘to deprave and corrupt’ must not be construed as ‘to shock and disgust’, which is not a criminal offence, the argument Lord Gardiner had deployed in gaining an acquittal in the Lady Chatterley case.
Yet if this were indeed the law, then surely the Act must have had as its object something of greater moment than the nudie magazines and nude pamphlets which British juries were asked so regularly to assess for depravity.
If the tests were truly designed for the control of ‘anti-social influences in the arts’, as the Report said, then how could the law seem other than misconceived when a decade or more of legal scrutiny and barristers' banter had been publicly squandered on the anti-social potential of pubic hair, the peculiar dangers of which seemed clearer to the police than to juries.
A decade later, society had begun to sense the triviality of this approach —‘splitting pubic hairs’, as the BBFC described it.
Few British juries had ever been happy ‘to equate ordinary sexual desire with depravity’, as the Working Party would have had it, but Williams a decade later was equally wrong in assuming that the 1959 test was therefore null and void.
Juries, faced with depictions of bestiality, sexual sadism or child pornography, had proved perfectly capable of deciding the issue ‘on an assessment of evil consequences which’, the Arts Council had mistakenly predicted, they can ‘have no means of judging’.
Indeed, it was the ‘anti-social’ focus of the obscenity test which had proved to be its singular virtue, since when juries drew the line, they did so on grounds of morals, not manners.
If the focus was clear, however, the psychological process of  depraving and corrupting could still be open to misconception.
Thus the Greater London Council proposed in their evidence to Williams that the law should prohibit any depictions ‘which purport to portray an unlawful sexual act’, a course which might have ruled out sin as a serious subject for filmed drama.
Not only tragedy would feel the ban, but comedy, too, since all drama begins with human frailty, and none so universal and absurd as the propensity of mankind to behave badly.
From Macbeth to Peter Rabbit , the world's most popular stories have explored unlawful impulses.
But it is treatment, not subject matter, which determines the stance of the artist — not the ‘what’, but the ‘how’ and the ‘why’— and studies of wickedness, even those which depict the crime in all its brutality, may nevertheless illuminate, appal or even deter.
Art, particularly great art, is, like religion, concerned with moral imperfections, but it can be perfectly moral in confronting them.
A more penetrating comment on the statutory test advanced in that 1959 Report was that it sought to control a mere ‘tendency’.
Incitement to criminality was already covered by the law of incitement, they argued, and to the extent that the Obscenity Acts add ‘a mere unintentional tendency toward crime as a punishable offence, they are to be deplored’.
This is the line taken by the United States Supreme Court, which rejected the ‘bad tendency’ grounds for abridging freedom of expression because it lacked the all-important factor of ‘clear and present danger’.
The answer put by proponents of the British approach is that the effect of publications or performances is rarely to incite directly whether to crime or anything else.
What these works do, or tend to do, not so much singly, perhaps, as in series, is to set in train through the sheer repetition of their demeaning view of women, for example, or their glamorisation of crime, what is known in behaviouristic terms as a process of conditioning, the ‘drip-drip’ effect of popular parlance.
It is the subtlety of this insidious process which blinds us to its true power — which is the power of advertising, of education, of good or bad parenting.
The power of cinema was recognised by Hitler and Stalin alike.
It was Goebbels who said: ‘The best propaganda is not that which is always revealing itself: the best propaganda is that which works invisibly, penetrates the whole of life without the public having any knowledge at all of the propagandist's initiative.’
When the propagandist is also a pornographer whose motives are those of the marketplace, the law must match subtlety with subtlety.
We live in an age of media saturation where the attention span bestowed on images and voices on the screen may be far greater during the years of maturation than the time and attention given to more traditional bulwarks of a civilised society.
And when we examine those repetitive media messages, we find amongst them those which dull, which desensitise, and which may ultimately disinhibit by eroding the internalised constraints which are part and parcel of the civilising process, constraints we used to learn at our mother's knee, and which we discard at our peril.
Amongst the films criminalised by the British obscenity test are a number of American porno films which celebrate incest as a stimulating variant on the standard range of sexual pleasure.
For Freud, incest was not just some strange psychological quirk: the capacity, he argued, was as universal as the opportunity.
Father-daughter incest, and particularly stepfather-daughter incest, is an increasingly reported and prosecuted form of child sexual abuse, and the urgent need for prevention outweighs the value of any post hoc cures, penal or therapeutic.
If men who take advantage of their own daughters are simply choosing the object of least resistance, then we dare not tamper with the ancient, world-wide, multi-cultural taboo against such conduct.
Yet since the early 1970s, sex films have treated father-daughter incest as just another staple of erotic entertainment.
BBFC policy follows British law in ruling out all such depictions lest they come to exercise a normalising, disinhibiting influence on men who have the power and the opportunity to do untold harm to their offspring.
The attraction of such films lies apparently in the offer of illicit sexual pleasure to men whose sexual confidence is at such a low ebb as to make them unlikely or unable to resist.
Such inducements can be caught by British law as having a clearly defined ‘tendency to deprave and corrupt’.
The same potential exists in rape films which confirm ‘macho’ myths about the sexiness of male power and aggression by suggesting the invariable gratitude of rape victims for the satisfying, liberating attentions of the rapist.
If inadequate men need the fantasy stimulus of a simulated female orgasm in order to perform at all, then perhaps such scenes have a therapeutic role to play in psycho-sexual conditioning.
But when the narrative is rape, and the sounds of pleasure are preceded by cries for help from an unwilling victim, then the messages are mixed indeed.
If failure to attract a willing partner leads some men to choose an unwilling one, or if, having failed repeatedly in the sexual stakes, such men find redress in humiliating and punishing one emblematic woman for the inaccessibility of all women, then society has failed in its role of socialising the male sex drive at its point of maximum danger and loss of control.
In most cultures, men are conditioned by upbringing to develop inhibitions against inflicting harm, particularly on women.
It is a matter of concern when such healthy and necessary taboos are eroded by the tawdry pleasures and pressures of pornography.
When market forces cultivate such tastes, then forces of another kind must supervene.
Films endorsing or encouraging depravity are not granted a BBFC certificate in Britain, and few such films were available as evidence to Royal Commissions until the advent of video.
The relative ignorance of judges and barristers about such films led the Criminal Bar Association to testify to Williams in 1978 that the deprave-and-corrupt test had outlived its usefulness, which led that Committee to recommend replacement of the criminal test by a scheme of prohibition based on physical rather than psychological harm to (1) children involved in child pornography, and (2) humans or animals involved in so-called ‘snuff movies’.
Everything else except for films was to be tackled through a scheme of restriction based on the offensiveness to reasonable people of unrestricted access to the material in question.
Some earlier critics of the deprave-and-corrupt test had suggested a return to a test based on ‘outrage’, with the Longford Report proposing in 1972 that an article might be deemed to be obscene ‘if its effect, taken as a whole, is to outrage contemporary standards of decency or humanity accepted by the public at large’.
The word ‘humanity’ borrowed some of its force from the 1959 approach, but the rest of the definition would have taken us back to a test of manners based on an assumption of consensus which is at worst suspect and at best unproven, but which is to be measured only by outrage, surely an irrational and wholly subjective response.
From the opposite camp, the Defence of Literature and the Arts Society supported a similar test of outrage by proposing to Williams that:
a person commits an offence if, for payment or not, he knowingly exposes or delivers to another person who has not consented to receive it any item which, on the ground that matter contained or embodied in it —(a) is concerned with human or animal sexuality, or (b) depicts violence or cruelty, or (c) is gruesome or disgusting, may, if taken as a whole, be expected to outrage the majority of persons who are likely, having regard to all relevant circumstances, to read, see or hear it.
Recognising that consent must be based on a true appreciation of contents, this proposal reveals a strange inability to grasp the extent to which a work of art can rarely if ever be described or paraphrased with perfect accuracy.
A great critic may evoke what it was like to attend a historic performance, but only a genius can provide an equivalent emotional experience.
Nor can a notice in the foyer adequately forewarn an audience of a work's potential for outrage.
But even if it could, are we to outlaw the artist's capacity to shock, to appal, to disturb profoundly in the interests of truth?
If outrage were the sole test of legality in the arts, then the Impressionists would never have been allowed to organise the Salon des Refusés, Edvard Munch would have been driven into permanent exile, and the score of Stravinsky's Rite of Spring would be gathering dust in some criminal museum like the Italian negative of Bertolucci's Last Tango in Paris .
Outrage condemned Shostakovitch, and it is an odd test indeed to be proposed in the defence of literature and the arts.
A major difficulty with such a test is that familiarity may breed tolerance rather than contempt.
Expectations reshaped by mores are no longer so easily affronted.
Victorians disregarded, or perhaps frequented, child prostitutes in the Strand until re-sensitised to the evil by a reformist campaign.
This is a point not taken by Lord Denning when he declares in R v. 
Greater London Council ex parte Blackburn (1976) that the
common, law offence has proved to be a far better stop upon pornography than the 1959 Act.
For this simple reason: pornography shocks and disgusts decent people, but it does not tend to deprave and corrupt them.
They revolt from it and turn away from it.
If asked, they will be quite ready to say that it is grossly indecent, but far less ready to say that it tends to deprave or corrupt.
In practice, few juries have ever supposed that ordinary people turn away so consistently from the sort of pornography brought before  British courts in the 1960s and 1970s.
Where they do tend to turn away is in cases where the effect of the work is aversive because its purpose is aversive and the intention to shock or appal is successfully realised.
Intention alone is not sufficient, however; if it were, the accused need only argue that he never meant the effect he produced.
The 1959 obscenity test is one of effect, which directs the jury's attention to the extent to which a work tends to encourage such feelings of aversion or revulsion rather than of corruption or depravity.
It was the failure to put this ‘aversive’ defence to the jury with any clarity which resulted in the notorious quashing of two obscenity convictions during the 1960s.
It was also the issue weighed by the DPP before declining to prosecute Pasolini's film Salo in 1977.
In the GLC case, which was the last in which a cinema film had been subject to charges of indecency, Lord Justice Bridge agreed with Lord Denning that the common-law test still applied to films, but went on:
I cannot say I feel any enthusiasm for the result.
The statutory test of obscenity has been much criticised, and with good reason.
But I don't know how many people today would accept as an appropriate test of criminality what is ‘shocking, disgusting and revolting’.
Definitions were always crucial in this debate, and the Church of England Board for Social Responsibility in its submission to Williams made a useful contribution to clarifying the distinctions between terms like eroticism, pornography , and obscenity :
Erotic publications and artefacts ‘reflect and celebrate the sexual nature and life of men and women’ in the context of the total human personality (a definition usefully extended by Williams in observing that the purpose of the erotic is primarily to express sexual excitement rather than to cause it).
Pornography is ‘the representation of sexual relations’ divorced from ‘a context of personal caring or affection’.
It trivialises sexual relationships by treating them in mechanistic fashion, its purpose being ‘the stimulation of sexual desires in the reader or viewer’.
The word ‘pornography’ meant originally ‘the writings of prostitutes’, which ‘provides an apt analogy for the prostitution of human sexuality which is a feature of pornography’.
Obscenity ‘represents a much more fundamental assault on men and women and what it means to be human…[it distorts]human personality by depicting it as deprived of those characteristics which are essential to humanity [since]common to all obscene productions is the degradation of persons and of relations between persons’.
The submission argued further that it would
be misleading to categorise as pornography works of art or literature merely because they were capable of being treated primarily as sources of sexual stimulation.
If there is an honest portrayal of human life and relationships, however extreme, we consider that a production can be judged according to the canons of aesthetic criticism.
The fact that it may be interpreted by some readers or viewers as pornographic is secondary.
The Church of England did not support the view that pornography per se should be criminalised; there are other means of control than the criminal law.
But when it turns to obscenity, their report contrasts the cruelty or violence depicted in Goya's Disasters of War or King Lear , which appeal ‘to our shared humanity’, with depictions of a more prurient kind which ‘invite us to collude in degrading it’.
The law's concern, it was argued, is with ‘the attractive presentation of a degraded humanity’, the effects of which may ‘include, but not be confined to, consequential actions’.
The honorary legal adviser to the Nationwide Festival of Light had criticised the deprave-and-corrupt test in The Daily Telegraph precisely because it had been so applied, arguing, in a plain man's version of Lord Denning, that
Everyone knows — except the depraved and corrupt — that obscenity depraves and corrupts all who condone or delight in it…but when a jury hears [that]they must decide whether, taken as a whole, it has a tendency to deprave and corrupt…they are easily bewildered and confused….
In the ‘Oz’ case, the Appeal Court ruled, in effect, that for the purposes of the Obscene Publications Act 1959 the word ‘obscene’meant,and meant only , ‘a tendency to deprave and corrupt.’
If Parliament had intended that, why did it not call the Act the ‘Depraving and Corrupting Publications Act’?
It was the value and aptness of a ‘Depraving and Corrupting Publications Act’ which later became manifest later when the worst of the so-called ‘video nasties’were found by judges and juries alike to have the effect of selling and reinforcing the pleasures of sadism.
The law of incitement could never have caught such publications; the obscenity test proved more than adequate.
The question to be answered is not whether the deprave-and-corrupt test is necessary in a modern society — that has now been conceded — but whether it is sufficient to catch the full range of material which ‘the protection of health and morals’ requires?
It is a strong test certainly, which means it is also a narrow one, but that, too, is appropriate in a free society.
Above all, the deprave-and-corrupt test carries the sense of something ‘strikingly or importantly bad or evil ’, to quote the words of an educationalist in The Times (1977), who continued:
It is hard to see how sexuality as such — I mean, when not combined with overt physical disruption such as torture or castration — can be a candidate for the genuinely obscene….
It could only seem so to those who see sexuality as something essentially disruptive, invading, and dangerous.
Unpredictably, in the post-AIDS world, sex has begun to carry just such overtones.
But in law, as in human relations, the case to be made must still be based on social responsibility.
And here we come back, as always, to the views of John Stuart Mill:
the sole end for which mankind are warranted, individually or collectively, in interfering with the liberty of action of any of their number, is self-protection.
That the only purpose for which power can be rightfully exercised over any member of a civilised community, against his will, is to prevent harm to others.
His own good, either physical or moral, is not a sufficient warrant.
(On Liberty )
Professor H.L.A.
Hart in his book Law, Liberty and Morality (1963) argued that the law was not and ought not to be a tool for ‘the enforcement of morals’, in particular in the field of sexual morals, where the activities condemned may ‘involve nothing that would ordinarily be thought of as harm to other persons’.
On the other hand, ‘society could not exist without a morality which mirrored  and supplemented the law's proscription of conduct injurious to others’.
It is the moral law which governs interpersonal relationships that must be reflected in statute law, suggesting a field of public morality which is the preserve of the state and a field of private morality which is not.
Even in the private sphere, however, Hart modified Mill's principle by justifying a degree of paternalism, since there are those who may be seriously harmed even with their own consent.
Ronald Dworkin, Oxford Professor of Jurisprudence, clarifies this fundamental principle that concern for the rights of others must rest on their own personal welfare and not on some sense of the ‘general benefit’:
A state may be justified in overriding or limiting rights [only if]competing rights …would be jeopardised if the right in question were not limited.
[But]we must recognise as competing rights only the rights of other members of society as individuals.
(Taking Rights Seriously , 1977)
There is an even more fundamental principle here, the principle of fraternity, without which the ‘deprave-and-corrupt’ test would be meaningless.
In a more recent book,Law's Empire , Professor Dworkin returns to this concept:
political legitimacy — the right of a political community to treat its members as having obligations in virtue of collective community decisions — is to be found not in the hard terrain of contracts or duties of justice or obligations of fair play that might hold among strangers, where philosophers have hoped to find it, but in the more fertile ground of fraternity, community, and their attendant obligations.
In the light of the revolution in gender attitudes in Western society in the past decade, it is perhaps ironical that the most significant application of British obscenity law in recent years, at least in relation to films and videos, derives almost wholly from the fraternal obligations which men owe to women.
If fraternity is the foundation stone of the British approach to obscenity, through the courts and the public authorities, then it is relevant to discover the extent to which such a principle plays any part at all in the regulation of obscene matter in the United States, given the fact that the USA produces the vast majority of publications which appear before the courts of America Europe and the free world.
The First Amendment of the Constitution stipulates that ‘Congress shall make no law…abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press’, while the Fifth states that no one shall ‘be deprived of life, liberty, or property without due process of law’.
After the Civil War, a Fourteenth Amendment was added binding state legislatures and courts in similar terms, so that protection against prior censorship was guaranteed, but not protection against proceedings for obscenity.
In the 1930s, the Supreme Court began to widen its interpretation of free speech to include writings and films of little or no artistic merit, provided they did not include ‘licentious’ speech, the forms of which were listed in 1942 as libel, slander, insulting or ‘fighting’words, and obscenity, all of which were excluded from First Amendment protection.
In Roth v. 
US (1957), the definition of free speech was extended to ‘unorthodox ideas, controversial ideas…
But implicit in the history of the First Amendment is the rejection of obscenity as utterly without redeeming social importance.’
Yet the word ‘obscenity’ was qualified: ‘Sex and obscenity are not synonymous.
Obscene material is material which deals with sex in a manner appealing to prurient interest.’
In 1959, the Supreme Court ruled that a state ban on ‘the exhibition of a motion picture [Lady Chatterley's Lover ]because that picture advocates an idea — that adultery under certain circumstances may be proper behaviour —’ was unconstitutional, since the First Amendment's basic guarantee is of freedom to advocate ideas not necessarily ‘conventional or shared by a majority’.
Obscene matter could be outlawed only to the extent that it went beyond ideas to become an ‘incitement to action or an excitation’.
In 1966, the Court ruled that a publication which is not obscene might be regarded as such if distributed in a lascivious manner, and in 1968, that the law's jurisdiction did not ‘reach into the privacy of one's home…[whereas]public distribution…might intrude upon the sensibilities or privacy of the general public…’.
The test of obscenity still required proof that the matter was ‘utterly without redeeming social value’, but it was not long before social value was claimed for sex, a Californian judge declaring himself unable to find such lack of social value in a film which ‘appeals to the normal  interest in sex and nudity which the average person has in such matters’.
In 1973 the tide turned with a 5-to-4 majority ruling by the Supreme Court in Miller v California that obscenity, as narrowly defined, was not protected by the First Amendment, and that each state could set its own standard: ‘People in different States vary in their tastes and attitudes, and this diversity is not to be strangled by the absolutism of imposed uniformity.’
Above all, the three-part test of obscenity adopted by the Court in 1966 was strengthened, laying down three essential conditions, all of which would have to be satisfied in every case:
(1)
that ‘the average person, applying contemporary community standards, would find that the work, taken as a whole, appeals to the prurient interest’;
(2)
that ‘the work depicts or describes, in a patently offensive way, sexual conduct specifically defined by the applicable state law’;
(3)
that ‘the work, taken as a whole, lacks serious literary, artistic, political, or scientific value.’
The effect of the second condition was to require the laws of individual states to define specifically the kinds of sexual conduct which would be subject to regulation if presented in a patently offensive way.
And a reference to ‘ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted’, had the unintended effect of limiting obscenity to hardcore pornography only.
The importance of public decorum was reaffirmed by the Court in another 1973 ruling that
the right of privacy did not extend so far as to confer a protected right on consenting adults to pursue their own choice in the matter of watching obscene and pornographic motion pictures within a theatre…[even one]not open to minors and which gave patrons due notice of the kind of entertainment provided.
In 1977, the Court made it clear that the kinds of sexual conduct specified in Miller were not exclusive.
Sado-masochism was added to the list, the first acknowledgment of the obscene potential of violence or cruelty.
But violence unconnected with sex was still not caught by the Miller test, since obscenity was defined as necessarily including some ‘patently offensive’ representation of ‘sexual conduct’which, being ‘lewd and obscene’, could form ‘no  essential part of any exposition of ideas’.
Whether or not depictions of violence could form an essential part of such a discourse was not considered, since the Court's focus was on sex, the ‘crass commercial exploitation’ of which can debase and distort a ‘key relationship of human existence, central to family life, community welfare, and the development of human personality’.
The difference between American and British approaches to obscenity law lies in the harms they seek to curtail and in their comprehension of the processes by which those harms are inflicted.
In Britain, the deprave-and-corrupt test is intended to curb the anti — social influence of obscene matter as measured by the consequence to others of changes in the attitudes or behaviour of reader or viewer.
In America, obscenity law protects the reader or viewer against harms he may inflict on himself, by whatever process those harms may be inflicted.
Nor need the courts assess the extent to which such harms are measurable against any standard of consequential morality.
All that need be proved is that the matter is of a certain type and the manner of presentation patently offensive.
This would, in Britain, be a test of indecency, not obscenity.
To understand how such an emphasis gained ascendancy in US jurisprudence, one needs to go beyond legal questions to those of history and politics.
The pendulum has swung on both sides of the Atlantic, and if the sexual habits of urban America had been transformed in the 1960s by the so-called sexual revolution, then the small-town traditions of middle America found their own political voice a decade later, and with it a judicial response from the highest court in the land.
It is not necessary here to weigh the relative merits of successive waves of public sentiment, and it is too early to guess the judgments of history, but differences between American and British obscenity law can be assessed on their technical merits, and the consequences are significant.
The American test relies wholly on community standards, which may cover an entire range of social conventions without necessarily embracing aspects of public morality adequate to the behaviour portrayed or the vile exploitation of that behaviour by the work itself.
Community standards may embrace moral principles or they may not.
The  Nuremberg courts rejected the plea of the defendants that they were only obeying the community standards of their day, since the gravity of their crimes had to be weighed against the highest moral standards of humanity, not the customs of the age or  the community.
Where freedom of expression is at stake, the same ethical standards are relevant, particularly where the works in question offer sexual excitation through scenes of rape or torture.
Even by the modest standards of the Supreme Court, American obscenity law has had little measurable effect since 1973.
Hardcore porn is openly traded in the cities and exhibited in cinemas and video shops across the country, despite experimental zoning restrictions in certain areas, yet there has been little or no attempt in the courts or the legislatures to discriminate between the greater and lesser dangers it represents.
A hopeful and insufficiently applauded shift in emphasis was signalled in 1986 by the Report of the Attorney General's Commission on Pornography, which sought to identify the relative harms caused by various forms of pornography, thus making it possible to draw up a list of priorities.
The first significant result has been a nationally coordinated programme of enforcement against the spread of child pornography in the United States.
The next priority will be the flourishing trade in sexually violent films, videos and magazines, but here the Supreme Court rulings could prove an embarrassment.
In 1976, the film Ilsa, She-wolf of the SS was brought before the courts of New York State on a charge of obscenity, but the case was dismissed because the judge found nothing which could properly be covered by the Miller test, no ‘lewd exhibition of the genitals’, no representations of ‘ultimate sexual acts, normal or perverted’.
Indeed, the film could not be described as hardcore pornography at all.
In Britain, the same film was refused a cinema certificate by the BBFC in August 1976 because of its prurient sexual exploitation of torture and the brutal degradation of concentration camp prisoners, male and female.
The Board's monthly report commented as follows:
Because the film includes no genital close-ups or explicit sexual activity, it has played in many parts of the world, occasionally with a classification less restrictive than that given to so-called ‘hardcore’ sex films.
England is one of the few countries in which the legal tradition provides a test which can distinguish between the natural and the unnatural, the civilised and the barbarous.
This work seems to us to be truly depraving and corrupting unlike some sex films which offend solely on grounds of impropriety.
The distinction between manners and  morals is exemplified by this film, and we can see no possibility of our offering it a certificate for public exhibition.
With the Miller test, the US Supreme Court had established a judicial equation between the terms ‘pornography’ and ‘obscenity’with the result that the kinds of ham they do can be neither distinguished nor assessed.
Williams characterised ‘pornography’ as combining the explicit description or representation of sexual matter with a function or intention to arouse the viewer sexually.
The offence this may cause is attributed to the fact that it ‘crosses the line between private and public since it makes available…some sexual act of a private kind…for a voyeuristic interest’.
This is compounded when it ‘not only exists for private consumption, but is publicly displayed…[or]forced on the attentions of those who have not even volunteered to be voyeurs’(para 7.7).
But that offence is one against propriety, against what a community may find appropriate to a particular time or place.
The issue is one of manners, not morals, and the degree of impropriety may be proportionate to the degree of explicitness as measured along a continuum running from softcore to hardcore.
That this is not the only dimension along which one can or must discriminate became fully apparent to juries when confronted with the ‘video nasties’ of the 1980s, where the verdicts surprised some observers by turning more often on the morality or immorality of the conduct portrayed and the moral stance taken towards it by the film-maker than on the affront caused to the viewer.
British cinema licences have for most of this century prohibited the exhibition of films which are ‘likely to encourage or incite to crime’, which anticipated the deprave-and-corrupt test of 1959.
American cinemas show films celebrating rape, which can be judged obscene only if the act is depicted or described in a ‘patently offensive way’.
Whether or not the act is criminal is immaterial, since it is the explicitness of depiction which renders it obscene.
There is nothing in the British test to exclude such a focus, provided there is also a clear sense of hams which flow from it.
But the case must rest on whether the depiction of sex on the level of gross anatomical detail, divorced from feeling and personal relationships, carries a probable consequence for the viewer of changes in attitudes or behaviour of a significantly harmful or antisocial kind.
In the age of AIDS and other incurable forms of  venereal disease, new moral attitudes are gaining ground, and juries might well be led towards the view that explicit sexual depictions are degrading to such an extent as to exercise a depraving and corrupt influence on future conduct.
But one hopes they would have reached this view on grounds not of personal taste or fashion, but on a calculus of harm which J.S. Mill would have recognised and respected.
In 1986–87, Parliament considered two new definitions of obscenity in Private Member's Bills tabled by Winston Churchill MP and Gerald Howarth MP.
Both Bills would have preserved the deprave-and-corrupt test, significant in itself, but would have added a new test, sufficient in its own right for the work to be deemed obscene.
The Churchill Bill in 1986 included a list of proscribed depictions any one of which would attract a conviction for obscenity irrespective of context or effect on the viewer.
The inadequacy of such an approach was exposed in Standing Committee.
In 1987, the Howarth Bill took a different route, proposing to add an alternative test based on whether or not the work in question was ‘grossly offensive to a reasonable person’.
No defence was provided for circumstances in which a reasonable person had made a conscious and informed choice to read, see or hear the work in question, provided only that some other reasonable person found it ‘grossly offensive’ for him to have done so.
This was a return to the test of outrage, with all its faults, but it met little outrage in Standing Committee and fell only because of the dissolution of Parliament for the 1987 General Election.
Were such a test to be adopted in future, it would reintroduce into British obscenity law a wholly subjective assessment of taste and decency with respect to works of art and public communications, and it would do so by amending an Act which was designed to focus solely on the question of harm.
In practice, the criminal law is a particularly blunt instrument for policing works of the imaging action, yet the alternatives are equally unattractive.
The Williams Committee suggested for films a system of state regulation by a public authority, with powers to ban but no criminal law to provide the grounds for such a ban.
The BBFC opposed this, preferring to apply the law, not make it.
But any law which is capable of setting limits across the whole range of publications must acknowledge the risks inherent in the very concept of limits.
In an open society, the law must do neither too much nor too little, which is why the shifting sands of community standards have  their place in the field of indecency, but not obscenity, the latter being a far more serious offence and one properly grounded in the fundamental values without which no civilised society can survive.
If a new test of obscenity is to be considered, then it must catch works which endanger not governments, but society itself.
It is their anti-social influence in that deep sense which is at issue, and which can be measured only by the extent to which such works encourage conduct which threatens the rights and freedoms of others to enjoy a peaceful and secure life under the law.
Such a test much be wide enough to safeguard public morality, yet narrow enough not to encroach on private taste or conscience.
It must balance the claims of freedom and responsibility.
The current British test meets all those requirements, but if clarification is needed, then the following is an attempt to interpret the test in the light of practical experience in applying it to films and video recordings.
It draws on the form of words suggested by the Williams Committee for their scheme of prohibition, and the purpose is simply to redefine the essence of the deprave-and-corrupt approach for those for whom the old form of words seems too far removed from the values and habits of today:
The exhibition or supply of any film, video or sound recording or any other publication shall be prohibited by law if the manner in which it depicts or describes violence or sexual activity or crime is such as, when taken as a whole, to encourage the imitation or toleration of behaviour which is seriously harmful to society by a significant proportion of those who are likely, having regard to all the relevant circumstances, to read, see, or hear the matter contained or embodied in it.
In applying such a test, no jury should require expert evidence, since it is not the psychological or sociological effect, but the moral effect that must be considered, in accordance with their own experience as responsible adults.
Questions of right and wrong are properly decided in criminal cases by juries chosen at random to represent the popular will.
Adults are familiar with day-to-day questions of morality or immorality and the extent to which good citizens may be turned into bad citizens or bad citizens into worse.
What is different about obscenity is that the test requires a jury to pronounce a work wholly unfit for publication in a civilised society, which implies an immoral influence of a strikingly serious kind.
It is  a judgment about moral limits and one which reasonable adults can properly be expected to make in a democratic community.
Indecency in public displays is and should remain a separate if lesser offence.
The Indecent Displays (Control) Act 1981 was sound in principle, but so narrow in application that it has rarely if ever been tested in the courts.
If the scope of that measure were widened to take in the contents of magazines which are easily accessible to persons under 18, it would form a useful adjunct to the powers of the police.
A Home Office Amendment to the Churchill Bill provided a model of how this might be done and was the only section of that ill-judged proposal which received unanimous support in Standing Committee.
It would almost certainly have been given the same support by the full House had it not been attached to a Bill to reform obscenity law, with which it had no clear or logical connection.
In America, the dissemination to children of material which is indecent but not obscene is a separate issue, and the Supreme Court has upheld state legislation to protect children from exposure to such material where accessibility to children is a particular feature of the medium in question.
On that principle, it seems correct that an amendment to extend controls to the contents of magazines should be added to the Indecent Displays (Control) Act, section 1(5) of which was drafted so as to exclude from ‘displayed matter’ caught by the test ‘any part of that matter which is not exposed to view ’.
Using the Churchill amendment as a model, the words ‘exposed to view’ could be deleted and replaced so as to limit such exclusion to ‘any part of that matter which is neither visible nor accessible to persons under the age of 18, or which, if so accessible, is not kept in a wrapping which, while intact, prevents that matter from being seen’.
The test of indecency would be the traditional common-law test, directing the jury's attention not to their own subjective responses, but to their sense of the propriety of the average man.
It is here alone that community standards are both necessary and sufficient as a test of criminality.
Manners change, and the verdict must ultimately rest on the jury's sense of what their own community would or should tolerate on environmental grounds at a particular moment in social history.
If the public are to be protected from gratuitous affront, then this will involve applying the manners test not only to public displays but to any matter which invades the privacy of individuals without their consent, which of course extends to unsolicited matter sent through  the post.
It has been said in defence of such publications that those who allow themselves to be depicted indecently are thereby ‘waiving their own privacy rather than impeding or intruding upon that of others’.
But that is to ignore the possible effect of indecent displays on the unwary viewer, which may be to invade the realm of the most private emotions and to play on these in an unsettling and intrusive fashion, utterly without permission.
The best protection against such unwanted intrusion is a code of manners as between strangers, and one that can be breached only by mutual consent.
Where such consent is knowingly given by adult citizens, the only restrictions which a free society ought to impose are those designed for the prevention of harm.
The involvement of children as viewers or participants in material classed as indecent or obscene presents a species of harm almost universally acknowledged.
In Britain in 1978, the Protection of Children Act extended the scope of the earlier Indecency with Children Act 1960 to cover indecent photographs, still or moving, of children under the age of 16.
All forms of publishing are subject to the Act, including distributing or exhibiting films or videos, so that works imported from abroad may be caught irrespective of context, circumstances or intention.
The 1960 Act had protected only those children under 14, so the decision to raise the age limit to coincide with the statutory age of consent seemed sensible and uncontentious.
But the test itself was also changed, from gross indecency, which like the deprave-and-corrupt test had been adequate to catch most child pornography, to the lesser test of indecency, the precise meaning of which is left to the jury to assess according to their own standards of propriety for children or young people.
The effect of this Act has been to inspire a greater sense of caution in British film-makers regarding the involvement of children in immodest or suggestive photography, and restrictions on importing such material might well spread these considerations abroad.
British law has also sought to control real cruelty to animals in film-making, forbidding not only the staging of such scenes, but their public exhibition as well.
The Cinematograph Films (Animals) Act 1937, like the Protection of Children Act, limits the range of material which may be imported into Britain for public exhibition or distribution, and it was once hoped, vainly, that such a law might provide the model for similar limitations in other countries.
Were  such laws to be extended to the treatment of humans as well as animals, as suggested by the Williams Committee, the international community might find such an example more appealing.
Films or videos of sadism, actual or simulated, have been traded widely on the international scene since the 1970s, the most notorious being the film Snuff , which purports to show the actual gang rape and murder of a prostitute in Argentina who is then physically dismembered before the camera.
Rumours of such ‘snuff’ movies had been carefully fostered in the New York Press with accounts of private screenings at Mafia parties, and when it was claimed that one had been acquired for public exhibition, it was advertised with the slogan: ‘Blood Money, the film that could only be made in South America…where Life is CHEAP!’
The police were said to have had no grounds for intervention unless the scene were shown to be the record of a real murder, so the posters dared the police to prove it real and the public to prove it not.
In Britain, most juries would find it depraving and corrupting to solicit members of the public to become voyeurs of an actual rape, murder, and dismemberment, but a new criminal test based not on the effect of the work, but on the circumstances of its production could provide one more useful link in the chain of criminal provisions which modern media law requires.
To go further in curtailing the freedom of expression would be, almost certainly, to go too far.
‘Freedom’, said Oliver Wendell Holmes, ‘is freedom for the thought we hate’, since if we deny the rights of the odious, we may also threaten the rights of the unpopular, which in time may become the wisdom of posterity.
Constitutional guarantees of freedom of speech and of the press arose in America in response to the efforts of George HI to suppress dissent through seditious libel laws and the licensing of the press.
Jefferson's purpose in the First Amendment was to stop all future American lawmakers from making it a crime for people to criticise their own government.
The extent to which such rights might justifiably embrace ideas unrelated to government or public affairs, ideas of no value at all, or cloaked in images of a sexual or violent nature, has long exercised the finest minds not only in American jurisprudence, but in Europe and the Commonwealth as well .
That debate is a continuing one, and amongst the principles most importantly at stake is that of artistic freedom, the right of the individual artist to explore the dark side of human experience and to  draw unpopular conclusions from his own, perhaps partial, vision.
The true nature and worth of such pursuits may elude their contemporaries, since history tends to impose a time-lag on the degree to which the public can keep in touch with the sensibilities of the artist.
Difficult modes of speech may be coined to convey difficult themes, but the private nature of the artist's invention is what gives it its power.
‘A work of art’, said Joseph Brodsky, ‘of literature especially…addresses a man tête à tête , entering with him into direct relations.’
It is this intimacy which permits and often begets intensity, and the world of the spirit is much the poorer when such works are suppressed.
Amongst such considerations, however, there must still be room for the needs of society, for what the European Convention calls ‘the protection of health or morals’.
If some media products can have effects which are subtle, persuasive and demonstratively antisocial, not by the standards of the day or the ruling party, but by the ethical standards which define civilisation, then no society can ignore the matter.
It will always be hard for the courts to distinguish between what is harmful and what is merely unpleasant or challenging, but it is a task which society must confront for its own good.
The future of a culture may depend on where and how it draws the line.
If dross is the price we pay for freedom of expression, there is nevertheless a point at which such dross may become pernicious.
In reflecting on the conflicts between freedom and responsibility, Burke said:
Men are qualified for civil liberty in exact proportion to their disposition to put moral chains upon their own appetites…
Society cannot exist unless a controlling appetite upon will and power be placed somewhere, and the less of it there is within, the more there is without.
It is still in the working out of that complex moral equation that the challenge lies, but in the two hundred years since Burke, we are little nearer to finding a wholly adequate, much less ideal, solution.
NEW POSSIBILITIES, NEW THREATS
Computers and Privacy
NORMAN LINDOP
The U.K. passport we all know and love is on the way out.
In 1987 the Passport Office ceased to issue the familiar hard-backed dark blue, gold-embossed symbol of British superiority, and we now have to make do with a limp, plastic-covered, mulberry-coloured booklet which is no more impressive than those of other countries.
The talisman will have become a docket, and a docket with a sinister purpose; for the change is not just to conform with the requirements of the EC but signals a fundamental change of function.
The new passport will be ‘machine readable’.
This means that at any frontier anywhere in the world a border official who has at his disposal a piece of equipment which is already widely and internationally available will be able instantaneously to record the personal details from a passport without the holder realising it, and the record will be automatically read into and stored by a computer.
Instead of the passport opening frontiers to the traveller without let or hindrance, it has become the means of international surveillance.
Ernest Bevin's utopian vision of going to Victoria Station and travelling freely abroad without documents of identity has finally faded.
It has been overtaken by the undreamt-of scale of mass travel, by the internationalisation of crime, in particular terrorism, and above all by the ubiquity of information technology.
Perhaps it was after all impossibly naive and idealistic to expect that frontiers would cease to be watched, but just what price are we paying for the security effected by border controls?
Will the surveillance made possible by modern information technology only apply at the frontiers, or shall we have to live with it in our daily lives?
This is only the latest in a series of issues which have emerged as computer technology has developed and linked up with telecommunications, and which appear to bear upon fundamental questions of individual freedom.
We are all familiar with the use of computerised  mailing lists by advertisers; they, too, are now international and going into orbit via satellite transmission — in the remorseless pursuit of markets and lower unit costs.
Networks of communicating computer systems, within and across frontiers, are growing all the time in the private and public sectors.
Bureaucrats and civil servants the world over are fascinated by the possibilities.
Already in Britain there are plans for putting into communication the computer-based personal information systems of DHSS, the Driving and Vehicle Licensing Centre, the Police National Computer and the Inland Revenue; and the embossed plastic cards with unique machine-readable numerical identifiers which are now issued automatically to all school-leavers to mark their entry into the National Insurance scheme will in a few years' time be, in effect, national identity cards.
The Big Brother of ‘1984’ will have set up in business, a few years late perhaps, but with effective tabs upon everyone.
As long ago as 1975 a Home Office White Paper ‘Computers and Privacy’ said, unambiguously, that ‘the time has come when those who use computers to handle personal information, however responsible they are, can no longer remain the sole judges of whether their own systems adequately safeguard privacy’, and it set out clearly the special features of computerised information systems which had implications for privacy.
The speed of computers, their capacity to store, combine, retrieve and transfer data, their flexibility and the low unit cost of the work they do, all facilitate the establishment and maintenance of ever more extensive record systems, retaining more and more data, which is easily and quickly accessible from many distant points.
This data can quickly be transferred from one information system to another and can be combined and transformed in ways which might not otherwise be practicable; furthermore, data held on computers is invisible and not directly intelligible so that people have more difficulty in knowing what is in the records or what is happening to them.
All in all, the technology could be said to be qualitatively transforming the threat to privacy which information systems, even manually sorted card indexes, have always posed.
It prompts the question whether there is not something inexorable about the mindless march of technology; are we doomed to be everlastingly in retreat before the insidious advances of electronic information systems?
And just what is it that we are objecting to?
What do we feel we are losing?
Throughout the 1960s, as technology, especially computer  technology, developed, pressure built up in Parliament for legislative controls.
Eventually, in 1970, the Home Office took refuge in a Committee of Enquiry into whether legislation to protect people against intrusions into privacy was needed.
This, the Younger Committee, reported in 1972 and its report is still a classic; it covered a wide range of activities and technological developments which might be intrusive, although it was precluded from considering the activities of government departments and other public sector organisations — a limitation about which it protested.
Sir Kenneth Younger and his colleagues had first to consider what was meant by privacy.
There was and is no legal definition of privacy; indeed there is no general agreement about what it is — like happiness we cannot define it but recognise it when we have it, or more often we know when we feel we do not have it.
The concept derives from an assertion by an individual against the rest of society,; since we are social animals and essentially interdependent, we voluntarily (or is it involuntarily?) surrender some of the autonomy of solitary existence in return for the support which society can give us.
The extent of the surrender varies from one person to another, and the assumptions about the claim to privacy also vary — not only from one person to another within a given group or society, but from one society to another and from one historical period to another.
‘The right to be let alone’ is probably the simplest statement of the privacy claim — significantly by an American judge in the 1880s — but it is a claim, not a fundamental right, since what is involved is a negotiation of the frontier between individual autonomy and social accountability.
At its literal face value ‘the right to be let alone’ is a quite unreasonable claim, and would be useless as the basis of granting legal protection.
The Younger Committee made no attempt at a definitive statement on what constituted privacy, contenting itself with a summary of different approaches and attempts at definition.
It examined and rejected the proposition that a general right of privacy should be legally recognised, pointing out that this was not the way in which English law had in recent centuries sought to protect the main democratic rights of citizens — neither the right of free speech nor the right of free assembly being embodied in statute law, for example.
Scotland might order things differently, but in England the rule was that what was not prohibited was permitted and the debate on civil rights was therefore concerned with the balance between the  acceptable limits imposed by law and the freedom of action of the individual.
Since then the pressure for a Bill of Rights has built up, partly inspired by the work of the European Court of Human Rights at Strasbourg, in which successive British governments have too often been on the losing side.
However, the Younger Committee argued that such a topic as privacy, which can be subject to rapid changes in social convention, was probably best not regulated on the basis of the slow build-up of case law, which would always tend to reflect the values of an earlier period rather than of contemporary society.
The Committee therefore concentrated on a series of ad hoc recommendations, relating to two main aspects of privacy — freedom from intrusion upon oneself, one's home, family and relationships on the one hand, and privacy of information, that is the extent to which one can determine how information about oneself shall be handled, on the other.
Under the first category they considered the intrusive gathering and dissemination of information by the publicity media, the handling of credit information, unwarrantable intrusion into personal matters at work and in education and medicine, prying by neighbours and landlords, and intrusive sales methods.
Under the second category they considered investigations by private detectives, industrial espionage, technical surveillance devices, and finally computers.
They made a number of recommendations about legislation in various areas.
During the 15 years since Younger reported, legislation more or less along the suggested lines has followed in two of the areas where it was recommended — the 1975 Consumer Credit Act, with the establishment of the Office of Fair Trading, and the 1984 Data Protection Act, with the establishment of a Data Protection Registrar.
In an era in which prevailing political opinion has opposed increases in legislation, most of the other areas have not been found appropriate for legislative action.
It is true that the media have developed procedures for self-regulation to forestall all-embracing legislation, but many would question how effective this self-regulation has so far been.
As such Reports go, therefore, Younger can be said to have been fairly effective, in spite of being limited by being unable to consider public sector threats to privacy.
When the Data Protection Committee was set up in 1976, to redeem a pledge made by the Home Secretary when Younger reported, It had no such limitation put upon it — it was in fact the first body  empowered to investigate information systems in the public sector, and the Committee came to see this as a major aspect of its work.
Here again, however, the terms of reference of the Committee were not entirely congenial — in its anxiety not to open Pandora's box too wide the Home Office expressly precluded the Committee from considering traditional manual or non-electronic information systems.
This was increasingly felt as an irksome and illogical limitation as the work of the Committee progressed, and prompted a somewhat disingenuous argument in its Report that in the long run the distinction would lose significance, because computers would sweep the board, and there would be no manual records anyway — an improbable outcome.
The Committee was in no doubt that, so far as any data protection principles were concerned, they should be universal and not dependent upon the particular form of system or record.
Although the Committee's terms of reference excluded manual records, its Report makes clear that it could not justify on grounds of logic or justice the exclusion of manual records from any data protection legislation based upon general data protection principles.
Nevertheless the Act is based upon this distinction; some other countries have followed the logic and applied the legislation to all forms of information systems, whether manual or electronic, but it is not known how effective such legislation is.
One of the Home Office's strongest objections to the inclusion of manual records under the legislation was what it saw as the insuperable practical obstacles to controlling such a ubiquitous traditional activity.
The extent to which a person feels threatened by other people having information about him or her varies from one person to another.
My father, if correctly addressed by name by a complete stranger, would say, rather coldly, ‘You have the advantage of me, Sir’— he felt slightly threatened by the mere fact that a stranger knew his name.
Presumably pop-stars and politicians feel otherwise, but many people like to feel they can control the extent to which their names are known; it is to them an aspect of personal privacy, and it extends to other identifiers like home address.
When investigators questioned the public about privacy on behalf of the Younger Committee, 33 per cent of those asked objected to the publication of names and addresses as happens in the Electoral Roll.
The idea of what has been called data privacy, the claim of the individual to control information about himself, is not confined to  so-called sensitive data or information of a particularly recherché kind — it can apply to any piece of data about an identifiable individual, who is the only one who can say whether or not, in the particular context, he or she regards the data as sensitive.
The context is all.
In the course of ordinary domestic, family and work-place life, each of us voluntarily gives our name and address to a wide range of agencies, authorities and individuals, usually in expectation of a service; in addition, of course , we are each of us under statutory obligations to give personal details to agencies of central and local government, whether as employed persons, voting citizens, rate-or-tax-payers or licensees (of TV, dog, car, etc).
The list grows as you think about it; the average middle-class citizen with a family, a house, car, insurances, mortgage, probably gives his name and address involuntarily (i.e. statutorily) to well over twenty agencies, and as many again voluntarily, each year.
And each time there is a specific context which itself frames and arguments the information about the individual.
We do it almost without thought — certainly without considering just what may become of the information.
When yet another mall order catalogue or free gift offer pops through our letter-box, personally addressed, we probably hardly stop to think how they came to have our name and address.
Now the receipt of unsolicited junk mail may seem a relatively trivial matter (though for some, who seem to regard their letter-box as part of their person, it is an affront)— and it certainly seems effective as a marketing device.
The Younger Committee pointed out that any attempt to control the distribution of unsolicited advertising matter by legislation would involve an element of censorship in determining which types of advertisement or literature were permissible and which not; they recommended no action.
The issue remains an irritant to many unwilling recipients, but could be left as a relatively harmless result of the publication of names and addresses, were it not for more disquieting developments.
Marketing is by its nature an expansionist, aggressive activity and those concerned with it are constantly seeking to improve their performance by increasing the scale and selectivity of their approaches.
There is therefore constant commercial pressure on address lists, especially if they are preselected — i.e. compiled in a particular context which is relevant from an advertising point of view.
It may be harmless enough if mail-order suppliers of  gardening sundries sell their mailing lists to publishers of gardening encyclopaedias — it is perhaps more questionable if access to share registers of companies is used to circulate shareholders with party-political propaganda about privatisation or nationalisation.
There is now a considerable market value attaching to an accurate up-to-date and selective address list, and some of the largest collections of data in the private sector, running to thirty million entries or more in some cases, are amassed in this way.
It could be argued that when publication of address lists reaches this scale they are so unselective as to be innocuous; the Swedish Data Inspection Board took the opposite view when it objected to the Readers Digest organisation compiling its own register of all adult Swedes (roughly 9 million).
The Board took the view that it was not in the national interest that such complete information about the whole nation should be in private hands and after a prolonged and bitterly fought legal battle it won — ensuring the perpetual hostility of Readers Digest the world over to any suggestion of data protection thereafter.
At the other end of the scale a short list of names and addresses is not necessarily harmless.
It may be so, if it is a personal Christmas card list, for example; but if the same modest list were to be headed ‘suspected sympathisers with the X Party’(or the Y terrorist group), or ‘directors of companies believed to be trading with country Z’— there could be danger to those on the list if it fell into the hands of evil-minded zealots — and perhaps then the shorter the list the greater the danger.
Less dramatically, but of no less threat to those concerned, the publication of even so innocuous a list as the Electoral Register can, by disclosing the addresses of those who live alone, present a distinct danger in areas where the crime rate is high.
These are simple cases of the general thesis that information is power — information about a named person can confer power over that person, and the more complete the information the greater the power.
As Seigel puts it in Computing Law —‘information is power over decision, power over capital, power over individuals, power over organisation, power over adversaries and power over the past, present and future, and [that]power lends itself to any use and abuse’.
Information exerts its power when it is handled — collected, stored, transferred, analysed, collated, indexed, and, of course, published, broadcast, or obtained illicitly.
Information, defined as knowledge conveyed to the mind by a statement of fact, i.e. knowledge transfer, can take many forms — it  can be words, figures or pictures, through the medium of speech, printing or screen, or of course any other stimulant to human senses.
Information is the currency of human communication; access to it may be controlled but information itself cannot be owned, since it is in essence in the mind.
It is not an offence under the Theft Act to take information.
The usual legal connotations of ownership are therefore irrelevant, but the possession of information, or the ability to control it, may nevertheless be of great significance; in an entirely trivial sense the paper or computer tape on which information is recorded can be owned, and while this does not confer rights of ownership over the information itself, this distinction may seem empty if what really matters is control of access to and use of information.
Now it can be argued that the mere collection of information about named persons is not in itself necessarily wrong; even if it does offend against good taste — like the prying neighbour behind the lace curtains — it is hardly an area for the heavy hand of the law.
If it is said that it is the use to which such information may be put that can be objectionable, the libertarian might well reply that gossip is an age-old way of passing the time and one of the cements of society.
It can be argued that it is a citizen's right to be free to collect information about whatever and whoever he likes and to do it in any way which is not intrusive or injurious.
Here again the attempt to define one man's right reduces the freedom of another — the right to observe discreetly impinges on the privacy of whoever is observed, and the claim to privacy restricts the right to observe, if right it be.
It is relevant to recall in this connection that Younger did envisage situations where mere observation could seriously impair privacy — where, for example, the person observed had a reasonable expectation that he would not be subject to observation, or had deliberately taken steps to prevent surveillance, but special technical devices, either optical or electronic (bugging), were used to spy upon him.
To meet such situations Younger proposed a new offence of ‘unlawful surveillance by device’ where it was done surreptitiously.
Here the normal human facility of observation, and the normal limits to human perception, would be extended and augmented by purely technical means — and the effect of technology would be not merely quantitative or multiplicative but qualitative; a new order of threat would be created.
Although several European countries have legal controls on such activities, in the U.K. the law has not  been extended in this way, though there may be legal remedies in some cases for those who believe they have been harmed by the use to which the surreptitiously collected information has been put: if, for example, unauthorised entry on to property has occurred, or if there has been breach of confidence or copyright, or if conspiracy to commit a crime, civil wrong, public mischief or some outrageously immoral act can be proved.
This leaves a wide range of activities in an area of unregulated uncertainty, including telephone tapping; this may be official, under Ministerial approval ‘in the national interest’, which Parliament may be said to have condoned or sanctioned, or it may be unofficial in the interests of, say, commercial or industrial espionage, in which case an offence is committed, if only the misappropriation of electric current!
The protection of individual privacy, in the sense of anonymity, has an obvious political dimension.
If the individual can fence himself off from the prying eyes or fingers of the state, can maintain his private domain in his own way without intervention by public authorities, an important aspect of political liberty is established.
Here again there is a question of balance: if society has democratically determined that taxes shall be collected and revenues so received spent in certain ways, non-payment of taxes is punishable even if the defaulter is objecting on conscientious grounds to aspects of staff spending — on arms, for example.
All this is straightforward enough, and is at the heart of liberal democracy, respecting dissent and minority opinion within the limits of the law.
How far should it be taken in respect of information handling?
The freedom of information lobby advocates the maximum possible openness by state and public authorities in disclosing information they hold; the state is a great collector of personal information — should that be publicly disclosed too?
It is significant that the first country to enact data protection legislation was Sweden, which has had a freedom of information regime for over 200 years; the Swedes have become accustomed to a much more limited version of personal privacy as a result.
It is commonplace in Sweden, for example, that the annual declarations of personal income and of wealth made by all citizens become publicly available documents once they are received by the tax authorities; a man can conceal his income neither from his wife nor from his neighbour.
All Swedes have an officially registered address and all Swedes have a personal identification number which clearly incorporates date of birth — there can be no secrecy about  age.
With so limited a territory left for privacy, perhaps it is not surprising that the Swedes have led the way in data protection.
Their privacy problems started long before computers.
This last point is important.
The idea that information about identifiable individuals must be handled with care is not new; it does not arise from the use of computers to process such information, though the rapid development of computer technology in the 1950s and 1960s brought the issue into sharp relief.
Together with the popular demonology associated in the public mind with these strange monsters called computers it produced a sudden upsurge of anxiety.
It was in this atmosphere of unease that the Younger Committee reported; about computers it had to say that, restricted as it was to investigating private sector applications, it had no evidence of abuse, but that there was a possibility and apprehension of abuse in the future.
It gave a clear hint that the threat could come from either the public or the private sectors, and it set out a number of principles for handling personal information which, as the Younger Principles, have become famous; they survive in recognisable form in the Schedule of the Data Protection Act of 1984, where they assume an unusual importance.
For the first time, an Act of Parliament lays a duty upon a public official, the Data Protection Registrar, to judge whether activities shall be deemed lawful by reference to a set of principles.
And although the Act is all about computerised data banks, the word computer is not mentioned in the principles.
In the form in which the principles appear in the Act they relate clearly to a version which was included in the Council of Europe Convention of 1981.
The first principle is that ‘the information to be contained in personal data shall be obtained, and personal data shall be processed, fairly and lawfully’.
This sounds simple enough, yet it does mean that the data subject (to whom the information relates) and the data user (who puts it into a computer) should each see the handling of the data in the same way, and this has not always been the case when data have been disclosed to third parties, or have been collected for one ostensible purpose and used for another.
Since the electoral registration officer is authorised by statute to sell copies of the electoral register, address lists from this source are fairly and lawfully obtained; objections to trading in other address lists can be circumvented if, at the time of the initial collection of information, it is made clear that addresses will be passed on unless the data subject  expressly objects.
As a general rule data users should give as much information as possible to data subjects about what they propose to do with the data and must on no account mislead them.
The second principle simply says that ‘personal data shall be held only for one or more specified and lawful purposes’.
Here the key words are ‘only’ and ‘specified’.
This means that data users, when they register, must state all the purposes for which the data are likely to be used, and they must then ensure that they do not use the data in any other ways.
The third principle is that ‘personal data held for any purpose or purposes shall not be used or disclosed in any manner incompatible with that purpose or purposes’.
This sounds a very broad and fine principle, and so it is.
But unfortunately the Act is framed in such a way as to permit it to be circumvented.
The principle appears to prohibit disclosure of personal data to third parties; in fact such disclosure is permitted either if the data user registers his intention so to disclose, or if the circumstances are covered by one of the controversial ‘non-disclosure exemptions’.
These have been described as a fraud upon the public because, even if a data user has solemnly undertaken in his registration statement not to disclose the data to any third party, he will under the Act be deemed not to have contravened the terms of his registration if he access to requests from police or tax officers pleading prejudice to their enquiries.
So much for fine principles.
The fourth principle is that ‘personal data held for any purpose or purposes shall be adequate, relevant and not excessive in relation to that purpose or those purposes’— and there is more to this than at first meets the eye.
It clearly precludes the collection of data for its own sake, or just in case it might turn out to be useful; and it requires that information shall be kept for only as long as it remains relevant.
It ties in with the fifth principle that ‘personal data shall be accurate and, where necessary, kept up-to-date’— a formidable requirement, if taken literally, in view of the frequency with which personal details (address, etc.) can change, and also bearing in mind the possible diversity of sources of information; and who but the data subject can be the true judge of accuracy — unless of course he may have an interest in falsifying the record?
Who is to judge if there is a dispute?
The Act goes no further than requiring that, where there is disagreement over accuracy, the fact that there is such disagreement must be recorded.
The sixth principle, that ‘personal data held for  any purpose or purposes shall not be kept longer than is necessary for that purpose or those purposes’, follows from its predecessors and places a heavy responsibility on data users to ensure that they regularly weed out data once it has served its purpose.
This is a new requirement for most information systems, which have simply expanded to contain ever more data, relevant and timely or not; but it is surely little more than good practice should require in the interests of efficient and economical operation.
The last principle of all, the eighth, is also soundly practical, requiring security measures to protect data from unauthorised or accidental access, alteration, disclosure or destruction.
The seventh principle is different from the others, and introduces an important new right for data subjects.
‘An individual shall be entitled (a) at reasonable intervals and without undue delay or expense (i) to be informed by any data user whether he holds personal data of which that individual is subject, and (ii) to access to any such data held by a data user; and (b) where appropriate to have such data corrected or erased.’
The right of subject access is established, as is the right to have the record corrected or erased if the other data protection principles require it, but there may be a charge for it.
In accordance with the terms of the European Convention the Act provides additional safeguards for four categories of what are called sensitive data; these are information about the data subject relating to racial origin, political opinions or religious beliefs, physical or mental health or sexual life, and criminal convictions.
The Home Secretary has power to modify or supplement the data protection principles to provide additional safeguards for these categories; it will be interesting to see what these additional regulations will contain.
The path to data protection legislation in Britain was a long and tortuous one.
There were attempts at legislation on computers and privacy through Private Members Bills from 1961 onwards, which the Home Office, as the lead department on the subject, managed to stall successfully until 1970, when it was one of the issues which led to the setting up of the Younger Committee.
When that Committee reported in 1972 there was further delay before a White Paper,Computers and Privacy , was published in 1975; the Data Protection Committee was established in 1976 and reported, recommending legislation, in 1978.
Six more years elapsed before the Act of 1984.
It  is hardly an exaggeration to say that by delaying tactics the Home Office held up the legislation by more than twenty years.
Why?
It can hardly have been on account of the unanimous beliefs of the many Home Secretaries who passed through the department during the period — though it has to be said that only one, Roy Jenkins, showed any real interest in the issue and he did what he could to achieve action.
Clearly the permanent officials were opposed to legislation and persuaded successive Home Secretaries of whatever party to follow their line.
As a kind of amalgam of a Ministry of Justice (dealing with the rights of the individual) and a Department of the Interior (responsible for internal order and the integrity of the state), it would hardly be surprising for the Home Office to show symptoms of schizophrenia; it controls immigration, prisons, and drug abuse, for example, in addition to carrying responsibility for the Metropolitan Police and the Special Branch, and all these activities depend heavily on collecting and using personal information.
Clearly it viewed suggestions for data protection legislation, especially those which made the inclusion of public sector computers a central point, with disfavour, and until pressure from Europe proved irresistible it was successful.
Even then it ensured that there would be emasculating exemptions.
Britain was almost the last country in Western Europe to legislate, though it had been in Britain that the debate had originated decades earlier.
When the Data Protection Committee came to consider the case for legislation it had no doubt that the public sector presented the greater set of problems: the complex modern government bureaucracies at national and local level are great consumers of personal information about citizens — mostly to the citizens' benefit, of course, but some of the possibilities of linkage, network-formation and hence secret profile-building about identifiable individuals seemed frightening.
The Committee would have liked to secure legislation which ensured that at least the existence of every computerised system handling personal information was known: such provisions apply in other Western democracies, but the British tradition of shielding National Security matters even from Parliamentary scrutiny militated against such disclosures here.
As a positive step towards ensuring some uniformity of treatment of all other non-secret operations, in both public and private sectors, the Committee strongly advocated a set of publicly known Codes of Practice, to one or other of which every user would be required to  subscribe.
Without ever explaining quite why, the Home Office fiercely resisted this approach until late in the Bill's passage through Parliament; as a result Codes of Practice are just mentioned in the Act, and the Registrar is now busy encouraging their formulation and observance.
Because they are optional, however, they cannot provide the safeguards once hoped for, and individual data users are able to register their activities in their own way.
So insistent were the Data Protection Committee that the public sector constituted the greater threat that they recommended wholesale registration of all public sector users but only piecemeal or phased registration of private sector users.
In the event the Act required simultaneous, across-the-board registration of both sectors, placing an unnecessary strain on the private sector, and ensuring the greatest possible public hostility to the legislation, and the greatest possible strain on the Registrar's Office.
The Report of the Data Protection Committee was published late in 1978, a bad time for political initiatives: within a few months the new Conservative Government was in office and contenting itself with a fresh and laborious round of further consultations — there seemed little likelihood of anything being done until, in 1981, the Council of Europe, as part of its concern with human rights, opened its ‘Convention for the Protection of Individuals with regard to Automatic Data Processing’ for signature by States which had appropriate legislation enacted.
Before long there were sufficient signatories for the eventual ratification and implementation of the Convention to become certain, and the prospect loomed of Britain becoming isolated as a somewhat dubious off-shore ‘data haven’.
This was because of the vast trade which had built up in trans-border data flow — the international exchange across frontiers of electronically processed information.
Britain, and especially London, had become ‘a cross-roads on the international data highway’; yet if Britain could not subscribe to the European Convention those who were subscribers could discriminate against Britain and refuse to handle data flows in either direction because there was no protective data legislation.
This had immediate commercial implications and the Government suffered an overnight conversion, bringing forward the first Data Protection Bill in February 1983 and reviving it after the election later in the year.
‘Commerce, not liberty, is the motive’, said The Times , going on to call the Bill, which became the 1984 Act, meagre and minimalist.
It was symptomatic of the British approach to the whole question that at the time the Act took effect no one knew, even to an approximation, how many data users were going to be required to register.
Ten years earlier at the time of the Younger Report, it had been possible to compile a rough estimate of the number of computer installations; all thoughts were then on the powerful centralised main-frame equipment which had dominated the technology till then.
By the 1980s, however, the whole aspect of the technology had changed, with profound effects on the privacy issue.
The emphasis was now on the proliferation of high-capacity small-scale computers capable of greater versatility than the older machines, lending themselves to the formation of networks, and many of them deliberately designed for easy access, so that much of the mystique was being dispelled.
No estimates could be made of the number of systems or the number of applications involving personal data — guesses ranged from 50,000 to 350,000.
The Data Protection Registrar, in publicising a closing date of May 1986 for the receipt of registrations, had no idea how many data users ought to be registering; in the event the flow of registrations was far slower than had been hoped, but by the end of 1986 it was clear that the higher guesses were more likely to be right.
Assuming that eventually ail data users handling personal data on computers are registered, what has been achieved?
It would be pleasant to be able to say that, as a result, the existence of all automated personal data handling systems is known, even if not much has been vouchsafed of what they do.
Unfortunately, however, because of exemption clauses which the Government insisted upon throughout the debates on the Bill, even this minimum reassurance is not possible.
Not only are personal data not protected if a Cabinet Minister certifies that exemption is required ‘for the purpose of safeguarding national security’(a rather vague and wide catch-all phrase) but there are other exemptions where the protection afforded by the Act is held to be ‘likely to prejudice’ the prevention or detection of crime, the apprehension or prosecution of offenders, or the assessment or collection of any tax or duty.
The decision on prejudice is presumably at the discretion of police and tax officers; if widely exercised it could set at naught some of the principal objects of the Act.
The Data Protection Act was not designed to curb the development  of automated data systems, but to ensure good practice on the part of users, and to give data subjects the right to interrogate users.
It was designed merely to fit within the minimal requirements of the European Convention and it hardly revolutionises the data privacy scene.
Nevertheless, assuming that all users are eventually registered, the data subject should be able to feel that he knows or can find out more than he knew hitherto about the extent to which he figures in the data banks.
The great motive power behind information technology is ever-diminishing unit costs, so that the application of computers can be expected to continue to proliferate.
Will the Act remain effective in the face of technical development?
One of the innovatory features of the Act is that the holder of the office it sets up — the Data Protection Registrar — has the task of applying a set of principles — the Data Protection Principles, set out as a Schedule to the Act.
He has to judge each application for registration in the light of the Principles; to the extent that the Principles are agreed to be universal and timeless, the march of technology should present few problems, since particular technical processes are not dealt with in the Act.
(Here it is superior to the American version, which attempted to describe the technology and was rapidly outdated.)
What is not so clear is whether the Principles have anticipated ail types of problem which the technology may throw up.
It could even be that we are moving into a hitherto unknown dimension with the next steps in IT.
Already we have micros everywhere, capable of linkage and ‘conversation’ with each other, up to now by telephone link, but any day now through satellites.
The electronic information explosion knows no frontiers; we may soon be enveloped in a world-encompassing atmosphere of information messages and ‘noise’ of a variety and density not known before, able to plug in to one or a multiplicity of channels and capture information of a wide diversity of nature and origin, much of it junk.
Once personal information gets into such a network it will be difficult if not impossible to restrict access to it; it could be that such an open system could be justified to the data subject as the latest desirable addition to the role of consumer in the acquisitive society — why not order one's claret from one's fireside by the keyboard direct from the château, with instant payment by electronic fund transfer at point of sale, debiting one's bank account instantaneously?
With the expansion and internationalisation of markets this may become commonplace.
A decade ago the Chairman of Readers Digest in the  U.K. could dismiss the pressure for legislation on data privacy as ‘like consumerism, a middle-class fad’.
Perhaps the wheel has gone full circle and the middle class is now prepared to sell its birthright of privacy for the glittering prizes of acquisition.
But that is not the end of the story; networks will not only serve the interests of the market; they bring within reach the possibility of the surveillance of whole populations, with serious implications for personal privacy.
In Britain it is easy to forget that, while we may have the publicly available electoral register, we are almost alone in Europe in not requiring each citizen to have a formally registered address, and to notify changes of address to the police.
It is an aspect of privacy we should take more seriously; it may seem a frail distinction to draw when armed police can batter down your front door on suspicion that a wanted person may be inside, but at least it gives the possibility of some redress, and may make it more difficult to achieve the total surveillance of society.
The arrival of the jackbooted armed emissaries of the state, battering the door in the small hours of the morning, has become the epitome of political repression of right and of left, particularly in respect of dissenting minorities.
It is made possible because information about citizens is held by organs of the state.
So it was when the Germans over-ran Holland in 1940 and within three days had rounded up large numbers of Jews — the Dutch population records which included religious affiliation were put to sinister use, promptly and efficiently even without the aid of modern technology.
We cannot afford to assume that all governments, ail public servants, will always be benign and free from corruption.
No legislative curb can guarantee fair and benevolent treatment for individuals irrespective of the fortunes of the political future; laws will not stop tyrants.
At best the existence of some checks and balances, or statutory tripwires, may serve to alert the wary as to how things are moving.
It is easy to be paranoic about IT and the future, and that is hardly justified; but constant vigilance is required.
For Information Technology is going to transform all our lives — we have hardly seen anything yet.
When every new house or flat is automatically provided with plug-in points for water, electricity,and information , each of them offering the instant service of a widespread network, everyday life will change.
Our shopping and baking habits, our home record-keeping and correspondence, local and worldwide, our legal, medical and insurance affairs, our  most intimate communications, could all be encompassed by our home data bank with its living connections to systems in the outside world; and by the two-way nature of those links and the ingenuity of the ‘hacker’ or by pure mischance all our secrets could be opened to the world.
The effect of IT on personal life could be as profound as that of an earlier technological innovation, the motor car.
The earliest horseless carriages were regarded as socially dangerous and the first legislation to control them required that each should be accompanied by three persons — a driver, a passenger in case the driver was taken ill, and a third person walking in front carrying a red flag.
If at the time of the first Red Flag Act anyone had prophesied that within 100 years horseless carriages would be careering around by the million, they would have been thought dangerously deluded; no one would have believed that society would survive such an onslaught.
Yet we have adapted our lives, more or less, to the motor car; the early legislation was progressively modified as technology advanced and attitudes changed until, by a process of social adaptation and general education, the current road traffic regulations and the Highway Code together just about control the monster.
We are at the Red Flag stage with IT, and it is hardly possible to anticipate how the future will work out.
In addition to vigilance we need education in the responsible uses of this new extension of man's powers, otherwise we might be driven to a fruitless Luddite destruction of computers because they seem able to take on a life of their own.
IT presents a challenge to the responsible society which cannot be ignored.
Interventive Reproduction
URSULA MITTWOCH
‘We have a tradition that sex and reproduction must be attended by privacy, dignity and romance.
It is a good tradition, provided we add a fourth attribute, namely understanding; for otherwise the fundamental life activities concerned with sex may become involved in fears, inhibitions and blind taboos.’
(Corner,The Hormones in Human Reproduction , 1964)
Ethical problems arising from discoveries, real or imagined, in the field of reproduction are not new.
In 1786, J.C.
Hencke, an organist in the German town of Hildesheim, published a book which set out to describe a secret of nature which the author had recently discovered.
As a result of his discovery, parents would henceforth be able to select the sex of their children at will.
The author regarded as unfounded the fears of those moralists who thought God's order would be destroyed if the birth of sons and daughters were determined by the parents.
He argued that, on the one hand, reproduction is mainly practised by peasants and others of low rank, who could hardly be expected to show much interest in whether they produced male or female children.
Whereas for those classes for whom his discovery was primarily intended, it might indeed reveal the wise intention of the Creator to prevent the sad fate of so many daughters who, because of exaggerated economic expectations, were hitherto condemned to spend their entire lives in the unmarried state.
Ethical problems do not change.
What changes are the details on which different generations base their convictions.
Another change within the last 200 years is in the field of reproductive biology.
The fourth attribute demanded by George Corner, that of understanding, is possible for the first time in the history of civilization; but it is a  possibility which so far is available to only a small minority of specialists.
Therefore I shall preface a discussion of the pros and cons of reproductive techniques by a brief résumé of the underlying biology.
Modern biology is based on cells.
The cell is the unit of which all living organisms are composed, and most organisms contain vast numbers of them.
A rough estimate tells us that an adult human individual is made up of ten million million (10&sup13;) cells, a number which exceeds that of the total population of the world approximately 2000 times.
Different cells, such as blood cells, nerve cells, and muscle cells, make up the various tissues and organs of the body, but the diversity of cell types is superimposed on a common plan: each cell consists of a nucleus, which is the seat of the chromosomes, the genes, and the genetic material in general; and which is surrounded by cytoplasm, whose constituents provide the environment in which the genetic potential is actualized.
The basic similarity between cells refers not only to their general plan but also to their genetic endowment.
Indeed, all the millions of cells that make up each one of us have been formed by a process of successive cell divisions, during each of which the 46 chromosomes were first faithfully duplicated, and then separated to form two new daughter cells.
This process can be traced back until we arrive at a single cell which was formed at the moment of conception by the fusion of two parental germ cells, i.e. one egg and one sperm cell.
This fusion cell, which is technically known as a zygote, could be regarded as the foundation stone of the new individual.
In view of the central position of the egg and sperm cell in reproductive biology, we need to look at them in a little more detail.
The diverseness of their appearance gives no clue to the similarity in the origin and function of the male and female germ cells (which are also known as gametes, or marrying cells).
The egg is the largest cell of the body, and in addition to its nucleus contains a relatively massive cytoplasm, whose contents provide nutrients to the zygote in the early stages of its development.
By contrast, the sperm is the smallest cell of the body, whose nuclear material is packed into the smallest possible space inside the sperm head, and whose cytoplasm  is reduced to a thin filament, the tail, which allows the sperm to swim before fertilizing the egg.
In spite of their different appearances and functions during the actual process of fertilization, the egg and sperm cells bring equivalent portions of genetic material to the zygote and hence the future individual.
They are able to do this because they are formed by a special type of cell division, during which the 46 chromosomes in the body cells of the father and the mother assort into 23 pairs, following which the two members of each pair segregate, so that the resulting germ cells receive only 23 chromosomes.
Fertilization consists of the coming together of the two sets of chromosomes, 23 paternal and 23 maternal ones, so providing a new set of 46 chromosomes ‘yoked together’ in the zygote, which is the first cell of the new individual.
The difference in size between egg and sperm is counterbalanced by the numbers in which they are produced.
During the reproductive life of a woman, one egg — rarely two or more — matures at monthly intervals and is discharged at ovulation, which brings the total number of eggs that are ovulated to barely 500.
In order to achieve this, almost seven million egg cell precursors are laid down in the female fetus.
But this number pales into insignificance when we compare it with the prodigious number of sperm, whose output runs to a hundred million daily!
Only one sperm fertilizes an egg, but it evidently requires the backup of many millions of others.
The word ‘sperm’ is derived from the Greek meaning a ‘seed’, and reflects the Aristotelian idea that the male semen (the latter word being derived from the Latin word for ‘seed,’) contains the formative element which grows and develops inside the mother's womb.
Only within the last hundred years has it become evident that a sperm is in no way comparable to the seed of a plant, which is a multicellular reproductive structure containing the embryo of the plant.
By contrast, a sperm is a single cell, a gamete, which needs to fuse with another gamete of opposite sex before the development of the embryo can be initiated.
The immense difficulties lying in the way of an understanding of the mysteries of generation, and the late stage in history when the riddle was solved, is also evident when we consider another commonly used term for the sperm cell, namely ‘spermatozoon’.
F.J. Cole (Early Theories of Sexual Generation , 1930) has described how in 1827, Karl von Baer achieved lasting fame by his  discovery of the mammalian egg in the ovary of the dog.
However, von Baer regarded the multitude of sperm cells swimming around in the semen as single-celled parasites, and he perpetuated this view by calling them ‘spermatozoa’, i.e. sperm animals.
During the 1840s, Albert von Koelliker showed that spermatozoa are not parasites, but products of cells in the testis.
The coming together of egg and sperm in fertilization was observed in simple marine animals, such as sea urchins, during the course of the following four decades.
The problem of how it comes about that individuals develop as either males or females was solved, at least in principle, during the first quarter of this century.
One of the 23 pairs of body cells differs in males and females, and these chromosomes are known as ‘sex chromosomes’.
Females have two equal sex chromosomes, called ‘X’, but males have only one X chromosome, which is partnered by a smaller one, the Y chromosome.
It follows that all eggs contain an X chromosome, but when spermatozoa are formed, the X separates from the Y, with the result that half the sperm contain an X, and the other half a Y chromosome.
The latter will cause the development of a male, the former of a female embryo.
The sex of the embryo is, therefore, predetermined at fertilization.
The human egg meets the sperm in the Fallopian tube (see Figure).
During ovulation, the ripe egg is released from the ovarian follicle which contained it.
It is channelled into a Fallopian tube, with the aid of the finger-like projections which surround its aperture, and which are themselves covered by numerous cilia, resembling tiny eye-lashes.
The journey of the sperm to the Fallopian tube is of necessity longer.
On leaving the testis, the sperm traverses a tightly coiled convoluted tube, known as the epididymis, which eventually widens into the vas deferens.
During ejaculation, the sperm is deposited into the vagina, after which it has to negotiate the cervix and the uterus, from where it enters the Fallopian tube.
Of about two hundred and fifty million spermatozoa that are deposited in the vagina, two hundred may reach the Fallopian tubes.
If egg and sperm meet at the right time, one of the spermatozoa is likely to penetrate the egg.
The fertilized egg, now known as a zygote, continues to move along the Fallopian tube towards the uterus, and while it does so, divides once or twice a day.
This results in a ball of cells, which then proceeds to burrow into the wall of the   uterus.
Implantation is completed about 15 days after fertilization.
Throughout this period, most of the cells become progressively committed to form the tissues such as the placenta which will surround and nourish the future embryo.
It has become customary to refer to the product of conception during the first two weeks as ‘proembryo’(or ‘pre-embryo’).
In medical terminology the proembryo is often referred to as ‘conceptus’, which, by referring to a past rather than a future event, has the additional advantage of neutrality.
In the third week after fertilization, the embryo itself begins to develop.
It is thought that about a third of conceptuses fail to develop into an embryo.
In most cases, their presence will not have been detected.
When first formed the embryo is only half a millimetre long, and bears no resemblance to its future form.
Six weeks later, most of its organs are present and its outward appearance begins to resemble that of a baby.
Henceforth, the embryo is referred to as a fetus.
It now measures about 25mm along its longest axis.
Even the briefest survey of the physical facts underlying reproduction will convey some idea of the complexity of the process, from the formation of egg and sperm, their meeting in fertilization, to the development of the embryo in the uterus.
Yet despite all difficulties, conception is successful in the majority of people.
On the other hand, about ten per cent of couples suffer from infertility.
These facts results in two problems.
Most people could have far more children than they are able to support, while a sizeable minority are unable to have any children at all.
Recent advances in the biology of reproduction have resulted in methods and techniques which can overcome both problems.
The pros and cons of the various procedures involved have been debated on many occasions with much ardour and conviction, and not a little prejudice.
To what extent should people be allowed to choose their own reproductive strategies?
Abortion
It should be evident from the preceding section that the product of conception obtained half its genetic endowment from the father's  sperm, and the other half from the mother's egg.
Therefore it cannot at any stage, whether as embryo or fetus, be regarded as part of its mother's body.
This is not an argument against abortion, but the legitimacy of this procedure needs to be based on a concept other than that a woman may choose how she wishes to use her body.
The alleged choice is in any case short-lived.
If there is a conflict between the baby's and mother's welfare after it is born, all public sympathy will have shifted away from the mother.
Even if the child is a drain on her health, and she cannot cope with it, public opinion will totally condemn her if she neglects or injures her child.
When contracted with the legitimacy of abortion, this difference in attitude must be attributed to the changed status of the child as before and after birth.
The argument about women's choices over their bodies is largely a red herring.
To bring up a child is not only a more protracted process than pregnancy, but is also in many ways more onerous, and certainly more expensive.
Abortion usually provides the last chance for a woman to opt not to have a child (unless she is prepared to offer it for adoption) either for social reasons or because the fetus is in some way malformed.
This possibility is available because the fetus is regarded as less important than the mother.
Contraception
Contraception as a problem of principle is largely, though not entirely, a thing of the past.
Family planning is regarded as the norm by the majority of people in developed countries, and the threat of overpopulation in developing countries is perceived by a thinking minority in many countries as casting a shadow over the future of mankind.
This of course does not mean that the opposition to birth control expressed in the early years of the century, particularly by religious authorities, has completely ended.
In particular, a Papal encyclical of 1968 explicitly proscribes any action which either before, at the moment of, or after sexual intercourse, is specifically intended to prevent procreation.
Nevertheless, the climate of public opinion has moved in the direction of making contraception available, in spite of legislation, which varies from country to country, aiming to restrict various aspects of the practice.
In Britain, condoms are available over the counter and from slot machines, so that anyone wishing to purchase them can do so.
However, oral contraceptives for women require a doctor's prescription, while other contraceptive devices need to be fitted in a clinic (Caroline Berry,The Rites of Life , 1987).
Even though there are valid medical and technical reasons for this state of affairs, it can lead to difficulties for women and girls.
A legal quandary can arise if the contraceptive is requested by a girl under 16 years of age.
Above that age children can give consent to medical treatment, whereas children below 16 require their parents' consent.
Suppose a girl under 16 does not wish her parents to know that she is seeking contraceptive advice: the medical profession is divided between those who give priority to partial consent, and others who, in line with the General Medical Council, hold that the principle of professional confidentiality overrides that of parental consent.
In 1983, Mrs Victoria Gillick sought a court order to rule the latter order of priorities illegal.
She won her case on appeal, but this was subsequently overruled by the House of Lords.
The outcome was clearly welcomed by those with liberal sentiments: for however much one may deplore the sexual activities of young teenagers, there can surely be little doubt that the protection of such a girl from an unwanted pregnancy must be a matter of primary importance, and, therefore, if need be, have precedence not only over the right of parents to give or withhold consent, but even over the right to information regarding their child, for whom they are legally responsible.
Artificial Insemination
Until recently, infertility was regarded as a problem for women, and hardly anything was known about reproductive problems in men.
Today infertility is seen as a problem for the couple and andrology has joined gynaecology as a discipline in scientific medicine.
In order for conception to take place, a man must produce a very large number of motile spermatozoa.
If the number of spermatozoa is relatively small, conception may fail to occur after natural intercourse.
However, if the sperm from a number of ejaculates are stored, added together and introduced into the wife's vagina or uterus, fertilization may be successful.
The techniques may also circumvent impotence and some other problems that prevent normal intercourse followed by conception.
Artificial insemination by the husband's sperm is approved by  many religious authorities as a means of achieving fertility in a couple who would otherwise be childless.
However, the practice is condemned in a recent announcement made by the Vatican on Respect for Human Life in its Origins and on the Dignity of Procreation, which permits a child to be conceived only as a result of intercourse within marriage.
Artificial insemination by donor (AID), i.e. by a man other than the husband, can be used to achieve fertility where the husband lacks spermatozoa, or is otherwise infertile, or if the husband is a carrier of a genetic disease with a high chance of its being transmitted to a child; alternatively the husband and wife may both be carriers of the same recessive gene, so that each act of fertilization would have a 25 per cent chance of giving rise to a diseased child.
The use of AID would make this an unlikely event.
This procedure has attracted more opposition, both from religious authorities, who regard it as in some ways similar to adultery, and from sociologists, whose misgivings are based on two main reasons.
One is that it may weaken the marriage by suggesting a ‘failure’ on the part of the husband.
The other worry is whether the child will or will not be told about his or her origin.
There are differences of opinion whether the whole truth is necessarily helpful in all cases.
The Warnock Committee on Human Fertilization and Embryology (1984) recommended that AID should be available on a properly organized basis and subject to licensing arrangements.
The Committee also recommended that the law should be changed so that the husband could be registered as the father.
In Vitro Fertilization
Whereas artificial insemination is a simple technique, which can be carried out in an outpatients department, or even at home,in vitro fertilization needs to be performed by highly skilled practitioners and requires sophisticated laboratory facilities.
The technique consists of four basic stages:
1.
Eggs need to be collected from the woman's ovary.
2.
Since spermatozoa in ejaculated semen are not yet able to penetrate the egg, the spermatozoa have to undergo careful treatment in the laboratory to achieve the maturation which normally occurs in the female reproductive tract.
3.
Spermatozoa are combined with the egg.
4.
After fertilization has taken place, the zygote is cultured in the laboratory for a few days and the proembryo is then placed in the woman's uterus.
In vitro fertilization was pioneered by Patrick Steptoe and Robert Edwards, and resulted in the first ‘test-tube baby’, Louise Brown, being born in 1978.
Since that time, more than 20,000 babies are thought to have been born as a result of this technique.
In vitro fertilization can restore fertility to women who ovulate but cannot conceive because their Fallopian tubes are blocked.
A major cause of tubal occlusion is pelvic inflammatory disease.
Once the oviduct is blocked, it is difficult to treat by surgery or other means.
Since the egg cannot enter the oviduct, the treatment consists of removing it from the ovary prior to ovulation, fertilizing it in the laboratory, and placing the proembryo into the uterus where it has a chance to implant.
A baby conceived by in vitro fertilization in this way is as genetically related to its father and mother as a normally conceived baby, and the technique is widely accepted as ethically acceptable, although not, of course, by the Catholic Church, for the reasons that have been mentioned above.
One ethical problem which does arise stems from the fact that the success rate of implantation increases with the number of embryos being implanted.
In practice, women undergoing in vitro fertilization are treated with hormones, which causes several eggs to ripen, and they are then fertilized.
The proembryoes can be frozen and stored, and their availability improves the chance of success of in vitro fertilizations as well as allowing a woman to have another child a year or two after the first.
The status of the proembryo, and the laboratory procedures to which it may or may not be subjected, have been the subject of extensive debates and discussions.
The availability of in vitro fertilization opens up the further possibility that the proembryo which is eventually implanted need not originate from an egg produced by the woman herself.
The procedure of egg donation, or of proembryo donation, could help some women to bear a child even though they are unable to produce their own eggs, or are bearers of a genetically transmissible disease.
The Warnock Committee recommended that donation of an egg or proembryo should be permitted as a means of treating infertility, but that the techniques should be carefully controlled by licensing.
The Committee further recommended openness with the children about their genetic origin.
Surrogacy
Surrogacy is an arrangement whereby a woman carries a child with the intention of handing it over to another woman after its birth.
This could be a way out for a couple unable to have children because of the wife's inability to bear a child.
If the wife is unable to produce eggs, or if she is the carrier of a serious genetic abnormality, the surrogate mother may also be the genetic mother of the child, and the spermatozoa may be donated by the commissioning woman's husband, either by in vitro fertilization or through intercourse.
Alternatively, the wife may be able to produce healthy eggs but for various medical reasons not be in a position to maintain a pregnancy.
In such a situation, her egg could be fertilized by her husband's sperm in vitro, and the fertilized egg be implanted in the uterus of another woman, who will bear the child, to whom she is not genetically related.
This condition is referred to as full surrogacy, or uterine fostering.
Of course, either type of surrogacy could be commissioned in the absence of medical reasons, with a view to providing a baby without the burden of pregnancy.
For instance, if a couple opted for a full surrogacy arrangement, they could have a baby that bears the same genetic relationship to them as do children conceived in the normal way, while someone else copes with the inconvenience of pregnancy and birth.
Of all the possibilities of interventive reproduction, none has been the subject of more public opposition than surrogacy.
The Warnock Committee, after expressing liberal views regarding such practices as egg donation and in vitro fertilization, turned to truly Draconian measures in their effort to stamp out surrogacy.
The Committee not only recommended statutory provision making all surrogacy agreements illegal and therefore unenforceable in the courts, but also called for the introduction of legislation rendering it a criminal act for any person to assist in the establishment of a surrogate pregnancy.
Agencies arranging contacts between potential commissioning and surrogate mothers would also be committing criminal offences.
Commercial agencies for the establishment of surrogacy have since been outlawed by the 1985 Surrogacy Arrangements Act (M. D. A. Freeman in Current Legal Problems , 1986).
In an age when homosexuality and abortion have been legalized, what could be the reason for an otherwise progressive body like the  Warnock Committee to invoke the criminal law with a view to preventing a newly available reproductive technique from being practised between consenting adults?
One important difference between surrogacy and homosexuality is of course that surrogacy results in the birth of a child; and it could be argued that such a child might be socially disadvantaged if the facts became known.
But if all children who might be socially disadvantaged were prevented from being born, the earth would be a thinly populated planet.
In the absence of more tangible evidence, the argument regarding possible harmful effects on children can be ignored.
A major argument put forward against surrogacy is ‘that to introduce a third party into the process of procreation which should be confined to the loving partnership between two people, is an attack on the value of the marital relationship’.
Since the same argument applies to in vitro fertilization by donor, which the Committee recommended should be available on a properly organized basis, the case against surrogacy continues as follows: ‘Further the intrusion is worse than in the case of AID, since the contribution of the carrying mother is greater, more intimate and personal, than the contribution of a semen donor.
It is also argued that it is inconsistent with human dignity that a woman should use her uterus for financial profit and treat it as an incubator for someone else's child.’
The last sentence begs at least four questions, and will be analysed in some detail.
What is, or is not, consistent with human dignity is obviously a value judgment, which can neither be confirmed nor refuted; and, of course, one can think of other activities that could be construed as being inconsistent with human dignity, which are not criminalized.
The point about a woman using her uterus for financial gain poses two problems.
If the loss of human dignity were dependent on the financial gain, there would be no moral and social objection to surrogacy in the absence of such gain; whereas if the condemnation refers to surrogacy under any circumstances, the question of financial gain is irrelevant.
The additional use of the metaphor of the uterus as incubator is comparable to the ‘Rent-a-Womb’ heading of the tabloids.
Both are designed to convince the readership of the horror of the subject-matter.
Why should the uterus be singled out for such treatment?
Supposing the sentence read: ‘It is also argued that it is inconsistent with human dignity that a man should use his muscles as a crane for  transporting someone else's goods’; or ‘that a woman should use her vocal cords for the delectation of others’; or ‘that a person should use his or her brain to work out someone else's income tax’— would these substitutes carry convictions?
The fact is that we all earn our living by using parts of our bodies, and there can be no biological, or logical, reason for outlawing organs of the reproductive system.
Nevertheless, according to long-standing tradition, the esteem with which different organs are regarded diminishes with their position in the body from the top downwards.
George Corner recalls an article in the Baltimore Sun of many years ago, according to which the heart and lungs are perfectly respectable, the liver not quite, the spleen dubious and the kidneys definitely vulgar.
In those days the prostate was so far below the standard of respectability that it could not even have been mentioned in the newspaper.
When we turn to the uterus, not only is it situated in the abdomen, but it is also confined to women; and even in our enlightened days, it is hedged around with taboos.
This is exemplified by another argument against surrogacy, namely that since there are some risks attached to pregnancy, no woman ought to be asked to undertake pregnancy for another, in order to earn money.
We are not told how these risks compare with, say, working as an air hostess, or as a policewoman.
Prostitution also is not without danger, but this is not usually cited as an argument for making it illegal.
Two members of the Warnock Committee dissented from the majority to the extent of permitting surrogacy as a treatment for childlessness under the general supervision of a licensing authority; and they also suggested that payment to a surrogate mother should not be a barrier to the child being adopted by the commissioning couple.
The same minority report emphasized, however, that the authors concurred with the majority in their disapproval of surrogacy for convenience, and that the criminal law should be invoked to prevent agencies concerned with surrogacy arrangements being run for profit.
Of course, it is possible that the Warnock Committee saw the surrogacy issue as a kind of scapegoat, whose condemnation would allow for a certain measure of acceptance of other technological advances in reproduction, such as in vitro fertilization.
Perhaps by joining in the public disapproval of surrogacy, and seemingly sharing the moral universe of ‘Disgusted of Tunbridge Wells’, the Committee may have increased their sphere of influence.
But  in order to arrive at a balanced judgment, a more rational analysis of the factors involved is required.
There appears to be a widely, though not universally, held opinion that the degradation of the surrogate mother is increased if she receives payment for undertaking the pregnancy.
Such payment, furthermore, is thought not only to detract from any generosity that might otherwise characterize her action, but altogether to cast doubt on her motives and her reliability.
The activities of commercial surrogacy agencies were unanimously condemned by the Warnock Committee, although the reasons for this are not obvious.
The only member of the surrogacy team who appears to be unscathed by financial considerations is the obstetrician.
As long as he operates within the law, nobody seems to suggest that an obstetrician or other medical practitioner should provide his services free, or that receiving a fee makes either his motives or his reliability suspect; and clinics can legally be run for profit.
Payment, it seems, is acceptable for professionals, but its legitimacy is more controversial for other ranks.
It is ironical that one of the definitions of ‘professional’ given in The Shorter Oxford Dictionary (1975) is ‘applied to one who follows, by way of profession, what is generally followed as a pastime, as a p. cricketer’.
The fee paid to the surrogate mother is thought to degrade not only her, but also the child, ‘since for all practical purposes the child will have been bought for money’.
It is worth reminding oneself, therefore, that the institution of marriage, which is so often held up as the ideal against which other relationships are to be measured, is certainly not unaffected by financial considerations.
Today undoubtedly a marriage involves fewer regulations regarding property between spouses than it did in the eighteenth century.
But even if the dowry has all but vanished, to marry a rich husband or wife is still a means of improving one's financial situation.
Who is to say what part of the loving relationship was generated by the bank account?
And what is the effect on the children of a marriage entered into for economic or social reasons?
Whatever the answers, neither marriage nor commercially run marriage agencies are illegal.
Those whose task it is to lay down the law on matters of ethics and morality need to ensure that their views are based on a wide knowledge of human institutions and their history.
They must also lay aside their personal feelings.
Most people would probably not be  delighted to be told that their daughter has chosen to become a surrogate mother; but it cannot be the function of the law either to prevent unpleasant situations, or to tell one's daughter how to conduct her affairs.
Surrogacy is frequently denounced as an exploitation of the surrogate mother, but the idea that the exploitation is increased if she receives payment is surely paradoxical.
One possible reason could be that in addition to a general sense of guilt associated with the organs of sex and reproduction, there is the added fact that most surrogate mothers belong to the economically disadvantaged classes; and it is arguably a case of exploitation if a woman is driven to use her reproductive organs to escape from a state of poverty.
Surrogacy however cannot bear any responsibility for our social system.
If a section of the population is held to live below a minimum economic standard because of the selfish aspirations of the rest of the community, this is an act of exploitation and a reason for communal guilt.
Any woman living above the poverty line may choose or refuse to become a surrogate mother, and value judgments of either exploitation by the commissioning parents or of greed on the part of the surrogate mother are misplaced.
But suppose a woman has agreed to become a surrogate mother and accepted a fee from the commissioning parents.
If she subsequently changes her mind and refuses to hand the child over, the courts may allow her to keep the child, and in practice she will be unlikely to return any money, even if she were legally required to do so.
This could provide an open opportunity for women to exploit couples who are desperate for a child by persuading them to hand over a substantial sum of money in lieu of a service that cannot be legally enforced.
The solution to this problem lies not in legislation but in effective screening of potential surrogate mothers.
This task could probably be best handled by the surrogacy agencies, who would need to be regulated, as adoption agencies already are.
By taking up references, and through medical and psychological testing, the failure rate could be minimized.
It does not matter whether the agencies are voluntary or run for profit, provided they are efficient.
The spectacle of adults fighting legal battles over children is by no means confined to cases of surrogacy, although at present these will run an increased risk of litigation.
The obvious solution is to reduce  the risk.
Careful screening, and matching of surrogate mothers and commissioning parents, are important steps in that direction.
Further legislation may also be necessary.
In cases of full surrogacy, where the fetus is not genetically related to the surrogate mother, there appears to be some doubt as to who is the legal mother, and this question will need to be settled.
In view of the importance of birth in determining the status of the child, a good solution might be if the question were decided in favour of the surrogate mother, and the child were adopted by the commissioning parents.
Once it is accepted that surrogacy is unlikely to cause any serious harm, the idea that it could be used for social rather than medical reasons should lose much of the horror and condemnation with which it tends to be associated.
As mentioned before, the fact that one may not approve of a practice cannot be a reason for wishing to have it outlawed.
A comparison with wet nursing shows up certain similarities, not least because it highlights the way in which fashion, prejudice, and moral attitudes dictate what are the perceived duties of motherhood.
During most of the sixteenth century, condemnation of women who employed a wet-nurse to suckle their babies was minimal.
As shown by Valerie Fildes, in Breasts, Bottles and Babies (1988), during the seventeenth century Puritan theologians in particular devoted sermons and popular tracts to the evils of non-breastfeeding mothers, and they were joined by philosophers and physicians; but this had little discernible effect on the wealthy.
Indeed, wealthy mothers who chose to breastfeed their babies were sufficiently exceptional to attract comment, often adverse, from relatives, friends, and a wider social circle.
None of the preceding remarks are intended to be seen as advocating either wet-nursing or surrogacy.
What does seem important is that discussions on surrogacy, as on other aspects of reproductive biology, should be put on a more rational basis, and that codes of practice should be regulated by professional bodies, and not by the criminal law.
Future Possibilities
This essay began with a citation from a book on how parents could select the sex of their offspring.
Although published in the eighteenth century, the idea was by no means new.
It may sound surprising therefore that the problem of sex selection before birth has still not been solved, nor is it likely that it will be solved for natural conceptions in the foreseeable future.
What is possible already is to detect the chromosomal sex of a fetus either by amniocentesis or, at an earlier stage of development, by sampling of chorionic villi; and if the fetus is of the unwanted sex, it could be aborted.
This procedure is currently adopted in families in which male but not female children have a 50 per cent chance of being afflicted by a serious disease, such as muscular dystrophy.
However, the sex of the fetus will be known in numerous situations of antenatal diagnosis other than for sex-linked diseases, and it now seems that some women seek abortions merely because they are dissatisfied with the sex of the fetus.
Some centres therefore decline to disclose the sex of the fetus unless the obstetrician specifically requests otherwise.
Do mothers have a right to select the sex of their babies?
At the present stage of scientific development, it is surely sad that a healthy human fetus should be destroyed merely because it is not of the sex the mother prefers.
It is an excellent rule not to destroy any living organism without good cause, and this applies particularly to a potential human being.
Whether it is a potential son or daughter hardly constitutes good cause for the termination of a pregnancy, and in our society requests to do so must be deemed frivolous.
It is to be hoped that education will counteract these requests which are in total opposition to the idea of sexual equality, and in addition seek to use medical and nursing resources which are required to combat disease.
The situation would of course be different if a method eventually became available whereby the sex of the offspring could be selected at conception.
This possibility, although not yet on the horizon of scientific advances, is already being proclaimed as a new scourge of humankind.
But it need not be so.
In Western countries, parents are likely to want about equal numbers of sons and daughters.
In a developing country, like India, a preference for sons would be  expected to lead initially to a reduction in the birth rate, which would be to the country's advantage; and before long, the more farsighted parents will realise that in order to have grandchildren, they should select not sons, who may not be able to find wives, but daughters, who will be sought after, and be able to enter into advantageous marriages.
The term ‘cloning ’ refers to a method of asexual reproduction, such as grafting of varieties of apples, whereby all offspring are exact genetic replicas of the parent stock.
In animals, the term is also used for the technique of inactivating the nucleus of an egg and replacing it with the nucleus of a body cell.
Each nucleus of an egg or sperm cell has a unique genetic constitution, but the nuclei of the many millions of body cells of an individual all have the same or similar genetic constitution.
In theory, therefore, the method could allow one to produce many millions of new individuals with identical genetical constitutions.
In practice a few frogs have been produced by killing the egg nucleus by ultraviolet irradiation, and replacing it with the nucleus from a cell of the gut of a tadpole.
No frogs developed if nuclei from adult frogs were placed into the egg.
In mammals, no transplantation of an adult nucleus into an egg has yet been successful.
The idea of cloning in this sense belongs to science fiction, and may never become a reality.
The principal fears engendered by what has been called the revolution in reproduction are created by ignorance; and as George Corner, who helped to lay the foundations for the new reproductive technology, foresaw, lack of understanding leads to fears, inhibitions and blind taboos.
This applies particularly to an understanding of the biological principles underlying the reproductive process.
For instance, much of the fear about scientists playing God and creating children can be dispelled if we consider that in the process of in vitro fertilization, the scientist allows the sperm to meet the egg in the laboratory instead of the Fallopian tube, which is blocked.
The process of conception as such is not affected, and the scientist no more ‘creates’ a baby than does the obstetrician who performs a Caesarean section, an operation which has saved the lives of countless mothers and babies in situations where birth could not take place by the natural route.
In addition to obtaining a better understanding of the biological  basis underlying reproduction, we also need more knowledge to evaluate reproductive customs in the cultural environment in which they happen.
Studying the history of marriage customs may show that some of today's reproductive practices may not be as revolutionary as they are sometimes made out to be.
What is most needed is rational dialogue based on a liberal education.