

NONESUCH
The name Nonesuch comes from the popular name for the plant botanists know as Lychnis chalcedonica .
The plant, a hardy perennial of the campion family, comes from eastern Russia originally but around the 16th century it became associated with the City of Bristol.
In Gerard's Herball of 1633 it is described: ‘The Floure of Bristowe or None-such…was called Lychnis, that is a Torch or such-like light, cleere, bright and light-giving.’
Nonesuch the magazine made its first appearance in 1911.
It was then a University magazine but after the Second World War it became, as Nonesuch News , the student newspaper.
In the early 70s, when the Union abandoned its own paper in favour of Bacus , a newspaper aimed at all students in Bristol and not just those at the University,Nonesuch became the name of the gossip column in the University Newsletter .
Those revels now are ended.
Nonesuch reverts to its old function, keeping the University as a whole together, telling graduates what is going on in their old alma mater , and keeping them up to date with what their contemporaries are doing.
Nonesuch is, in publishing terms, a ‘life style’ magazine, a publication which brings together a wide range of articles of interest to a group of readers united by a common bond.
Just as, say,Country Living magazine appeals to all who are united by an interest in the country, so Nonesuch aims to unite all those who share a common interest in the University of Bristol.
What Nonesuch becomes in the future depends upon its readers.
Back in 1911, the first editorial called upon readers to keep the editor informed.
We would like to repeat that call, and add to it.
Let us know what you are doing, what other graduates are doing, what you remember with affection (or otherwise) about the University.
Nonesuch can become what you want it to be.
We would like it to reflect again ‘the flower of Bristol’.
But we don't mind hearing about a few ‘weeds’— they are often more vigorous and more interesting than the cultivated varieties.
Newslines
The University has turned round a large trading loss in one year.
In 1988–90 the annual accounts showed a deficit of £4 million which was met from reserves.
In 1990–91 the deficit was eradicated and the University will be reporting better results to the Court meeting in December.
The University is ‘big business’ these days.
The turn-over now exceeds £100 million.
But through tight management it worked its way through a difficult year without having to call upon its bankers for an overdraft.
The University's overhauled financial systems allow it to plan for another year in which income and expenditure will at least balance and may perhaps allow some restoration of the reserves it needs to cope with unexpected problems.
Because it spends most of its money on staff, tight financial management inevitably means that posts which fall vacant will be frozen.
But other currently held open will be filled.
Like a glacier, we will be freezing at one end and unfreezing at the other while still making progress.
NEW FELLOWS
Professor John Gould of Classics was elected a Fellow of the British Academy in July.
Professors Andrew Lang and John Steeds and Dr John Malos were elected Fellows of the Institute of Physics.
BRISTOL MILES BETTER?
A car built by students in the Mechanical Engineering Department achieved an average of 764 miles to the gallon in the annual Shell Mileage Marathon.
Competing vehicles have to cover a ten-mile course carrying a driver at a speed of at least 15 miles per hour.
But although the students' efforts compared well with other universities and schools, the Bristol team has some distance to go before it can match the efforts of the Japanese motor industry entry which achieved 6,142 miles to the gallon.
NEW PRESIDENT
The University Union has elected its first black President for over 30 years.
He is Rob Mitchell, a second-year student of Drama.
The last black President of the Union was George Odlum, now a leading politician in his home island of St. Lucia.
BRISTOL WINS HENLEY PRIZE
The University has won one of Henley's newest trophies.
The Henley Prize was established in 1990 and is open to schools, colleges and non-collegiate universities.
Crews from Japan, the USA, Ireland, Scotland and Wales competed.
The Bristol eight established a new record for the course against Oxford Polytechnic, and after defeating Nihon University from Japan in the semi-final, won one of the best races of this regatta against Imperial College by just three feet.
The Boat Club was voted Athletic Union's team of the year and Club captain Piers Robinson shared the AU award for ‘Contribution to Sport’.
The Club showed another sign of progress — the winning eight at Henley was coxed by a woman, Rachel Foister.
The winning Bristol eight
The new Social Sciences Faculty Building in Woodland Road was completed this summer and will be officially opened on 23 October
Thatcher's Way to the Top
Sue Puffett explains how she became one of Britain's few women thatchers.
When I graduated in Economic and Social History from Bristol in 1982 I had no idea that I would be earning my living as a thatcher, one of the few women working in that field, some eight years later.
Yet strangely my time at Bristol had given me some relevant training.
As a student I supplemented my grant by joining the Officer Training Corps, which not only brought me many good friends but also allowed me to participate in various outdoor activities such as abseiling, pot-holing, parachuting and canoeing.
It was through the OTC that I met my future husband, Eric, who was at that time a permanent staff instructor.
After graduation I worked in London for a couple of years, but in 1985 a decision had to be made: my husband had just finished a sixmonth intensive training course at the Thatching Advisory Service in Berkshire.
This was for him the beginning of an independent ‘second career’ after leaving the army.
The decision to operate in Devon had been made and a suitable (thatched) cottage to live in had been found.
What had now to be resolved was exactly what role I would play in the new venture.
Should I continue to work in London and commute, or find suitable alternative employment in Devon, or join the team?
As a young schoolgirl I had always wanted to do something different and to work out of doors, but as I progressed along the educational road these objectives had somehow receded to be overtaken by the more accepted priorities of passing exams and going to university.
Hence in 1985 it was quite a simple choice: the prospect of a summer working outdoors won easily.
At that point it was viewed very much as a short-term arrangement, with more suitable employment to be sought come the winter.
My romantic dreams of hot sunny days ending in a well-earned drink at the local hostelry were soon shattered.
As happens in any new venture, I discovered that the hours I had to put in at the beginning seemed to outnumber those available in any day.
Far from cultivating a golden tan, I had difficulty in keeping the rust at bay during a particularly wet summer.
However, despite all the negative factors, I enjoyed the work and Eric and I operated very well together as a team.
At the beginning I was simply a labourer, which entailed doing all the preparation on the ground and ensuring that Eric on the roof was always supplied with materials to work with.
We use two main materials in the West Country: Devon wheat reed (straw) and water reed (mainly of European origin because of increasing demand).
The methods of fixing are the same: we use either hazel spars cut from the hedgerow and twisted to form staple-like shapes, or nail the reeds in place with special thatching crooks (hooked nails).
The locally grown wheat reed is the cheaper medium and a roof constructed, whereas water reed will last for at least 50 years.
The latter makes economic sense as water reed costs approximately only a third more for double the life expectancy.
With wheat reed more preparation work is needed.
Bundles have to be ‘butted’: the butt ends are beaten on a flat surface to ensure that they are all level.
Each bundle is then clipped with garden shears to give a clean cut.
As a personal preference we then split each bundle in half to allow easier handling on the roof.
Water reed bundles are much smaller in diameter and can therefore be put straight on once they have been butted.
Water reed is also much harder wearing, being woody in character, and so requires no clipping.
As my husband says, ‘Thatching is rather like life: you start at the bottom and work up.’
Before we can begin to lay the new thatch the old roof has to be stripped off back to a firm base.
We then begin by putting on the ‘bottles’(small, tightly tied bundles, somewhat resembling a bottle in shape) to form a new eave line.
We continue by laying course upon course of reed using our legget (bat-shaped tool) to dress each course as we go.
The great art is to ensure that the coat (dressed face) remains tight and even.
Hollows attract water, which obviously defeats the object of the exercise: to create a waterproof hat.
In essence, the art of thatching relies on a good eye for lines.
Ultimately we reach the ridge, where we favour an intricate design of vees and scallops called a ‘block-cut patterned ridge’, held down by a heavy lattice pattern of hazel spars.
As a personal trademark we put up a straw model of a short-eared owl made locally especially for us.
Ridging and patching were the first jobs that I tackled once it became apparent that I was neither going to find another job nor be content to remain a labourer.
My actual first thatching was done at Chessington Zoo on the ladies' loos when we were helping out a fellow franchisee with whom Eric had trained.
The franchise system was a good way for us to get into thatching as it dispensed with the need to endure a long apprenticeship, gave us a six-month intensive course teaching all the rudiments of thatching, and provided contracts and a source of cheap materials.
We stayed with the franchise for some three years until we felt to operate on our own.
Our decision was strengthened by the fact that we were able to buy materials direct from the Devon suppliers.
We have since formed a partnership and employ a young labourer to do all the preparation work.
Our eventual aim is to bring him on to thatching and so continue to expand.
In the early days we ventured further afield than we do now, working in Suffolk, Berkshire, Wiltshire and Surrey.
Even now we still use a caravan on site to reduce travelling time, which has the additional benefit of allowing us to take our black cat, Muffy, with us.
He is a seasoned traveller as well as an agile ladder climber, often coming up to join us on the roof.
I rarely think now about the strangeness of the job, I simply enjoy the wonderful views and the job satisfaction I achieve.
Physically the work is very demanding but great strength is not a prerequisite; agility and balance are more important.
As yet I have never fallen off a roof, although I have experienced the odd flutter of the heart when a ladder slips.
Our worst experience was when a ladder we were moving from A to B hit an overhead cable.
At the time we were rushing from job to job repairing storm damage, and fortunately were both wearing rubber soled boots.
Thatching is an attractive job.
You meet some delightful people and lasting friendships result — being a husband and wife team helps.
But perhaps the greatest satisfaction is the knowledge that you have created something of the beauty that is going to be there for many years.
At the end of the day it is good to be able to think that as you step back to look at the work — especially if you remember to get down from the ladder first.
Training for the Marathon
Paul Dieppe explains how he used a Kuwaiti sports stadium to train for the London event.
Conferences held in strange places are a part of every academic's life.
I always pack at least two essential items in my luggage: my trainers, and a mass of paperwork.
The trainers are part of my ritual resolution to get fit (instead of boozing with my mates each evening), and the paperwork usually includes at least one final demand from an irate publisher or editor.
The trainers are rarely used, and I generally return with the paperwork untouched.
But not this time.
I made one good decision: to wear the trainers on the plane, and carry the paperwork in my hand luggage.
I made one bad decision: to board the plane.
It refuelled in Kuwait on 2 August 1990.
I spent the next four and a half months in Kuwait and Iraq as part of Saddam Hussein's human shield, with nothing except my hand luggage and the clothes (and shoes) that I was wearing when the flight left London.
‘What did you do in the war, then, daddy?’ they asked me when I returned.
‘Got fit and wrote books,’ I was able to reply.
To begin with we were confined to barracks.
Our nervous Iraqi guards kept us inside the small bungalow that was ‘home’ for the 12 of us.
Keeping fit could only be achieved by exercising in the early morning, when the temperature was tolerable, and tempers not too frayed.
I struggled with a makeshift skipping rope and tried to do a few more press-ups each day; it was not much fun.
But towards the end of our stay in Kuwait, the rules were relaxed, and we were allowed out to a nearby sports stadium to exercise for an hour every day.
The heat of summer had gone and the cooler November days were ideal for running on the superb surface.
After a few laps of the track we could kick a ball about or even have a go at throwing a  javelin.
Most of us set ourselves personal targets: four laps within six minutes, for example.
As time went by, the laps got easier.
Running was also a popular way of passing the time int he camps set up around military installations in Iraq.
I was kept in a chemicals factory for a few weeks, but could maintain my running on a makeshift path around the camp.
Again, targets were set, times carefully recorded, and fitness improved.
The food was not too good, nor too plentiful, so when I returned I was a lot lighter and a lot fitter.
Writing offered us another way of dealing with time, anxiety and frustration.
To begin with we used what paper, pens and pencils we could put together from our hand luggage and from among the belongings left in the house that we had been bundled into.
It was not always easy to concentrate, as distant explosions and nearby arguments in Arabic disturbed our peace, but it was something to help pass many long hours.
And, again, things improved.
We found a computer that had mysteriously been left untouched by the Iraqis (they took anything that they thought might be valuable broke everything else, as a rule).
When they started to let us out of the house we were able to rummage amongst the appalling pile of rubbish strewn around the University campus nearby.
(I found myself living next to the University of Kuwait, instead of the University of Bristol, for the majority of my enforced stay in the Middle East.)
There we found some floppy disks, which, to the amazement of our minders, we carried back to the house.
(‘What are those dirty little things, Mister?
Are they good?’)
They allowed us to ‘backup’ material written on the computer's in-built word-processing package.
Most of us used the computer; we got to a point where you had to book your time.
We even managed to get the disks out of the country, via the British Embassy in Baghdad.
We gave them to an Embassy official as we passed through that city, en route to military installations near Fallujiah.
The Embassy and Foreign Office seemed powerless to do anything to get us out, but a floppy disk slides easily into a diplomatic bag.
I started off by quickly writing that important journal article that was one week overdue.
(That was a waste of time.
The special edition of the journal had long since been published by the time I got the material out of Iraq.)
Next, I set about finishing off some chapters of a rheumatology book for GPs that my Bristol colleagues and I have been writing.
Then I wrote an introductory pocket book on musculoskeletal disorders for medical students.
Next I started on chapters for another arthritis textbook…and then…and then I came to my senses.
Then, as the days had become weeks and the weeks month, I started on much more interesting projects.
Short stories, memoirs, diary notes, and finally, I started writing my first novel.
‘Let's see what you've been writing, then, dad.’
‘Well,’ I replied nervously, ‘This is some of the stuff I did in the early days, it's all medical and rather boring.
Then there are these diary notes, but maybe you would like to read my story, well, actually, it's a novel, you see, my first novel, actually.’
A few hours later the verdict was in.
‘This student handbook is really good, dad.’
‘And the novel?’
‘Oh, that.
Well, that's naff!’
Well, they were certainly right about the novel.
I am not sure about the rest.
Why not read the books and find out?
‘I hope you're not going to get too fat again, dad.’
‘No, of course I won't.
I tell you what, I'll run in the next London Marathon, then I'll have to keep fit.’
‘You could never do that, not at your age.’
So I wrote to the London Marathon office.
I explained that I had not entered at the right time because I had been a hostage in Iraq.
A novel excuse, they said.
Prove it.
I did, and they let me run.
Having cost the University of Bristol a lot of money over the previous months, I thought I ought to try to put something back, so I got myself sponsored: part of the money was to go to the Arthritis and Rheumatism Council, and half to the newly-formed Bristol University Arthritis Research Group.
I even wore those same trainers that had been glued to my feet for four and a half months.
But all to no avail, the manufacturers were not among the sponsors.
However, lots of people did give very generously, and we managed to raise several thousand pounds for research and education on arthritis.
So, what have I got to show for my time as a hostage?
A couple of books, a little sponsorship money for a national charity and for arthritis research in Bristol, and a finisher's medal from the 1991 London Marathon.
Not bad for four and a half months of the University's time, I suppose.
I probably would not have done as well if I had been at work.
In reality, of course, I gained much more.
The dark side will always be with me.
The loss of freedom, the loss of contact with my family, fear, boredom, the frustration and the anger.
To witness the atrocities men can sink to is a bizarre experience: we all belong to the human race; we are all guilty.
But many good things have emerged as well.
And the good must triumph over the bad.
Getting fit and writing books is now irrelevant.
The running and the writing do not matter.
It is hard to explain what does.
Family and friends must come at the top of the list.
They were and are magnificent.
A kind of war medal: Paul Dieppe with Marathon trophy
Choices for Chickens
Britain has 35 million chickens but until recently, no-one asked them what they thought about where they lived.
Christine Nichol reports.
Thirty-five million hens in the UK are kept for egg production.
Despite some shift by farmers towards keeping hens free range or in large percheries (which produce ‘barn’ eggs), some 90% of hens are still kept in battery cages.
The welfare of these hens has been a controversial issue for many years, and for the past five years we in the Department of Animal Husbandry have been conducting research into ways of improving their welfare.
Our first step is to obtain information about the hens' own point of view.
This means assessing their likes and dislikes by means of preference tests where they can simply choose between different options, or ‘operant conditioning’ tests where they have to perform some task such as pecking a button to get access to (or to exit from) a particular environment.
One of the major criticisms of the battery cage has been that it is so small that the hens have no room to  move or to perform their natural behaviour patterns.
Indeed, the current legal minimum allowance of 450 square centimetres per bird gives the bird a space which is less than a page of this magazine.
However, some people have argued that, since hens continue to lay eggs under these conditions, there is no evidence that they need more space.
Our research does not support this view.
Hens show marked and lasting preferences for more space than 450 square centimetres.
Indeed, their aversion to being in a small cage appears to increase during the initial three months of caging, so they certainly do not adapt quickly to these restrictions.
Moreover, it seems that their motivation to perform behaviour such as wing flapping and wing stretching actually increases during confinement in a battery cage.
When birds are released from cages, they flap and stretch at a very high rate, suggesting that they are compensating for their earlier restriction.
There is also little doubt that the lack of opportunity to exercise in a cage is a major factor contributing to the weak and brittle bones of the typical battery hen.
The Farm Animal Welfare Council, an independent body set up to advise the Ministry of Agriculture, suggested that 600 square centimetres should be adopted as a minimum allowance in Europe.
This has yet to be approved but, even so, it is unlikely to be the end of the argument.
Unless hens have at least 800 square centimetres they will not be able to perform simple preening and stretching movements.
To flap their wings they will need more than 1,000 square centimetres.
The simplest solution might appear to be to ban battery cages altogether and keep all hens free range or in percheries: but this presupposes that these alternatives really are better for the birds.
Birds kept in small, well-run flocks may indeed be better off, but ‘free range’ is not always the ideal that it would appear to be.
In the wild, even modern breeds of hens form themselves into small social groups comprising one cockerel and perhaps four or five hens.
The birds spend much of their day foraging in dense, varied vegetation and return to roost together at dusk.
Commercial free range farms often keep hens in densely packed flocks of up to 4,000, with access to bare grassland rather than the varied shrubs and trees they prefer.
It is not surprising that the mortality due to feather pecking, cannibalism and parasitic diseases can be disturbingly high.
There is an urgent need for sensible housing which caters for the basic physical and behavioural needs of the hens, but which can be easily and economically managed.
One of our research projects, funded by the RSPCA, is concerned with ways of improving alternative systems.
Gafyn Blakeway, a PhD student in the Department of Animal Husbandry, is devising methods of encouraging social stability, partly by using imprinting techniques to encourage birds to stay in small subgroups within the larger flock.
However, another project, funded by the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (MAFF), takes the battery cage as the starting point (with its advantages in terms of hygiene and the social stability of a small group of birds) and asks what can be done to improve their welfare.
Apart from more space, the hens' highest priority seems to be a nest.
Hens which have to lay eggs on a wire floor become extremely agitated before they lay, and show stereotyped pacing behaviour indicative of severe frustration.
In addition, experiments have shown that hens will pay a very high ‘cost’ in terms of time and energy to get to a nest.
In economic terminology their demand for a nest is ‘inelastic’: however much the ‘price’ goes up, the birds seem willing to pay it.
For these reasons, we have tried to incorporate nests within modified battery cages.
Hens seem to recognise and accept a moulded hollow depression separated from the main cage area as an adequate substitute for a real nest.
These moulded sties allow eggs to roll away through a small hole at the back for automatic collection.
Initial experiments by Heather Reed, an ex-PhD student funded by MAFF, showed that providing a single nest site for a group of four birds was insufficient.
Some birds laid their eggs on the floor and others showed signs of frustration.
When she provided groups of four birds with three nest sites between them, these problems were overcome.
The nest sites were particularly attractive to the hens when they were lined with rubber matting, or neoprine.
Dr Christopher Sherwin, a Post Doctoral Fellow funded by MAFF, has extended the initial studies and examined the effects of different configurations of nest sites within the cage.
When he provided nests on two tiers, hens showed a strong preference for the lower level.
When nests were placed at the side of the cage, hens preferred the rear positions.
The hens also appeared to be very consistent in their decisions, with individual birds choosing the same nest day after day.
These studies are providing the basic data we need to design a ‘welfare improved’ cage.
Feather pecking can be an enormous problem in all husbandry systems.
It causes feather loss, is painful, and may lead to cannibalism.
It is not a sign of aggression but is, rather, a substitute for the pecking and scratching the birds would do if they were able to forage or dustbathe in an unrestricted and varied environment.
Another aim of the improved-cage project is, therefore, to prevent feather pecking by providing attractive alternative objects to peck.
The main problem we have found is that the hens' interest in simple peckable objects wanes rapidly.
In our search for the ideal occupational therapy we have examined motorised objects (boring, according to the hens) and water pumps which moisten their dry food (more fun).
The search continues for a practical solution.
The hens' problems do not end with their time int he battery cage.
After a year in the cage the hens are caught and transported to the slaughter house.
Weak bones are very likely to be broken as hens are pulled out of their cages, and the entire process appears to frighten and exhaust the birds.
Transportation to the slaughterhouse is also a problems for the 600 million meat chickens, called broilers, which are eaten in the UK each year.
Since they have been selected for fast growth, these birds are only seven or eight weeks old when they are transported — really just overgrown chicks.
Broilers are not kept in cages but are reared on deep-litter floors in large houses.
In surveys we found that the fear levels of both broilers and hens arriving at commercial slaughterhouses were extremely high.
When restrained by a human (or a natural predator such a fox) many chickens will enter a kind of catatonic trance known as ‘tonic immobility’.
In the wild this may allow them to escape as the predator may lose interest in them, but in the laboratory the length of time they remain in this state before righting themselves is a good measure of their fear level.
We tested chickens by restraining them gently for 15 seconds and then timing their recovery from their trance.
We found that the length of time transported chickens spent in this catatonic state matched that which researchers elsewhere have shown to be typical of the very highest levels of fear.
There is obviously something extremely distressing about the whole process of transportation.
We are now attempting to identify the worst components of the transportation procedure to make recommendations for improvements in the design of lorries or in driving or handling practice.
So far, we have discovered that particular movements are especially distressing while noise has no apparent effect on the birds.
In our experiments birds are trained to avoid motion by performing (or learning not to perform) a particular response such as pecking a key.
We are investigating the possibility that motion sickness may be a factor in the unpleasantness of transportation.
In addition, we are looking at ways of reducing fear by enriching the environment of the birds (with small objects to peck at and intermittent music) during the rearing period.
Most broilers experience very little stimulation during their seven weeks on the farm and it is not surprising that they find the sudden changes when they are caught and transported extremely frightening.
Lastly, we have begun a series of more fundamental studies of the abilities of both chickens and pigs, asking, for example, what they are able to learn by watching others, and whether they are able to empathise with each other .
The greater understanding of the minds of our common farm animals that we gain from these experiments will undoubtedly be of use in designing housing systems which allow the animals both increased freedom, and increased control over their own lives.
Peckable objects for bored hens
Tree-roosting free range chickens in Greece
The Gentle Scholar
The pre-War Vale of Glamorgan shaped one of Bristol's finest scholars and most delightful of men.
Don Carleton describes the life and work, the humorous verse and the unique antiquarian quality of Basil Cottle.
Basil Cottle was born on St Patrick's Day in Roath, a medieval sector of Cardiff.
But although the name Roath is an ancient one — it means, in Irish, the forest and therefore dates back to a time when Welsh was borrowing words from Irish, around the 5th century — there was little that surrounded the young Cottle which was in fact medieval.
The Roath of his youth was Victorian or Edwardian, part of the urban sprawl of the expanding 19th-century city.
His parents — his father was a clerk at the docks and his mother a schoolmistress — were never rich but they were very literate and they encouraged their son to read, observe and learn.
He recalls that the treats of his childhood were educational; railway trips to Gloucester, Hereford and even Shrewsbury.
His greatest holiday delight was to view old churches and their stained glass.
He claims that he was a little pedant, even as early as the age of five.
He seems to have been a solitary child, happiest in his own company.
He had little in common with other boys and girls in his neighbourhood and he remembers his secondary school simply as ‘horrid’.
In 1934 he entered University College Cardiff.
It was a difficult time.
Money was scarce and unemployment was high.
Throughout the five years of his university career his father was unemployed.
Students in Cardiff in those days had little money and no holidays.
In the summer, when he was not studying or working to earn money, young Cottle took a bus deep into the Vale of Glamorgan.
There he would walk all day, refreshed only by a drink or two of water, returning home at 6 o'clock to a good Welsh tea.
It must have been at that time that his habit of keeping notes on his travels began.
He could not afford a camera so he was forced to make a note of the old churches he visited in words and in little sketches.
At the University, pursuing his hope of becoming an archaeologist (he may really have meant an antiquarian), he was studying for three Honours Degrees.
In those far off days, it was possible for students to study courses which suited their interests rather than the subjects most convenient for their teachers.
In 1937, Cottle obtained First Class Honours in Latin.
He returned the following year to complete the qualifications for a First in English and a Second in Greek.
It was an achievement which required hard work.
Yet Cottle did not have the extensive hours of study available to the modern undergraduate.
In his second year he was already marking the Greek essays of first-year students and giving them some classes, in order to raise money.
He was also working for the Department of Archaeology and the Museum and, greatest profit of all, teaching English to the daughter of a rich immigrant Hungarian Jewish family who paid him, for just two lessons a week, more money than his poor father had earned by a hard week's slog in the docks.
After graduation, Cottle returned to Cardiff to study to be a teacher.
He was sent on teaching practice to Cowbridge Grammar School, one of those small country grammar schools which used to be the glory of Wales.
It was, he says, the first decent school that he was ever in, a cheerful, disciplined place where manners mattered and clothing didn't.
It was while teaching a form called ‘the sink’— the exam failures and the less bright — that he came to that perception which all good teachers share: to inspire pupils you have first to gain their attention and one of the best ways of doing that is through humour and anecdote.
Cottle reached his anecdotage early in life.
In 1939, with two more Firsts to his credit — in the theory and in the practice of teaching — he returned again to Cardiff.
Life seemed set  fair.
The staff in the English Department were outstanding.
E. C. Llewellyn, the Professor, was a rich, pleasant man, interested in linguistics, who had assembled around him an excellent team.
Among the lecturers were two Cambridge men; Bethell, a Leavisite modernist, and D. G. James, later to be Professor of English at Bristol and Vice-Chancellor of Southampton.
They had found for Cottle a scholarship to enable him to pursue an MA.
At £100 per annum(multiply by 40 for today's value) he was, by the standards of the time, very well off.
He settled down to work on his chosen topic: the tradition of St Thomas Becket in literature, art and religion.
But 1939 was not a year to be starting any scholarly project.
Three times during that year, Cottle was called before medical boards to assess his fitness for active service.
Twice his eyes and his feet caused him to be rejected.
On the third occasion, however, he was classified as C3, one of the lowest categories available, and in May 1940 he joined the Colours as a private in that most unfashionable of units, the Pioneer Corps.
After a period of basic training and the usual round of very menial assignments characteristic of the Pioneers, he became Company Clerk at Liverpool, where he endured the friendship of a kindly, bibulous sergeant-major and the enmity of an overbearing, loud major.
He was glad to be transferred to the Army Education Corps after about a year, to discourse, with the rank of sergeant, to soldiers on topics such as‘why Turkey will remain neutral’, ‘why Japan has entered the war’ and so on .
His talks on these and other more literary topics enlivened the otherwise very dull existence of those troops set to guard the wild coasts of Cumbria against the invader.
His humorous and anecdotal but scholarly teaching style did not go unnoticed.
After being promoted to Sergeant-Major, Cottle was summoned before a board to see if he were officer material.
Twice he was rejected; apparently there was an unspoken but rigidly adhered-to dictum that no ex-private of Pioneers could possibly be worth promoting.
But on the third occasion both the board and the candidate faced the issue squarely.
‘How did a man like you ever come to be in the Pioneers?’ asked the board.
Cottle looked solemn.
‘I had influence, Sir,’ he said.
Wit outweighed prejudice.
He was duly commissioned.
In the course of time he was sent to Cornwall to educate the Ack-Ack regiments (and to examine the Cornish churches) but the sudden onset of a mysterious and debilitating illness (which later proved to be high blood-pressure) led to his being discharged as being unfit for service.
At that time, when so many men were in the services, a triple-Honours like Cottle could have had his pick of senior posts in schools and universities, but he still wanted to serve his country.
He turned to Principal Rees of Cardiff College for advice.
Fortunately, Rees had that very morning been placed in a position to help.
Someone, somewhere (he could not say who or where) wanted classicists.
Would Basil be interested?
It was some kind of war work.
Cottle was interested and a few weeks later was invited to London where he was offered a job in the Foreign office, doing something, somewhere.
It was not until he had accepted and had received travel instructions that he found himself at Bletchley Park as part of the Enigma team reading German cypher traffic.
When the German war ended he was given his own section trying to break Albanian cypher.
It was then that the nation reaped the benefit of the flexible BA curriculum common in universities before the war.
Basil had had to choose a minor language as part of his Classical Philology course.
He had elected to read some Albanian.
His old course and his new job gave him his first academic publication: a grammar of the Albanian language.
Cottle might have remained in the Foreign Office as a Balkan expert.
The work was interesting and the pay was excellent, but an offer from one of his old lecturers tempted him to Bristol.
D. G. James had become Professor of English; he had need of a medievalist.
Would Cottle apply?
Despite having to take a drop in salary of about two-thirds, Cottle accepted.
In 1946 he reported for duty in the English Department with another young lecturer, a modernist called Henry Gifford.
The English Department in the late 40s and 50s, like the University, was smaller in scale and, although excellent, very different from the kind of place it is today.
The staff in those days included the formidable and devout figure of Susie Tucker, a great Norse scholar, and soon colourful characters like Bertram Joseph, a practitioner of and authority on Shakespearean gesture.
Students were different too.
Many were following the old General (later Combined) Degree which allowed them to study three subjects for finals.
The Department taught English as a foreign language in the post-war years to French, Germans, Norwegians, Swedes and Turks, who begged Basil Cottle to ‘say us jokes’.
Verses on Occasions
Macbeth
(Extract from a  pantomime .
L. C. Knights, who had just joined the University, had written a famous essay on ‘How many children had Lady Macbeth?’)
Q. You seem to be from Dunsinane.
So could you help us to explain
A problem somewhat done to death:
How many children had Lady Macbeth?
A. In scrutinising this enigma,
Astigmatism is no stigma.
The safest answer I can give
Will be this little narrative:
Mummy, in her capricious way,
Was very kind to us one day,
And let us, as a special treat,
Sit on the castle's pleasant seat;
Whereat, with crumbs of apple tartlets,
We fed the temple-haunting martlets.
Then someone said, ‘Whose are these weans?—
Lady Banquo's, or the Queen's?’
Mummy smiled grimly, and said ‘Thanquo!
I'll settle that with Lady Banquo…
And see that no-one mentions Fleance —
That little beast is in abeyance’.
Then someone did a tactless thing:
He put this question to the King —
‘How many children has your wife?’
Daddy just laughed, and answered,
‘Fife’.
Cornish Poem
In response to a challenge to compose limericks on Cornish place names
A Sergeant in camp at St Breward
Forgot that you vomit to leeward.
On his way from the mess
He disordered his dress,
And was barred from the dance by a steward.
A Matter of Taste and Judgment
(Speech advocating the purchase of an Italian painting at a General Meeting of the Senior Common Room)
I address the Chair, the connoisseurs, the rest:
My views on this fall into couplets best.
Those who decry the picture are forgetting
That this room is its most appropriate setting.
This building mirrored to Victorian eyes
The Doge's Palace and Italian skies;
For this weak semblance to be rendered strong,
Painters from Venice fittingly belong:
Giorgione, Tintoretto, even Titian
Or Veronese — anyone Venetian.
And, since these four lie quite outside our purse,
Buy this Bassano — cheaper, little worse.
See with what skill the wily Brentnall planned,
And yet could not efface with cleansing hand
The pointed evidence of each fenêtre
Venetian Gothic is its raison d'être.
Second, we must recall by every right
That a museum occupied this site.
We owe it to the city to maintain
Traditions sounding to the common gain.
This is not just something for after lunch,
To hand unnoticed while we flip through Punch.
It has to represent the scholar's choice —
To be demanded (in a cultured voice).
Taste be our guide.
The canvas now on view
Has long been judged.
This judgment is of you.
Guard lest posterity derisive shout,
‘They bought a daub, and threw a master out.’
Cleaning Up the Second Hand Car Trade
(Written when the Times (on Saturday, 20 August 1983, p. 2) depicted a 1923 20 h.p. (body 1910) vintage Rolls Landaulette built for Lord Lonsdale by Hamshaw of Leicester, but spelt it ‘Launderette’)
Your caption on page 2 today
Hints at the price we'd have to pay
To purchase, in this age of jet,
A ‘20-horsepower launderette’
— A Rolls, at that, to gild the gilt,
Its body for Lord Lonsdale built.
So did they queue, and did they sit,
In 1923, and knit?
And did his friends from noble halls
Ride to the sound of swirling smalls?
— A belted Earldom's bagwash proud,
Dark linen in a Silver Cloud!
At an Exhibition: i
All that I feel, deep in my heart,
Faced with contemporary art,
Is anger, puzzlement and worry
That I and it are contemporary.
At an Exhibition: ii
(published in the Times , 4 June 1985)
There was a young lady of Yiewsley.
She inspected the paintings of Fuseli.
The subsequent night
Was all nausea and fright,
And she woke up refusing her muesli.
At a Departmental Meeting, 29 June 1972
Le cynique est celui qui sait très bien
Le prix de tout et la valeur de rien.
The Cathedrals of France
COTTLE'S GUIDE TO THE FRENCH CATHEDRALS
Maguelone
Status
See transferred to Montpellier in 1536 
Location and description
The almost companionless cathedral on its former island amid the lagoons, and the feasible route for reaching it, are a sheer delight.
There are the benefits of sea and sands and since cars have to be abandoned for the final approach, there is the pleasure of a short journey in a hooty little tin train.
The bunchy, mutilated church, shorn of tower-tops and population, and barely furnished, has still a compelling Romanesque core in limestone, pink and russet.
Outside, the sparse windows threaten a sombre interior, which, however, proves to be both spacious and unencumbered with aisles or piers.
The imagination must replace the lost steeples: the NE chapel of St Sepulchre, topped with the chapel of St Pancras, survives in its transeptal position, but the matching SE chapel of St Mary has lost its upper storey: the adjoining chapel of St Augustine to the W, and its upper chapel of St Michael, are now only crags; the Bishop's tower at the NW, late and ill-built, has fallen in, though some of its elevation remains; and the SW tower of St John has left only a matrix on the W wall.
Set back from these two, on the middle bay of the original W front, is the soaring W wall topped with a machicolation and entered by the fine late Romanesque and early Gothic doorway with its 13th century tympanum of Christ and the Four Beasts, its unusually long foliaged lintel with four Latin rhyming couplets and a lucid signature by Bernardus DE III VIIS (de Tréviers) dated 1178, and the powerful bas-reliefs of SS Paul and Peter, with sword and keys, all carved in various marbles from antique sources.
This is the most fortunate part of the exterior; matching it in strength, though not in detail, is the E apse, in beautiful close masonry blocks with three dignified round arched windows, but now nearly bereft of the machicolation that once crowned the tall buttresses.
History
Clearly, there have been disasters and reversals here, and the image of the calm backwater is no reflection of its history.
Vizigothic in origin, with its Bishop Boèce at the Third Toledo Council in 589, and worth besieging in 673, it shared in the collapse of the Spanish kingdom of Toledo, and the Muslims moved in, though not for long.
Charles Martel had them out in 737, but the island was laid waste and largely abandoned for three centuries, the Bishop and clergy fleeing and the Counts of Melgueil, of evil repute, appropriating the see and its revenues; yet in 798 St Theodulph of Orléans reported that despite this, and pirates, there were still four chapters there.
With the coming of an energetic bishop, Arnaud, in 1030, the cathedral and its precinct were reconstructed, with fortifications, iron gates and a great bridge across the lagoon; there was a collegiate church of the Trinity, a chapel of St Blaise, and of course cloisters, an infirmary, and a cemetery, and all the time reference to the ‘Saracen’ port.
All this has vanished save for the church, of which St Augustine's chapel is an original fragment.
A brief greatness was now conferred on the place, when the Popes found it an island refuge in their struggle against the Empire: Count Pierre of Melgueil bestowed the county and bishopric on SS Peter and Paul and Pop Gregory VII in 1085, Pope Urban II graciously granted it back as a fief for a mere annual ounce of gold, and in 1096, on a visit, astonishingly declared the church ‘second after that of Rome’, with arms of the two 
Description
Entering through the W door, one of the best preserved in France, on encounters an apparently vast hall with few and high-placed windows which are restricted to the S side (the lost claustral buildings abutted in the N).
The daring manipulation of space, and especially of height, is deceiving: the internal length is only 131 feet, the width of the nave and the apse 30 feet, the width at the transepts 79 feet, but over the nave the intrusion of the cavernous tribune, on great round arches and with three windows to light its gallery, lifts the eye and leads it through while at first appearing to block the view.
The canons erected this burly structure at the close of the 12th century, and gained isolation both to recite their offices and perhaps to escape from damp and cold below; a wide staircase and a gentle gradient took them through the thickness of the N wall.
Above, a lost altar of St Nicholas was replaced by Fabrèges with the superbly informative tomb-slab of Bishop Jean to Monflaur (+1190), on which his faithful sacrist Bertrandus records ‘in this vase, John.
A(lpha) 
University History
Extracts from a pageant written to mark the centenary of University College in 1976
The past administration
Even in 1945
One office kept the place alive:
The V.C.
and his senior chums
Fixed policy & did the sums,
With everything they wrote or said
Stored in Miss Shapland's able head.
There was a typist in a blazer,
Two clerks, & Alexander Fraser.
He did say them jokes — it was an effective way of teaching English idiom and Cottle was never a man to miss an opportunity to use humour constructively.
At Burwalls, he and the Warden, Jock Sloane, ran the place like a couple of jolly uncles.
The duller reaches of committee work he spent, not in pointless doodling like his colleagues, but in producing elegant little drawings of imaginary but perfectly possible churches.
He welcomed changes in the life of the University and of the Department in adroitly phrased verse and limericks.
He wrote two poems to welcome Princess Marina when she came to open a theatre — the old Vandyck (now Wickham) Theatre — with which she was apparently delighted.
He was celebrated for his speeches in verse to the Senior Common Room and he was quietly famous for his annual pantomimes in verse; these were unusual dramatic pieces.
Perhaps in deference to the Greek drama, they were remarkably lacking in plot or incident.
Words were everything and a quirky sense of observation added an extra ingredient.
Words are indeed one key to Basil Cottle's character.
He has a remarkable feeling for, and ability to communicate, the sheer intoxication (the only kind he permits himself) of using words well.
His Triumph of English ], and his Dictionary of Surnames for Penguin have become deserved bestsellers.
In America, where they have a fondness for creating lists of the greatest ever people, his Plight of English has placed him among the very top writers on the English language.
But Cottle's tastes have continued, like his Welsh degree, to be wide.
He has maintained his early interest in archaeology.
He is a Fellow of the Society of Antiquaries, and he was President of the Bristol and Gloucester Archaeological Society.
When he speaks, as he often does, on, say, the archaeology of Early Christian Ireland, he speaks from a fund of experience as well as knowledge.
His taste for walking remains unabated and he has actually visited all the sites to which he so clearly refers.
In Ireland, he holds the remarkable record of having thrice visited the country for three weeks and never having experienced rain there.
When his University vacations in the 60s and 70s exhausted the walking possibilities of the British Isles, he turned to foreign countries.
Like his early walks in the Vale of Glamorgan, his latest travels have been marked by the study of churches.
He has seen all of the cathedrals in Denmark, Belgium, Bavaria and the Faroe Islands.
More recently he has embarked on making a record of all the cathedrals of France.
There are over 150 and he has already seen all but 40.
Each one is carefully logged in meticulous detail in words and in pictures (what a publishing opportunity for some enterprising firm).
In cathedrals, as so much else, Cottle has a highly developed taste for the unusual and the unappreciated.
His antiquarian temperament has made him a greater snapper-up of unconsidered trifles of archaeology, architecture and literature.
He has his own particular slant to everything.
A good churchman, he is a Church Warden — but of a church that ceased to exist in the late 18th century.
He wrote his doctoral thesis on the literature of the English romantic movement — but on Joseph Cottle (no relation) who published the poems, rather than the poets themselves.
An accurate scholar and an inspired teacher, he did not become a Professor in Bristol — yet his friends and pupils combined to give him that rarest of honours, a Festschrift, a book containing some of their best work, published to mark his 70th birthday.
Basil Cottle continues to delight friends and colleagues in the Senior Common Room.
He advises them on obscure medieval manuscripts, on 19th-century poetesses of Accrington, on King Arthur, on archaeology, on the cult of the saints, all with equal facility and depth of knowledge.
They, in turn, join him in cheerful conspiracy to see that the great cathedral list of France is constantly and step-by-step updated.
Basil Cottle stands for something very important in, and to, Bristol University: unyielding scholarship, a devotion to excellence in teaching, and a gift for friendship — and an ability to see the funny side of life.
The University needs all of these qualities for the future.
Long may he remain to provide an exemplar.
Cottle the Pioneer
An opportunity for publishers?
How Basil Cottle's guide to the French Cathedrals might look — when he has seen the remaining 40 episcopal seats.
Because he doesn't drive a car, it may take some time.
Willses and their Ways
Sidney Watson outlines a brief history of the Wills family.
‘Rich men furnished with ability, living peaceably in their habitations.’
(Ecclesiasticus XLIV v. 13)
Wills is a name long known in the West Country.
The founders in Bristol of the firm of W.D.
&.
H.O.
Wills, which became the Imperial Tobacco Company, were descended from Anthony Wills who was born c. 1510 and owned property in Cornwall.
Many of the early Willses were yeomen farmers.
After the Reformation several were ordained in the Anglican Church while others became active Nonconformists.
In 1688 some of them marched with the invading army of William of Orange to Salisbury where one of them decided to stay on as a small shopkeeper.
It was his great-grandson — the first Henry Overton Wills — who moved to Bristol where by 1786 he had become a partner in a tobacco business.
Through the following century this business increased its capital value from £15,000 in 1804 to £15,000,000 in 1902 (multiply by 40 for today's values).
The Willses themselves progressed from living in rooms over their shop to residing in country mansions.
The Willses' most obvious contributions in the sphere of education have been the founding and development of the University of Bristol.
Harry (H.H.) Wills was one of the first Engineering students at University College Bristol after its opening in 1876.
It was the offer of £100,000 from H.O.
Wills which initiated the campaign for a Charter which saw University College Bristol unite with the Engineering Faculty  off the Merchant Venturers' College to form the University of Bristol.
When the Charter was signed by the King, H.O.
Wills became the first Chancellor.
George Wills was the first Treasurer and the second Chairman of Council in the new University.
Lord Winterstoke became the first of five Pro-Chancellors who have been elected from Wills families.
Subsequent benefactions by George and Harry Wills enabled the principal buildings to be constructed and a cousin, the first Lord Dulverton, generously contributed to their repair from damage suffered in the Second World War.
The most recent contribution by the Dulverton Trust has been for the instalment of Dr Peter Ridgway Watt's windows in the new wing of Wills Hall.
The University has not been the Wills family's only educational project.
In the Bristol area, Willses have given donations to Clifton College (where many of them were educated) and have also successfully launched an educational experiment at Rendcomb College in Gloucestershire.
Since the Second World War the family has entered the international arena by its contributions to multi-racial education in Africa, by establishing the International Students' House in London for students from overseas, and by founding the Michael Wills Scholarships at Oxford University to replace the Rhodes Scholarships which had been discontinued for Germans in 1939.
More widely still, Willses have given essential help in promoting the United World Colleges and inaugurating the International Baccalaureate.
The contributions to national life made by various family members have been recognised by honours and awards.
Between 1893 and 1980 descendants of the first H.O.
Wills were created two peers, four baronets, three knights and one dame.
One Wills wife also became a dame, and the husband of a Wills received a knighthood.
In addition, one adopted son was knighted and an adopted daughter became another dame.
On the other hand the first Chancellor of the University and two of the University's chief benefactors, Harry and Melville Wills, each lived and died as plan Mr Wills.
What they most prized was the untitled Freedom of Bristol which was accorded to them and to two more of their relations.
The first of the Wills titles was granted for political services but the family members served all parties.
From 1880–1969 four Willses and one of their adopted sons were elected Members of Parliament: one Liberal Home Ruler, two Unionists and two Conservatives.
In war Willses have served their country on land, at sea and in the air.
In peacetime two of them have been appointed Lords Lieutenant of English counties.
Willses have never been ashamed of their religious faith, and the disabilities which they suffered in the past as Nonconformists served to strengthen their convictions.
They have set great store by congregational singing, preferably with organ accompaniment, and donated these instruments to schools and other institutions.
Willses generously contributed to the construction and repair of churches.
H.O.
Wills II possessed no less than 30 silver trowels, one for each occasion when he laid the foundation stone of a Nonconformist chapel.
His granddaughter had an Anglican cathedral built in East Africa and her brother paid for extensive renovations to St Mary Redcliffe Church in Bristol.
Willses also composed music and words for hymns and anthems.
They did not confine themselves to church attendance nor to their concern for church buildings, but endeavoured to follow Christian principles in their everyday lives.
Like their Bristolian neighbours, the Frys, they were ahead of their time in fostering friendly relations with their factory workers.
The first H.O.
Wills used to invite four of his eight employees to lunch with him on alternate Sundays.
Recently the Dulverton Trust has contributed more than £1 million to charities which seek to improve industrial relations.
Willses have always advocated religious education and study in schools and colleges, believing, like the first Duke of Wellington, that if education is separated from religion ‘you would get so many clever devils’.
In 1813 the first H.O.
Wills presided at the inaugural meeting of the Bristol Union Society for the Promotion of Sunday Schools, and his son, W.D.
Wills, drew up a religious curriculum for Taunton School.
One of their descendants has founded the Farmington Institute for Christian Studies which successfully encouraged the Government, when drafting the Education Reform Act of 1988, to restore Christian studies as an educational subject.
During their lives, Willses have continually contended against ill health: even those who have attained the biblical quota of ‘three score years and ten’ have suffered at least one serious illness.
Their religious faith has sustained them in sickness, and in health has prompted concern for the ills of others.
Throughout the last 200 years they have subscribed to the construction and repair of hospitals.
In the Bristol area they have played active parts in the administration of the Jubilee Convalescent Home, the Bristol General Hospital and the St Monica Home.
Those personally acquainted with the Willses have appreciated their virtues and valued their friendship, but others have found difficulty in understanding some idiosyncrasies of their characters.
One unexpected characteristic has been an innate shyness which has recurred in several generations.
Even H.O.
Wills III, despite his position in business and his status as Chancellor of the University, preferred to go to his office at night after his staff had gone home, and to give instructions in writing rather than by word of mouth.
In their financial affairs they have been abnormally secretive.
With very few exceptions they have refrained from ostentation: indeed their Nonconformist distaste for personal extravagance, reinforced by infusions of Scottish blood, has sometimes prompted small economies which, in the light of their extraordinary benevolence to good causes, have been accepted as amusingly careful instead of absurdly mean.
The Willses' modesty about their own achievements has amounted to selfdisparagement, and their preference for understatement has made some of them seem uncommunicative, especially at large gatherings, and has masked their underlying good humour and quiet sense of fun.
Because of these complexities, friendships with the Willses tend to be built up step by step and to become all the more valued because their qualities are seldom revealed all at one time.
In the history of the six generations which succeeded the first H.O.
Wills, there has been no doubt of the widespread respect from all walks of life which has been earned by most Willses by the end of their lives.
Their crowded funerals have been dignified by ceremony proper to their public status and success, but few personal tributes were more poignantly expressed than by the posies of primroses picked by children of the unemployed at the Docklands settlement where Mrs Melville Wills had worked to within a few days of her death at the age of 73 in 1936.
It is also remarkable how few of those Willses have allowed themselves to rest upon the laurels of their past benevolences, and how many have kept alive their sense of public duty and obligation in the spirit of Goethe's awesome admonition, ‘That which thy fathers have bequeathed thee, earn it anew if thou wouldst possess it.’
Furnished with ability by Sidney Watson (Michael Russell, Salisbury, 1991) is to be launched in connection with the Campaign for Resource.
Profits from sales will go to the Dulverton Trust.
The University's first Chancellor, H.O.
Wills
Campaign for Resource
Alisdaire Lockhart, Development Director, introduces the campaign to generate new investment funds to support the long-term development aims of the University.
This autumn sees the launch of a ten-year development drive which aims to generate £100 million for capital investment within the University.
Led by Sir Michael Angus, Chairman of Unilever and Deputy President of the CBI, Bristol's Campaign for Resource will provide the financial means for achieving the University's full potential in terms of facilities for teaching, research and continuing education.
By the end of this century, it is hoped that 11,000 students will be benefiting from a Bristol education, an increase of 50% on current student numbers.
Similarly, research activity is planned to double in this time and continuing education, or extra-mural studies, to grow by at least one-third.
It's an ambitious plan, but Bristol is responding to national as well as local needs.
All political parties are agreed that Britain needs more graduates, its industry needs the products of high level research and there is a continued drive to extend the frontiers of medical science.
For these reasons, universities across the country must be in a position to extend the benefits of a higher education to all sections of society.
Placed in the top four universities in terms of financial support from the Universities Funding Council (UFC), Bristol has received funding from the UFC this year to support the second largest increases in student numbers in the country — some 17%.
However, Government funding as a proportion of total university income has fallen — from 65% to 51% in the last five years.
Further growth of the University will only come from additional investment from other, non-Governmental sources — investment  that will be generated through the Campaign for Resource.
We are committed to developing a sound financial base, one that makes the University less vulnerable to unexpected changes in public policy and one that provides the necessary foundation for capital growth.
Sound progress in the overall management of University finances has, in just one year, reversed the trading loss of 4.8% on income experienced in 1989–90.
However, to move forward and to develop an infrastructure that will support corporate growth, the University needs a new financial base and the Campaign for Resource is set to achieve it.
In a competitive environment, Bristol is already well-positioned to attract new investment funds.
Despite the nationwide demographic downtrend of the last ten years, student applications to Bristol have doubled.
Now one in seven of all university applicants in the UK select Bristol among their choices, creating a situation in which 26,000 applications are now received for just over 2,000 places.
In research Bristol has achieved recognition for excellence across all of its six faculties.
In the UFC 1989 assessment over half the academic departments at Bristol received recognition of excellence, and ten departments received top ratings defined as ‘research of international excellence in some sub-areas and national excellence in virtually all others’.
Bristol's new development initiative is set to build on this strong foundation by financing a range of projects that support four distinct categories:
an increase in teaching and research;
the provision of equipment for teaching and research;
support for academic developments through Fellowships, Scholarships and Student Bursaries;
the provision of more student residences and an improvement in the academic, social and recreational activities of the University.
In real terms these overall objectives have been translated into a series of major development projects.
They include (in no particular order):
expansion of the Engineering Faculty to double its present size;
a purpose-built home for the Department of Music;
enlargement of the Veterinary School for an increased student entry;
new laboratories for ‘Molecular Science and the Environment’;
a research endowment for the Chair of Medicine;
a fund pioneered by the Chairman of Council to improve access for women to higher education;
a Chair in General Practice;
an extension to the Faculty of Law;
an international Institute of Child Health;
the Access Initiative for Deaf Studies;
new accommodation for the Department of Surgery;
new refectory and recreational facilities for students and staff;
extension to the Faculty of Social Sciences;
enlargement of the Library;
an Institute of Cancer Studies to focus basic and clinical research;
additional student residences to support the growing student numbers.
The capital cost of these projects is some £100m.
Over £4m has already been invested in projects in advance of the Campaign launch.
The Campaign for Resource is championed by a team of distinguished patrons, drawn from all aspects of political, industrial and public life.
In the future, we also hope to establish groups of Patrons in North America and the Far East to work with the Bristol Alumni to generate overseas investment.
The University has already established a ‘Not for Profit’ Corporation in the United States for the tax-efficient transmission of funds from the US to the University.
Our drive for investment will be global, but the returns on that investment will also be felt on an international level.
Bristol will increase its contribution to the pursuit of scholarship and research for the benefit of all mankind, for the creation of a better quality of life for our fellow citizens, for a renewed industrial future for our country and for a better understanding of the past and expanded horizons for many who are trapped by lack of opportunity or missed chances in earlier education.
The Campaign for Resource is a campaign to ensure that industry and the nation as a whole continue to have access to leading edge research and a high calibre workforce, which this University can and should provide.
We invite all those who have shared in Bristol's success in the past to support this campaign and to share in Bristol's success in the future.
Sir Michael Angus Sir Michael Angus, leader of the Campaign for Resource, has been Chairman of Unilever plc and Vice-Chairman of Unilever NV since 1986.
Born in 1930, he was educated at Marling Grammar School, Stroud, and graduated from Bristol University with a BSc in Mathematics.
He was awarded the Honorary Degree of Doctor of Science by the University in July 1990.
He served as a Flying Officer with the RAF before joining Unilever as a management trainee.
Sir Michael became Chemicals Coordinator in 1976, and was appointed director for North America in 1979, also becoming Chairman and Chief Executive Officer of Unilever United States Inc.
In 1980 he was made Chairman of the Board and Chief Executive Officer of Lever Brothers Company, New York.
He became Deputy Chairman of British Airways plc in 1989.
He is also a non-executive director of Whitbread & Company plc and of Thorn EMI plc.
Sir Michael was created a Knight Bachelor in the 1990 New Year's Honours List.
He is married with three children.
Sir Jeremy Morse Sir Jeremy Morse, Chancellor of the University, has been Chairman of Lloyds Bank since 1977.
He was born in 1928 and educated at Winchester College and at New College, Oxford, where he obtained a First in Classics.
He trained in banking at Glyn, Mills & Co, and moved to the Bank of England in 1964.
From 1966–72 he was Executive Director in charge of overseas affairs and Alternate Governor for the UK on the International Monetary Fund.
He joined Lloyds Bank in 1975 as Deputy Chairman.
In 1984 he became President of the British Bankers' Association.
He is also President of the European Banking Federation and a Director of ICI.
In 1989 he became the University of Bristol's sixth Chancellor.
Sir Jeremy has been Warden (Chairman of the Governing Body) of his old school, Winchester, since 1987, and became an Honorary Fellow of New College in 1979.
He has held a Distinguished Fellowship at All Souls' College, Oxford, since 1983.
He was knighted in 1975.
Sir Jeremy is married with four children.
Royal Fort House, present home of the Department of Music
Invitation
The autumn launch of the Campaign for Resource will include a wide range of events to which we welcome friends, alumni, students and staff.
Saturday 9 November The Alumni Concert
A concert of Baroque music in the Great Hall of the Wills Memorial Building at 7.30 pm, followed by a buffet supper with the musicians.
Tickets for the concert (£5) available from the Music Department.
Tickets for the buffet supper (£10) from Petra Armitage-Smith at Senate House, Bristol BS8 1TH.
Mid-November ‘Radio 4 goes to college’
Radio 4 roadshow consisting of light entertainment, a ‘higher education and society’ debate and a talk on news and current affairs by Brian Redhead.
November/early December International Poetry Festival
Three poetry reading evenings in the Victoria Rooms, organised by the Department of English on behalf of the Arts Faculty, with poets from the UK, Ireland, Europe and North America.
Light buffet, bookable in advance.
Wednesday 20 November AIESEC Seminar: ‘The value of higher education to commerce and industry’
AIESEC Debate : ‘This house believes that a University degree is more of a hindrance than a help to a career in British industry.’
Chaired by Sir Jeremy Morse.
Speakers will include Professor Sir Douglas Hague and Sir John Klingman.
Thursday 21 November The Law Alumni Reception
Reception (6–7.30 pm) for the announcement of plans for the Faculty of Law to Law alumni and friends.
Hosted by Sir Michael Angus at Unilever House, Blackfriars, London.
Guest of Honour will be Lord Griffiths, Chairman of the Lord Chancellor's Advisory Committee on Legal Education and Conduct.
Late November The Student Arts Festival
Drama, debate, concerts, opera and a photographic exhibition.
Other events
Monday 21 October Book launch
Reception to mark the publication of the Wills family history.
Wednesday 4 December
Opening of the Lewis Wing in the Wills Memorial Building , named in memory of His Honour Judge Sir Ian Lewis.
Friday 6 December The Colston Research Society Dinner
The Campaign for Resource will be introduced to leaders of the medical and veterinary professions and industry.
Guest of Honour will be the Rt.
Hon William Waldegrave MP, Secretary of State for Health.
Thursday 19 December The Campaign Lecture and Inauguration of the Roll of Benefactors
The Campaign is to launch a new annual University Lecture.
This year's Lecture will be given by Lord Flowers, FRS, on the role of universities in the 21st century, and will be followed by the inauguration, by the Chancellor, of the Roll of Benefactors of the University.
Cot-death and Cancer
Visiting Australian, Sandy Guy, discusses what Bristol is doing to cope with family tragedies.
In July this year, national newspapers reported the sudden cot-death of TV personality Anne Diamond's baby son.
Earlier there had been reports that actress Julie Walters was having to confront the fact that her child had leukaemia.
But every day doctors across the country are trying to cope with the traumatic effect such illnesses have on ordinary people whose family tragedies do not make the headlines.
Cot death, or sudden infant death syndrome (SIDS), is the commonest cause of death in infancy between the age of one month and one year, and affects between 2 and 2.3 per thousand live births in the UK.
Childhood cancers, including leukaemia, can strike a healthy child at random, regardless of race, social background or creed.
Bristol is at the forefront of the fight against a number of childhood conditions, including cancer and sudden infant death.
The leaders of the University's teams in the research into sudden infant death and childhood cancers, Professors Jeremy Berry and Martin Mott, are adamant that support for the family is a very important factor in making progress in the management of these disorders.
Jeremy Barry, the newly appointed Professor of Paediatric Pathology, is supported by a grant from the Foundation for the Study of Infant Deaths.
He is part of a multidisciplinary team which has been working together since 1984.
Professor Jean Golding, Dr Peter Fleming, Dr Peter Rudd and Dr Elizabeth Hall all work together on the ‘Avon Infant Mortality Study’.
The results of this study suggest that the incidence of cot death can be reduced.
In Avon, deaths have fallen from nearly 4 per 1,000 in the late '80s to less than 2 per 1,000 in 1990.
This improvement related to the Bristol team's efforts to make parents more aware of four main factors for cot death, which are identified from the parents' accounts of the death of their baby.
They can avoid these factors by:
Laying the baby on its side or back to sleep (the prone sleeping position has been identified as a risk factor for cot death).
Not over-wrapping babies (mothers in the UK, it has been found, tend to over-wrap their babies).
Breast feeding (the antibodies found in mothers' milk are helpful in protecting the baby against infections).
Not smoking (smoking heralds many dangers, and is an independent risk factor for sudden infant death syndrome).
Professor Berry stresses, however, that these are risk factors, not causes.
The hunt for causes goes on, and research into the causes goes hand-in-hand with care for the families.
Recognising factors in sudden infant death is also very important in eliminating ‘old wives tales’ about cot death; some of these superstitions have been the cause of great suffering for the families involved.
It does not take much imagination to understand the depth of grief that the parents feel at the loss of their baby.
Professor Berry believes that support is a very important part of the grieving process the family faces following the trauma of a cot death.
In Avon, Dr Peter Fleming, or a member of his team, will visit the home within 24 hours with the General Practitioner to give an explanation, as best they can, as to what has happened, to explain the post-mortem findings, and to counsel parents and help them in any way they can.
Support continues for as long as the parents feel they need it, and is renewed, if they wish, if and when the mother becomes pregnant again.
This new pregnancy is monitored  throughout the nine months, and added support is given throughout the first months of the new baby's life.
Family support is also important in the University's childhood cancer programme.
Professor Martin Mott believes that support for a child suffering from cancer, and his or her family, plays a major role in overcoming the disease.
Professor Mott, who has been working on the cancers of childhood for almost 20 years, is the new Professor of Paediatric Oncology.
His Chair is funded by the Cancer and Leukaemia in Childhood Trust (CLIC), and organisation which has supported the University's work since the beginning of Martin Mott's research into and care of children with cancers.
Professor Mott says, ‘The children go through such an unpleasant experience during their treatment; they are very sick, and often the treatment makes them even sicker.
The children and their families need a great deal of support during this time — support which it is not possible to provide from the Health Service.
The provision of those support facilities by the CLIC Trust makes an enormous difference to the children and their families.’
The progress of research and study into childhood cancers, particularly leukaemia, has been remarkable, with some extremely encouraging statistics.
As many as three-quarters of children with leukaemia now survive; 20 years ago it was a very different story, and statistics showed a high mortality rate.
The future is now also looking a great deal rosier for children with solid tumours.
Already two-thirds of children with tumours can be cured; there is still a great deal of research which remains to be done.
Management of childhood cancers follows a different path to that of adult cancers.
Adult cancers focus on one part of the body: the lungs or the colon, for example.
Childhood cancers are diffuse, that is, they affect the whole body, so systematic treatment is the rule.
Exciting steps into research have been made in Bristol in the past decade.
In one area of research, a computerised data base at the Bristol Oncology Unit which is cross-matched with another at the Christie Cancer Institute in Manchester allows research to take place into the incidence of childhood cancers throughout the South-West of England.
By looking at the types of cancer which occur, where they occur, and in what numbers, researchers can spot, for example, any environmental causes of the disease or assess the effectiveness of diagnoses or treatments.
Another research project funded by the CLIC Trust, the ‘Histocompatibility Antigens Project’, looked at the antigens on the surface of cells forming the tumours of childhood.
Researchers wanted to find out if the presence or absence of these antigens helped the tumours to overcome the body's immune system.
Through this project, it has been established that some antigens are indeed absent from the tumours.
Cells in the tumour seem to resemble the body's own cells soon after conception when a baby is still developing.
In normal development, the cells may act in this way so that the developing baby is not attacked by the mother's defence system.
The mother's immune system does not normally ‘reject’ the developing foetus.
It seems likely that the absence of antigens on the cells in the foetus helps that process.
If the scientists are right, then a major clue about how cancer develops in children has been found.
Another clue appeared in the work of CLIC-sponsored research student, Andrew Shaw.
Compared with adult cancer, cancer in children is relatively uncommon.
In adults the occurrence of cancer increases with age.
This suggested that unlike adult cancers, childhood cancers were not caused by factors in the environment.
It seemed possible that childhood cancer was therefore something that happened naturally, was something that was part of the child's genetic make-up, its chromosomes.
Chromosomes are the ‘blueprints’ that the body cells use to make up the new individual.
In the instance of one of the commonest cancers, a kidney tumour called Wilm's tumour, Andrew Shaw found that the tumour arises when both copies of chromosome 11 are defective.
In rare circumstances, one copy may be missing at birth, and this increases the likelihood that the second copy may be damaged, and a tumour then results.
For most tumours, however, the genetic blueprint is normal, and two events are therefore required to knock out both copies of the relevant gene before a tumour arises, which is why they are so rare.
Researchers are trying to sort out the difference in genetic make-up both in cancers and in normal tissue.
If they can identify positively the gene which is causing the trouble, then they may be able to correct it.
Final results are, as yet, a long way off.
However, the clues to the cause can lead to better ways of treating the disease as soon as they are recognised.
At the other end of all this research is the sick child, whose life has suddenly altered in a most dramatic way.
Previously surrounded by school mates and push-bikes, he is now surrounded by the clinical smell of the hospital and the sight of other sick children, some of whom may be minus their hair.
This is obviously disturbing for both the child and his or her family, particularly if they have not had a great deal of contact with hospitals previously.
A child is happier in the home environment, and home is the best place for a child when undergoing treatment for cancer or leukaemia.
Treatment at home, however, requires special skills.
Specially trained nurses — domiciliary nurses — venture out to the homes of these children from the Oncology Ward at the Bristol Hospital for Sick Children.
Their involvement with the child and his  or her family begins at diagnosis and continues until the outcome of the case is resolved, either by the cure or by the death of the patient.
In both cases, involvement does not end at that point.
Like the family support in sudden infant death cases, the nurses remain in touch with the family as long as they are needed.
These novel ideas of working with the patient's family as well as the patient, and seeing the patient in the context of the family, area transferable to other disorders and places.
For the past decade, I have been the parent of a child who suffers from cerebral palsy.
Our path together in life hasn't been easy — there was very little support available for parents whose babies were diagnosed brain damaged in Australia in 1980.
With family support of the kind practised here in Bristol, the situation would have been easier for me to accept.
In an effort to combat the isolation and fear I felt at the time, I sought out a number of parents in similar situations to my own; we had to create our own support systems.
In the intervening years, there have been some changes, but not nearly enough.
The devotion, care and research taking place in Bristol in the effort to combat these tragedies is uplifting.
This type of care can be extended to all areas of human illness and suffering.
Professors Berry and Mott are right to stress that the support of the child and the family is of the utmost importance.
With the growing scientific knowledge of the causes of both sudden infant death and cancers in childhood over the years has grown the equally important knowledge of the benefits gained from support for the family.
As the Bristol teams, and others who may build on their examples, move forward in their research and their care for families, we can begin to look forward to a time when the tragedy of loss and anguish faced by famous people like Anne Diamond and Julie Walters, and thousands of other ordinary everyday people, may become a thing of the past.
‘A major clue about how cancer develops in children may have been found’
Professor Mott with a young patient
Forty Years on
Christopher Robinson describes how the Bristol Theatre Collection built its international reputation.
Forty years ago the Theatre Collection was founded as a research centre for staff and students in the Drama Department.
The original aim was  to establish a collection of graphic material illustrating the development of theatre from primitive days to the modern period.
Forty years on, the Theatre Collection is a leading research centre for the study of drama and theatre history and has achieved an international reputation as one of the foremost collections of its kind in Great Britain.
Among the Collection's earliest acquisitions were the Robinson Collection and the Charles Landstone bequest.
The first is a collection of 18th- and 19th-century playbills, and the Landstone bequest provided a complete range of theatre programmes for virtually all professional productions in London between 1944 and 1969.
This forms the nucleus of a comprehensive collection of programmes dating from the 1840s to the present day, which continues steadily to increase.
The Collection's first significant expansion occurred in 1966 when the University purchased the remarkable collection of the theatre historian, Dr Richard Southern.
Apart from some 18,000 prints and photographs of prints in other collections representing all aspects of theatre architecture, scenery and costume designs, Dr Southern's collection also included a vast amount of original material in the form of engravings, playbills, designs, paintings and several hundred books, many of which are now rare collector's items.
Other unique material in the Southern Collection includes the unpublished manuscript notebooks of the distinguished theatre historian, William John Lawrence, who was born in Dublin in 1862, and of whom it was once said that to whatever aspect of theatre history the student may turn, Lawrence will have been there before him.
These 11 large folio books, designated ‘The Lawrence Notebooks’, were compiled over 30 years from the 1890s and contain detailed notes for a comprehensive history of stage scenery and technical appliances, together with lives of the most prominent scenic artists.
With the acquisition of the Southern Collection it became apparent that the accommodation allocated to the Theatre Collection was seriously inadequate.
The Standing Commission on Museums and Galleries inspected the Collection, its staffing and funding, and a report was published by HMSO.
As a result of this a full-time Keeper was appointed and in 1969 the University Grants Committee financed the Collection's move to new premises as part of the refurbishment of the VanDyck Printers Building for the Drama Department.
Previously the Collection had been housed at 29 Park Row on the top floor.
The new premises provided a library and reading room, a model room and a stack room for storage.
Nevertheless, although the Theatre Collection had become well known and respected by academics and theatre historians, it remained largely unknown outside its immediate circle for another three years until, in 1972, with the assistance of the Victoria and Albert Museum's Purchase Grant Fund, the University acquired the Beerbohm Tree Collection, previously on permanent loan to the V & A.
Tree built Her Majesty's Theatre in 1897 with the huge profits from his phenomenally successful production of Trilby at the Haymarket Theatre.
The Collection provides complete coverage of his management of Her Majesty's  from that time until his death in 1917, including the original plans by the eminent theatre architect, C. J. Phipps.
The Tree Collection is especially rich in prompt books, the most important of which are those for his elaborate Shakespearian productions.
Filling more than 200 storage boxes, the Tree prompt books and play scripts form the bulk of the Collection, but there are many other items of equal value which shed a great deal of light on Tree's productions and give valuable insight into Victorian and Edwardian staging.
There are, for example, a large number of production photographs of outstanding quality and a substantial number of original scenery and costume designs, notably those of Percy Anderson who is closely associated with Tree.
Also of great interest are the ledgers and account books which give details of production costs, actors' and technicians' salaries, box-office takings and general running costs.
These are supplemented by more than 60 massive volumes of press-cuttings.
The Tree Collection, as purchased in 1972 from Tree's last surviving daughter, the late Lady Cory-Wright, has been and remains of incalculable value to biographers and researchers into Tree's production and turn-of-the-century staging in general.
It lacked, however, Tree's own personal papers and correspondence which remained in the possession of Lady Cory-Wright.
After her death they passed to Tree's grandchildren, David Tree and Virginia, Marchioness of Bath (who is, incidentally, President of the Friends of the Theatre Collection).
In 1982, again with the aid of the V & A's Purchase Grant Fund, the University bought the correspondence and thus completed the Tree Collection.
The papers include letters to and from Tree, his diaries, notes on productions, information on provincial and foreign tours, lectures and addresses.
The Theatre Collection later acquired the personal papers of Tree's wife, Maud, which give a fascinating insight into the life and work of a popular actress, socialite and philanthropist.
The papers include a substantial amount of material relating to Tree's three daughters, Viola, Iris and Felicity.
1980 was notable for the start of a unique and rewarding relationship between the Theatre Collection and Dr Eric Jones-Evans who, in that year, generously decided to give to the Collection his own magnificent collection of theatrical memorabilia.
Although a qualified doctor, Eric Jones-Evans was essentially a man of the theatre.
He was born in 1898 and one of  his earliest and most vivid memories was of seeing Sir Henry Irving in The Bells , an event which sparked off a life-long passion for the theatre.
After the First World War he joined a ‘change-nightly’ repertory company, appeared regularly at the Grand Theatre, Southampton, and later formed his own touring company before specialising in one-man shows drawn from the works of Charles Dickens.
During his long life, Eric Jones-Evans built up an impressive collection, much of which relates to his idol, Henry Irving.
He was a friend of the popular actor Bransby Williams and of one of the last great actor-managers, Sir John Martin-Harvey, both of whom bequeathed Eric a wealth of material relating to their own careers.
The Eric Jones-Evans Collection consequently consists of a prodigious quantity of play scripts, prompt books, playbills and photographs, as well as a large number of costumes, props, paintings and drawings, artefacts and photographs.
Eric Jones-Evans began donating material to the Theatre Collection in 1980 and the remainder, including his substantial library, formed just a part of his considerable estate, the bulk of which was bequeathed to the Collection upon his death in 1989.
In 1983 one of the most outstanding gifts to benefit the Theatre Collection was donated by Alan Tagg, one of this country's most prominent and prolific stage designers.
Since the mid-50s he has designed well over 100 West End productions and has also worked at the National Theatre, the Royal Shakespeare Company and the Chichester Festival Theatre.
He was also closely associated with the work of George Devine and Tony Richardson at the Royal Court Theatre where he was to design 17 productions, starting with Look Back in Anger in 1956.
The material he donated to the Theatre Collection consists of designs, models, groundplans and technical drawings for productions at all the aforementioned theatres and provides an unusually comprehensive survey of one designer's work in various spheres.
In 1984 the Royal Victoria Hall Foundation, former owners of London's Old Vic Theatre, deposited a portion of their archive material with the Theatre Collection and three years later the Governors of the Foundation decided that the entire archives, covering the history of the theatre and a complete documentation of the Old Vic company from 1944 to 1963, should be housed in Bristol.
With a nice sense of timing the University allocated two extra rooms to the Collection, adjacent to the existing stackroom, one of which was designated the Old Vic Room.
The Foundation provided a grant for the installation of mobile shelving and the room was officially opened in 1989.
The growth of the Theatre Collection has been in some way analogous to that of the proverbial snowball, for as its reputation has increased so too has the number of donations and bequests in the form of private collections, both large and small.
They range from the impressive Eric Jones-Evans and Alan Tagg collections to a small but exquisite (and previously unknown) portrait of Ellen Terry, painted when this legendary actress was at the start of her career in Bristol and presented to the Collection by the artist's granddaughter.
The late Richard Thesiger in 1982 donated to the Collection a fascinating collection of material relating to the life and career of his uncle, the actor Ernest Thesiger.
Other bequests include those of Cecil Madden (who, besides being a prolific playwright, was the first producer for television at Alexandra Palace in 1936 and later became Assistant to the Controller of BBC Television Programmes) and, more recently, the substantial theatrical library of Alfred Emmet, co-founder of the famous Questors Theatre.
Owing to the steady increase in its holdings, the Theatre Collection has been able to mount a series of exhibitions illustrating various aspects of theatre history.
The first of these was simply called Theatre .
It was shown at Bristol City Art Gallery  and Museum in 1976 and its opening marked the inauguration of the association of Friends of the Theatre Collection.
Since 1980 the Theatre Collection has mounted an exhibition every year, but to many people's surprise and regret, it has never had a permanent display area of its own.
In 1989, however, the University allocated the VanDyck Gallery in Park Row to the Collection and the following year, which by a happy coincidence marked its 40th anniversary, the Theatre Collection was able for the first time to mount an exhibition in its own Gallery.
The Gallery comprises three rooms, one of which is to be designated the ‘Eric Jones-Evans Room’ and which will house his Collection and provide a research centre for the study of 19th-century theatre and melodrama.
It will stand as a permanent memorial to the man whose generosity has so benefited the Theatre Collection.
In due course the main gallery will be refurbished and modernised to provide an important contribution to the cultural amenities of Bristol.
Costume design by Percy Macquoid for Herbert Beerbohm Tree as Cardinal Wolsey in ‘Henry VIII’, Her Majesty's Theatre, London, 1910.
Set design by Alan Tagg for ‘Look back in anger’ by John Osborne, Royal Court Theatre, London, 1956
Costume design by ‘Wilhelm’ for a pantomime at the Prince's Theatre, Bristol
A Model Golf Swing
Ronald Milne describes his investigation of the dynamics of the gold swing and suggests a way golfers could obtain more accuracy in their shots.
Look in any Golf Club professional's shop or at the advertisements in any golfing magazine and you will see everywhere the implication that ‘professional’ clubs need to be different from those used by ordinary golfers.
Roughly speaking, conventional wisdom dictates that the more flexible golf club shafts are suited to the weaker player while stiffer shafts are appropriate for better players and professionals.
Great emphasis is place don the importance of the correct choice of shaft in relation to the player.
One recent advertisement in a magazine proclaimed, ‘We challenge anyone to prove that the shaft is not the most important part of a golf club’.
This is a challenge which I and my colleague John Davis have already taken up.
I have been interested in the dynamics of the golf swing for ten years, and John is an expert on instrumentation who was able to help me with the experimental work.
The computer part of the study has been my personal research interest, but it has also over the years provided stimulating final-year projects for students in the Engineering Mathematics Department.
As a research project, it could be said to be one of the ‘old-fashioned’ kind; it had to be done on a shoestring.
Within the world of golf, t here is a considerable body of traditional knowledge, or received wisdom, about the importance of golf club shafts.
This wisdom underlies the  manufacture of clubs by large companies and small.
Shafts are being manufactured to closer tolerances than ever before and are being produced in ever widening ranges to meet the differences among players.
For those who produce the clubs, and for those who buy them, considerable investments can be involved.
Yet there is no indication that the conventional wisdom underlying shaft design is rooted in a body of hard evidence, either of a theoretical or experimental nature.
What is in doubt is the basis of the design philosophy.
The long history of the game maya suggest that better players should use stiffer clubs and that has to be taken seriously.
On the other hand, that is not an obvious conclusion from the dynamics of the golf swing.
One way of testing the design philosophy and the claims made about the importance of the shaft for the player is to construct a suitable computer-based mathematical model of the golf swing and the behaviour of the club shaft during it.
I made such a model in Bristol.
A hot in golf obviously involves the player and the club.
I did not have enough knowledge to enable me to make a complete computer model of the individual player's contribution to the stroke.
There were no suitable medical or bio-mechanical studies which could be used.
Since I therefore had to exclude the neuro-muscular contribution the player makes, I knew that a computer model would only take us far.
John would have to help me to back up the computer data with some experimental work.
Notwithstanding the problems it was clear that I could emulate to some extent the effect of the shoulder rotation (shoulder torque) and movement of the wrist (wrist torque).
The shoulder torque has most effect on the arm of the player, the wrist torque on the club itself.
The computer model shows how club head speed is generated.
The force of the shot comes form the speed.
Only 8% of the power of the shot comes from the wrist.
All the rest comes from the back and the legs.
Contrary to the popular belief, the hands do not hit the ball; they act as a hinge.
We can also observe through the computer model the behaviour of the shaft throughout the swing.
The model is able to mimic very closely the actual behaviour of the golfer.
Thus the computer model will go some way towards giving a fundamental understanding of the dynamics of the shaft itself without being able to explain fully the contribution made by the individual player.
The most important characteristic of the shaft according to received wisdom is its flexibility.
The flexibility of the shaft shows itself in bending and twisting.
Manufacturers test shaft design by three basic means.
They clamp the butt and place a weight near the tip which enables them to derive both a measure of the bending stiffness and the ‘kickpoint’.
The ‘kick-point’ related to the shape of the shaft at the point of impact; a shaft with a low kick-point shows a greater curvature near the tip than a shaft with a high kick-point.
The second test measure the tip rotation.
The third measures the vibration frequency of the clamped shaft carrying a tip mass equivalent to a club head.
It has to be remembered that the centre of mass of the club head does not lie on the shaft but off to one side (except of course in the very special case of certain putters).
There is another important point.
During the swing the shaft acquired additional stiffness because it is under considerable tension.
Any one who has ever played a game of ‘conkers’ will know that a swung string holding a chestnut acquires a stiffness equivalent to a shaft.
Indeed, if one could find some way of starting the downswing, one could probably hit a satisfactory shot with a club head swung on a chain using the stiffness generated by the tension.
In a full drive or a similar distance shot, this ‘tension bending stiffness’ is, in the 40 milliseconds (ms) before impact, large enough to be comparable with the stiffness measured by the manufacturers' tests as part of the shaft itself.
The present aim of shaft design is to specify a particular bending flexibility in the shaft while reducing twisting as far as possible.
My computer models showed that at the beginning the swing (about 230 ms before impact), the application of wrist torque bends the shaft backwards.
In the second phase of the swing, in the last 130 ms to impact, the shaft gradually straightens and begins to bend forward as a result of the force exerted by the offset mass of the club head behind the shaft centre-line.
Near impact, the effective weight of the club head is about 150 times its actual weight.
The torque force exerted because of the offset centre of mass, particularly on a wooden club, is considerable and has important effects on the amount of loft which is achieved.
In the last phase of the shot the effect of impact causes a few cycles of vibration at a frequency of about 30 Hz.
The computer simulation shows that, given the same input torques, a ‘flexible’ shaft produces a ball speed less than that produced by an equivalent ‘rigid’shaft.
Flexibility of the shaft does not therefore, contrary to popular belief, add to the club head velocity by a kind of ‘springing back’ action.
The computer model shows that a ‘totally rigid’ shaft hits the ball 4% faster and therefore, presumably, further.
But in ‘real life’ the inputs made by the individual golfer vary and will always be difficult to simulate.
We have very little knowledge about the dynamics of the human wrist.
Experimental work has been done on other human joints but there is nothing which tells us about, for example, the impedance of the wrist.
We do know that, when gripped by a golfer, a club's behaviour is different from the way it behaves when gripped by a clamp as it is in the standard manufacturers' tests.
Nonetheless the Bristol computer managed to simulate different effects of varying wrist torques.
These were checked by strain gauge measurements and by making high speed films of selected golfers during the swing.
The strain gauges were bonded to the shaft and took 200 readings per second.
A typical run over 10 seconds began at the moment of address and finished with the follow-through.
The region of interest later became focused on the period from the top of the backswing to shortly after the impact with the ball.
The high speed video camera facing the golfer filmed the shot at 200 frames per second and a shutter speed of  of a second.
Another camera recorded the line-of-flight view to establish the angle of the golfer's swing plane.
The results obtained from the strain gauges and the high speed film confirmed the validity of the computer model.
The simulation was undoubtedly typical of the real golf swing as shown on the video.
The main conclusion was that shaft flexibility does not play an important dynamic role in the swing.
The principal effect of a change in flexibility, namely a change in effective loft at impact, could be tested simply, in a way which related to the practice, already common among golfers, of resting the toe of the club on the ground and then pushing the butt firmly downwards.
The computer analysis also threw up another interesting question: if shaft flexibility is not dynamically important than why is it apparently so important for golfers?
Dunlop Slazenber prepared three special sets of clubs for me and I invited a small group of golfers to try them.
Each set had identical swing weights but had shafts of different flexibility.
The golfers, four amateurs of handicaps ranging from 13 to 5 and four professionals, were told not to waggle the clubs or to bend the shaft on the ground but just to hit the ball.
The results were somewhat surprising.
The amateurs were unable to distinguish one shaft from another for either woods or irons.
The professional were not much better than the amateurs at distinguishing the irons but were better than the amateurs at spotting the shaft differences between the woods.
The implications for future club design are problematical.
It would appear not to be necessary to provide a range of shafts for iron clubs and possibly not for woods either.
If shaft flexibility is not important dynamically there seems little point in introducing it as an unwanted variable in the swing.
Any effective loft which a golfer may have enjoyed through using a flexible shaft can be restored by an adjustment of the clubface.
The computer model shows that it doesn't matter what short of shaft a golfer uses — from the point of view of obtaining distance.
There would be an advantage, however, in using a stiffer-shafted club because the resulting higher torsional stiffness increases accuracy.
There should therefore be fewer visits to the rough.
Finally, more work can be done on refining computer models of ‘real swings’.
The behaviour of shafts of clubs held in golf club-testing machines is very different from the performance of the same club out on the course in the hands of its owner.
Shaft performance data derived from a testing machine do not really apply to the ‘real’ golf swing.
Computer models will have a role to play in making the golf-clubs of the future.
We also need some more work on the wrist and other p arts of the body involved in swinging the club.
When we have those results we will really be able to sort out what is going on when a golfer tries to hit that wee white ball.
Computer simulation of a golf swing
A Very English Rebellion
Deborah Moggach talks to Olivia Abbott about what it was like to be young, embarrassed, and in Bristol
The novelist Deborah Moggach came to Bristol as an undergraduate in the early 1970s.
‘I adored Bristol and if I had to live anywhere in the world, I would come back and live here.
I can imagine ending my days in a lovely Georgian house in the Paragon or Cornwallis Crescent, gazing at this wonderful view.’
We sat on a park bench in Clifton, having revisited the streets where Moggach lived during her time in Bristol.
The time of her ‘terribly middle-class rebellion’, as she calls it.
She rolled a cigarette as she talked, laughing at herself, her past, her middle-classness, her ‘rebellion’, her embarrassment.
You must be sisters , first published in 1978 and re-issued in paperback this year (Mandarin £3.99), was Moggach's first book.
It is set in Bristol and is heavily autobiographical.
‘The whole book is about embarrassment, really.
It's about being young and terribly embarrassed and wanting to make an impression but not knowing what it is.
I'm terribly fond of the book and it was very personal; I just hoped that it would be personal to other people, particularly people at that same period in their lives.
It is embarrassing being young and wanting to be more liberated than you are, yet not being, and pretending to be more liberated than you are, or that you're having a racier time.
‘There's a terrible self-consciousness at being a new student in a hall of residence, hearing the clattering dinner plates, going into the dining room and not knowing anybody, then suddenly realising (as happens to the heroine, Laura, in the novel) that one's not wearing a gown and everyone else is.
That happens!
There's the embarrassment of your parents coming down.
You want to disown them because their voices are too loud and the car's wrong.
And there's the desperate search to find any boyfriend as quickly as possible, so that you look as if you're all right and not alone.’
It is hard to imagine Deborah Moggach being embarrassed now.
Tall, slim and disarmingly natural, she laughs freely and talks frankly.
She has an air of someone who enjoys life very much: an inquisitiveness, thoughtfulness, acceptance and a total lack of selfconsciousness.
She seems very at home in her skin.
It is hard to picture this woman as a gawky teenager, arriving in a new town, terribly self-conscious at being a new student.
It is much easier to picture her rebelling.
‘Everyone had to be rebellious then,’ she says.
‘You simply couldn't hold your head up if you weren't rebellious.
The cool thing would be, during the three-day end of year exams, when you're allowed to do them at home, to be seen drinking the Students’ Union or in a pub around here, being terribly laid back while everyone else was hunched over their desks in their rooms.’
Moggach is very conscious of the fact that she ‘dipped her toe in’ and then retreated.
As she describes in her book, she was an adolescent girl coming to grips with growing up and kicking against conventions ‘but only in this rather middle-class way.
I didn't entirely freak out, I just dabbled: I dabbled in all sorts of things.’
She never dropped out of University and she always worked (when no-one was looking), but she never really felt a part of the University itself, so much as a part of Bristol the city.
‘I find it terribly romantic.
But then, in the early '70s, Bristol was very raffish: the port connection made it a terribly druggy city, which to a student seemed very exciting at the time.’
When she first arrived in Bristol Moggach lived at Badock Hall, then the only mixed hall of residence, which also gave it an aura of excitement.
She vividly remembers the ‘bedder’ carrying her heavy suitcase upstairs for her and saying knowing ‘It must be all them  contraceptives in it.’
‘I thought it was nice, the way she missed out this syllable in the middle, and that as an English student I was going to notice things like this.’
She laughs at herself as a girl again.
Moggach was at Badock for a year, doing the things that students do: coming back across the Downs at night (no money for bus fares), giving each other piggy backs: ‘It was all very jolly and studenty and like students should be.’
At her entrance exam she was asked to recite a poem to the interviewers.
She vividly remembers asking them to turn their backs to her as she was so nervous.
‘And so they did: Cottle, Gifford and everybody turned their backs on me and I recited it.
It was very charming, I enjoyed that.’
Despite her lack of involvement, emotionally and socially, with the University, Moggach loved her subject.
She skipped lectures (‘because that was what you were supposed to do’) but she adored English.
She had three years to spend in a beautiful city, reading; and that was what she was supposed to be doing.
‘Heavenly, heavenly stuff.’
She studied Anglo-Saxon under Dr Basil Cottle.
Despite not enjoying the learning process, as such (‘I hate learning languages’), she loved ‘the feel and the sound of the words as they rolled around in the mouth.’
There were two elements in the English Department at that time.
‘Christopher Ricks was very good because he was a bit trendy in that he played Bob Dylan and quoted from the Daily Mirror in lectures and tutorials.
He had parties where we all played ping pong and ate ice lollies and it all seemed charmingly fun and unstraight.
And he was the only lecturer who would admit that he'd changed his mind about something since the last lecture, and that made a great impression on me.
I thought that, instead of speaking from his notes that he'd been speaking from year after year, he was reassessing what he was doing.
We were all very impressed by him and he was a very influential and interesting professor.
‘Then there was the traditional side: I had most tutorials with Gifford (I was his pete) and Scattergood, who was lovely.’
After leaving Badock Hall, Moggach eventually moved to Cornwallis Crescent, to a bedsit where she kept two rabbits.
It had French windows opening onto a communal terrace and that beautiful view of Bristol that you get from Clifton and which she clearly loves so much.
Here she became involved with people form the BBC Orchestra, as there was a double bass player living in the next room.
It was then that she began to really drift from University life.
She then moved to the Paragon, which she remembers once again for the view over the city and the estuary and for its huge Georgian bathroom which had a balcony.
The memories are probably combined due to the fact that she watched the SS Great Britain being towed into harbour while she was sitting on the loo.
At this time Moggach met the man on whom the character of Mac in the book is based, and as she recalls it: ‘I became very rebellious and sort of opted out.’
They moved into a flat in Bellevue Crescent, had a dog (called ‘Badger’, like the family dog in the book) and wore moth eaten fur coats, walking around with the dog on a piece of string, rolling their own cigarettes (a habit which has stuck) and spending hours in the pub drinking scrumpy.
She worked throughout this period, but it was here, she says, that she knew she had disassociated herself from the University too much.
This two-way pull is very evident in the character of Laura, who is based on Moggach herself.
She has found, though, that by writing so closely about what happened to her she has, in a way, lost some of her own past.
What really happened has become over-printed by the fiction.
‘I lost what really happened.
Now, if I read the book, that's what happened in Bristol.’
The book was written about five years after Moggach left Bristol.
She had by then married and was living in Pakistan where, she found, she could look on events from a distance and see them more vividly.
At this stage she started to write about her time in Bristol as very faintly disguised autobiography.
She couldn't write while she was at Bristol.
She describes it as ‘paralysing’.
‘I wanted to write, but when you study English literature it paralyses you from being a creative writer, because what you read is so wonderful all the time, you feel you can't possibly pit yourself against them and try yourself.’
She did try, writing what she describes as ‘two of the most frightful purple passages of stream of consciousness prose’, but they were so awful she threw them away.
She is convinced ultimately, however, that coming to Bristol and studying English was of great benefit to her.
‘Doing English is terribly useful for a writer as long as you can get rid of the inhibitions from reading other people's wonderful work.
There are two schools of thought: one is that studying English inhibits you and makes you too academic to be a natural, instinctive writer.
The other is that it actually fosters in you in-built critical faculties, so you can actually edit and shape your work as you go along, having been taught by the master — the masters of literature — not just the professors, the great writers.’
Convocation
Arthur Graves describes an opportunity to get involved in running the University through the organisation which draws together all graduates.
It is perfectly possible to go through a University career, satisfy the examiners, graduate in the splendour of the Great Hall, and leave as a Bristol graduate without ever once having thought how the whole thing has been organised.
It is also possible to continue as a graduate without eh thought occurring.
But those who maintain this state of untroubled innocence have missed an opportunity.
A University is not some great machine which trundles on its way, going blindly about its purposes.
It is the aggregation of its members, past and present.
It can take a flavour from the rich mixture of people of which it is composed.
Its direction can be determined by the thoughts and wishes of individuals.
For present students the route to influence is through the Union and through the representation which students now have on Faculty and University committees, up to and including Senate and Council.
For graduates the way to be active is Convocation.
Many graduates seem unaware of Convocation, yet they are all members of it.
It was deliberately set up when the University received its Charter in 1909.
It consists of the registered graduates of the University together with all the members of Senate, the teaching staff and certain other officers (such as the Vice-Chancellor).
Convocation has a role defined in the Charter: it may ‘discuss and pronounce an opinion on any matters whatsoever relating to the University including any matters referred to it by the Court or the Council’.
It can also ‘enter into communication directly with Court, Council or Senate on any matter affecting the University’.
To help it in these roles it has two seats on Council which is the top executive body of the University.
It also has 100 seats on Court which is, so to speak, the Annual General Meeting of the University.
It is not directly represented on Senate which is the supreme academic body.
But of course it is perfectly possible for Bristol graduates who are members of Senate to reflect a Convocation view there.
In day to day terms, Convocation involves itself int he life and work of the University through its Chairman (currently Dr Derek Zutshi) and its committee.
The present committee is heterogeneous.
It includes people who graduated as long ago as 1933 and others who left only five or six years ago.
It incorporates a wide spread of disciplines and its members have been, or are, involved in a variety of professions.
It can therefore provide collectively a formidable knowledge of the University and bring to bear an enormous fund of experience.
Two years ago, for example, Convocation considered a response to the University Plan.
Its views were warmly welcomed by the Committee of Deans.
More recently it has been concerned about the University's financial and management difficulties.
A special Convocation group studied the University's own investigation and that prepared by  consultants.
It independently concluded that the main causes of the deficit in 1988–90 had been identified and that the Action Plan the University was following would prevent a similar situation arising in the future.
The University's response to Convocation's observations and suggestions in these matters was positive.
Convocation is currently building up a database of the skills, expertise and experience of its members so that advice across a wide front of issues can be readily available.
It has membership of a number of University committees so that the information and comment it may wish to provide can be easily and quickly put into the University's decision-making processes.
Convocation is also active nationally.
Bristol is a member of the National Congress of University Convocations at which issues such as Government funding for the universities and the alternatives to it can be discussed.
If you would like to be involved in Convocation, there are several opportunities each year to take an active interest.
In July the Annual General Meeting of Convocation is the central focus of a reunion weekend.
The Hall Associations hold their reunions at the same time and there is an opportunity to see the work of one or more departments.
Early in the Autumn Term there is a reception at which you can meet current staff and students.
Some members like to come back to Bristol for social events like the Alumni Foundation concerts or the sports reunions which are organised from time to time.
For the Bristol graduate Convocation represents an opportunity to see that the University has its graduates' advice on how to preserve what is good while changing to meet the needs of the future.
If you would like a note of Convocation's social programme, write to Dr Martin Crossley Evans, Assistant Secretary of Convocation, Senate House, Bristol BS8 1TH.
In the Spring Term there is an Annual Lecture at which a national celebrity talks about an issue of current interest.
Breaking up isn't hard enough to do
That's what some divorced people told Gwynn Davis in a Bristol study which may lead to law reform.
Breaking up is hard to do, a popular song assures us.
But evidence collected in a University survey suggests that many couples not only regret parting but wish that in fact breaking up was somewhat harder.
In some ways ending a marriage is now easier than it has ever been.
Until 1857 in England, the only way a person could obtain civil divorce was through introducing a private act of Parliament.
In that year a new law was passed to make divorce easier and simpler.
Byu today's standards the Victorian Act made divorce neither easy nor simple.
Adultery was the sole ground, but a wife could only divorce her husband if accompanied by some other matrimonial transgression.
A wife's adultery, on the other hand, was considered sufficient in itself.
It was not until 1923 that the sexes, on this ground, were placed on an equal footing.
The next radical change to divorce law came as a result of some effective ridicule.
Sir Alan (A.P.) Herbert, who delighted in finding cases which proved the law an ass, wrote a highly amusing novel called Holy Deadlock .
In it he recounted the farcical activities of a couple who  wished to divorce but were unable to do so unless one partner committed, or pretended to commit, an act of adultery.
A. P. Herbert was not the only writer to spot the comic possibilities.
The professional correspondent became a stock figure in farces and films.
The reality was that these otherwise respectable women consented to spend a night in the same room as the supposedly erring husband, but in circumstances which not only discouraged passion but positively precluded it.
Unlike some of the other authors, A. P. Herbert was an MP, and in a position to make laws as well as jokes.
He was able to introduce what has become known as the Herbert Act to extend the grounds for divorce to include (in addition to adultery) desertion, cruelty and incurable insanity.
The Herbert Act did not challenge the presumption that divorce law was intended to achieve a verdict on the morality of the parties' conduct.
The prize for the innocent spouse lay in benefits such as child custody and financial support.
Where the wife was the erring partner, the husband could seek freedom from the obligation to provide such support.
In the 1960s (sometimes castigated as an age in which morality was abandoned), Parliament decided to introduce a single, morally neutral ground for divorce, namely the irretrievable breakdown of the marriage.
But the idea of ‘fault’ was not banished entirely.
The petitioner still had to prove breakdown by demonstrating one (or more) of the following ‘facts’: that the respondent had committed adultery; that the respondent had behaved in such a way that the petitioner could not reasonably be expected to live with the respondent; that the respondent had deserted the petitioner for a continuous period of at least two years; that the parties had lived apart for a continuous period of at least two years and that the respondent consented to a decree being granted; or that the parties had lived apart for a continuous period of at least five years.
Whatever Parliament's intentions may have been, it was readily apparent that three of the new ‘facts’ were merely the old ‘faults’in a new guise.
The 1969 Act, therefore, was nominally based on a breakdown but in reality it introduced a hybrid system.
The Court was still, in theory, under a duty to enquire into the facts alleged.
I say ‘in theory’ because the 1970s also saw the introduction of the ‘Special Procedure’under which undefended divorces are dealt with on the basis of written evidence, without the parties even having to attend court.
The Special Procedure has in fact now become the standard procedure; it is most unusual these days to have a full hearing on the decree.
Instead, our  divorce courts spend their time checking on arrangements for children, and supervising battles over custody, access, maintenance, and the matrimonial home.
Does this mean that the 1969 legislation is working to the satisfaction of all concerned?
Not exactly.
People still attach enormous significance to the question of ‘grounds’ for divorce.
When, with colleagues in the Department of Social Administration, I interviewed members of the divorcing population, they argued passionately that divorce was too easy (or too difficult); that everything was rushed through before they had time to think (or that it dragged on interminably); and that divorce should be morally neutral (or that there should be an inquest in which every detail of their spouse's despicable conduct was exposed to public view).
Such contradictory findings do not immediately lend themselves to providing a basis for a programme of legislative reform.
But certain broad agreed themes did emerge from our research.
We found that the decision to end a marriage tends to be unilateral, and is more often taken by the wife; there is widespread evidence of regret, but this is confined to one party in most cases; while some members of the divorcing population allege that divorce is ‘too easy’, these people will often say that they themselves have struggled with their marital problems for many years.
It is always ‘other people’ who treat marriage lightly.
We also occasionally observed some ambivalence or uncertainty on the part of the person initiating the divorce.
Some people can be ambivalent in this way for years.
A frequent cause of complaint was that the need to take rapid decisions in the course of the legal process leaves some people with the sense that they have acted precipitately.
Meanwhile the present fault-based ‘facts’ all too often exacerbate ill-feeling.
The biggest problem lies with what is commonly termed ‘unreasonable behaviour’.
The use of this particular ‘fact’ encourages a wish to defend the degree proceedings — an impulse which is usually quite unrelated to any prospect of saving the marriage.
These broad themes taken together led us to put forward a proposal for a anew divorce law in our book Grounds for Divorce .
It seemed to us that two nettles had to be grasped: the first was to decide whether divorce law should attempt to remedy the ‘injustice’ meted out to ‘innocent’spouses who are divorced against their will.
To regard this as an ‘injustice’ runs contrary to the idea that divorce is to be obtained on proof of breakdown.
This is because ‘breakdown can arise from unilateral decision.
We therefore concluded that it was necessary to abandon any attempt to ‘do justice’ between the parties in the context of decree proceedings.
We felt that there can be no question of fairness when the law effectively endorses unilateral decision.
Furthermore, to seek ‘justice’ when all the court is interested in is ‘breakdown’is, as many respondents discover, a thoroughly dispiriting and disillusioning experience.
The second key question was how far it was desirable (or feasible) for courts to control the exit from the marriage.
The present law relies on a combination of delay and the stigma of ‘fault’ in order to provide some disincentive to premature or ill-judged divorce.
In practice, the fault-based ‘facts’ create so much antagonism that any prospect of reconciliation is severely undermined.
The present law is concerned only with ending marriages, not with saving them.
So where does the answer lie?
One possibility would be to conclude that we no longer need a legal concept of marriage.
Family has adopted principles for the protection of children and dependent spouses which could apply equally to the unmarried.
‘Marriage’ could become a purely social or religious ceremony — in which case there would be no such thing as divorce, legally speaking.
The problem with this is that most people still want, at some stage in their lives, formal (that is to say legal) recognition of their commitment to one another.
But they also, if circumstances change, want to be able to escape from that commitment should it prove intolerable.
We concluded that decisions about divorce should be left to the parties (or just one party, if only one wants it).
We felt that there should be a delay on its formal registration — say, for a year — as a kind of safety valve.
That safety valve might operate by way of an administrative procedure, calling for no external judgements as to whether nor not ‘breakdown’ had occurred.
In the meantime, the couple could have immediate access to the divorce court in order to tackle the really urgent questions concerning money, property and children.
The Law Commission has now taken up our suggestion, which it terms ‘divorce by process over time’, in its discussion paper Facing the Future .
It seems that every few decades in this country we have a major battle over divorce law reform.
The next battle approaches.
Our researches here in Bristol have supplied some of the ammunition.
How the Other Half Lives A divorced woman rings her ex-spouse: Perhaps you could spare some time to see the children on Saturday…
I want to go out.
THINKS Well, it's all right for HIM…he's got a very cushy number…he's not lonely…he'd got: 1.
GIRL FRIENDS.
2.
MONEY.
3.
A BACHELOR FLAT.
4.
NO HOUSEWORK.
5.
FREEDOM.
6.
UNINTERRUPTED NIGHTS.
7.
PARENTAL POWER WITHOUT RESPONSIBILITY.
8.
NO ONE TO THINK ABOUT EXCEPT HIMSELF.
HE HAS, OF COURSE TO PAY MY MAINTENANCE, AND THAT HE MAKES INTO AN ACT OF CHARITY.
Why do you always sound so ANGRY?
THINKS It's all right for HER…
She's got a cushy one…
I knacker myself at my job to keep her nice and warm in my HOUSE, WITH MY KIDS AND MY DOG AND MY HI-FI AND MY CAR AND MY DAVID HOCKNEY PRINT…
AND I DON'T GET ANY THANKS.
Changing Places
Jeff Goodman talks about a new opportunity which the University Careers Service is offering to graduates of the last ten years to re-assess where they have got to in their careers.
How did you get to where you are today?
Was your career decision a carefully thought out choice based on a thorough consideration of your strengths and values and of the opportunities available to you — or was it an intuitive leap into the dark?
Was it really your decision or were you heavily influence by others?
Did you give the process the time and effort it really needed?
How you make a choice of career is likely to be a significant factor in determining how successful it ultimately is.
This is not to say that there is only one right way of making such a choice but it can be helpful to have an insight into your own personal style of decisionmaking, and how this was applied to your career choice.
The Careers Advisory Service at Bristol University has identified a range of decisionmaking styles used by people making their career choice.
See if you can judge which style, or combination of styles, you used to make your decision.
Intuitive
A gut feeling based on superficial understanding and emotional preference.
The sort of motivation which encourages people into advertising ‘because it's creative’ or personnel ‘because it's to do with people’.
It is an important element in the decision-making process for many graduates.
Some need to be encouraged to trust their emotional preferences.
Freud reckoned that if you are choosing a partner or a career, then you must trust your heart.
Compliant
Fitting in to others' expectations, e.g. spouse, friends or colleagues.
In the end, others have made the decision.
A common phenomenon among students where peer pressure is strong.
In Bristol, often the pressure is to go for high status careers.
One student came into the Careers Service expressing an interest in social work — but in a whisper, in case any of her friends overheard.
Impulsive
A choice based on inadequate information responding to a feeling of urgency.
Very common for those who have left the whole process too late, perhaps because of exam pressures or the more attractive diversions of student life.
Some people give more thought to choosing a car or a holiday than they do to choosing a career.
Fatalistic
‘What will be will be’; a sense that you have no control over your own destiny.
Letting someone else decide — most often manifest in people applying for a wide range of jobs perhaps with little in , because they are unable to decide which is most appropriate for them and hoping that somehow the right choice will be made by the employers themselves.
Paralytic
Where the implications of the choice are so overwhelming that the individual can't make a choice at all.
What we call the ‘rabbit in the headlights’ approach to decisionmaking.
This often results in delay — postponing the choice by finding an excuse or setting an unnecessarily long timescale.
People may drift into a job without ever having made a positive decision.
Systematic
This is what most career advisers would see as the recommended approach.
The sort of British Standard  style of career choice.
Weight up all the constituent elements of the choice — exploring your own strengths and weaknesses, values, interests and temperament and matching these against the range of opportunities available.
So, how did you make your initial decision about what to do after graduation?
How are you continuing to make decisions?
Career choice is a continual process, not a once and for all decision.
People change and so do opportunities; there is a need continually to make choices to accommodate these changes.
Whatever your situation, whether you are planning a change of direction or simply looking forward at the various opportunities open to you, the process of your decision-making is an important element of the choice itself.
With this in mind, the Careers Service at Bristol is offering a course for graduates of Bristol within ten years of graduation, who would like to help to take stock of their career to date and consider their future.
Whether you feel that your original decision was not very wise, or that you never really made a decision, or you just want to review your situation, this course can help you.
At a time of recession, the benefits could be considerable.
CAREER DEVELOPMENT COURSE
For graduates in the first 10 years after graduation.
Few people give themselves the time to think clearly about their own futures.
This course will provide an opportunity and structure to help you stand back from your present job, take stock of where you are in your life, and explore future possibilities.
Alumni Foundation
Kenneth Grayston introduces an opportunity for graduates to get together at the latest in a series of University concerts.
In November, Raymond Warren, Professor of Music in the University, will find himself, or rather one of his works, in distinguished company.
His Graduation Fanfare is to open the next Alumni Foundation Concert which will feature works by Back, Torelli, Handel, and Purcell.
The Alumni Foundation concerts are a new and pleasant tradition which has grown up in recent years.
In 1987 the Foundation helped fund the purchase of a new concert grant piano.
Roger Green and Peter Katin gave delightful concerts to demonstrate the new instrument which provided an opportunity for graduates to come back to the University, meet old friends again and raise funds for the Foundation.
The Foundation's funds, although they arise in modest sums from events such as the concerts and total not much more than £300,000, have a disproportionate effect in use.
Over the years since it was set up in 1982, the Foundation has provided funds for the purchase of teaching equipment, the development of Library services, the restoration of much-loved features of the University gardens, a scholarship for under-privileged students from overseas, the publication of monographs, and improvements to sports facilities.
The grants have always been small, ranging in size from £20 to £12,000.
But for those departments and individuals who received them, they have been vital and they have paid off in ways not expected at the time of the award.
For example, support given some years ago to a postgraduate in Theoretical Chemistry, Mark Bayley, led to offers of collaboration between Bristol, Yale and a German University.
The Foundation has been delighted to be able to sow the seeds of international cooperation by supporting postgraduates.
But of course it wishes to replenish its coffers.
On Saturday 9 November University musicians past and present will be joining together to perform a varied programme of Baroque music in aid of the Foundation (see advertisement on page 43 for details).
There will be a buffet reception afterwards — a chance to renew acquaintance with old friends.
And of course you will have the added pleasure of knowing that part of the ticket price will be going to help students and to keep Bristol as a place of excellence.
For further information about the Alumni Foundation write to the Alumni Foundation Office  
Books
80TH BIRTHDAY TRIBUTE
As a tribute on his 80th birthday, a book containing 22 articles written mostly by former collaborators and colleagues has been assembled to honour Sir Charles Frank (Sir Charles Frank — an 80th Birthday Tribute , edited by R. G. Chambers, J. E. Enderby, A. Keller, A. R. Lang and J. W. Steeds).
Sir Charles Frank came to the Department of Physics in 1946 and worked there until his retirement in 1976.
Most of the important Physics that has been done in the laboratory during that time has been profoundly influenced by Sir Charles.
Indeed, he has continued to play an active role in Bristol Physics since his formal retirement.
His work can be summarised by an expression which he himself used in a retirement speech in 1976: ‘Physics is not just concerning the nature of things but concerning the interconnectedness of all the natures of things’.
His contribution to Physics has spanned a huge range of disciplines from muon-catalysed nuclear fusion (which is now an area of flourishing research directly initiated by one of Sir Charles' short papers for Nature in 1947) to defects in solids, liquid crystals, quasi crystals and polymer crystallisation.
Some of Sir Charles' ideas relate to 19th-century physics such as his very recent work on the vectorial description of the rational relationships between neighbouring crystal grains.
No brief article can do justice to Sir Charles' many contributions and the influence he has had.
For example, his best known prediction made in 1949 that crystal growth is mediated by dislocations has been confirmed on many occasions.
The ideas that a circuit of Burgers vectors around a dislocation is not closed motivated Michael Berry to think about closed orbits in a variety of new contexts.
This in turn led to a hitherto unknown phase in quantum theory (the ‘Berry’ phase), the full and profound implications of which are still being worked out.
John Enderby
75 ALL OUT
1990 marked a time of celebration of a joint venture between town and gown which has given pleasure and interest to many, with the publication of the 7th pamphlet of the Bristol Branch of the Historical Association, under the continuing editorship of Emeritus Professor Paddy McGrath.
Contributors are not confined to University historians, however.
Parts of the University as diverse as History of Art, English, Sociology, Medicine, Continuing Education and the Information Office have produced authors following their fascinations with the rich history of the city of Bristol, as well as respected local historians such as the archaeologist Leslie Grinsell, and former City Archivist Elizabeth Ralph.
Transport, energy provision, religion, law and order, race relations, entertainment, continuity and change — the 75 pamphlets so far published offer fascinating perspectives on the evolution of the city.
Don Carleton's work on the lost Prince's Theatre brought happy memories to many of the older generation who remembered it as a magical place of childhood.
Rohit Barot's pamphlet,Bristol and the Indian Independence Movement , has a particular contemporary relevance as there is currently a campaign among the Indian community in the city for a statue to be erected to the remarkable Indian reformer, Raja Rammoham Roy, who died in Bristol in 1833.
Those who are enraged by the state of disrepair of Bristol's streets may derive a cold comfort from reading in Elizabeth Ralph's pamphlet,The Streets of Bristol , that things were just as bad in the Middle Ages and that by the end of the 18th century the roads to Bristol were a lot better than the roads in it.
Another in the series which will help the modern reader keep things in perspective is Susan Thomas on the Bristol Riots, which shocked the nation in 1831, caused massive destruction in the city centre, in comparison with which the St Paul's riots (never as bad as the press would make out) look like a tea party.
By 1831 political rioting was, it seems, something of a popular sport.
Nowadays, of course, there is football, but unpopular town councillors ought perhaps to demand a reprint of this pamphlet and beware.
Perhaps after considering the slave trade, religious oppression, or even just the growth of Bristol as a great commercial city, the armchair historian would be happy to settle down with Anne Crawford on Bristol and the Wine Trade and reflect that not all the vices on which Bristol is founded are entirely a bad thing.
Hilary Deighton
Those old Goldney Blues
Janice Stephens suggests starting an antique collection with Bristol connections
Thomas Goldney III, in whose house and garden several generations of Bristol students have now lived, was described in the late 18th century as ‘a very curious gentleman’.
The Earl of Hyndford had been sent a box of earth from the ‘innermost parts of the Cherokee nation’.
He thought it might be of use to the ‘curious’ Mr Goldney in the making of porcelain.
Goldney, for reasons we do not know, declined the offer of the Cherokee earth and it therefore fell to Cookworthy and Champion to perfect the porcelain known as ‘Bristol China’.
But another Thomas Goldney, the fifth of that name and grand nephew of Goldney III, did subsequently enter the trade.
In 1836 he went into partnership with John D. Pountney to make pottery.
Although Pountney's firm claimed an ancestry dating back to 1652 it can only be accurately traced to 1786 when premises at Temple Back (9 Water Lane) were run by one Joseph Ring.
Ring was killed by falling masonry in 1788 and the firm changed its name several times thereafter.
It became Ring, Taylor and Carter, then Elizabeth Ring and Co, and then Pountney and Allies.
When Edward Allies retired in 1835, Thomas Goldney joined.
Between 1836 and 1850 the firm was called Pountney and Goldney.
The earthenwares it produced were marked in several ways.
Form 1836 to 1849 they carried an impressed mark, ‘Bristol Pottery’.
The firm also adopted, with appropriate changes, the horseshoeshaped emblem with an enclosed cross used by Pountney and Allies.
With the retirement of Thomas Goldney the firm reverted for a time to Pountney and Co, and eventually became known simply as the Bristol Pottery until its cessation in the 1960s.
The most famous work of the Goldney era, the memorable series of blue and white platters and dinner services produced celebrating the beauties of the Bristol landscape, was a continuation of a series first introduced by Pountney and Allies.
Marked on the back ‘Bristol Views’, these delightful transfer printed pictures were based on the work of late 18th- and early 19th-century painters such as F. Nicholson.
Because the style ‘Pountney and Goldney’ lasted only a few years, and because the scenes depicted are still very attractive, good examples, without chips, cracks or staining and with the recognised mark, often fetch high prices at auction.
At Aldridges of Bath recently, for example, auctioneers and saleroom alike were astonished when a Pountney and Allies meat plate, showing a view of Hotwells with the Irish packet St Patrick sailing up the river, sold for £1,600.
But other more reasonably priced ‘Bristol Views’ plates can still be found in antique shops, at fairs and even, with luck, at car boot sales.
They are eminently collectable, and a pleasant way to remember Bristol, even if you weren't in Goldney Hall.
‘Curious’, after all, meant ‘investigative’ when the Earl of Hyndford used it of Thomas Goldney III, and that is what universities are meant to be about.
Pountney and Allies: The St Patrick packet sailing up past Hotwells
Top: Pountney and Goldney: the Avon Gorge
How can I weigh my head?
Universities are commonly asked odd questions, such as why bananas are yellow, how hedgehogs mate, and why water goes in the direction it does down the plughole.
Peter Green describes his intervention in one recent matter of urgent public controversy.
This question appeared in June in The Guardian 's ‘Notes and Queries’ column, a swap shop for questions about origins of proverbs, obscure Hollywood movies and scientific curiosities.
It briefly attracted my attention, but I soon returned to the more intellectual business of marking exam scripts.
What really provoked my interest was the publication the following week of two purported solutions.
Now I realise that millions of people do not read The Guardian , or missed that column on that day, or were not interested in the question.
Some who were interested might have been unable to think of a method.
But how was it possible for two different people who clearly knew some basic mechanical principles to have a go and produce answers that were nonsense?
One tried to use Archimedes' flotation principle (weight of water displaced = weight of body).
He went adrift by imagining that you could float in water head up and then duck your head under, thus displacing an extra quantity of water, which could be measured.
(Of course your weight wouldn't change, so neither could the amount of displaced water; an arm or leg would have to stick up instead.)
The other dealt with weights and seesaws, but forget that balance on a seesaw is governed by weight multiplied by distance from the pivot: in fact for a rigid body the entire weight might as well be concentrated at the body's centre of gravity, so there's no way of discriminating head weight from body weight like this.
I felt these elementary slips should be corrected, and came up with a possible solution.
Because of the point I've just made, if you want to use a balancing method, you have to move your head, and take before and after readings.
So, lie flat on your back over the pivot on a seesaw, and arrange yourself so that it balances.
If you bend your head forward onto your chest, the seesaw will tilt and you must shuffle along the board to restore the balance.
Divide the amount you have to shuffle by the horizontal distance you had previously moved your head: this ratio gives the weight of your head as a fraction of your whole body weight.
It won't be very accurate in practice, because of difficulty in measuring the distances accurately, but at least it's right.
So I faxed this in to The Guardian , and they duly printed it, but any thought that this small contribution to knowledge settled the matter was dispelled the following week, when another completely bogus answer was printed?
Who are these erratic amateur scientists?
I'm worried that they might be school maths teachers; but the really terrifying prospect is that they might be designers of ships or bridges.
m = horizontal movement of head s = amount of shuffle to restore balance 