

Essex by the Sea
Dovercourt in the thirties was an Essex coastal village favoured as a retirement home for those who enjoyed stiff breezes and bracing walks.
From the seafront up to a mile inland was an uninterrupted expanse of tall grass and fern, the delight of ramblers.
In the wet months it could turn into a quagmire.
Billy Butlin was not much interested in winter conditions.
What he wanted was wide open spaces that could be converted to one of his new-style holiday camps, offering bargain, trouble-free holidays for the whole family.
At Butlin's everything was laid on.
Mum and Dad could relax knowing that the children were being looked after, that someone else was cooking the meals and that every evening would bring some form of entertainment.
And all for a price that at an ordinary hotel would barely cover the cost of bed and breakfast.
Butlin knew that the leisure industry was about to be revolutionised by a law forcing employers to give their workers holiday with pay.
The millions who would soon be looking for somewhere to spend their hard-earned break were his natural customers.
He set about looking for new sites.
Dovercourt was ideal.
The land was cheap and there was plenty of it, room for an amusement centre and communal dining hall, children's play areas between the fir trees and lines of tiny chalets  fronted by pebble-dash walls and mock Tudor porches, copies of the latest fashion in middle-class suburbia.
The hint of quality did not allow for heating and surface drainage, but neither were strictly essential in the summer months.
Dovercourt had just one season as a holiday camp before it was taken over by the RCM as short-term accommodation for refugee children.
With Harwich and the docks at Parkeston Quay not more than two miles away, and a direct rail line to London, it would have been hard to think of anywhere more convenient for the RCM to set up a distribution centre.
When the first Kindertransport arrived at Dovercourt, it was cold but dry.
The children's immediate reaction was a sense of relief at having arrived somewhere.
Then there was the excitement of finding out about this strange miniature town with its open view of the North Sea over the mud flats.
Celia Lee's first impression of Dovercourt was roses.
‘I couldn't believe it: roses in wintertime!
It made a strong impact on me.
What a beautiful country.’
Others remember the green of the countryside.
‘The first question they asked,’ reported a voluntary worker, ‘was, ‘May we go on the grass?’.
They were astonished when we said ‘Yes’ Everyone remembers the holiday chalets —‘our little houses’as they were soon to be called.
In the way children have of promoting the incidental to matters of vital importance, settling in was a flurry of inconsequential activity.
When Johnny Blunt was given his pocket money, he immediately went off and bought a tin of pineapple.
There was curiosity and wonderment at those features of life that went unremarked by the natives but to foreigners were so eccentric, and so quintessentially British, like porridge and kippers for breakfast, ‘a peculiar liquid which looked like coffee, tasted like poison and was said to be tea’, and bottles of HP Sauce and vinegar on the dining table.
Outside, men in wellingtons excited comment, though it was not long before everyone appreciated the value of waterproof boots.
Those from middle-class homes, the great majority, were puzzled by the lack of double glazing and by  the custom of shooting loads of coal into iron stoves which sent most of the heat up the chimney.
In the chalets, stone hot-water bottles were a puzzle; so too were blankets (‘I had always associated them with picnics, holidays and Wild West stories’), and English toilet paper, ‘hard and shiny’.
The new experience everyone enjoyed was eating bananas and it was a great disappointment when the supply stopped short at the beginning of the war.
The greatest deprivation was German sausage, made more intense for one boy who had brought a whole salami all the way from Vienna only to have it thrown away by a Dovercourt helper ‘because it didn't smell right’.
A reporter from the Jewish Chronicle visiting Dovercourt a week after the arrival of the first Kindertransport had nothing but praise for the RCM.
But it did not take a sharp journalistic instinct to realise that for refugees — particularly young refugees — life could never be that simple.
In the weeks ahead the loneliness would intensify, but in the early days there was too much happening to keep homesickness at bay.
A stream of visitors turned up at the camp.
J. S. Homes, the National Liberal MP for Harwich, made an early visit, closely followed by the mayor who arranged for the town band to give a concert.
The chief rabbi made two visits, the first to distribute his Book of Jewish Thought , the second to plant a commemorative tree.
For Celia Lee the excitement of meeting new people soon wore off.
She recorded her impressions of Dovercourt in 1941 when she was still only fourteen.
For the first time in its history, Dovercourt was news.
Though some newspapers like the Mail and the Express harped on the theme of ‘charity begins at home’, the general line was to stress the potential benefits of taking in such ‘lively, sturdily-built and intelligent’ children.
Picture Post thought the young refugees would be a credit to Britain:
What their parents would have made of this is another matter.
Of all the journalists who made the pilgrimage to Dovercourt, the team from the BBC caused the greatest excitement.
Radio was still something special and the idea of putting out a half-hour programme on the young refugees — to be called Children in Flight -was a great public relations coup for the RCM.
The word from Woburn House was that everybody should cooperate with all the enthusiasm they could muster.
For a week, producer Robert Kemp had free run of the camp, interviewing whoever he chose for as long as he chose.
The result is the single most comprehensive account of the early days at Dovercourt.
This is not to say that it was wholly accurate.
The style of B BC Radio was to report but not to offend.
The editing of the draft script reveals an overwhelming urge to remove any hint of criticism of the administration and to avoid other possibly contentious errors, like education and employment.
Where the programme is most revealing is in its assumption that the proper way of handling young refugees was to treat them as if they were entrants to a minor public school.
The doctor set the tone:
The contributions from the children suggest cheerful acquiescence in a slightly dotty game, though doubtless this mood was created largely by careful rehearsal.
Their chief spokesman was Leslie Brent, who was chosen for his grasp of English.
The words came over clearly but cautiously:
Leslie Brent was denied his ambition to be a cook.
Instead, he became a professor of immunology but says that he still enjoys cooking.
One line of his broadcast —‘Now it is very cold and we cannot stay in our house’— hints at a crisis that nearly closed Dovercourt and did result in the evacuation of Pakefield, the overspill camp near Lowestoft.
Around Christmas the cold became so intense that children slept in their sweaters or coats.
‘Four of us shared a double bed,’ recalls Margot Barnes.
‘When one said ‘turn’ we all turned.’
There were nights when stone hot-water bottles left out on the floor froze solid.
Top blankets were nearly always damp.
In the early morning, waking up to a fierce easterly wind and a leaden sea, the children gathered in the dining room to find snow fluttering through the rafters and piling up over the breakfast plates.
It was too much for the older boys, who had the bright  idea of purloining some old electric heaters from the stores.
But when they were switched on they blew the main fuses, which deprived them of lighting for the day and taught them why they had to rely on coal fires.
Erich Duchinsky, a Youth Allyah worker at Pakefield and Dovercourt, encouraged his youngsters to keep on the move.
‘You could not stand still for a moment.
Running about and trying to organise energetic games was my total preoccupation.’
Those who were too tired to move and still felt cold took themselves off for a hot bath.
In the last weeks of December, Pakefield had to be evacuated.
Two hundred and fifty children were moved to St Felix's Girls School in Southwold, where the staff gave up their holiday to help look after their guests.
The luxury of single cubicles and warm beds lasted until the end of the first week in January when the regular boarders returned.
Then it was back to Lowestoft and a new set of problems.
After the snow came the rain.
One night the water in the gullies flooded over into the chalets.
Children were carried shoulder-high to the road, where a bus took them to a seafront hotel.
They spent the night sleeping on the ballroom floor.
After that it was boys only at Pakefield.
The girls went to Dovercourt.
Not that conditions there were very much better.
The chalets on the lower ground nearest the beach were liable to flood and more than once young children had to be lifted from their beds in the middle of the night.
On these occasions a dormitory was improvised in the dining room.
Early in the New Year, Anna Essinger, the doughty headmistress of Bunce Court, was asked by Norman Bentwich to take charge of the welfare and education of all children at Dovercourt and Pakefield.
Having emigrated from Germany with most of her school some five years earlier, she and her team of staff and older children knew a thing or two about the traumas of young people settling in a strange country.
It was impossible not to notice Anna Essinger.
She was tall and imposing, but in a rather distant way; her formidable look was emphasised by dark glasses.
But the personality belied the appearance.
She got on with children and dedicated herself to their wellbeing.
Anna Essinger did not like what she found at Dovercourt.
She thought the domestic arrangements were too primitive  and the facilities for education, particularly language training, at best inadequate.
One of her immediate problems was overcrowding.
Dovercourt was designed for at most 500 residents but was providing for up to twice as many.
Those children leaving the camp to go to foster parents (about one hundred in December) were vastly outnumbered by new arrivals.
The sheer volume of young people clamouring for attention frustrated Anna Essinger in her ambition, which was to recreate the spirit of Bunce Court by the sea.
But she did try.
From her own school she enlisted five teachers she could ill afford and ten senior boys and girls.
Then the call went out for teaching assistants.
Train fares and free board and lodging were offered, plus pocket money ‘where necessary’, but this was never more than a pound a week.
Undergraduates on Christmas vacation were the biggest group of helpers, but their colleagues were attracted from a wide catchment of background and experience.
Vera Tann's husband Fred was a railway shipping clerk at Parkeston Quay continental office.
When he told her about the children at Dovercourt she and a friend went along to help in teaching English.
A volunteer who had lately returned from China where she had seen another aspect of the refugee problem spent her first evening at Dovercourt simply observing the children.
She forgot to mention the noise.
Everybody else remembers the uproar in what was known grandly as the palm Court, the former bar and dance hall where during the day several lessons were held simultaneously, including at least one assault on the piano.
Classes gathered round the pipe stoves which gave out a strong smell of soot.
There was great fun learning English songs: ‘Tipperary’; ‘Underneath the Spreading Chestnut Tree’; ‘Daisy, Daisy’ and the ‘Lambeth Walk’— simple, rousing tunes to which new and more appropriate lyrics would be added.
But singing songs and letter writing, though powerful antidotes to homesickness, did not amount to a decent education, as Anna Essinger was well aware.
Writing in 1941, Walter Friedmann, who taught at Dovercourt, regretted 
That luck played a big part in the distribution of favours at Dovercourt is confirmed by Anna Saville.
Children in Flight was broadcast on the evening of 3 January 1939.
Gladys Rushbrook heard the programme at her home in Leigh-on-Sea.
Her husband had just finished the day's work at his butcher's shop and they were settling down to supper.
One of the boys was Ernest Jacob.
There was a happy ending.
Ernest Jacob's parents did get out of Germany, just four weeks before the outbreak of war.
But if the Rushbrooks had not encouraged a father to visit a sick son, it would have turned out differently.
Another of the boys was Herbert Rothschild.
Mrs Rushbrook resumes the story:
After Children in Flight , parcels of food and clothing started arriving at Dovercourt.
There were shoes and coats from Marks and Spencer, the National Sporting Club sent a pair of boxing gloves and an Essex butcher provided beef sausages for all, once a week.
Free tickets at the Harwich Electric Cinema provided a welcome diversion from camp routine, not to mention a painless method of learning English.
News of Dovercourt travelled abroad.
One day a trunk-load of winter woollens turned up, a gift from Johannesburg where a news item in the local paper had inspired a ladies' circle to start knitting.
But however welcome, such generosity did not help solve the central problem which was to find suitable homes for the children.
Every Sunday, prospective foster parents gathered at Dovercourt to view the inmates.
It was a ritual that distressed Anna Essinger and her staff but, given the pressure to move the children out of the camp so that others could take their places, nobody was able to come up with a better alternative to what was known as ‘the market’.
Sunday was the day for looking smart.
For three hours in the morning the dining room became a barber's shop, with a queue  of youngsters waiting for their short back and sides.
Baths were mandatory and not just a lazy soaking but a good scrubbing with carbolic soap.
Then the best clothes were chosen, none of them the height of fashion nor even necessarily a good fit, but neat, tidy and clean.
The adults were told to arrive when the children were having lunch.
That way, by walking between the long tables as if on a tour of inspection, they could view the prospects without embarrassment.
Anyway, that was the theory.
In reality, adults and children usually ended up furtively edging round each other, anxious trying to detect matching personalities.
Leslie Brent was in Dovercourt for three weeks before going to Bunce Court, a happy chance which put him into the most favoured category of child refugees.
In the evening, the names of those who had been picked from the line-up were read out over the camp tannoy.
The children were apprehensive, none more so than the newcomers who were still struggling with their English and were generally mystified by events.
When Zita Hirschhorn heard her name, so little acquainted was she with all that was going on, she cried out: ‘Ich bin verkauft ’(‘I am sold’).
The greatest sadness was the children who felt unwanted.
These were not necessarily the shy or reserved ones, who were quite likely to be snapped up by ‘parents’ who were looking for a quiet life.
But a child who was unusual in some way — a thin, undernourished-looking boy, for example, or a large, overnourished-looking girl — were liable to feel the pain of rejection.
As a group, the older ones were the most difficult to place — because, inevitably, they were the most difficult to manage.
It was said that these teenagers were easily offended.
But who could blame them?
Exiled from their own country for no reason, they developed keen antennae for any insult, actual or implied.
They resented stern reminders not to speak German, to be polite and always, always to be grateful.
Stuck in Dovercourt with little prospect of continuing their education or of fulfilling their parents' ambitions, they did not see what they had to be grateful for.
Perhaps it would have been better for them if they had gone straight to hostels or agricultural training camps.
This was certainly the view of Youth Allyah workers like Erich Duchinsky.
He argued that teenagers were wasting their opportunities at Dovercourt, keeping the futile hope alive that they would be adopted by rich families and lead a fine life, when they could have been using their time to constructive purpose.
Why then did the RCM insist on fostering as the only way of emptying Dovercourt and Pakefield?
A report circulated in the spring of 1939 admitted that the camps ‘became slave markets where people with the best intentions in the world went to help one child, yet unconsciously did harm to many by looking them over and rejecting them’.
But the report concluded: ‘There was good reason for the Movement not to follow the example of the continent (where hostels were the rule) for France and Germany are definitely clearing stations.
It would not profit the children there greatly to learn the culture of those countries when in a few months they would have to go overseas.
Yet the case is different with the children in England, for when they emigrate, the vast majority will go to English-speaking countries, and they will have profited from the intimate contact they had with the English life and language.’
As it happened, re-emigration was a non-starter, but it remained government policy and, until the war, it was seen as the only long-term solution to the refugee problem.
The other question that needs answering is why the RCM did not take more care in choosing foster parents.
As many children were soon to discover, being taken into a family was no guarantee of happiness.
But the RCM was working against the clock with little in the way of professional back-up.
As one organiser put it:
The longer the older teenagers remained at Dovercourt, the more dissatisfied they became and the more difficult to control.
Anna Essinger tried to keep discipline by appointing group leaders, but responsibility did not rest easily on youngsters who were preoccupied by their own future, or apparent lack of it.
Formal discipline gave way to the survival of the strongest.
Not surprisingly, the younger ones associated the bullies with the violence they had encountered at home:
There was no evidence of this, but it is clear that old rivalries were used as an excuse for fights.
As one who did get into quite a few scrapes, Henry Schwartz admits that the Viennese and Berliners divided into rival camps, but thinks that the seriousness of the fighting was overstated.
At the time, it was anything but silly.
Fears of serious outbreaks of violence were real enough, as too were the risks of public reaction against the Kindertransporte if stories of indiscipline got out.
Those who had to keep order had no power of retribution, except the withdrawal of minor privileges.
All they could do was plead for commonsense or, in desperation, threaten a stern lecture from Anna Essinger, a device which usually succeeded when all else had failed.
Youngsters falling out was one thing, but just as worrying were reports that some of the more mature boys and girls were getting on with each other just a little too well.
Like other teachers at Dovercourt, Howard Franks was under orders to curb the romantic inclinations of their wards.
The nearest Dovercourt came to real scandal was when some of the boys discovered the red light district of Harwich.
Ironically, it happened when a party was staying at the Salvation Army Sailors' Hostel for a fortnight before going on to Dovercourt, at the kind invitation of Major and Mrs Parker.
In the evening, some of Major and Mrs Parker's guests wandered off into town.
The incident came at an awkward time, preceding by a few days a visit by the Chief Rabbi.
Fortunately, he was diverted from any inquiry into the sexual morals of the camp by a report that boys were playing football on the Sabbath.
A reasonable defence might have been that field sports were preferable to roaming the docks  but, instead, the chief rabbi was assured that the boys needed the exercise.
He was not convinced:
Rabbi Hertz had his way.
Dovercourt ended its days as a refugee centre in March 1939 when there were less than a hundred, mostly older boys, still in occupation.
The orthodox boys went to a hostel at Westgate (closed at the end of 1939) and the non-orthodox to Barham House, just outside Ipswich, which soon became an agricultural training centre.
For a short time, Dovercourt was restored to its original function, but in 1942 it was requisitioned as a prisoner-of-war camp.
It was another five years before the holiday-makers returned.
Today, a few of the ticky tacky chalets occupied by the refugee children can still be seen.
Until recently they were the location for the television series Hi Di Hi .
But the days of Dovercourt holiday camp are numbered.
There is a plan to clear the site to make way for a spanking new conference centre.
No doubt every comfort will be laid on, though, in winter, there will always be the sharp east wind to remind occupants of tougher days at Dovercourt.
The Price of Humanity
By Christmas 1938 the RCM was in desperate straits, though the staff were working too hard to realise it.
At the root of the crisis was a shortage of hard cash.
While demand for places on the Kindertransporte showed no signs of letting up —.
indeed, was beginning to increase at an alarming rate — the resources to meet the challenge were simply not to hand.
On 8 December, the former prime minister, Stanley Baldwin (Lord Baldwin), had made a successful radio appeal on behalf of refugees, ‘the victims…of an explosion of man's inhumanity to man’.
The broadcast was subsequently distributed on record at eight shillings a disk.
Christie's held a charity auction, and up and down the country the rotaries and women's institutes geared themselves for yet another season of money-raising fetes and flower shows.
The Baldwin Fund brought in some £500,000, but not all of this was for child refugees.
In fact, it was not until April 1939 that the RCM was given its allocation of £200,000.
By then, the critical decision had been taken to restrict the flow of refugee children into Britain.
Forced back on a policy of self help, the RCM soon discovered that the public responded best when appeals were made of behalf of specific projects — £40 to support one boy in a course of agricultural training, say, or £60 for a year's schooling.
The next step was to call for volunteers to act as foster parents, either  at their own expense or with the help of a small grant.
The campaign was got under way on 25 November when Lord Samuel delivered an emotional appeal to the British public to open their homes to refugee children.
The response was encouraging; over 500 offers came in, and though the inevitable, lengthy process of inspection deprived those on the early Kindertransporte of any immediate benefit, the principle of recruiting guarantors to act as foster parents was well and truly established.
Faith in the government as the banker of last resort was consistently misplaced.
Chamberlain's cabinet was obsessed by the fear that if taxpayers' money was used to shore up the refugee organisations, other countries, not least Germany, would be encouraged to hand on to Britain yet more of their unwanted citizens.
Accusations of defeatism were countered by the naive assumption that Sir Herbert Emerson, the League of Nation's high commissioner for refugees, who was based in London, had a trick or two up his sleeve.
The fact was that Sir Herbert was a desperately unhappy man.
He spent his time looking for a Jewish homeland that was not Palestine.
It was a hopeless task.
Ever more fanciful proposals were raised, discussed at enormous length and consigned to the reject file.
There was talk of setting up a Jewish state in Abyssinia, the Russians offered the Amur basin, as long as the population of the new republic was limited to 100,000 and several Latin American countries declared an interest in farmers who had a start capital of at least £500.
(Few European refugees qualified either by occupation or savings.)
Mexico welcomed single, able-bodied men, but they had to promise to marry local girls.
Much praised at the Evian conference for a bold offer to absorb up to 100,000 refugees, the Dominican Republic had closed its application list at 2000.
By November 1938 it had shortened to just twenty.
The best hope, decided Emerson, was British Guiana, which offered sub-tropical wide open spaces.
The trouble was it offered little else except tropical wide open spaces.
Essential services like housing and transport were not even on the drawing board.
Emerson was not deterred.
‘The prospects have been greatly improved,’ he reported breathlessly, ‘by the promise of the British government to provide the main roads if the stage of mass settlement is reached.’
If this was the likeliest prospect for a major resettlement, what  chance was there for the re-emigration of the Kindertransporte ?
As it happened, of the 5381 children who arrived in the first six months of 1939, only 113 re-emigrated, and most of those went to join their parents who had escaped Germany by other routes.
Yet, throughout, re-emigration remained the official policy.
Its place at the centre of government thinking was re-emphasised in April 1939 when the RCM was told that, henceforth, each guarantor would have to put up a deposit of £50 to support the cost of a child's re-emigration.
The order was supported, a trifle ingenuously, by a claim that the government was trying to broaden the scope of the RCM to take in more of the not so urgent cases.
But, of course, the £50 deposit, at a time when the annual wage was less than £500, was a powerful deterrent to all but the wealthiest families and remained so until the Baldwin Fund agreed to put up the money for children without guarantors or for foster parents who could not afford to pay.
The government was on stronger ground with the proposal to set up a coordinating committee to act as a channel of communication, mainly to the Home Office, for up to thirty organisations involved with refugees.
Lord Hanley, a bluff, no-nonsense administrator who had learned his trade as governor of the Punjab, was appointed chairman.
He had the unenviable task of trying to reconcile the disparate interests of, say, the RCM and the International Solidarity Fund, whose interpretation of their grand title was to resist all efforts to open up the labour market to non-nationals.
Still, there was some virtue for the RCM in having the chance to compare notes with like-minded bodies such as the Society of Friends and the Christian Council for Refugees, the latter a long-sought-after but, at times, bitterly contested amalgam of the Catholic Committee for Refugees from Germany and the Church of England Committee for non-Aryan Christians.
Between them, the Quakers and the Christian Council looked after about twenty per cent of those who came over on the Kindertransporte .
Often these children had no idea why they had been sent away.
They knew nothing of Judaism, did not feel Jewish, and yet had enough Jewish blood in them to make them somehow different from their former friends, if not quite enough for them to be welcomed unreservedly into the Jewish community.
They were to figure prominently among the more tragic case histories.
The experience of the coordinating committee, with its balance weighted towards non Jewish affairs, undoubtedly persuaded the RCM to adopt more of a non-denominational role in its refugee work.
Leading figures in the RCM like the Marchioness of Reading, who had been born into a Jewish family, converted to Christianity and had now converted back to Judaism; Elaine Blond, Sigmund Gestetner and Lola Hahn-Warburg quickly caught on to the message that the best chance of currying public favour was to play down the religious factor.
Malcolm Muggeridge was one of many observers of the political scene to note the ‘unmistakable tang’ of anti-Semitism in the air.
British Fascists were a small and divided minority, but not, it seems, without their influence.
Moreover, there was a powerful lobby of Jewish opinion in favour of putting adopted nationality before race and religion; indeed, this had been the keynote of Jewish immigration to Britain since the 1880s.
Assimilation implied a working partnership with the religious and social establishment.
For this reason there was no resistance when Lord Hailey urged the RCM to take on Sir Charles Stead, another old India hand, as executive director.
It was a post for which he was singularly unsuited and from which he removed himself or was gently pushed in September 1939, but, though he failed to hit it off with the central committee, he did bring to the organisation the stamp of institutional legitimacy.
After Stead's appointment, the RCM deliberately set out to become broad church.
A religious triumvirate was formed with a Catholic, Canon George Craven, and a Protestant, the Reverend William Simpson, elected to the central committee to join Rabbi Maurice Swift.
The next move was to find a chairman from the ranks of the  great and the good, someone of acknowledged independence who combined the qualities of Solomon and Job.
The choice fell on Lord Gorell, the son of an eminent judge who had inherited his title from his elder brother.
At 55 he could claim a distinguished record of philanthropic and public service which included setting up the Royal Army Education Corps.
As a cross-bencher in the House of Lords he had steered clear of party politics, but his writing and speeches put him firmly on the side of the underdog.
That he was not Jewish was seen as another point in his favour.
Endorsed by the central committee, the invitation to Gorell to head the RCM was sent by a roundabout but significant route:
A second, critical appointment was that of a professional to take charge of the administration.
Dorothy Hardisty did not actually take over from Sir Charles Stead as executive director until the outbreak of war, but by then she had already made her presence felt as an able and energetic deputy.
A widow of fifty-eight, Dorothy Hardisty had the great quality of adoring children, though her generosity of spirit did not extend to all adults.
For her, there was never any question of suffering fools gladly.
Her capacity for work can be judged by her later career.
When she retired from the RCM in 1948 she went on to run the Violet Melchet Infant Welfare Centre near Sloane Square, a job she held for the next twenty years.
One of her joys was taking the bus along the King's Road when that thoroughfare was the epitome of the swinging sixties.
At eighty-two, Dorothy Hardisty took her grandchildren to Battersea Fun Fair.
When they showed an interest in the water chute, she  decided it was too dangerous for them to go on it alone.
So she went with them and thought it was great fun.
The religious and cultural mix that was now characteristic of the RCM at national level showed too in the provincial committees which sprang up to recruit foster parents and organise hostel accommodation.
The first of these committees were in Manchester, Birmingham, Bristol, Cambridge and in South London (Battersea).
All of these began work in the same week as the first Kindertransporte were given the go-ahead.
That they managed to start up so speedily was largely thanks to local representatives of the Jewish Refugees Committee who simply doubled up for the RCM.
Cambridgeshire was the exception in that a child refugee group, led by Greta Burkill, had been active since 1933.
By September 1939, there were twelve regional committees and sixty-five area committees, the latter increasing to 175 by the end of the war.
In the early days, the chief burden of committee routine was inspecting likely homes for refugee children.
A list of suggested lines of enquiry was circulated by head office — What is the husband's, or breadwinner's work?
Is German spoken by anyone?
General views on bringing up child.
Is a maid kept?, and so on.
If the home was judged to be satisfactory, the prospective foster parent, or ‘befriender’ as the RCM preferred to call them, was given some reading matter to prepare for the day.
A pamphlet which achieved wide circulation was called Helpful Information and Guidance for Every Refugee .
Though intended primarily for adults, the advice held good for young refugees.
They were urged to learn English, to refrain from speaking or reading German, not to make themselves conspicuous by manners or dress, and to accept, without criticism, the way things were done in Britain.
‘The Englishman,’ they were told, ‘attaches very great importance to modesty, understatement in speech rather than overstatement…
He values good manners far more than he values the evidence of wealth.’
If the proposition is doubtful it is yet more evidence of the all-pervading influence of the public school ethic in refugee work.
The ideal counted for more than the reality.
The responsibilities of the regional and area committees increased in line with the numbers of refugee children needing care.
By mid-1939, in addition to finding places to live for children who  arrived without guarantors, the committees had delegated to them the twice-yearly inspection of homes, arrangements for schooling and vocational training, and the task of sorting out any difficulties over religious education.
Along with the spread of the RCM organisation across the country, the head office was put on a firmer footing with the purchase of Bloomsbury House, the former Palace Hotel just off London's Bedford Square.
The deal was put through by Lord Hailey on behalf of all the major refugee bodies.
At about the same time the aliens department of the Home Office took on extra staff and moved to Cleveland House on Thorney Street.
Bloomsbury House was Hailey's finest achievement.
At last there was room for a central bureau of information, which went a long way to reducing the confusion caused by overlapping responsibilities.
The offices were cramped and without essentials like typewriters which had to be shared.
Still, they were better than everything that had gone before.
In the first six months of 1939, the staff of the RCM at Bloomsbury House, mostly volunteers, fluctuated between sixty and seventy.
They dealt with something like 5000 letters a week and interviewed up to 500 petitioners on behalf of children still in Germany.
The visitors were herded into two large halls, which were once the hotel ballroom and dining room.
There they had to wait, often for hours at a stretch.
Tempers frayed with time.
‘If some of our visitors are somewhat lacking in restraint,’ noted an RCM report euphemistically, ‘it must be remembered that many are overwrought with anxiety.’
Perhaps this was an example of the famous English preference for ‘understatement in speech rather than overstatement…
’ The same talent came into play whenever the religious issue surfaced.
It was inevitable that the RCM commitment to accepting help from wherever it was offered would be seen by orthodox Jews as a betrayal and a challenge.
A counter-attack was only a matter of time.
It came in February 1939, when Harry Goodman, a dyspeptic character who worked alongside Rabbi Solomon Schonfeld on the Chief Rabbi's Religious Emergency Council (CRRE C), launched a bitter diatribe against the faint hearts of Bloomsbury House.
Goodman contended that the RCM was putting at risk the interests of the Jewish faith by its readiness to enlist help from the Christian community.
That gentile foster parents were liable to  imbue youngsters with their own values, however hard they tried to take a neutral line, was undeniable, but the alternative, to turn away children because there were not enough Jewish homes for them to go to, was rejected out of hand by the RCM's ruling council.
It was the beginning of a long-running feud which rumbled on throughout the war and beyond.
The RCM tried hard to play down the issue, arguing that all those working for refugees would achieve most if they cooperated.
But, uncompromising in their beliefs, the leaders of the CRREC chose to go their own way, negotiating directly with the Home Office for permits to bring over the children of strictly orthodox families.
These were fostered by other strictly orthodox families or sent to hostels in north London — the girls to Stamford Hill, the boys to Amhurst Park.
A happier relationship was forged between the RCM and Youth Allyah , though here again there was a clash of ideals.
For Youth Allyah , Zionism came before all, an article of faith expressed with terrifying force by David Ben-Gurion, Jewish leader in Palestine when the flow of refugee children was at its height.
Here spoke the man of destiny whose singleness of purpose overrode all other considerations.
The RCM had its Zionist sympathisers and there were those like Lola Hahn-Warburg who had a foot in both camps.
But at Bloomsbury House, the interest of the children took priority over any political cause, a philosophy which supported the family environment over other forms of upbringing.
For Youth Allyah , who were now sending over more children on transit visas, foster homes, even orthodox foster homes, could not inspire the full-blooded commitment to a pioneering life in Palestine.
While cooperating closely with the RCM, children brought over from Germany under Youth Allyah auspices surrendered home comforts for the spartan discipline of the barrack room in agricultural training camps like Whittingham House near Edinburgh and Great Engham Farm and Pine Trees in Kent.
Youth Allyah had a knack of bringing in the money.
What with Becky Sieff crusading the country and a succession of charity dinners and film and theatre premieres, close on £300,000 was raised in the first half of 1939.
A third of this came from a sixteen-day British tour by the Broadway singer and comedian Eddie Cantor.
Himself the child of Jewish refugees, Cantor insisted that all proceeds from his tour should go to a special fund to support the re-emigration of young Jewish refugees to Palestine.
But whatever money was raised, it was never enough.
In March 1939 Norman Bentwich, who more than most realised the desperate straits of the Austrian Jews, wrote to Josef Löwenherz in Vienna:
As competition for places on the Kindertransporte mounted to panic proportions, the chances of success turned increasingly on knowing the right people — an official who could hurry through an application or, more critically, someone in Britain who was willing to take on the financial responsibility of acting as a guarantor.
Having a close relative in Britain, even a recent arrival, was a huge advantage.
for example, an older sister found a sponsor for Gerta Jassem just two months after arriving in London to take up a job as a chambermaid.
For Nina Liebermann, solution was a chance acquaintance with a wealthy businessman.
With a mother who was active in B'nai B'rith , Anne Barth was offered a place on one of the early Kindertransporte , but her parents decided to hold back in the faint hope that conditions would improve.
By February 1939 they were reconciled to the inevitable.
The parting was less traumatic than some, however.
Anne left Germany in the expectation of seeing her family again before very long.
It was simply a matter of waiting for their visas to be approved.
Their patience was ill-rewarded.
When the visas did come through they were dated 5 September.
Just two days too late.
Much effort went into tracing remote family connections abroad on the off chance of identifying a benefactor.
Johnny Blunt's father worked his way through the sporting calendar:
Young mothers who had kept their looks had an obvious advantage when it came to extracting vital documents from unhelpful bureaucrats.
The more blatantly they were prepared to use their charm, the smoother was the way of escape.
Sometimes it was the children who forced the pace, pleading in all innocence to join their brothers, sisters, or friends who had somehow won this great distinction of a place on a Kindertransport .
But for all those like Thea Rudzinski who managed to blank out the significance of the journey there were more who shared with Helga Samuel the anticipation of worse to come.
In the early part of 1939 the Kindertransporte were nearly all from Vienna, where pressure on the Jews was at its most severe.
Then in February, attention switched back to Berlin.
Jewish sources attributed the sudden rush for places to the arrival in the city of Adolf Eichmann.
His orders were to apply the methods that had proved so successful in Vienna to mop up the surviving Jewish influence at the heart of the Reich .
Accordingly, leaders of the Jewish community were packed off to Vienna to receive first-hand information on organising mass emigration, though how anyone could think of forcing thousands of destitutes over the border —.
with a passage on a leaky tramp steamer to Shanghai or Trinidad as their only hope of salvation — as ‘organised emigration’ defied the imagination.
In any event, this latest tightening of the screw brought about a sharp increase in the number of Kindertransporte from Berlin and a change in the composition of the Kindertransporte from Berlin and Vienna.
The average age of child refugees fell dramatically.
As Wilfrid Israel noted, ‘Babies in their cradles and small children of the tenderest ages were handed over by their parents.’
But handed over to whom?
The few adults who were allowed to accompany the children had too many demands on them to act as full-time baby minders.
That role was assigned to older children, not always with their approval.
A despairing mother, spotting a thirteen-year-old boy seated by an open window, thrust her infant into his arms.
The train pulled out.
He looked after the little girl throughout the journey, everyone, including the Gestapo guards, assuming that it was his sister nestling in his lap.
He held on to his charge until he came off the boat at Harwich.
To this day, he wonders how she made out.
The Nazi-imposed rules for managing the Kindertransporte were made more restrictive in early 1939, presumably as an attempt to disguise from decent citizens what was being perpetrated in their name.
Lorraine Allard had only had four days' warning before leaving from Berlin:
Greater use was made of quiet suburban stations or of quieter platforms on the main stations; trains left at night and the number of family wellwishers come to say goodbye was restricted to one parent for each child.
The new rules were self-defeating.
To load up a Kindertransport in lonely isolation was to attract more, not less attention.
As for the limit on the number of adults allowed near the train, this merely served to intensify the emotional pressure and to cause more breakdowns.
Vera Coppard left Berlin in May 1939 when she was thirteen.
Vera went to a Quaker school in Cornwall and a short time later to school in Letchworth.
Meanwhile, her mother was arrested in Berlin:
She was followed by Vera's father who arrived on 1 September.
The support given to Vera Coppard and her family by the Quakers came at a point when the Jewish organisations in Berlin and Vienna were reduced almost to the point of impotence.
Many others had reason to be grateful to the Quakers for refusing to give up their mission to help refugees.
With her mother in prison, ten-year-old Angela Carpos was adrift in Vienna.
The ferry crews on regular service between Harwich and the Hook evidently took to their unexpected role as child minders.
David Mann was a steward on the S S Amsterdam :
To the children, uniformed crew represented the menace of state authority.
They could hardly bring themselves to believe that such people could behave politely.
Herbert Rothman still experiences a sense of wonder that ‘they apologised if they bumped into you’.
Harwich, too, is a source of happy memories, a favourite being the policeman who actually smiled.
‘It was then that I made up my mind that r would never leave England,’ declares Lotte Bray (Lowenstein).
‘A country where a policeman smiled had to be a good place to settle.’
There were the inevitable difficulties with English.
Johnny Blunt could say ‘Yes; no; door; window’, but he did better than Harold  Waterman (Hans Wasserman) who knew a complete sentence: ‘The gardener's in the garden.’
He waited thirty years to use it in conversation.
Equally inevitable were the moments of sadness, made more painful by their sheer incongruity.
‘I wrote a postcard to my parents,’ recalls Margaret Olmer; ‘I can't remember if I addressed it to both.
It still makes me feel guilty.’
Boat Train
The scene shifts to Liverpool Street.
Those from the Kindertransporte with homes to go to — belonging to relatives, friends or sponsors — or to hostels, did not pause at Dovercourt but went straight to London, to a central distribution point set up by the RCM to the rear of the station concourse.
Liverpool Street has changed enormously in recent years, but those who remember the taxi ramp leading into the station from the old Broad Street side will recognise immediately where the RCM set up shop.
It was in the large, dimly-lit room below and to the left of the ramp, one of those cheerless spaces which Victorian architects (or their clients) felt bound to utilise, as with the arches of urban railway viaducts which were originally blocked off to make cheap classrooms for council schools and are now occupied by small garages and furniture makers.
The Liverpool Street dungeon was known, incongruously, as the gymnasium, presumably in memory of its intended purpose, though it had long been used for general storage.
In preparation for the Kindertransporte , the room was cleared of boxes and other flotsam.
Close to the door, rows of slatted chairs were set out behind a rope barrier.
At the far end was hung a large tarpaulin.
A large handwritten notice was propped up by the door —Bürge bleibt hier (guarantors' seats here)— with an arrow pointing that way.
Behind the tarpaulin there were tables and chairs for the RCM workers, mostly, as an American journalist noticed, elegantly turned-out young ladies who looked ‘a good deal more like a junior league committee getting together to discuss a costume ball than officials waiting to sort out a trainload of Jewish refugee children’.
One of these smart socialites who belied her appearance was Elaine Blond (then Elaine Laski) who often went to Harwich to escort parties of children to London.
This impression was confirmed by a reporter from the New Yorker , one of the many journalists who turned up regularly at Liverpool Street in search of a heart-warming story.
Once into the reception hall where the children were ushered to seats, the process of identification began against a medley of shouted greetings and grievances.
Only the children with a smattering of English had any idea what was going on.
Pacified by what was now a familiar hand-out of a packet of sandwiches, some chocolate and an orange, many, like ten-year-old Angela Carpos, were bewildered.
When the claimant was a relative or friend, the first reaction after the hugs and kisses was to take hold of the label round the  child's neck, tear it off and throw it to the ground.
The gesture was entirely understandable.
With strangers the preliminaries were taken at a more gingerly pace.
Dorli and Lieserl Oppenheimer were met by the Lerskys, friends of their parents, a Palestinian photographer and his wife who appreciated the traumas the children were suffering.
Mrs Lersky reported back to Vienna on the day's events:
The last stage of the journey was the train north.
The Lerskys were soon to return to Palestine.
The arrangement was for Dorli and Lieserl to be looked after by a young Leeds couple, Theo and Tilly Hall, who had offered to take in refugee children.
It all seemed straightforward, but Mrs Lersky was up against a dilemma:
The memory that would always stay with the Lerskys was of the tiny Lieserl waddling along the platform.
Even when relatives were on hand, the first critical days could be horribly disorganised, as Kurt Weinburg can confirm:
Real fear came on those who thought they were abandoned.
Barely able to Speak English, adrift in a strange country, Nina  Liebermann could find no trace of Mrs Landers, from the West London Synagogue, who was supposed to be at the station.
This left the adults without children (‘possibly they had been taken off at the Dutch border; the SS guards liked to give a lasting impression of their authority’) and a few veterans of earlier Kindertransporte who returned to Liverpool Street — sometimes, like Martha Levy, three or four times a week, on the off chance of spotting friends from home.
It was invariably a wasted journey, though in her loneliness Martha always found some comfort in the sight of Jewish taxi drivers.
In Germany, they were not allowed access to the main stations.
In late October 1938, some 15,000 Jews of Polish extraction were taken from their homes in Germany and dumped across the Polish border.
Among them was ten-year-old Harry Katz.
This was one of the last Kindertransporte from Poland.
The first, carrying thirty-four boys and twenty girls, docked on 15 February.
It had started in Zbonszyn, a small town on the Polish border where 7000 deported Jews found refuge in stables and barns.
Marga Goren-Gothelf was one of the survivors.
The money for three Kindertransporte from Zbonszyn (154 children in all) came from the Polish Refugee Fund in Britain which raised £5000.
The RCM was not involved either as Sponsor or as provider of accommodation.
Nearly all the children went to orthodox hostels run independently of the Movement.
The last group of Zbonszyn children arrived on 29 August, three days before the outbreak of war.
Apart from the Society of Friends, there was no established organisation ready to come to the help of children under threat in Czechoslovakia.
The RCM held aloof for the same reason that it kept out of Poland — the resources did not stretch to additional responsibilities, or so it was argued.
Those who rejected the conventional view and took up the cause of Czechoslovakian children were largely outside the mainstream of refugee aid.
One such was Nicholas Winton, a young stockbroker set apart from his colleagues by his radical views.
Abandoning winter sports for the refugee camps, Nicholas Winton was quickly convinced that a German invasion of Czechoslovakia was imminent.
This made the plight of the refugees more desperate than anyone in London could imagine.
Winton duly threw himself into the muddled affairs of the British Committee for Refugees from Czechoslovakia, a group of diverse personalities whose good intentions far outstretched their capacity to offer constructive help.
He soon discovered that the Czechs were no better organised.
By this time, the British Committee had a boxroom office in Prague run by Quaker ladies and other volunteers from the British community.
As the queue of would-be emigrants handed in their names, Nicholas Winton spent every spare hour collecting guarantors and publicising his cause.
His principal allies were the Society of Friends, the Unitarian Church and Picture Post , the popular weekly magazine which published a series of articles on the Czech crisis.
When all that was lacking was someone to chaperone the Kindertransporte , Trevor Chadwick, a Latin teacher from Swanage, made a timely appearance.
Before his return to England, Chadwick made contact with Nicholas Winton.
He then went back to Prague to recruit the first Kindertransport to take to the air.
Twenty children were flown to Croydon, and ‘They were all cheerfully sick, enticed by the little paper bags, except a baby of one who slept peacefully in my lap the whole time.’
In March 1939, the German army marched into Prague.
Air lifts were now out of the question, but trains were still a practical proposition — as Chadwick discovered when he came to deal with the Nazi official in charge of emigration.
There was trouble over the adults and Chadwick had to grovel to earn approval for his second train transport.
Shulamith Amir was one of the passengers.
The arrival of this transport took refugee workers by surprise since none of the children had proper documentation.
When  essential papers had failed to come through to Prague, Chadwick had decided to cut corners by manufacturing a few of his own.
Convincing enough to persuade the Germans that London had kept to the bureaucratic niceties, the stamp of approval was secured and away went the train.
Chadwick anticipated a row but the Home Office telegram, threatening to send the children back, he refused to take seriously.
‘I figured the mob of legally accepted guarantors would stop that one.’
The British Committee was divided on the issue of cooperating with the Gestapo.
There were those who felt that Chadwick was too friendly with Kriminalrat Boemmelburg and his cohorts but, as Nicholas Winton points out, there were no advantages in antagonising the Germans.
Trevor Chadwick's unauthorised transport from Prague was not the only one to catch reception workers on the hop.
With weeks, sometimes months between the issue of travel documents and their actual use, frequent changes in timetabling and the inevitable delays on overworked railways and sea routes, predicting when and where a transport would arrive was about as reliable as betting on a roulette wheel.
In the spring of 1939 clashes between Germans and Poles in the so-called ‘free city’ of Danzig added another starting point to the already confused map of Kindertransporte routes.
Four transports carrying a total of 124 children came from Danzig, travelling by train via Berlin to the Hook where they joined up with other groups waiting to be ferried across to Harwich.
The muddle was such that the welcoming committee threw away their lists of expected arrivals and started from scratch.
There was less of a problem when individual benefactors like Lord Sainsbury, Jean Hoare (a cousin of Sir Samuel Hoare) and the Reverend Alan Bateman, provost of Coventry Cathedral, set up their own lines of communication, dealing directly with families who wanted to send their children over to Britain, as well as arranging travel and acting as guarantors.
Jean Hoare virtually  handed over her Bloomsbury flat to young refugees.
When Czechoslovakia was in terminal crisis she raised money from the Royal Institute of British Architects to bring back a planeload of children from Prague.
Towards the end, as the German hold on Prague tightened, the Kindertransporte were beset by bureaucratic delays.
Nicholas Winton identified the state travel agency as the source of the trouble.
On the outbreak of war, a transport of 180 children was left stranded in Prague.
They were commemorated by a note in the RCM annual report:
Cast in the unenviable role of responding to the ever more frequent appeals for help from Vienna, Norman Bentwich decided to see for himself what needed to be done.
He travelled in the second week of August 1939.
His report offered not a vestige of comfort.
The only hope was emigration.
But the quotas imposed by the United States and Britain — a thousand to each country — fell a long way short of Eichmann's target of clearing another 45,000 Jews from Vienna, at least a third of them children, within six  months.
The interview with Eichmann, which the Jewish community had struggled to arrange, failed to yield results.
Bentwich was told to go home and persuade his own government to do more.
On the Vienna and Berlin routes every transport had its smattering of adult supervisors, who had to sign a pledge to return immediately they had handed over their charges to the RCM.
Failure to do so would have put at risk all future Kindertransporte and, though in the last weeks of the peace the temptation to stay on in Britain must have been great, the escorts always did their best to get back.
They were mostly recruited from one of the youth movements, or were teachers or social workers with a readiness to handle any problem thrown at them.
A common experience was suffering the unwelcome attention of Gestapo guards who were inclined to lift items of value (sentimental as much as practical) or to vandalise luggage.
When the intimidation became unbearable, as at Bentheim on the German-Dutch border, the route was abandoned in favour of a Belgian crossing at Herbesthal, but usually there was little that could be done except to comfort the children and to urge calm.
Lotte Freedman's husband Freddie accompanied several Transport .
Newly married, the Freedmans were able to obtain exit visas for themselves.
They spent much of the war running a hostel in North Kensington.
‘We had forty boys aged fourteen to eighteen.
I could barely boil an egg.
But I learned.’
The principle of learning by doing was familiar to all supervisors, not least Käthe Fischel from Prague, one of the youngsters who was sufficiently self-possessed to be recruited for nursery chores.
Another young helper holds a particular memory of a little girl with brown eyes.
Twenty-two years on, a social worker was on duty with a new colleague.
‘There was something vaguely familiar about her; she had lovely brown eyes…’
The adult supervisors really came into their own in negotiations with British customs.
Everyone knew that the rules were being stretched, but it took a skilled operator to persuade an official to ignore evidence that was blatantly paraded before him.
Norbert Wollheim was a master of the craft.
On another flying visit, Norbert Wollheim found that one of his charges was over the age limit.
On rare occasions a parent would act as chaperone.
Ruth Michaelis and her brother were taken by their mother ‘all the way to our first foster family, a rector and his wife in Kent, and then she went back to Germany’.
There was some Jewellery in their luggage and, to put the Gestapo off the scent, Ruth aged four years one month, was urged to carry a large, overdressed doll.
The only complete family to come over on a Kindertransport was the Alperns — Leo and Adele and their children Heinrich, Anita, Sonja and Irena.
They came from Freiburg, where Leo was a credit draper.
Like other Polish Jews, he was arrested in October 1938, but Adele and the four children ended up at Zbonszyn.
Three months later the three older children were told they could go to Britain.
A week after they left to join a transport at Warsaw, permission came through for their parents to follow them ‘for domestic service’.
By sheer coincidence the family was reunited on the boat train and sailed together, on the Warszawa , which docked at Cotton Wharf near London Bridge on 15 February 1939.
Having made it, that family was split up for more than a year, but was reunited after the Blitz and eventually settled in Torquay.
In the last month before war was declared, families who were still on the waiting list for places on the Kindertransporte , but knew they had little chance of moving up the queue, took to waiting at the main rail stations, watching and hoping.
Seven-year-old Sonia Altman had a guarantor in  Middlesbrough but, having missed one transport date because she had to have her tonsils out, there seemed little prospect of an early escape from Vienna.
At Leipzig, Betty Israel saw a baby handed up through a carriage window.
‘The thoughts and feelings of that poor mother, giving over that tiny tot to a complete stranger, still haunt me today.’
The responsibility every Kindertransporte worker wanted to avoid was a last-minute decision on numbers.
With the demand for places on the Kindertransporte shooting far ahead of the capacity of the RCM to provide guarantors, disappointments were inevitable.
But that did not make it any easier to break the news.
Philip Urbach was on a transport that was supposed to leave in mid-August.
It was the second last transport to leave Berlin.
Rudolf Melitz was on board.
When they walked off the boat at Harwich, they saw a news hoarding with ‘ultimatum’ in large letters.
Philip Urbach was encouraged by a German-sounding word (‘Maybe English wasn't so difficult after all’), without realising that it meant war over Poland.
The last of the pre-war Kindertransporte left Berlin on 31 August.
It was a close-run thing.
Just hours before the train was scheduled to depart a call came through to the Youth Allyah office in London, warning that the transport was about to be cancelled.
The imminence of war had compelled the Dutch to close the border, which meant that the train would be stuck in Germany.
It was pointless even to start the journey.
Intense lobbying of the Dutch authorities forced a concession.
The train would be allowed to cross the border if there was an absolute assurance that the children would be taken on to Britain.
The promise was delivered and the train left on time, though with fewer children than expected.
There were places for sixty-six passengers, thirty-one with Youth Allyah and thirty-five with the RCM, but as the train was boarding the total was cut to sixty.
The youngest were left behind.
Waiting at the border was the irrepressible Gertrude Wijsmüller with a bus she had managed to commandeer.
She had been less fortunate with the driver, who was not at all sure of the route to the Hook and had to rely on friendly passers-by to give directions.
But they made it to the boat, which sailed in the early hours of 1 September, two days before war was declared.
Any lingering hopes of bringing more children out of Germany were finally stifled by a Home Office ruling that refugees from enemy territories would no longer be allowed entry under any circumstances.
This left open the possibility of further Kindertransporte from countries threatened by Germany, but in the first months of the war no one was willing to engage in such defeatist speculation.
In fact, it was not until the German army invaded Holland on lo May 1940, that any action was taken on behalf of the 26,000 non-Dutch Jews who were sheltering in and around Amsterdam.
On 11 May, an order went out for German refugees to remain in their houses.
Three days later, the head of the Jewish community was told that a boat was docked at Yjmuiden, ready to take any Jews who wanted to go to England.
It was a case of  first come, first served.
The office of the Jewish Refugee Committee was soon overflowing with eager claimants for places on the boat.
One of the more persuasive was Gertrude Wijsmüller, not on her own behalf, but for the Burger-Weeshuis, a hostel which accommodated some seventy-five children.
She promised to make all the arrangements, including the hiring of as many buses as she could find.
One o'clock was agreed as the deadline when Mrs Wijsmüller and another refugee worker, Gertrud van Tijn, were to meet at the American Hotel to decide on their next move.
When the time came there was not much doubt as to what they should do.
When the buses were all on their way, Gertrude van Tijn followed in her car.
One of Mrs Wijsmüller's passengers was Ilse Wertheimer.
She related her experiences to a BBC radio reporter in September 1940.
The S S Bodegraven was an elderly steam freighter, serviceable for short hauls but not built for military action.
Fortunately for the young refugees, there was much to divert them from the risk they were taking.
Ya'acov Friedler recalls the scene:
By now the two Gertrudes, Wijsmüller and van Tijn, were on their way back to Amsterdam.
Meanwhile, the Bodegraven was having a hard time trying to dear Dutch waters.
All this time the children were crowded on deck.
It had been assumed that, because the journey would only take a few hours, it was better to be in the open air than in the dark and unventilated cargo holds.
But when at last the planes turned away and headed for land, the order was given for all passengers to get below.
There was one more attack to come, not from German planes but from British gunners.
Thrown off course in dense fog, the Bodegraven drifted south towards the Kent coast, where it was spotted by a local defence unit.
At the sound of gunfire the refugee ship turned away and made off round the southern counties and up towards Liverpool, where it was finally recognised as a friendly vessel.
The Bodegraven docked to a hero's welcome.
When asked how they had managed to escape, the younger children chanted ‘Mrs Wijsmüller, Mrs Wijsmüller’.
There was not much else they could say that was understandable in English.
Immigration formalities were waived and the passengers from the very last Kindertransport were taken in by the Manchester branch of the RC M. Two hostels were opened for the group henceforth known as the ‘Amsterdam children’.
Between December 1938 and September 1939, the RCM brought over 9354 refugee children.
Of these 7482 were Jewish.
Adding to these the 431 children sponsored by Inter-Aid in the months before Kristallnacht , the 700 or so who came to Britain under the auspices of Youth Allyah , the 100 orthodox children rescued by Rabbi Schonfeld and the Union of Orthodox Hebrew Congregations, and the Polish and Czech refugees saved by Nicholas Winton and his friends, brings the total to well over 10,000.
By the end of 1939 only 331 of these children had re-emigrated, either to join their parents or relatives mostly in Palestine or the United States.
More would have gone if there had been money to pay for their fares.
But the RCM could barely cover its existing commitments while American refugee groups, though  ready in principle to advance funds, were prevented by immigration law from subsidising transportation costs.
The best that was on offer from the National Refugee Service in New York was cooperation to ‘get in touch with American relatives and affiants and attempting to secure the steamship fare, or as much of it as possible, from them’.
So small was the number of beneficiaries, they were outnumbered in the war years by those children who joined the RCM ranks having turned up in Britain by long and roundabout escape routes.
In 1943, there were several arrivals from Scandinavia including Wilhelm Flehner, born in Vienna, who had escaped from Norway over into neutral Sweden.
His parents had sent him to Oslo immediately after Hitler's annexation of Austria, when he was only nine.
Soon afterwards his mother and sister came to Britain.
Five years on, with the Nazis extending their anti-Semitic reach, Willi's guardian, a Russian Jewess who looked after several refugee children, decided it was time for a mountain trek to more hospitable territory.
They did it in winter through deep snow.
A few weeks later, when the link had been made between Willi and his mother, who lived in Rochdale, the Movement collected money for the rest of his journey.
Also from Sweden, but after a more convoluted adventure, was Rudi Neumark.
He and a friend had fled from Vienna over the border into Czechoslovakia.
When the German army followed them, they kept on the move, taking on odd jobs along the way, until they ended up in Warsaw.
There they split up, Rudi going by train to Gdynia where he managed to work his passage on a Polish boat to Stockholm.
This brief experience as a merchant seaman qualified him for another voyage, this time on an American cargo vessel bound for London.
This was when his troubles really started.
Having been on the run for nearly four years, Rudi had grown from an early teenager into a young adult.
So instead of a hero's welcome, he was put in charge as an enemy alien to spend his eighteenth year in an internment camp.
Home from Home
To qualify as a model foster parent you had to be at the wealthier level of the middle class, with an already established family; it helped if you lived in the country (away from urban enticements), spoke a little German, and could tolerate moody children who suffered bouts of depression and were inclined to long silences.
And you had to be Jewish.
The typical foster parent was not at all like this.
Recruited from the lower-middle or working class, the representative benefactor lived in a small house in a town or city, had no children or had children who were grown up, spoke not a word of German, knew nothing of Germany beyond the front-page news of the Express or Mirror , and did not begin to understand the trauma of being a young refugee.
And the typical foster parent was not Jewish.
This last discrepancy between the ideal and the typical foster parent was the cause of much anguish within the Jewish community and much criticism from without.
Why were there no more Jewish families willing to take in refugee children?
The Union of Orthodox Hebrew Congregations (ADATH) suspected a dastardly plot by the RCM to subvert orthodox Judaism by favouring Christian hospitality.
The ADATH policy of rejecting  all non Jewish offers to help assumed that if the RCM took an equally hard line, the faithful would rise to the challenge.
But the argument did not stand up.
The Jews of Britain were a tiny minority, less than one per cent of the population.
For six years up to the war, they had raised millions to help their German cousins and had absorbed over 60,000 refugees, not all of them living off charity by any means, but with the great majority owing thanks to Jewish organisations for giving them a new start.
The dismissive view —‘They can afford it’— derived from the anti-Semitic assumption that all Jews were well off.
It was propagated by otherwise intelligent people like the eminent bishop who greeted a party of refugee children, kitted out in their ill-fitting hand-me-downs, with the cheerful observation: ‘I didn't know there were any poor Jews.,
Anyone who was familiar with the less fashionable districts of London, Manchester and Leeds knew otherwise.
The average Jew was the average Englishman, living off a weekly pay packet of four pounds a week or less at a time when, in the worst-hit areas for unemployment, up to twenty per cent of the population was below the poverty line.
Allowing for those who were too selfish to want to help even when they were well qualified to do so, and those who were manifestly unsuitable to act as foster parents, because they were too young, too old or too inexperienced — a third, say, of the total, it was unrealistic to expect the Jewish community to absorb 10,000 refugee children.
In fact, the community was near the end of its financial tether.
The warnings had been clear for some time.
In early 1939, Lord Hailey had voiced fears that ‘the problem would frankly become unmanageable’, but his appeals to the government to support the refugee cause with public funds had met with blank refusal.
The risks of establishing an expensive precedent were considered too great to countenance.
As the pressure of numbers built up, Sir Samuel Hoare, the Quaker Home Secretary, began taking his lead from Hailey, telling the cabinet that the funds of the refugee organisations ‘have been strained to the utmost’.
By July, Hoare was forecasting that before long refugees will ‘have to be supported from British public funds if scandal is to be avoided’.
The rest of the cabinet was still reluctant to commit the taxpayer, but it was ready to take seriously a scheme put up by Lionel Rothschild for an international trust fund.
The idea was that the leading countries on the Evian Committee would join in promoting a public subscription of £20 million, of which £5 million was to be raised in London.
Revealing a touching faith in the stability of money, Rothschild suggested that no interest would be due on the loan but that the capital would be repaid after forty years.
To start the ball rolling, the government was asked to contribute £1 million.
Opposition came from the Treasury ministers who objected to a handout of a cool million as a near sacrilegious attack on the principle of sound finance, and from the Foreign Secretary who had no faith at all in the capacity of the Evian Committee to agree on joint action.
Decisively outvoted, Hoare went away to think up an alternative plan.
But by then it was too late.
The only concession forced through before the critical days in September was on the tax allowance to foster parents who were now able to claim for any child in their care under the age of sixteen or in full-time education.
On 30 August, the RCM announced that it could not accept any more refugee children.
Two days later, war was declared.
On 3 September, Hoare was replaced as Home Secretary by Sir John Anderson, who promptly declared a banning order on immigrants from territories controlled by the Third Reich .
Cutting off the flow of refugees did not solve the financial problem, though for a time the government acted on the assumption that the refugee organisations could now look after themselves.
When the evidence proved otherwise, the Home Office held out the prospect of a sizeable loan to be repaid on an unspecified date.
The Jewish bodies turned the offer down flat, arguing that it was immoral for them to accept a loan which they had no reason to believe they would be able to repay.
They were, however, ready to accept an outright grant and on 1 December they warned the Home Office that, if the money was not forthcoming within a week, the refugee organisations would close down, leaving their charges to be maintained on the local rates.
At this point, the Home Office negotiating team, led by Sir Alexander Maxwell, promised to think again.
The next offer was more attractive.
Maxwell suggested that the government might be prepared to make a grant equal to the amount collected by the  refugee organisations.
After some discussion on back-dating, the formula was accepted though it had only six months to live.
By the summer of 1940, the Central Council for Jewish Refugees was again feeling the pinch, with the result that the government accepted, in principle, the responsibility for the whole cost of maintaining refugees at scales to be agreed and seventy-five per cent of the cost of administration.
Since the scales were minimal by any standards, the refugee organisations were still in need of help, none more so than the RCM which, for some curious reason, was not immediately included In the government s grant scheme.
It was not until 1942, after a lengthy investigation into the efficiency of the RCM, that state support was forthcoming for child refugees, to the limit of eighteen shillings a week for each child.
One of the conditions held that ‘where a youth or girl was being adequately cared for by foster parents or was satisfactorily settled in life with sound views and reliable character…then the Movement might and should reduce, or in some cases discontinue, its welfare work.’
In these restrictive circumstances, the quality of foster parents was all-important.
The RCM understood this as well as they understood the realities of keeping up the supply of foster parents.
They were less well-informed when it came to knowing the sort of people who were likely to volunteer as foster parents.
RCM activists were drawn largely from wealthy and privileged families.
Early on, they imagined that all foster parents would be like them — not so rich perhaps, but sharing the same basic standards.
It came as a shock to find that the Englishman's home did not necessarily have a spare bedroom or a bath or inside lavatory.
Another revelation: enthusiastic volunteers were not necessarily best-suited to be foster parents, either by temperament or circumstances.
But since the RCM staff were not trained social workers, many undesirables slipped through the inspection net, including quite a few whose only interest was in acquiring cheap household labour.
Ursula Hutton, nee Cohn, did not even get a good night's sleep before plunging into the realities of her new life with her foster family in Willesden:
Ursula was expected to do all the housework, look after the baby of the family and was paid 2/6d a week.
Split up from her brother, Diane Gamer had no complaints about her foster mother —‘She was a very loving woman.’
Her brother was less fortunate:
Parents naturally worried about their children, how they were settling in, how they were behaving with their new families.
Tom Berman, now in Israel, still has the first letter his mother wrote from Czechoslovakia to the Millers in Glasgow on 14 June 1939.
Described as ‘kind-hearted, yet…a lively and obstinate boy,, Tom was brought up in a prosperous house (his father was a manager of a textile firm) and was used to a well-stocked meal table.
With the nervous worry comes the loneliness: ‘The house is quiet as the grave’, and the fear of the future: ‘Though we have registered we are told at the American consulate it may last [take]years until we get the possibility of emigrating, the quota being overcharged.’
And the worry again:
Tom stayed with the Millers, who were a childless couple, until 1952.
His parents did not escape.
Manfred Drake (formerly Manfred Drechsler) remembers how much he missed his mother at first:
For those children going straight to foster families, without even the support of the friends they had made on the journey, natural feelings had to be forced down as adjustments to a new environment and a new language were made.
Herbert Hobden (Holzinger) tried hard to keep a stiff upper lip as he was introduced, with his ten-year-old sister, to his new home:
Martha Blend had her first sight of a new foster mother in the cavernous waiting room at Liverpool Street Station:
Then there were those who were favoured by the luck of the draw.
One girl remembers her first impression of her foster father: ‘He had Sephardi eyes, like my mother.
I felt at home at once…’
And Helga Samuel was given every support and care by her well-off foster parents.
She describes the first meeting at Liverpool Street:
For those who did not reach a secure environment as quickly as Helga, lack of basic English could lead to weird experiences.
One boy thought that ‘To let’ signs indicated a toilet.
Another, on his first bus journey, noted down the name of a shop as a landmark for the return trip.
It took a little time for him to realise that ‘Bovril’ was not a local retailer.
Herta Stanton stayed two days in London before travelling to her new home:
After arriving at Liverpool Street and spending the night in London, Angela Carpos was sent off to Edinburgh with another girl.
Luckily the driver had some idea of what was going on — and managed to escape assassination.
Letters from home contained frequent reminders to show appreciation.
As Marietta's mother and father wrote to her in Birmingham on 1 July 1939:
But it was hard to express gratitude for what was bound to be seen as a harsh deprivation — the loss of natural family.
Inge Joseph, then twelve-year-old Inge Polloch, kept a diary from June to September 1939.
She promised to tell everything but added: ‘I hope you won't be too shocked if I complain too much…’
Inge stayed with the Robins family in Falmouth in a large house and had the benefits of a private tutor but she was homesick for Vienna.
‘I feel I shall die of misery…when I die I want written on my tombstone: ‘Here Lies a Child Who Perished Miserably From Homesickness’.'
Mrs Robins comes over as a cold, strict woman who was for ever giving orders.
Great upset was caused when she forbade Inge to speak German with her sister Lieselotte.
For Mr Robins, Inge felt the beginnings of a schoolgirl crush and hated him when he did not take her side.
Often she hated everyone and spent a lot of time crying, which the Robinses evidently decided not to see.
It is easy enough to put another interpretation on the behaviour of the Robinses, to argue that they were doing their best in trying circumstances (to forbid German was not a bad way of teaching English), and that they had their work cut out dealing with precocious children.
Gratitude, perhaps, comes more easily with hindsight.
Miss Harder was a spinster in her early fifties who ran a small tobacconist's shop in London's Archway.
She had continuously offered her services to the RCM committee as a foster parent, but they had never found a suitable child and perhaps also felt that she was too poor to cope.
But when she heard about Lore Selo and her two sisters, whose mother did not want them to be parted, Miss Harder promptly offered to take all three and the committee were shocked into acceptance.
Miss Harder even refused the offer of financial assistance, in case it led to another child losing his chance of coming to Britain.
Lore will never forget her first meeting with Miss Harder:
After a few months the three girls began to settle down.
When a message came from a friend in Prague that their mother had disappeared, Miss Harder did everything she could to console them and they became very close.
With the outbreak of war, the shop fell on harder times.
When Miss Harder had to do without her assistant, Lore helped out:
Six months after the sisters arrived in England, Miss Harder died of consumption.
The sisters were separated, Lore working as a maid and the others going to foster parents.
Twenty years later, in a talk which was later broadcast on Woman's Hour, Lore looked back:
Clearly, concern for children in what appeared to be less than propitious circumstances could be misplaced.
Martha Levy, too, was happy in what many would have found an unenviable situation.
She had a room in Exmouth Street in London's East End, with a family of five adults:
Ya'acov Friedler experienced two very different, but both very English, foster homes, adapting with ease and enthusiasm to both ways of life.
Staying first of all with the Maggses —‘the first parents I had in four years and I have good reason for not putting parents in inverted commas’— in a small country town, he learned the respectable, middle-class way to do things:
Happy though he was, Ya'acov wanted very much to be together with Solly, his brother, and the Maggses were not able to accommodate the two of them.
They found a new billet in a working-class household.
The Crooks, middle-aged and childless, made them welcome.
There was just one problem:
Margaret Olmer found her working-class foster parents in the Midlands very anxious to learn as much as possible about her background:
The family who took in Lorraine Allard had a long-term relationship in mind:
In any case, Lorraine was far too preoccupied to think about romance.
As the prospects of war increased, many children became obsessed with getting their parents out of Germany.
For Lorraine it was her one and only thought:
Children who made a successful adjustment and settled in happily with a foster family were devastated when they were subjected to another round of upheaval and insecurity.
This was Peter Prager's experience:
Michael Brown's sister stayed with a family where her brother was able to visit.
She was seven years old and he was ten:
Ruth Michaelis felt betrayed from the time her mother brought her over to England and left her with the Reverend Stead and his family.
She was constantly promised that there was not going to be a war and that she would soon go back to her family.
A sixth sense told her otherwise.
Unhappy with the Steads, where she was beaten with a leather strap for wetting the bed, Ruth found a happier relationship with another family, but she could not rid herself of the insecurity.
The job of inspecting foster homes, which was supposed to be carried out at frequent intervals, was shared between the national office, regional committees and the provincial committees.
The quality of inspection varied enormously and was dependent not just on the inspectors' powers of observation but also on their view of how young refugees should be treated.
There were those who, almost despite themselves, equated refugees with second-class citizens.
Not for them the comfortable life; they might get ideas above their station, which was to devote themselves to hard labour and be grateful for small mercies.
This attitude was not entirely absent from the ruling council of the RCM where, among others, the Marchioness of Reading, wife of the former Viceroy of India, judged every problem within narrow class conventions.
Refugees were seen as deserving sympathy and help, but they were not to be pampered.
She even turned down a government offer of extra clothing coupons on the grounds that hand-me-downs were quite good enough for her refugees.
Class prejudices were just as strong, perhaps even stronger, at regional level.
When a mild complaint was made against the Tunbridge Wells paid secretary and she was invited to Bloomsbury House to discuss the matter with Lola Hahn-Warburg, her reaction was hostile, to put it mildly.
Against such examples of blatant petty mindedness must be set the tone of sympathetic understanding adopted by Lord Gorell and those closest to him in the RCM. the letter he sent out to regional chairmen and secretaries in December 1942, is a fair indication of his philosophy:
What notice was taken it is impossible to say.
But the records suggest that the hard school of child rearing prevailed, at least to the extent that there was not too much sympathy for youngsters who were not entirely happy with their foster parents.
There was still less appreciation of the problems encountered by youngsters old enough to go into lodgings.
Aside from the psychological strain of settling in, some had to face considerable physical hardship.
Brought up in Vienna when  anti-semitism was rife, Peter Hugh Granby (Peter Hugo Guensburger) knew what it was to be self-reliant:
But as a child refugee, he needed all his resources to cope.
One of his group's first lodgings was in a boarding house in Southend on Sea:
It was the bugs that drove Philip Urbach from his first lodgings:
Philip had to enlist the aid of the police to get his ten shillings back before moving to another room in Victoria:
Philip was working long hours for Charles (now Lord) Forte and was so tired one night that he slept through the air raid warning and the attempts of his landlady to rouse him.
The house was hit by a landmine and collapsed.
Philip was so tightly wedged that when he was pulled out he left his pyjamas behind and emerged stark naked, although not seriously harmed.
Landladies were among the more frequent visitors to Bloomsbury House as the records indicate:
Often, lodging and employment went together.
Families who were used to servants, but were now finding domestic staff hard to come by, took immediately to the idea of having a young refugee about the house.
Herta Stanton was taken in by a naval widow:
Regina, younger and less assertive than Herta, was visited at her foster home by an RCM worker:
Regina was eventually moved and found work — but it was still hard to communicate with her:
Fortunately, someone at Bloomsbury House realised that getting through to Regina depended on making friends with her closest companion.
Visits by RCM workers were liable to be resented by foster parents — not necessarily because they had anything to hide, but because they felt their housekeeping and parental capabilities were being questioned.
Sometimes that attitude rubbed off on the children:
It was easy to offend middle-class pride.
Reporting back to Bloomsbury House on a visit to the Jacobs' residence where Ilse, a probationary nurse, was staying, Miss Smith recorded Ilse's hospital treatment for flat feet.
A few days later, an irate Mrs Jacobs was in touch: ‘She stated that neither she nor her husband saw our representative and she is annoyed that ‘some person’ should have questioned her servants about their private affairs.’
Bloomsbury House made soothing noises which seem to have done the trick.
After several weeks, Miss Smith visited again:
Ilse passed her State Final Exams in nursing in 1945.
With the large number of children spread out over the country, it was inevitable that visits were infrequent.
Many former refugee children report never having seen a Bloomsbury House representative.
Where problems do crop up in the records they are often of the type that are familiar to all families with teenagers.
Complaints from young adults about being treated like children come thick and fast:
Brigitte and Mrs Kreeger were able to settle their differences.
In other cases there were stronger emotions at work:
Without disclosing the actual reason for the call, Mrs Payne was visited.
She said she was finding Eva difficult and that she was telling lies.
Eva had pretended she would have to do office work until after lunch on the Sunday, when in fact she had wanted to have lunch out at a cafe with a girlfriend.
Mr Payne had forbidden this because Eva had not been straightforward.
Eva had been very upset.
Shortly afterwards, Eva called again at Bloomsbury House to register her feelings about her foster family:
There was no prospect of a reconciliation.
Eva moved out and went to a hostel.
A different sort of jealousy was at work in the Baran household:
It did not take long to realise that what really worried Mrs Baran was Franziska's relationship with her husband, although: ‘…from the way in which Mr Baran talked about Franzi I did not at all get the impression that there is any reason for Mrs Baran to be jealous’.
The flow of complaints was by no means one way.
Foster parents were as likely as their wards to find a justifiable cause for bellyache.
Shortly afterwards:
Perhaps such behaviour was more easily endured if the children were one's own.
Mrs Coles expressed great regret when she parted with Mary, continued to provide her clothes and had her back to stay for the Christmas holidays.
Lutz, who at twelve was three years older than Mary, was even more of a handful:
The Speakmans decided to keep Lutz with them but he continued to have problems.
Four years later in Birmingham, he was arrested for breaking and entering.
Only about fifty children actually had to be removed from their foster homes.
Friederike was one of the most serious cases.
From the age of thirteen in 1939, ‘Fritzi’ lodged with Mr Argles, a former refugee worker in his sixties, and his wife in Staffordshire.
In October 1944, Mr Argles telephoned the Birmingham office and said that his wife was severely indisposed.
He asked that Fritzi and her brother Mickey be removed from his house at once.
The Argleses were closing up their house and leaving the district on the advice of their doctor.
Later, the doctor himself telephoned to explain what had happened.
Owing to an ‘indiscretion’, Fritzi must be removed from the household immediately.
Gradually the unpleasant truth emerged.
Fritzi had been forbidden by Mrs Argles to reveal what had happened but, once she had left the family, she spoke:
It would have been hard for an outside eye to have detected anything wrong, although Fritzi's brother Mickey had provided a clue.
For some time, he had suffered psychological problems which were attributed to his experiences in Germany.
It was later revealed that Mr Argles had employed a boy who had been convicted of offences against young children.
Doubtless this was the source of Mickey's difficulties.
Fritzi's file ended on a positive note:
Missing the affection of friends and relatives, and short of material goods and luxuries, the young refugees were open to temptations which were liable to shock the ladies at Bloomsbury House.
But they were quickly on to Mr Schwartz, who had paid young Freddy large sums of money for running errands for his shoeshine business.
Mr Schwartz promised to tell if he gave Freddy any further money or clothes.
Soon, Freddy was asking if Mr Schwartz might buy him a suit.
His RCM contact tactfully pointed out that, unless he started to buy his own clothes out of his savings, he would not learn to be self-reliant.
Some months later, came the denouement.
In cases where a young child was formally adopted by a family, visits were usually discontinued.
At the top of Elfriede's file appear the words, ‘No action!
No visits!’
Elfriede came to England at the age of three and stayed with the Lewis family in Newport, Monmouthshire.
In 1942 she was described as ‘a normally developed, healthy little girl who has no memory for any other home or country.
She is as much a part of the family as Mrs Lewis's own  baby sons…we think she is very fortunate to have found such a wonderfully happy home.’
Few cases were so simple.
For Liesl whose mother had been able to escape to this country, a battle royal developed between her parent and her foster parent.
After more skirmishes, a compromise was reached which allowed for Liesl to stay with the Wynnes until her real mother was able to care for her.
Though those parents who were able to escape to England might have been expected to accept immediate responsibility for their offspring, this was often not practicable.
Hampered by their lack of English, traumatised by events in Germany and Austria and, in most cases, with very limited resources, they were invariably in need of care themselves.
Knowing the risks, Bloomsbury House kept an eye on those children who were reunited with their parents.
They were anxious about seventeen-year-old Joseph:
In fact, Joseph and his mother stayed together, moving eventually to a larger flat.
Families were often separated, mothers and daughters being sent into domestic service many miles apart.
Magda Chadwick remembers:
If a reunion with parents took place quickly enough, the result was ecstatic.
Sonia Altman's parents followed close behind her Kindertransport .
Alice Staller (now in California) was glad of her mother's support, even from a distance.
She had been guaranteed by several people and entered Michael Hall School.
When the school evacuated to Minehead, Alice was taken out of the classroom to become a full-time household help:
Gerda's mother was living with a man to whom she was not married.
She was very anxious to have her daughter with her.
Gerda kept contact with her foster mother, visiting her in the holidays, which satisfied Bloomsbury House that the decencies were being preserved.
The strains of life in a strange country without parents could cause conflict between brothers and sisters.
Solomon might have replied (the records do not give his side of the story) that it takes two to quarrel.
Having relatives in England was not always the bonus it was made out to be.
Uncles and aunts were likely to be out of touch with what was happening to their family on the continent, and sometimes there were tensions and disagreements which had caused them to move away in the first place.
Not exactly overjoyed at the prospect of looking after her niece, Liesl Silverstone's aunt secretly attempted to shift the responsibility without her niece knowing:
Some of the happiest memories are of small hostels that provided more of a family atmosphere than did foster homes.
This was particularly noticeable when hostels were set up by individuals or by groups of sympathisers, rather than by religious or other charitable organisations.
There was the contact with friendly adults, but not so close as to suggest to the children that their real parents were being supplanted — a common resentment in foster homes.
At the same time, the children could draw emotional strength from a shared experience.
Among those who set themselves the task of creating a hostel for orthodox children was Sybil Wulwick.
Married in the summer of 1938 to the Reverend Geza Wulwick, who had been brought up in Czechoslovakia, and who spoke fluent German, she and her husband settled in Middlesbrough and almost immediately started collecting money for refugee children.
Their breakthrough was the free loan of a large Victorian house.
Reverend Wulwick dedicated himself to the children's needs:
The Schlesingers already had five children including one, John, who was destined to become a leading film director.
Bernard Schlesinger was senior physician at the great Ormond Street Hospital for Sick Children, his wife, Winifred, a gifted musician and linguist.
With their sympathetic, open-minded attitudes to young people, they came closest to the RCM ideal for a foster family.
The hostel was a large house in Highgate which the Schlesingers bought with money left by a relative.
A matron was installed, and three helpers, one of whom did the cooking.
There was room for twelve children.
One of them remembers:
There was one more refugee helped by the Schlesingers.
As a relative, Dick Levy went to stay in the family home.
When the war ended and Bernard returned there was a big party in the country.
It says much for the tolerance and humanity of the family that among the guests was a group of German POWs.
The extended family of the Schlesingers kept in touch over the years.
Other foster children with happy memories did the same, though distance and new relationships combined to make contact sporadic.
Ya'acov Friedler returned from Israel to visit the Maggs family after a gap of fifty years.
Siegmar Silber corresponded in the 1970s with the family he had stayed with before leaving at the age of eleven to join relatives in the States.
There was so much news to exchange — careers followed, children born, marriages made.
Edith Taylor's story is one of the most extraordinary.
Four years after her husband died she returned from the United  States to marry her foster father, Mr Taylor, who was then a widower:
Evacuation and Internment
In the back rooms of Whitehall, where they worked on the knotty problem of what to do in a national emergency, there was a file on the likely effects of German air attacks on London.
It started with the assumption that 100,000 bombs would fall on the capital within fourteen days of the declaration of war.
Enormous casualties were anticipated.
The partial remedy, for no one could think of exhaustive response, was to clear London and other big cities of children aged under fifteen, the sick and the handicapped: all those who were of more hindrance than help to the defence effort.
At the time of the Czechoslovakian crisis on Monday 28 September 1938, there was a temporary evacuation of schoolchildren and hospital patients from London.
Just short of a year later, on 1 September 1939, came the real thing.
Among the million and a half dispatched from urban Britain into the countryside were between two to three thousand refugee children who were experiencing their second dramatic upheaval within months.
Fourteen hostels were evacuated en masse .
At the start of the operation, children went every day to school equipped with gas masks in cardboard boxes and carrying a small case ready packed — no one knew which day they would actually be leaving and the destination was secret.
When the day finally came, each child was tagged with a number for identification.
Iron rations were issued for the train or bus journey.
Some children  had last-minute treats of ice cream and sweets which made them very sick.
Weeping parents bade goodbye to their offspring.
It was almost a rerun of experience in Germany and Austria.
At the reception centres children were billeted by haphazard allotment or by ‘cattle market’ selection.
They were paraded around while householders took their pick, a routine familiar to refugee children who had passed through Dovercourt.
Many families had children forced on them by billeting officers.
Local authorities appointed volunteers to go from door to door to see who had room and who didn't; those on the receiving end had no choice in the matter.
No child could be expected to enjoy the experience, but for refugee children there were several factors which made evacuation more than typically painful.
Even those who had arrived in early 1939 or before did not as yet have complete command of English and this made communication with their new and sometimes reluctant hosts difficult.
In rural areas the heavy regional accents added to the problem.
Some refugee children underwent, for the second time, a fall in living standards from those they had been used to in Europe, which added to the depression they were already feeling as the threat of invasion increased.
As Dorothy Hardisty wrote in her journal:
The worst sufferers were those children who were placed in remote places where strangers were automatically suspect.
Magda Chadwick, born in 1928, experienced this thinly veiled hostility:
For Margaret Olmer, born in Vienna in 1931, despite forebodings at Liverpool Street, rural life in Norfolk proved congenial and, perhaps because she had already had to learn to adapt, she settled in more quickly than the daughter of her host family who was evacuated with her.
She loved the countryside, the dogs and the local school.
In the Blitz she returned to London and then was sent to the Midlands, until the Jewish Committee returned her to a Jewish environment in 1945:
In many cases ‘the religious question was exacerbated by evacuation.
Refugee children naturally gravitated towards people showing them kindness, and were thus susceptible to proselytisation by their Gentile hosts.
Desperate to ‘belong’, many Jewish children were happy to attend church or chapel with their hosts, even if there was a synagogue in the vicinity.
This was especially so in the Midlands, where there was a high concentration of Quaker and Christadelphian families.
Very little explanatory information was given to householders who received refugees.
The local RCM committees followed up  in the wake of evacuation, but this was too late for orthodox children arriving at their billets on the evening of Friday, 1 September.
Householders unaware of Sabbath conventions caused much discomfort to their young guests until they became better informed about Jewish religious observances.
Orthodox pupils of the Jewish secondary school were greeted on arrival at Shefford with a welcoming ham omelette.
With their lack of English they were unable to explain why they chose to go hungry rather than eat such a choice dish.
Throughout the autumn, a period of successive Jewish holidays, the Anglo Jewish press reported a general absence of kosher food in reception areas.
Some communities provided a communal hot kosher meal at noon for Jewish children, who had to make do with cold vegetables and bread for breakfast and dinner.
The Home Secretary, Sir John Anderson, suggested that this should be a general measure, but few local authorities saw the need to exert themselves.
The happiest results came when householders gave their evacuees time to settle in and made some attempt to understand their cultural differences.
One such family took in two sisters:
Kurt Weinburg's evacuation began disastrously but, thanks to his headmaster (who had already proved his sensitivity by introducing Kurt on his first day to the only other Jewish boy in the school), it turned out better than he expected:
In spite of evacuation to an Apparently safe area, Peter Morgan has vivid memories of a more frightening side of wartime activity:.
Peter went next to the Latymer School which had been evacuated from Hammersmith to High Wycombe.
He was still in the way of stray bombs.
One landed in the middle of the school playing fields.
The disruption caused by the evacuation extended through to  Bloomsbury House.
It was clear that the records department could not remain in London.
The files not only contained the family details of each child but also their Home Office permits, passports and other certificates.
A country house, The Grange, was rented at Hindhead and the aftercare department was transferred there, together with the records and a staff of fifteen.
Three girls and two boys from Germany helped in the house and the office and another boy worked in the garden.
Refugee children under the age of sixteen were liable to be evacuated; refugee children over sixteen risked being interned.
From the first day of the war the security forces went in fear of the unseen enemy: agents and provocateurs smuggled into the country under the guise of fugitives from Nazi persecution.
Voices were raised in support of rounding up all foreigners, but the government was unwilling to go the way of its predecessor in the first world war and order a general internment.
Public opinion, it was argued, would react unfavourably to such an extreme measure.
Instead, a nationwide network of 120 investigative tribunals was set up, headed by lawyers who were empowered to call before them all adult foreigners living within their jurisdiction.
The plan was to categorise aliens under one of three headings.
A small number were assessed as category A — German and Austrians with specialised military knowledge which could be used to hinder the British war effort.
They were immediately interned.
Category B covered those who had lived in Britain for some time and showed no obvious signs of hostility.
They kept their basic freedom but were not allowed to own a car, a camera or any large-scale maps, and were forbidden to travel more than five miles from home.
Those who could produce evidence of ‘character, associations and loyalty’ were placed in category C and were left to their own devices, at least for the time being.
Home Office guidelines suggested that refugees from religious, racial or political persecution had the strongest case for a C registration.
The tribunals began their work in October 1939.
Since they met behind closed doors and no provision was made for legal representation, decisions were heavily dependent on the sensitivity of individual chairmen.
Not surprisingly, their deliberations  revealed wild inconsistencies.
In Leeds, aliens of whatever background were given a B label, whereas in Manchester they were designated grade C. Several tribunals put the unemployed into B category, telling them to apply for a transfer to C when they found jobs.
One tribunal decided that all women qualified for a B rating on the entirely erroneous assumption that domestic servants were a prime source of disaffection.
It was not until the Home Office called the tribunal chairmen together to clarify the guidelines that the ratio of Bs to Cs began to fall.
Even so, the RCM had to accept that some 300 of its boys were stuck with a B rating.
Protests were made on their behalf but, as Henry Toch discovered, self-help was the only effective recourse.
After a few weeks of relative calm — the ‘phoney war’— chauvinism was revived by the German invasion of Norway.
The bad news persisted.
With the fall of the Netherlands, Belgium and Luxembourg, anti-alien feelings mounted to near paranoia.
Addled by the speed of events which sent him scurrying from The Hague, the erstwhile British ambassador, Sir Neville Bland warned that:
In fact, the Germans experienced limited success with their Fifth Column in Holland.
They did install agents in The Hague with instructions to guide paratroopers to the Dutch seat of government.
But they were not successful (Queen Wilhelmina and the government escaped) and they were certainly not disguised as servant girls.
However, Bland's nightmare vision had a powerful effect on the government's thinking and on public opinion.
Anyone with a foreign accent, including refugee children, were labelled as potential saboteurs.
The light-hearted tone of Elaine Blond characterised Bloomsbury House policy of not taking minor problems too seriously.
There was a war on; inconvenience could be expected and not only for youngsters.
Travelling the country, Lola Hahn-Warburg found that her pronounced German accent caused a lot of trouble.
But as the war intensified, the jokes wore thin.
It is still with a sense of amazement at the flights of human inanity that Ruth Michaelis relates the experience of her brother Martin, who found himself in serious trouble with his foster family:
One of the first decisions of the Churchill government was to tighten security along the vulnerable south and east coasts.
Starting on lo May, all male category B and category C Germans and Austrians living in these areas were detained, among them boys just past the age of sixteen who were taken from foster parents or schools without explanation.
It was a brief stay at Seaton.
The next stop was Bury in Lancashire, where home was a disused cotton mill.
A warning against a panic reaction to the Bland report came from the Home Secretary, Sir John Anderson.
He pointed out the enormous differences between the Netherlands and Britain, starting with the absence of a common frontier with Germany.
Britain had exercised tight control over the entry of aliens for as long as anyone could remember and, anyway, there had been little contact between Germany and Britain for at least nine months.
Moreover, the vast majority of the 73,000 Germans and Austrians in Britain were refugees from Nazi oppression.
It was ludicrous to see them as a threat to security.
But prejudice triumphed.
The order to intern all male category B aliens was posted on 16 May.
A week later the order was extended to women and their children.
Then a start was made on rounding up the C grade, those who were known incongruously as ‘friendly enemy aliens’.
By July, more than 30,000 men and women were interned, among them some 1000 refugee children registered with the RCM.
Elaine Blond joined the chorus of protest from Bloomsbury House:
JEWISH REFUGEE CHILDREN ON A TRAIN, SHORTLY AFTER CROSSING THE GERMAN BORDER PHOTO: WIENER LIBRARY
GERMAN REFUGEE CHILDREN EMBARK IN HOLLAND FOR THE JOURNEY TO ENGLAND PHOTO: WIENER LIBRARY
12 DECEMBER, 1938.
CHILDREN FROM VIENNA ARRIVE AT HARWICH, MOST OF THEM JEWISH, THE REMAINDER ‘NON-ARYAN’ CATHOLICS AND PROTESTANTS, OR THE CHILDREN OF ANTI-NAZIS.
THEY WERE THEN TAKEN BY SPECIAL TRAIN TO PAKEFIELD HOLIDAY CAMP, LOWESTOFT PHOTO: WIENER LIBRARY
THE CHILDREN ARRIVE AT CUSTOMS IN ENGLAND PHOTO: WIENER LIBRARY
A DISTRESSED TEENAGE REFUGEE ON ARRIVAL IN ENGLAND PHOTO: WIENER LIBRARY
TWO OF THE YOUNGEST REFUGEES: THE BOY IS FIVE YEARS OLD AND THE GIRL SIX PHOTO: WIENER LIBRARY
A LITTLE GIRL FROM A PARTY OF CHILDREN DRAWN MAINLY FROM BERLIN AND HAMBURG CLUTCHES HER DOLL.
ARRIVING IN HARWICH ON 2 DECEMBER, 1938, SHE WAS THEN TAKEN TO A HOLIDAY CAMP AT DOVERCOURT, NEAR HARWICH PHOTO: WIENER LIBRARY
A PARTY OF REFUGEE GIRLS AT AN ENGLISH RECEPTION CAMP PHOTO: WIENER LIBRARY
REFUGEE CHILDREN WAVE FROM THEIR CHALETS AT A HOLIDAY CAMP IN DOVERCOURT PHOTO: WIENER LIBRARY
DORLI (NOW DOROTHY) AND LISI OPPENHEIMER IN VIENNA, DECEMBER, 1938, BEFORE THEY LEFT FOR ENGLAND, WHERE THEY STAYED WITH LEO AND TILLY HALL IN LEEDS PHONE: COURTESY OF DOROTHY FLEMING
DOROTHY AND LISI SENT THESE PICTURES TO THEIR PARENTS IN VIENNA TO REASSURE THEM THAT THEY WERE HAPPY IN ENGLAND PHONE: COURTESY OF DOROTHY FLEMING
OTTO M. SCHIFF, CBE, FOUNDER AND CHAIRMAN, JEWISH REFUGEES COMMITTEE 1933–49; HONORARY PRESIDENT, CBF 1949–52
REGISTRATION CARD OF REFUGEE LIESEL FISCHMANN
DECEMBER 1938.
HUBERT PARDO, AGED 13, FROM HAMBURG, AND MR AND MRS H. OGILESBY, THE COUPLE WITH WHOM HE STAYED PHONE: HULTON-DEUTSCH
The refugee organisations now found themselves in a difficult position.
Once again they were besieged by applicants — desperate relatives of the interned — seeking information and reassurance.
But little information was available from official sources such as the Home Office bureau at St Stephen's House in Westminster.
Eventually, a central department set up jointly by the refugee committees helped to alleviate major problems like the treatment of refugees as Nazis, refugees and Nazis being kept in close proximity, inadequate accommodation, lack of adequate medical care and the separation of families.
Most of the RCM internees were packed off to the Isle of Man, a late addition to the list of camps drawn up by the War Office in 1939.
In fact, it came as a complete surprise to the hoteliers of Ramsey when they were given notice to quit their premises within six days, leaving behind ‘all furniture, bedding, linen, cutlery, crockery and utensils’.
In Port Erin, where a women's camp was set up, landladies were asked if they would accept internees at 3/ a day.
As the summer tourist trade was looking gloomy, the offer was taken up enthusiastically.
For one early arrival in Ramsey, where the internees were cordoned off from the rest of the town by barbed wire:
The mood soon passed.
Refugee children had proved their ability to adapt.
Once they found their bearings some of them even discovered a few side-benefits to internment:
Walter Friedman, who was running a hostel in London and who himself just managed to avoid internment, points out:
In almost all of the internment camps lectures and school classes were held.
Youngsters who had hitherto been isolated on farms and factories could now take part in informed discussion on a wide variety of subjects.
Politics was a favourite topic.
Fred Dunston remembers a particularly heated discussion:
Visiting the Isle of Man for the RCM in November 1940, William Simpson was impressed with the efforts being made to give youngsters an education, though he was anxious that an ‘English’ influence should be maintained.
Often, all education was conducted by the internees themselves — English lessons being given by people who had been in this country for a number of years.
At Onchan: Reporting on a common complaint, Mr Simpson noted a serious shortage of football boots.
Billeting arrangements were subject to strain.
The promised allowance to cover extra heating and lighting was not forthcoming, and as the days lengthened and winter approached there was understandable bad feeling between landladies and their reluctant lodgers.
Mr Simpson spoke of the unaccustomed burden the landladies were having to carry and stressed the need for ‘good public relations work’.
But ex-internees remember well the monotony of the boarding house diet:
Ya'acov Friedler was interned in the women's camp at Port Erin with his sister, who had asked for him and his brother to join her there.
He remembers a culinary repertoire consisting of kippers alternating with macaroni in tomato sauce.
Internees did the work of chambermaids and waited at table:
However, emotional tension did occur in the camp on another front:
The women in the camp made Ya'acov and his brother Solly the focus of their affections:
For some Movement children, the hardship of internment was compounded by plans to ship ‘enemy aliens’ to Canada and Australia.
At a cabinet meeting on 24 May 1940, Churchill stated in an aside that he was ‘strongly in favour of removing all internees out of the United Kingdom’.
In June, Canada volunteered to take 6000 to 7000 and Australia 10,000 prisoners of war and dangerous internees.
Lumped together, these two groups were no more than 4000 strong.
By no stretch of the imagination could the majority of internees be described as ‘dangerous’.
Nonetheless, it was decided to make up the numbers with category B and C refugees.
In early June, the RCM was summarily informed that the Duchess of York with 200 passengers, including a handful of teenagers from Huyton, was on its way to Canada.
At the end of the month, the Arandora Star , once advertised as ‘the world's most delightful cruising liner’, set sail with nearly 1200 internees and 200 British troops to guard them.
The ship, carrying two and a half times its normal load of passengers, was sunk by a German U-boat off the coast of Ireland at 6 a. m. on 2 July 1940.
Amongst those who lost their lives were 143 Germans and Austrians and 470 Italians, but the total number of casualties, which included members of the crew and some British troops, was not revealed.
The only message survivors were permitted to send, a postcard with the words ‘I am safe’, puzzled the recipients, who knew  nothing about the deportations.
Distracted relatives, not knowing whether their menfolk were interned in this country, interned in Canada or drowned, were directed by the Home Office to the War Office and from there to the Admiralty, who sent them back to the War Office.
Such was the official secrecy, or confusion, that it took several weeks to confirm that no RCM boys were among the casualties.
Despite the tragedy, the deportation continued.
The Dunera , an 11,000 ton former troopship, bound for Australia, set sail on 10 July.
It carried 2543 men, of whom 2100 were category C aliens, refugees from the RCM and Youth Allyah were on board: Alfred Cooper was among them:
Conditions were no better, and possibly worse, on the Ettrick which made for Canada with 220 RCM boys on board.
The Dunera almost shared the fate of the Arandora Star .
Early in its voyage it was grazed by a torpedo, but thereafter she avoided the attention of the German U-boats, docking at Melbourne Bay on 3 September, where some of the Arandora Star survivors disembarked.
The others continued to Sydney, where they were taken to an internment camp at Hay, three miles up the railway on the Murrumbidgee river.
For Alfred Cooper, as for his fellow passengers, journey's end came as a welcome relief:
Back in England, as the scandal of the Arandora Star , the Ettrick and the Dunera filtered through to the public, opinion shifted from ‘intern the lot’ to ‘free them now’.
On 31 July, the Home Office published a White Paper listing headings under which internees could be released.
The first two groups covered those under sixteen and over sixty-five years of age and young persons under eighteen who had been resident with British families, or in an educational establishment prior to internment.
Young people under RCM care were therefore among the first to qualify for release.
This was the case for Peter Prager:
Casting around for a suitable envoy to go out to Australia on behalf of a contrite British government, the choice fell on Major Julian Layton, an active promoter of the refugee cause whose experience encompassed several weeks on the Isle of Man liaising with the civil administration.
He departed with authorisation to release all young internees who were willing to join the Pioneer Corps.
The remainder either remained in Australia for vital war work or joined the labour units of the Australian army.
Six Youth Allyah boys managed to secure emigration permits for Palestine.
Although compensation was given to the deportees for possessions stolen from them during the journey, no compensation was offered to the schoolchildren who were forced by internment to leave school or job training to which, in most cases, they were unable to return.
The official view remained faithful to the spirit of a memorandum issued to the internment tribunals in 1939:
Even when the collective paranoia of the early months of 1940 subsided, this attitude prevailed.
Board and Lodging
At a time when property prices were distinctly flat, the influx of refugees created a boom in one sector of the market.
From 1938, enticing offers appeared in the small ads section of the Jewish press:
RCM hostels sprang up across urban Britain with the highest proportion in London, Manchester and Leeds.
They housed children who could not find foster parents or who were too old to fit easily into a new family environment.
Run by members of the RCM local committees or Jewish Refugees Committee, they relied on state allowances and charitable appeals to cover the costs of upkeep.
It was calculated that each child needed one pound a week for food and clothing.
Donations in kind were as welcome as money.
A boy's hostel in London received mattresses from a shipping company, blankets from another firm and food from the Deserving Charities Organisation.
London's East End traders were particularly generous.
A large part of hostel administration was in the hands of volunteers who were themselves refugees.
Although they spoke German and came from the same backgrounds as their charges, they were  often young and inexperienced and unprepared for the demands of the work.
Hatry Katz spent several years in a hostel in Leeds:
Lottie and Freddie Freedman, a young married couple, came to England with a Kindertransport from Berlin via Hamburg in 1939.
Freddie, who worked for the youth department of the Jewish community in Rosenstrasse, had organised and travelled with many transports, until finally he was warned: ‘You either stay in England or you've had it.’
Intending eventually to travel on to America, the Freedmans had nowhere to go and were unable to take work.
Bloomsbury House sent them to help out at a hostel.
Lottie was thrown in at the deep end:
Freddie then applied to be a hostel leader with Lottie as matron.
They were interviewed by Mrs Norman Bentwich and other leading lights of the Jewish community.
At 22, Lottie felt she had few qualifications for such a sensitive job, but after his time with the Kindertransporte Freddie was more confident.
The appointment committee was impressed.
At the start, Lottie was confounded by the garden:
Lottie did her best with the disorientated and often distressed inmates.
In the early days of the war the Freedmans lost all their boys aged over sixteen to internment.
Throughout the Blitz, Lottie regularly trooped down to the Anderson shelter at the bottom of the garden with the boys and her baby daughter in a Moses basket.
When her husband was spotted, torch in hand, prowling the garden at night, the neighbours accused him of spying.
But the Freedmans had less trouble with overconscientious citizens than with their local synagogue:
Generally, children from orthodox homes were placed in hostels controlled or strongly influenced by the Chief Rabbi's Religious Emergency Council led by Solomon Schonfeld.
Among those he approached to help with finding accommodation for the orthodox children he was bringing from Germany and Austria was Mrs Annie Wolfson.
She and her husband bought a house in Victoria Park Road in Hackney to convert into a hostel for twenty girls.
Intended as a clearing house for girls who could not immediately
find other homes, the hostel was managed by the Hackney Aid Committee for Refugee Children, who recruited a matron and staff from the ranks of the unemployed refugees.
Judging by the loud protests when the girls had to be evacuated to Norfolk, the enterprise lived up to the best expectations.
It reopened in 1941 and was active until the end of the war.
Circumstances were less favourable for the Home for Jewish Refugee Children at 5 The Avenue, London NW6.
This orthodox hostel was opened in December 1938 to receive children from Dovercourt.
One of the early arrivals was Zita Hirschhom (Sonia Schmitzer):
Zita Hirschhom stayed with the hostel until it closed in 1948.
Low down in the popularity stakes was Cazenove Road in London's East End.
Even after experiencing the spartan life of a training farm, Käthe Fischel found conditions at this orthodox hostel hard to take.
Claire Barrington also remembers Cazenove Road:
Hard conditions were not necessarily a bar to enjoying hostel life as Martha Levy discovered:
Hostel food was a regular subject of complaint for RCM visitors:
A contributor to Karen Gershon's book We Came As Children remembers two very different hostels:
Walter Friedmann describes the difficulties experienced by young people struggling to educate or better themselves, while coping with hostel life and trying to make a living:
In March 1939, a group of thirty boys from Frankfurt took over The Cedars, an eight-bedroomed former nursing home on the 6000-acre Waddesdon Estate of James de Rothschild.
Nearly all the boys had started life in rural Germany but, to escape anti-Semitism, had been sent to Philanthropia, a Jewish school in Frankfurt.
Here they stayed in a hostel run by Hugo and Lilli Steinhardt, which was attacked on Kristallnacht .
A desperate letter of appeal from the Steinhardts to Lord Rothschild in London resulted in the handing over of The Cedars.
Among the other famous names who set up hostels for the Kindertransporte was Harry Jacobs, the head of Times Furnishing.
He took in ten children up to five years old and guaranteed their upbringing and education to the age of eighteen.
During the war he moved children to his home in Surrey, where a wing was converted into a nursery, and he engaged a cook and nurse and a maid to look after them.
When he was called up, the children moved to Hemel Hempstead.
Eva Minckes, now aged eighty-five and living in Israel, worked at the home.
She was actually the real mother of one of the children, but was never allowed to say so —‘to avoid sadness for the other children’.
Lord Sainsbury took twenty-five children, paid for their education and kept in touch with them afterwards.
The Salmon family (Harry Salmon was chairman and Julius Salmon a director of J. Lyons), together with the Glucksteins, accommodated  twenty-three children in The Haven above Burton's Tailors on the Kentish Town Road in London.
Peter Morgan remembers being taken out to lunch at the Trocadero and visiting Cadby Hall, the headquarters of J. Lyons.
Of the hostel he said:
English names were adopted to speed up the process of assimilation.
That was when Peter Morgenstern became Peter Morgan.
To the same end, the clothes brought over from Germany were quietly removed.
‘On the train from Harwich to London our cases were taken away as our guarantors did not want us wearing funny clothes,’ one girl remembers.
‘Even at the age of eight years old, I knew how much love had gone into that case…’
Gifts of cuddly toys were no compensation.
Peter Morgan had no complaints, however, and went on to work in the hotels and restaurants of the Lyons empire.
Among the non Jewish organisations responsible for hostels, the Christadelphians were to the fore.
With their faith rooted in Jewish law, the Christadelphians had a long-standing interest in cooperative ventures, contributing generously to attempts to re-establish the Jewish people in Palestine.
When the exodus of children from Germany and Austria began, they were among the first to respond.
A refugee mother and her two teenage sons were the founder residents of one of the earliest Christadelphian hostels — Little Thorn, on the Bilton Road in Rugby.
Here a small group of Jewish boys were given a home and were trained for careers in leather manufacture, cabinet-making, and engineering.
The hostel also became a focal point for refugees to gather and socialise at weekends.
Also in the Midlands, Elpis Lodge (‘Abode of Hope’) opened in April 1940 at 117 Gough Road, Edgbaston.
Managed by Birmingham Jewry, the running of the hostel was funded by the Birmingham and Coventry Christadelphian Ecclesias.
Dr Hirsch, previously headmaster of a school in Frankfurt, and his wife were wardens of the hostel, which accommodated twenty teenaged boys.
The atmosphere of the hostel was orthodox.
Aside from the practical aspects of caring for the young people, there was much talk of spiritual care and regeneration, so that the young men at Elpis Lodge would go out into the world ‘imbued and enlightened with the hope of a better future’, and not embittered by the ill-treatment and injustice they had experienced.
In the years up to 1945, forty-eight boys learnt woodwork, tailoring, engineering and many other trades, often carrying on the work traditional to their families.
Evidently there was some feeling that life at Elpis Lodge was too comfortable.
A contributor to The Christadelphian of January 1941, set out to correct the impression:
If comfort was at a premium in the average hostel, in the agricultural training centres it was entirely absent, often as a matter of deliberate policy.
Käthe Fischel, who was at the David Eder Farm in Kent throughout the harsh winter of 1939, remembers:
The centres were mostly run by Youth Allyah , in cooperation with the RCM, but there was one notable exception where the RCM took all of the responsibility — and all of the blame.
Barham House, just outside Ipswich, on the Essex-Suffolk border, started life as an overspill camp for Dovercourt.
It had accommodation for 200 boys.
There was no mistaking Barham House.
Built as a Victorian workhouse, it had a grey, forbidding look which must have deterred all but the neediest applicants.
Its defects were emphasised by its proximity to Shrubland Park, a splendid Palladian mansion with a long drive and imposing gatehouses, which first-time visitors sometimes mistook for the RCM building.
They were soon put right.
According to the book of ‘daily happenings’, life at Barham House was a model of domestic harmony.
The camp was run by a staff dedicated to the belief that young people thrived on fresh air, early morning runs and cold showers.
Even assuming the truth of this, the experience of some of the inmates suggests that it was possible to have too much of a good thing.
That is what happened to Ernst Sicher.
Others recall the plague of rats (‘They tore away the bottoms from the boys’ trousers and at night you could hear their squeaking very clearly') and the epidemic of scabies.
With the spring, there was a dramatic improvement in the quality of life.
The damp retreated down the walls, the gardens came back to life and there was fresh food in the kitchen.
But relations between the youngsters and their adult minders did not change for the better.
A stream of complaints to Bloomsbury House led to the sacking of the more objectionable roughnecks.
One of them made a farewell address:
The new regime consisted of a triumvirate of English Protestant, Irish Catholic and Jewish interests, with each representative chasing hard for jobs and foster homes for their charges.
It was not an ideal arrangement, but it worked well enough for youngsters to feel that Barham House was on their side.
In fact, the only serious problems at this ‘stage involved children who did not want to leave the security of the one home they knew.
With the first days of the war came another change, a retrograde one this time, in the way Barham House was managed.
By a mysterious logic which was lost on the majority, a retired military officer took command, demanding total obedience from all foreigners in the camp.
‘There's a war on now and all of you are in enemy territory,’ he announced to a general assembly.
‘Whoever criticises my authority is criticising the government and will be interned.’
Once again, Bloomsbury House was inundated with complaints.
The reaction was to try to speed up the reallocation of those remaining at Barham House (a process which was unintentionally assisted by the activation of the internment laws), to provide the best possible reason for closing the place down.
The last residents moved out towards the end of 1940, leaving Barham House to be taken over by the army.
Youth Allyah would not have given up quite so easily.
The concept of allyah — immigration to Palestine to live on agricultural settlements — was a passionate ideal which took priority over all other considerations.
The children were split into two age groups,Youth Allyah for the fourteen to seventeen-year-olds and Hechalutz , the adult movement, for the rest.
The younger children, who had completed nine years of school but who were not quite old enough to join the Hechalutz training programme, combined a half-day study syllabus with agricultural work.
Youth Allyah was opposed to the very principle of fostering refugee children.
It was an article of faith which led to disputes with the RCM and lively discussions between Rebecca Sieff and her younger sister, Elaine Blond.
The appeal went out for the loan or gift of farms or country estates where Youth Allyah children could live, learn and work collectively.
If this was not possible, then they had to be placed as ‘hands’ on conventional farms where they were close enough together to meet in the evenings with their Madrichim (group  counsellors) for cultural communion.
A former worker at Youth Allyah's London office argued:
Contact between the various Youth Allyah training centres was chiefly by newsletters published by the London office, but some groups brought out their own monthly bulletin with such exalted titles as The Plough, Seeds and Our Life .
At first written in German and Hebrew, these publications soon turned to English.
Within Youth Allyah there were several competing Zionist factions ranging from the strictly orthodox Bachad to the moderate Maccabi Hazair , the Zionist scout movement.
All these groups were keen to add to their numbers, which could lead to problems when more than one faction was active in a locality.
Still, for all its divisions,Youth Allyah provided a sense of cultural identity and companionship which the RCM was not capable of offering.
Yoash Kahn, who has taught in England for many years but who also has strong links with education in Israel, recalls his hostel days with affection, even if he did have problems adjusting to the regime.
In the early days Yoash was a natural rebel, refusing to make his bed with a proper hospital corner, throwing the blue collection box for the Jewish National Fund at a fellow student, and taking up almost permanent occupancy of the bed-wetters room.
Yoash ran away and was returned to the hostel.
With time he began to settle and his school work improved:
Yoash became an ardent flag carrier for Habonim .
By the beginning of the war, there were around twenty Hachshara centres in Britain.
The best known was Whittingham House, twenty miles from Edinburgh, described by an admiring nonresident as ‘a little Jerusalem in Britain's green and pleasant land’.
Once the home of Lord Balfour, it was offered by his son, Viscount Taprain, for the training of 200 children in agriculture, horticulture and forestry.
Children from Youth Allyah and the RCM were housed there.
Almost immediately, there was a conflict of values between Youth Allyah and the presbyterian governors.
The school matron, herself a refugee, acted as an intermediary:
Well-meaning sponsors in London could be no less insensitive:
Teachers were in short supply and those who did volunteer were naturally steeped in the Scottish tradition of education.
The attempt by the first headmaster to run Whittingham as a Jewish Eton was not appreciated by the children.
Erich Duchinsky, a Youth Allyah worker, led the campaign to have him removed.
One of the younger teachers took over.
Nonetheless, an inquiry by Youth Allyah in the autumn of 1940 revealed a persistently unsatisfactory state of affairs.
It was understandable that most of the staff had no previous experience with Jewish children, but there seemed to be little effort to make contact.
Lessons took up only two hours a day and the farm work was badly organised.
But the faults were not all on one side:
Two new teachers were engaged and six Madrichim drafted in to inspire greater devotion to Zionism.
Nonetheless, the lack of  cohesive leadership took its toll, and by late 1939 thirty of the original 166 students had reneged on their undertaking to emigrate to Palestine.
By 1941, places at Whittingham were left vacant by departing eighteen-year-olds.
A year later, the school closed.
Those children remaining went to Dalton House near Edinburgh.
Despite the high praise lavished on Whittingham by Norman Bentwich, among others (he called it ‘the most romantic of the agricultural centres’), it was hardly a success story either for Youth Allyah or the RCM.
Conditions were just as tough at Great Engeham Farm in Kent.
Handed over in 1939 by Its owners In response to an advertisement in The Times, Youth Allyah decided to use it as a transit camp for refugee children who were waiting for permanent hachshara .
The farm itself housed twenty-five Czechoslovaks who were part of the overspill from Whittingham.
The RCM placed fifty children, the agricultural committee of the Council for German Jewry another thirty, and the Women's Appeal Committee sent a small group of Polish children.
They were all sent to work on neighbouring farms where pickers were in great demand.
Out of season they helped build up local defences by filling sandbags.
Fred Dunston (Fritz Deutsch), a Youth Allyah worker and former Scout leader from Vienna, was drafted in as an organiser of the transit camp, which was to be built on a large meadow across the road from the training centre at Great Engeham Farm:
Accommodation was provided by big marquees, high enough to take double-decker bedsteads.
Later on some old railway carriages situated on the farm were also used.
A kitchen, washing facilities and lavatories were to be built, camp style, in the open.
It was hoped to accomplish all this within a week.
This did not prove possible, but all the same the camp was soon in full swing.
A few army bell tents were put up quickly, but the marquees remained packed in huge bales while lorries kept arriving with yet more  gear.
Arrangements were further complicated by the arrival of an orthodox Bachad group who demanded a separate kosher kitchen all of their own, which they maintained right up to the time of their departure to Gwrych Castle at the outbreak of war.
Arguments between different factions of Madrichim and competition for the children's allegiance caused more headaches:
During the first two weeks about 180 children arrived at Great Engeham.
They went short on just about all the basic resources including water, which had to be transported over the fields in a two-wheeled handcart.
As there was no proper path, half the water was lost on the journey.
To keep up with demand, teams of carriers worked in shifts throughout the day.
There was consolation in knowing that others were worse off.
A party of girls who went on an outing to a local Guides' camp were surprised to find that the accommodation there was even more primitive than that at Great Engeham.
The only difference was that the Guides could look forward to returning to comfortable homes.
The abundance of physical work prevented Madrichim from spending enough time with the children, let alone helping them with their education.
This meant that the troublemakers, including many who did not want to come to Great Engeham in the first place, were given a pretty free run.
Fred Dunston and his fellow workers can recall children who ‘turned our hair grey’, they were so difficult to handle.
Even those who were prepared to join in found it difficult to understand what the camp was trying to achieve.
With the approach of war, the children responded to the danger by working more closely as a group, by exceeding their targets for filling sandbags, and by camouflaging their tents with foliage.
At this point the first contingent of Bachad children was sent off to their own training centre, Gwrych Castle, in Wales.
At the beginning of December 1939, Fred Dunstan was one of the adults who went with the last group of children from the transit camp to ‘Bydown’, not far from Barnstaple in North Devon.
This was an old country house with large grounds providing room for about sixty to seventy people.
Accommodation there was good in every respect and there was a good staff ratio  so that agricultural work and educational lessons could be organised properly in half daily sessions.
The local Refugee Committee took great interest in the centre, and visits to the pleasant town of Barnstaple were much enjoyed.
In March 1940, Fred, together with some adults, members of the Hechaluz and about twenty children from Bydown and other centres, moved into a house at Braunton, which was also not far from Barnstaple.
The work for this group had been arranged on a large but highly specialised farm, which concentrated on growing bulbs, flowers and potatoes.
However, from the Youth Allyah point of view, the general conditions on this farm as well as the work demanded from the children was totally unsuitable:
Under such unfavourable circumstances it was clearly not possible to pursue the Youth Allyah dream of creating a genuine community and to run it on democratic lines like a Kibbutz.
Everybody was far too exhausted.
It was hard enough for Fred Dunston in his  capacity as treasurer to decide on priorities for what little money was to spare.
After careful consideration, Fred Dunston explained the intolerable conditions to those concerned and it was decided to arrange for the return of the children to Bydown.
By and large, it was the same story at many of the smaller training centres.
At Hales Nurseries near Bournemouth, which took in over fifty children, conditions were very similar to those at Bydown.
The nurseries closed down in February 1940, with many of the children and adults moving on to Bydown and Braunton.
At Llandaff Castle near Cardiff, children from Gordonia, Young Macabee , Zionist Youth and B'rith Kodesh (all Jewish youth movements connected with Zionism) divided their days between agricultural work, housework and study.
At the outbreak of war, forty-five of these children were evacuated to the best known of all the agricultural training camps, Gwrych Castle in North Wales.
Gwrych Castle was offered rent-free by Lord Dundonald — who also made a grant towards rates and taxes and paid half the cost of repairs — a necessarily generous offer since the castle had been uninhabited for over fifteen years.
(Ignoring the dereliction of the building, Norman Bentwich described it as ‘one of the stately homes of Britain’.)
For Youth Allyah the greatest virtue of the castle was the land that came with it — 500 rough but serviceable acres.
The first residents arrived from Kent on 31 August 1939, a preemptive move against the imminent mass evacuation.
Erich Duchinsky was looking after them.
Striking images for the exhausted new arrivals!
But there was more to come.
They found that their only means of illumination was the collection of antique paraffin lamps and that there was only one boiler — which worked intermittently.
One of the latest inmates noted ruefully, ‘Too much water runs down the ceiling and walls, instead of the usual way, through the water pipes.’
Forty-six years on, John Edelnand, now living in Luton, revisited Gwrych Castle and the neighbouring village of Abergele and found his memories of the local people still clear:
Whatever their achievements in stimulating Zionist beliefs, and their powerful impact upon individual pupils, the farming centres failed in their immediate objective of providing a loyal and dedicated labour force for the emerging Palestine.
How could it have been otherwise?
In July 1939, a group of fifteen children from Great Engeham and Whittingham Farm School left for Palestine, but they were the last until after the war.
Meanwhile, those waiting for the chance to go soon passed the age of seventeen, the upper limit for Youth Allyah emigration visas.
No wonder that after the intense psychological preparation for the big move which never came, many became disillusioned with hachshara and left.
Gwrych Castle was abandoned by Youth Allyah in 1941.
The casualty list soon spread to other centres such as Clonin Castle and Millisle Farm in Northern Ireland, where travel restrictions made communication with central office in London all but impossible.
Finance too became a problem.
Before the war public appeals had raised sufficient money to keep Youth Allyah afloat, but, when it became clear that large numbers of children would not soon be leaving for Palestine, the question arose as to who would care for them during their prolonged stay in Britain.
In theory, those who worked on the farms were capable of supporting themselves.
In practice, the employment was seasonal and ill-paid, covering little more than the necessities of life.
In 1940, Lola Hahn-Warburg and Elaine Blond for the RCM joined with the Council for German Jewry to appeal for a state support for Youth Allyah .
They were unsuccessful.
For the rest of the war Youth Allyah depended on its own brave attempts at self-sufficiency and, when these failed, on charitable appeals and grants from the RCM.
Willingly to School
Middle-class children from a German Jewish background were weaned on a faith in learning as the way to a prosperous and fulfilling career.
In Britain their sights were lowered.
They were expected to leave school at fourteen and go out to work to earn a living or take up technical training.
After all, that was the prospect for the vast majority of British children.
Why, it was argued, should refugees be treated differently?
As a senior Home Office official put it to an RCM conference in October 1942: ‘A refugee should have treatment comparable to that of an average English child in receipt of free education’, adding, ‘It is not possible to provide continued education except in highly exceptional cases of brilliancy.’
All children were entitled to free elementary education up to the age of fourteen.
Thereafter, a limited number of free places at secondary and university level were open to stiff competition.
As newcomers to the British education system, not to mention the English language, refugee children started with two obvious disadvantages.
But even when these were overcome, and ‘brilliancy’ was proved beyond question, there was a psychological impediment which held back all but the most single-minded.
Dorothy Hardisty, General Secretary of the RCM, knew the problem and advised making the best of it:
Quite simply, refugee children, however gifted, were not encouraged to rise up the economic and social hierarchy.
The general view, extending to some members of the RCM, held that refugees belonged to the lower orders, and that no amount of hard work or intellectual promise on their part could alter their self-evident assumption.
One young refugee remembers: ‘When asked what I wanted to be I said a doctor.
The woman who was filling in the form said: ‘I can't put that down — you must remember you are a refugee.’
The prejudice was compounded by some foster parents who had a bias against education:
Jean's headmistress did not agree; nor did Bloomsbury House.
After a long argument, an offer from the Movement to take over financial responsibility for the girl's education persuaded Mrs Gross to change her mind, Jean stayed on at her grammar school.
When she came to England, aged five, Hannah was described as a bright if naughty child.
The pattern continued throughout her time at school, leading her foster father to conclude that her education was a waste of time:
What he did not know, until an RCM visitor winkled it out, was that Hannah wanted to study art.
Hannah was duly offered and accepted a place at Farnham.
With evacuation and the Movement's preference for rural settings for foster homes and hostels, younger children were often isolated in small village primary schools, where they were a curiosity to the other children and to the staff.
Struggling with an unfamiliar language, the simplest conversations were misinterpreted, as when Herbert Hobden (Holzinger) failed to understand why ‘yes’ was pronounced ‘yessah’at school until someone explained that it was the respectful way to address the teacher: ‘Yes, sir.
Many experienced the feeling of guilt by association.
And again:
Sensitivities were sharply attuned.
Vera Coppard, attending St Christopher's School at Letchworth, found it hard to take the persistent jokes about her being a Germany spy.
The not unfamiliar childish jape of depositing a stink bomb in her locker caused her great anguish.
Did they really hate her so much?
Another layer of guilt was added for brighter children who acclimatised sufficiently to start pulling ahead of their classmates.
Said one: ‘I lied about my birth but I realised I was different and always coming top of the class did not help.’
Teachers were by no means free from prejudice.
Even those who prided themselves on liberal views found it hard not to score points off the Germans, including refugee Germans.
‘British soldiers are the best in the world,’ a schoolmaster told his class, adding, for the benefit of the Kindertransporte pupils, ‘You people did not think we had it in us.’
The natural tendency was to lie low:
Probably the greatest difficulty for the RCM was in satisfying the needs of the older children, who had already achieved a sound basic education at home in Germany or Austria.
By rights, as Dorothy Hardisty pointed out, these young people should have been destined for college or university.
A British youngster from a poor background who gained higher school certificate had at least a chance of going on to university or technical college, with fees and maintenance paid.
Young refugees, however, were not eligible for state scholarships or state bursaries.
This effectively cut them out from higher education.
Their only hope was a university scholarship or exhibition and, though a small number of refugees did find their way into university by this route, it was more common for those who wanted to continue their studies to attend evening classes or sign on for correspondence courses.
Even so, cleverness and dogged determination were not always appreciated.
Klaus was a boy with a good school certificate who wanted to join ICI to work in chemical engineering.
His RCM contact could not resist a snide comment: ‘It is extraordinary that a boy of fifteen should have such a very high opinion of his capabilities.’
A happier story is that of Edward.
Born in 1936, he came to England three years later, followed shortly afterwards by his mother.
In 1944 he was awarded a free place as a weekly boarder at Rowan House School.
By the time he returned to Germany in 1948, his progress was such that his teachers were inspired to  proclaim: ‘He is a brilliant pupil…
An example to us all.’
Among those who campaigned tirelessly for gifted youngsters, knowing full well that there was more at stake than mere survival, was Greta Burkill.
As chairman of the Cambridgeshire Committee in effect, covering the whole of East Anglia — some 800 youngsters came within her province, although at the height of the evacuation this figure increased to 2000.
German born, her father a left-wing journalist, Greta went to school and university in Britain and married a Cambridge don, Charles Burkill, in 1928.
Always the true internationalist, Hitler's advent was her signal to pitch into refugee work.
The Cambridge Refugee Committee started life in the Quaker home of Hilda Sturge.
In 1935 the Committee moved to 35 Hills Road and then was given the large house next door — number 55 -by Jesus College.
Hilda Sturge took on responsibility for the adult refugees, while the Committee, with Greta acting as honorary secretary, looked after the children.
The Cambridge Committee brought over at least seventy guaranteed children from Germany, mostly teenagers, who were all given a decent education.
Private schools In the area were persuaded to offer places at reduced fees.
With two daughters of her own, Greta expanded her family by taking in the son of a German socialist who had been sent to a concentration camp, and a Viennese boy who adopted her name by deed poll.
She helped a succession of youngsters to take part-time degrees by getting them jobs as kitchen porters or trainee cooks.
In one year alone she was overseeing twelve undergraduates, of whom eleven emerged with first-class degrees.
One of her helpers was Nina Liebermann:
The early months of the war and the threat of an air attack on London brought a number of educational establishments to Cambridge — the London School of Economics, Guy's Hospital, St Bartholomew's and Bedford College among them.
It was difficult to imagine a more stimulating environment for bright children  who might otherwise have lost out on their education.
But life was never easy for the young refugee, as Greta Burkill later recorded:
Friedrich Bettelheim was one of the young people who benefited from Greta Burkill's efforts.
He came to England aged ten years old and at seventeen was taking his higher school certificate in physics and hoping to study medicine as a Major scholar at King's College.
He was young to be going up to Cambridge, but was taken on there and gained a first in Preliminary Natural Sciences.
Greta Burkill did not confine herself to looking after his education, but fought for him to spend a summer with his parents in Venezuela — a country not keen to grant visitors' visas to Jews at that time.
Despite such success stories, Greta Burkill's persistent correspondence with universities, the Education Ministry, the Home Office and the International Student Service (IS S) suggests a frightening lack of imagination in high places.
As the secretary of the ISS wrote to her in November 1943:
George Alexander Gruen was accepted by Winchester School and was about to sit for his Cambridge entrance when he was interned and shipped off to Canada in 1940.
Greta fought for his rehabilitation.
Returning in 1941, he was given lodgings by the Vicar of Trumpington, a grant by his school and £52 by the Movement.
He achieved a First in his preliminary examination at Trinity College, Cambridge and went on to also get a First in the History Tripos Part 1.
His studies were again interrupted, this time by a spell in the Intelligence Corps, from which he returned to Cambridge to complete Part 2 of the History Tripos.
D. K. Haymann gained a scholarship to St John's College from Gordonstoun, the school founded by Kurt Halm, the brother-in-law of Lola Hahn-Warburg.
But the scholarship was worth only £100 and, though his school plundered its scarce resources to add £20, it was not enough for the boy to support himself at Cambridge.
Hearing of his difficulties from Greta Burkill, the College contributed a further £50 and the Self-Aid Society for Refugees another £50.
His tutor raised what more was needed for financial security.
The constant battle for funds is echoed in the case of Fritz Buchwitz, a talented young mathematician.
He gained a £120 scholarship to Sidney Sussex College in Cambridge in 1943, but had no other financial help.
He was told to go up to Cambridge, despite a shortfall of £60 in his funds, and that his college would do its utmost to ensure that he could carry on with his studies.
Georg Kreisel gained a Major scholarship to Trinity College from Dudley Grammar School in 1941.
No other money was  available.
His housemaster wrote to Lord Baldwin asking for help, which led to an extra £150 per annum towards Georg's keep.
Lord Baldwin's generosity was well rewarded as Georg gained a double First in Mathematics in 1942 and went into research for the Admiralty.
Wolfgang Graetzer was another gifted pupil.
He went to Bedford Modern School in 1939 and, after only four terms, gained four distinctions and five credits in his School Certificate.
He was then sent out to work, first at a toy factory in the East End of London and then at an estate agents.
The International Student Service came to the rescue with a place at the Northern Polytechnic, with lodgings in a hostel guaranteed by the RCM.
There he gained an Intermediate BS, and then worked washing up plates and studying in the evening so that he gained a scholarship to Imperial College, where the ISS agreed to support him.
But the strain proved too much and Wolfgang became ill.
This was put down to his experiences in Vienna and the intense strain of his life after leaving school.
Eighty-one refugee children went to Bunce Court, the school Anna Essinger had brought over from the Schwäbische Alb mountains of the Danube to Otterden, a large manor house standing in twenty-five acres of Kent countryside.
Bunce Court was a progressive school.
The emphasis was on self-reliance, with the children free to work out their own solutions without a close-knit family environment.
Staff and pupils were on first name terms, so that Miss Clifton was Cliffy to her face, and Anna Essinger, who had been dubbed Tante Anna in German, was known simply as T A. The children contributed to the maintenance of their school, to the extent of making furniture and cleaning and repairing the building.
But, unlike other progressive schools, classroom teaching was firmly rooted in the German tradition with the highest priority given to academic excellence.
Clever, imaginative children like Leslie Brent did well at Bunce Court.
The eldest of a family of nine, Anna Essinger was a dominant personality with the physique to match.
A former teacher at Bunce Court, remembers her as:
Bunce Court took a broadminded approach to religion.
According to Leslie Brent, Anna Essinger was:
Nor was Anna Essinger much interested in Jewish nationalism.
But she did have an acute social conscience which Lucie Kaye, a former colleague, describes as ‘a Quaker mentality’.
And she was without question, a very courageous woman.
Those who found difficulty in settling at Bunce Court had to sort out their own problems.
There was no time for laggards.
Pupils and staff were under enormous pressure.
From the earliest days in England, Bunce Court was open to children whose families were victims of Nazi persecution.
At least a dozen pupils were educated free of charge on a promise that fees would be paid when the parents' situation improved.
(Some, who got to America, conveniently forgot their pledge.)
When the Kindertransporte began to arrive, Anna Essinger led a party of teachers and older pupils in trying to inject a semblance of education into the chaos that was Dovercourt.
But she soon fell out with those who dictated RCM policy.
She disapproved of the haphazard selection of foster parents (she would have much preferred the children to go to hostels run on the lines of Bunce Court) and, when the Movement pressed ahead anyway, she concentrated on plucking out from the crowd the children she identified as  especially gifted and on salvaging those who had been packed off to unsuitable foster homes.
A former pupil at the school remembers:
Private benefactors enabled the school to build two new dormitories, while thirty of the youngest children were accommodated in an old farmhouse.
There was never enough money for essentials.
Hardly a week passed without Anna Essinger setting off for London on a fund raising mission, invariably returning with promises to sponsor more refugee children.
The sharpest financial blow came in mid-1939, when the owner of Bunce Court decided she wanted to sell the freehold.
It was a choice of buy up or get out.
Somehow a mortgage was raised, but the diversion of resources frustrated Anna Essinger's attempts to add further to the number of admissions.
In May 1940, her problems were compounded by an evacuation order which transposed Bunce Court from Kent to Shropshire and by the internment of some of its best teachers.
The school occupied Trench Hall, a stately home which, having stood vacant for seven years, showed all the obvious signs of neglect.
This was when Anna Essinger's philosophy of self-help came into its own, not least in transforming the jungle of a garden to provide food for the entire school.
How Bunce Court got through the war it is hard to imagine, but get through it did and with flying colours, if the testimony of former pupils is anything to go by.
The school was that rare achievement — a family within an institution.
There was greater contentment there than within the average hostel or foster home and most certainly a greater sense of personal fulfilment.
The irony of Bunce Court was its failure to survive for very long after the war.
Anna Essinger's commitment to refugee children was extended into the peace by the arrival of youngsters who had survived the concentration camps.
But when they moved on the school lost its reason for being.
There were not many families with young children who welcomed a school with Teutonic  associations, however liberal, and the refugee label was a further disincentive to parents canvassing the choice of private education.
Having retired to a cottage on the estate, Anna Essinger appointed a successor, who fought a losing battle against falling rolls and proprietorial interference.
Bunce Court, the school, closed in 1949.
It reopened soon afterwards as a home for unmarried mothers.
There was a clear understanding between the RCM and the Home Office that youngsters who were already into their teens when they arrived in Britain in 1938 and 1939 should undertake some form of vocational training.
But there were four conditions to be met before permits were issued.
Two of them favoured refugees; their conditions of work had to be at least as good as those offered to British workers, and their employers had to provide real training as opposed to handing out menial jobs to what was essentially cheap labour.
But the other two conditions were tightly restrictive.
Young refugees were not allowed to compete with their British contemporaries, and the jobs open to refugees had to be specifically created for them.
This meant that farming was the likeliest occupation for RCM boys, even though they mostly came from urban professional and commercial backgrounds and had a positive aversion to rural life.
But the country needed food and there was a shortage of workers in this traditionally ill-paid industry.
In February 1941, the RCM circulated some 1500 fourteen-year-olds on the attractions of a career on the land:
The letter did not mention that, having made the choice, there would not be much chance of going back.
The policy of the labour exchanges towards boys who wanted to come out of farming was to refuse them alternative employment.
Clive Milton was one of the few who found that the open life did have its virtues:
Another occupation, essential to the war effort and which urgently needed more staff was nursing.
An RCM report on girls in nursing appeared in 1944, when the number of Kindertransporte volunteers in the profession passed the two hundred mark.
Training for nursing was on strictly formal lines, with great emphasis on turning out in a neat, starched uniform and on working to the rule book.
Comments in personal record cards dwell on disciplinary matters.
Many girls worked in minor clerical jobs and were encouraged to learn shorthand and typing skills at evening classes.
Brigitte, aged sixteen in 1943, hoped to give up her job as a messenger to do secretarial studies full time:
Brigitte did make enquiries at Pitmans, where classes started at five in the evening, and at the Kilburn Polytechnic, where there were weekend classes, but continued to doubt her ability to study enough at evening classes.
Menial work was easy to come by, either through the local Labour Exchange or through the Movement.
But the jobs were invariably dead-end and, despite the Home Office call for ‘real, training, wages were at subsistence level or below, which led to a succession of requests for small loans from the Movement.
Many girls and boys wandered from job to job, like Rosina Domingo:
When Bloomsbury House or a regional committee acted as a Labour Exchange, it was a case of take it or leave it — there was no time for career advice.
Claire Barrington worked in the tailoring trade:
After going to evening classes to study dress design, Claire hoped for better things, but was soon disillusioned when she found that her employer expected to use her designs without paying her.
She then tried a government training course in shorthand and typing but, lacking confidence, ended up as a filing clerk.
Herbert Gale came to England in December 1938, at the age of fifteen.
While in the transit camp at Lowestoft he was offered a choice of hostels in Belfast, Leeds or London.
He chose Leeds.
His regional committee found him work:
Philip Urbach fell on his feet when by chance he met a teacher from a school which was being evacuated to Wales.
The school was Summerhill, run by A. S. Neill, whose revolutionary views  on education have since had considerable influence on modern teaching methods.
Philip was taken on as a sort of pupil-teacher, helping with the children and also furthering his own education.
The tensions of wartime could easily turn anger against refugees who were thought to be getting privileged treatment.
Salomea was at the Cadby Nursery when, at short notice, several refugee nurses took up the chance of emigrating to America.
When Salomea tried to find another job, she was turned down because she had been given notice from her previous employment.
She went on to take a social science course and to train for general nursing.
Promotion for Hilde was not the cause for celebration she had expected:
The borderline between teasing and victimisation was easily crossed as Herbert Gale (Hans Groschler) discovered:
A familiar character in the annals of wartime prejudice was the busybody who made a vocation out of telling others how to behave.
There were those who took direct action against their tormentors.
Paula, aged twenty-three in 1945 and working for the Worcester Brass Company in Birmingham, had no hesitation in sticking up for herself: The report adds: ‘Paula is living a very bright life with plenty of entertainment and dancing, but she knows how many beans make five!,
Of the reports on problem children that came through to Bloomsbury House, in at least fifty per cent of the cases education, or the lack of it, was a contributory factor.
Youngsters who were found jobs and then left to their own devices invariably ended up lonely and frustrated.
They were different from other young workers and they were not allowed to forget it.
Feelings against refugees and things foreign, like a German accent, caused mysterious illness and bloody-mindedness.
Karl was judged to be a normal, pleasant boy when he started as a clerical assistant in February 1943, but he was soon complaining that the work he was given was boring and that his pay — 1/6d an hour — was not enough.
He was frequently sick, though the doctor could find nothing physically wrong with him, took to borrowing money which he did not pay back, and was averse to working or changing his clothes.
In July he was thrown out of his hostel and ended up at the Jews’ Temporary Shelter in the East End.
From there he was handed on to Bloomsbury House, where Elaine Blond agreed a one-off payment to fit him out for another job.
This ‘last chance’ produced ‘a wonderful change, both in the brightness and cleanliness of Karl’, and his supervisor had ‘the feeling that the chance given to him will be more than repaid’.
But within a fortnight Karl was back to zero —‘as bad as ever’.
Having lost one job he was interviewed at the Feltham Ordnance Factory, but was rejected as useless, ‘having fallen asleep while waiting to be given instructions’.
There followed a period of over a year when Karl moved aimlessly through a succession of jobs.
Then there was a police report.
Karl had been caught travelling the Underground without a ticket.
Bloomsbury House helped to get him off with a warning, but there was no further contact.
The last heard of Karl was at the end of the war when he had a job as a waiter.
There were occasions when Bloomsbury House pulled out all the stops on behalf of children who were clearly gifted — usually  in the arts.
At sixteen, Edgar gained a scholarship to the Royal College of Music in 1941.
Up to then he had been supported by the British Council, who now passed the buck to Bloomsbury House.
Edgar was offered a grant for six months; after that he was on his own.
It was long enough for him to persuade the Royal College of Music that his talent was worth taking seriously.
His scholarship was extended, but he was without maintenance until Bloomsbury House put him in touch with a sponsor.
In 1943 he was still doggedly pursuing his studies.
Help of a more immediately practical nature was given to Manan, a young pianist who was without a piano.
Bloomsbury House had the answer.
‘When the weather gets warmer she will be able to go and practise on the piano in the home of the Misses Montague — we will let her know when this is possible.’
Though not in the best of health, Marian was determined to make her own way, accepting little else from Bloomsbury House except tickets for the occasional outing to the Wigmore Hall.
Her last entry reads: ‘Letter from girl thanking us for concert tickets.
Informs us that she has managed to buy a piano with her savings.’
When no other funding was available, one or other of the wealthier members of the RCM could be relied upon to chip in a contribution.
Awarded a free place at Birmingham University to study music for three years, Peter was short of basics like clothes and books until Elaine Blond gave him £30 and arranged for Peter to work at Bloomsbury House in his holidays to help make up any shortfall.
Hans was sitting his finals, at the London School of Economics in 1947, when his father called Bloomsbury House and asked if his son could have a fortnight's convalescence at their expense as he was over-tired and very nervous.
The father had only been in the country six months and had no means of supporting his son.
Hans was sent to Bournemouth for a fortnight.
Also at the LSE, Hella was guaranteed £60 a year for the first two years of her course by Professor Harold Laski, the brother of Elaine Blond's first husband.
When he was no longer able to provide this, Dorothy Hardisty persuaded the International Student Service, who were already paying Hella £20 a year, to increase their grant.
Shortage of money was not the only impediment to higher education.
When Hannah declared her ambition to be a teacher, Bloomsbury House replied that it was doubtful ‘if she could be released from essential work to take up full-time study’.
Undeterred, two months later Hannah enrolled at University College, London to read French, having obtained her release from war work on medical grounds.
She had also found herself a sponsor to support her to the tune of £100 a year.
Bloomsbury House, asked to contribute £35 towards books, told her she was too late that term (it was November) and that she might possibly get a small emergency grant for the summer term (six months ahead) if she still needed it.
The case was passed on to German Self Aid, who Rave £50.
Would-be actors and actresses were rarely taken seriously by the Movement.
Having fallen in love with the theatre in the Free German Youth, a left-wing group dedicated to rebuilding Germany for socialism, Ruth called Bloomsbury House to say ‘she was very interested in dramatic work and hopes one day to take it up as a career’.
The weighty hint was ignored.
In May 1944, Ruth called again:
Two years on, Ruth made yet another bid to launch herself into her chosen career:
The records peter out before telling us if Ruth achieved her ambitions.
But if single-minded determination is a qualification for a stage career, Ruth had a better chance than most.
Another aspiring actress bitterly resented what she considered to be interference from Bloomsbury House.
Of Sonja, her RCM adviser wrote:
One month later, however, Sonja was working at Amersham Repertory Theatre as a student trainee — receiving no wages, but getting her maintenance paid by her ex-employer.
Of all the obstacles put in the way of young refugees entering the learned professions, none were higher and bulkier than those erected by the medical fraternity.
Very few beat the system and those who did were not much encouraged by Bloomsbury House.
Vera was a brilliant member of a very clever family of sisters.
At sixteen, having taken her Higher School Certificate, she was already preparing for her first MD examination.
Encouraged by Mr Lacey, her guarantor, who firmly believed that, young as she was, Vera would find a medical school to accept her, she applied to Kings College Hospital, the Royal Free Hospital and Glasgow Medical School.
Bloomsbury House reacted sceptically with a  half-hearted inquiry as to the Home Office attitude to refugee medical students.
But Vera did not wait on a Home Office ruling.
Having passed the equivalent of the first MD examination, the universities could hardly turn her away, though places were made conditional on her waiting for her eighteenth birthday before going up.
To occupy the intervening months she took a job in a hospital.
There was a lot to be said for knowing your place if you wanted help from Bloomsbury House.
Hermann clearly went about his interview in the wrong way:
The brush-off seems to have had the desired effect.
Subsequent entries on his report card show Hermann enjoying his new job delivering films to cinemas, paying off his debts and making toys in his spare time.
Appeals to Bloomsbury House to support job training and applications throw up some curious details: ‘Ruth needs 2 prs. knickers and 1 apron’— she got the first items but not the apron.
One frequent request was for containers in which to put belongings which were to be stored at Bloomsbury House: ‘Alice needs 2 wooden boxes and 1 cardboard container in which to put all her belongings…’
Very often special clothes were needed for work -gumboots and waterproofs for those working on the land, aprons and overalls for those in catering.
On the lower end of the job market, the most popular employer, certainly for girls, was Lyons.
The smart Corner Houses had an undeniable glamour in those dull days.
As Peter Morgan remembers: ‘Waitresses at the Corner Houses were called Nippies — all in black with a frilled apron and a frilly hat.
You couldn't get a job as a Nippy if you had anything more than an eighteen-inch waist.’
Bloomsbury House tried to dampen down the enthusiasm for Lyons — the uniforms were very expensive to provide — but many ended up working there.
Peter Morgan himself went on to be a waiter in London's foremost hotels.
As ever, the saddest cases were those where no amount of educational funding could improve their life's chances.
Margot was slow at her schoolwork, and, with little chance of improving, it was hoped that she would eventually emigrate to Palestine with her sister.
But in 1944, at the age of fifteen, she was judged to have the mental age of a child four years younger.
There was still some hope.
It was not to be.
In 1947:
Later in the year, a report from St George's Hospital was quoted:
When the 1945 Education Act broadened the entry to secondary and higher education, it became much easier for Bloomsbury House to deal with the more able children.
Susanne was one of these.
She gained the best School Certificate results at her school in  Norfolk and went on to take science subjects for Higher Certificate.
Now eligible for a county scholarship, it was no problem to encourage Susanne to think about a university course.
But for most, persistence and endurance were still the prerequisites of educational advance.
And even then, there was no guarantee.
Eva Maria, born in Berlin 1927, had a long and difficult struggle to get her higher education.
Described as ‘weak and difficult to deal with’, she was nonetheless accepted for Oldham Grammar School while living in one room with her mother — a ‘mentally weak person’ who worked night shifts.
Eva Maria wanted to be a teacher and was offered a place, after a couple of years, at St Katherine's Training College.
She struggled to get finance together and qualified in 1947.
In 1951, she received an LCC grant and was able to study full-time at London University.
For Eva Maria, persistence and endurance paid off.
She was one of the few.
War Effort
When Peter Prager left his family on 23 December 1938, he had only one thing on his mind:
He was aged fifteen at the time; seven years later his dream came true.
In 1945 he joined the army as a civilian in the censorship division and worked in Berlin.
His teenage resolution was shared by many young refugees, though when it came to offering their services they found that joining up was not as simple as the recruiting posters had led them to believe.
Captain Bernard Davidson had been one of Otto Schiff's adjutants on the Refugee Committee before his appointment by the War Office as recruiting officer for the aliens and refugees.
At first, there was not much to do.
It took some time for the War Office to be persuaded that fugitives from the enemy could usefully serve their adopted country.
In 1940, any refugee of military age was less likely to be called up than to be sent down, to an internment camp.
But as the fear of invasion receded and the public outrage at the scandals of the Arandora Star and the Dunera made itself known, refugees moved up in the War Office estimation.
It was not far, it has to be said, but far enough for enrolment with the Auxiliary Military Pioneer Corps, later known as the Royal Pioneer Corps, to secure release from internment.
The Pioneer Corps was non-combatant, though volunteers had to accept the risks ‘of being employed in any theatre of war’.
It was the least glamorous sector of the army, undertaking labour of all kinds: construction work, handling of stores behind the lines, digging latrines.
British subjects who were too old or otherwise unsuitable for active service found their way to the Pioneer Corps.
From 1940 they were joined by thousands of refugees who were keen to serve in some capacity, however lowly, and equally keen to escape internment.
The first training centre for refugee recruits to the Pioneer Corps was the Kitchener Camp at Richborough in Kent.
From there, five companies, each of 300 men, went to France in the early months of 1940.
When the British Expeditionary Force was ordered to retreat, the Pioneers were issued with rifles, machine-guns and anti-tank weapons to help fight the rearguard action on the withdrawal to Dunkirk.
All five companies returned safely and, with the prospect of invasion looming nearer, the training centre was moved from Richborough to the West Country.
Alien soldiers, who might be treated as traitors by invading Germans, were too much at risk so near the south coast.
The fear of invasion was a powerful factor in many refugees' lives.
Kurt Weinburg, evacuated to Cornwall with his school, was active in the Boy Scouts, spending much of his spare time on salvage collections.
Naturally, he was on the lookout for more exciting activity.
Kurt was able to sign up without first enduring the humiliation of internment.
Older boys, who had a spell on the Isle of Man or in one of the other internment camps, had first to be interviewed by Captain Davidson.
With only one medical officer on hand, their release took some time.
Passed fit, they were encouraged to anglicise their names before filling out identity cards and soldiers' books.
The warning was clear.
If they kept to German names and were captured they would be treated as traitors.
Many members of the alien companies of the Pioneers chafed against the restrictions of their service.
They wanted to join one of the fighting services and be eligible for promotion like British soldiers.
But, in the early days of the war, even the most gifted were spurned.
Here is Fritz Braunthal who, judging by his letters, was a highly intelligent eighteen-year-old.
He was, he told Greta Burkill, intent  on persuading the Cambridge University recruiting board to offer him a place on an officer training course.
Two months later he got his answer from Colonel Murray of the Cambridge University Senior Training Corps.
Fritz turned again to Greta Burkill:
As always, Greta was prepared to take up the challenge (‘We might put pressure on the War Office at this end’), but was forestalled by an offer from another direction.
‘I have not yet joined the Pioneers,’ wrote Fritz on 15 November, ‘but I have got myself a job as a radio reporter with the United Press of America.
It is tremendously interesting and suited to my qualifications as a knowledge of languages is essential to the job.’
He added, ‘But I would chuck it immediately if I could get into the army.’
On his behalf, Great Burkill made one more assault on the establishment, only to receive from the university the final brush off.
Those who could not take the Pioneers at any price had the option of training for essential civilian work.
This is why Victor, with his higher school certificate in physics, chemistry, maths and German, ended up on a mining course at Chesterfield Technical College.
He spent his war at the Bolsover Colliery in Derbyshire.
Others became farm labourers.
Towards the tail end of 1942, the military embargo on refugees was beginning to weaken.
The prospect of a long war with the inevitable increase in demand for service manpower was a critical factor.
But the realisation that the refugee community was not riddled with spies and fifth columnists helped to soften official attitudes.
Volunteers with technical qualifications were accepted for the Engineers, Ordnance and the Service Corps.
The first fighting unit thrown open to refugees was the International Commando Unit.
Those who joined knew full well that they were liable to be dropped behind enemy lines.
As Lord Mountbatten said of them:
With the refugees giving such good account of themselves, the case for the surviving restrictions was fatally weakened.
By 1943, they were free to offer their services to any part of the military except the Signals; 800 Pioneers went into technical units, 650 to combatant units of the infantry and armoured corps, 450 to the Intelligence Corps and specialist formations, 300 to the Commandos, the Airborne troops and the special forces, and over 100 to the Navy and the Royal Air Force.
Leslie Brent, who was young enough to have avoided internment but was nonetheless classified as an enemy alien, joined the forces in 1944:
Many refugees found themselves in the same position.
As the Allies advanced across the continent, there was a huge demand for interpreters and for interrogators to interview German and Austrian prisoners of war.
The Intelligence service was even prepared to give young Hans a second look, even though he was not a prepossessing sight.
He had been working at tar Processing and the fumes had given him an unpleasant skin complaint.
He also seemed to be rather boastful and above himself.
But his appearance was misleading.
In an interview with the Intelligence Department of the Foreign Office, he showed great promise as an interpreter.
He joined the Civilian Branch of the Army of Occupation in Germany and in 1945, at the age of twenty-two, became an interpreter with the US Air Force.
The final comment on his report card reads: ‘Still the same old boaster…’
Howard Franks interrogated German POWs in England and Norway:
Clive Milton, too, worked as an interpreter:
Later he returned to England to work in a POW camp:
Some of those who served with the Forces on the continent were brought close to areas where their families had lived, or where friends and relatives had last been heard of.
Sometimes the compulsion to try and trace them was irresistible, as Alfred Cooper found:
Towards the end of the war, Alfred joined the Jewish Brigade.
Recruitment was mainly in Israel, but the Brigade was part of the British Army and was stationed in Italy, Holland and Western Germany.
Alfred went to Germany with the Brigade after the war and was stationed at Bielefeld, a German army camp taken over by the British:
The Jewish Brigade was composed of ardent Zionists who carried their missionary zeal through the displaced persons camps of Europe.
It seemed like home to Henry Schwartz, though it came as a surprise to find that he was not immediately accepted.
After VE day:
Discipline in the Jewish Brigade was of a sort unknown in any conventional army:
Soldiers serving elsewhere in the British forces were liable to encounter problems with their Jewish identity.
Clive Milton:
Herman Rothman found that his religion and the army were ill matched.
Lothar, one of the RCM's more difficult cases, had troubles of a different kind during his time in the forces.
While working at Lyons Corner House in April 1942, he came out in spots.
This was diagnosed as impetigo, an unpleasant and contagious affliction.
At the end of 1942, out of work, he was advised to apply for the Pioneer Corps and was accepted.
However, the Pioneer Corps sent him straight back, insisting he was suffering from VD.
Lothar replied that he simply had a skin complaint that could be cleared up in a few days.
Then Bernard (now Major) Davidson was informed that Lothar was suffering from scabies.
The recruiting officer stuck by this diagnosis, although Lothar's specialist at the Charing Cross Hospital passed him A1.
Eventually he enlisted.
In February 1943, the RCM received several desperate letters from Lothar, who was in hospital, but would not say what was wrong with him.
Two months later:
The truth was never revealed, though it seems likely that Lothar suffered an injustice.
In any event, he left hospital to resume  training on 15 April and later in the year was planning on getting married.
Young refugee women enlisted in the Women's Auxiliary Territorial Service.
(The RCM annual report for 1940–1941 lists eighty of their girls with the ATS.)
Lady Cohen, wife of Lord Justice Cohen, was appointed senior commander in that Force, with the responsibility of recruiting alien women and looking after their welfare.
Other girls joined the Women's Auxiliary Air Force Service (WAAFS), the Land Army and the National Fire Service.
Many more, of course, were helping the war effort in the nursing profession.
Ya'acov Friedler, interned with his sister on the Isle of Man, remembers the first signs of the change of heart towards enemy aliens:
Lore Selo, working her fingers to the bone as a maid-cum-housekeeper in Finchley, was thrilled to meet a cousin of hers in uniform:
Lore was shocked by the general standard of hygiene:
Starting as a mess orderly, Lore was eventually transferred to North Wales.
Lore went as a receptionist to an army hospital in Abergele and then was posted to Canterbury, where she worked for Personnel Selection.
Six alien companies of the Pioneer Corps accompanied the allied invasion.
Many refugee servicemen were decorated and many gave their lives to their adopted country.
In 1943, men who had been invalided out of the Pioneer Corps formed an ex-servicemen's club, identified by the initials NB — non-British.
The club survives and organises reunions every year.
Short Straws
Children who were required to go out to work at fourteen, that is, the great majority of British teenagers, could hardly be blamed for assuming the right to lead their lives as they saw fit.
In reality, their freedom was closely con fined.
Those who came from more or less stable families were generally restrained from the wilder flights of liberty by parental influence, an influence reinforced by the economic advantages of continuing to live at home.
But for refugee children these social conventions seldom came into play.
An overcrowded hostel was naturally keen to dispose of its more mature residents to make way for a fresh intake, while the foster parent was, by definition, a temporary parent offering short-term security against long-term uncertainty.
With rare exceptions, refugee children were expected to leave home as soon as they could fend for themselves.
With only the staff at Bloomsbury House and their regional offices as the long stop for advice and modest practical assistance, it is not surprising that a high proportion of Kindertransporte veterans, possibly as many as one in ten, found themselves up against the police or other bastions of social authority.
The personal files held by the RCM reveal a sorry procession of young people who tried to solve their problems by turning to petty crime.
A typical example was Gert, a complex boy who confused Bloomsbury House visitors.
To one he was ‘highly intelligent and showing creative ability’; to another his intelligence  was not above the ordinary’; he was more the show-off who had an ‘exaggerated idea of his age and importance’.
Both observers were disturbed by Gert's laughter, ‘which appears to ring with hysteria’.
A few days short of his fifteenth birthday, Gert attempted suicide, cutting his wrist and jumping from a third-floor window.
He had been caught stealing from a friend and had reacted ‘hysterically, to the inevitable reprimand.
There followed a succession of minor criminal offences, mostly against youngsters with whom he shared lodgings.
No record of medical or psychiatric treatment appears in Gert's file, though there were persistent efforts to persuade him to pay off his debts from his earnings as a packer on an assembly line.
By August 1941, when he was sixteen, he had an evening and weekend job as a trolley boy in Lyons Piccadilly Brasserie.
Whatever he was doing with the extra money, he was not settling accounts with those he had defrauded.
The police were called in.
Gert had been reported for selling torch batteries, which he said his employer had given him.
He was put on two years’ probation.
The last heard of Gert was in 1943 when he tried and failed to join the RA F. Bloomsbury House urged him to settle for the Pioneers.
At this distance it is impossible to tell if Gert could have made more of his early life if he had been given the chance to make use of the ‘creative ability’ spotted early on by one of his helpers.
But it is a fair assumption that many young refugees fell foul of authority out of sheer frustration with undemanding and tedious work, usually at subsistence wages.
The intervention of Bloomsbury House forestalled a likely prison sentence for Otto, who stole money from his landlady and his employer.
What made the case stand out was the motivation for Otto's pilfering.
The proceeds went on tickets for West End theatre, where the boy spent all his free evenings.
Predictably, he wanted above all else to be an actor but, when he had the chance of realising his ambition by working overseas, for some reason the Home Office refused an exit permit.
But in 1945 he was allowed to join the US Army — as a civil censor.
Because it was hard for young refugees to find decently paid jobs (all else being equal, refugee status was a disqualification in the eyes of most employers), they were frequently in debt.
The more assertive and imaginative found honest ways to supplement their regular wage packet.
Margaret and her friends collected old clothes, converted them into dusters and sold them out of a suitcase in the Camden market and to old clothes dealers.
Others just continued borrowing until they ran out of luck or excuses.
Then came the blustering denials of any intention to act dishonestly, which did little to help their cause though many were sincere.
Appeals for advice on how to handle this boy or that girl who owed money arrived daily at Bloomsbury House.
The appeals were made as often in sorrow as in anger.
What more, for example, could Mr Marshall have done for Helmut?
Out of the kindness of his heart he had let him have a job in his shoe repair shop.
The boy showed little talent for the business and hardly earned the £2 10s Mr Marshall paid him at the end of the week.
But his employer recognised that, after Helmut had paid for his lodgings (fifteen shillings for a room and ‘a rather meagre breakfast’), there was little enough to live on.
No wonder Helmut was seen ‘loitering around after working hours’; no wonder he burst into tears at the slightest provocation; and no wonder he was in debt.
Little was done for him in the three years up to his seventeenth birthday when, like so many others, he found companionship and, ironically, the security he craved for by joining the army.
Helmut's problems were compounded by an unsatisfactory relationship with his landlady who ‘is just on eighty years of age and has a large house to keep clean with no help whatever’.
Predictably, she was not sympathetic to the boisterous ways of a young teenager, though she did not go so far as a Mrs Dudley who complained to Bloomsbury House that one of her fifteen-year-old lodgers, Willy, had ‘broken the beading on a wardrobe and had also broken a chair’, offences which most parents of healthy teenagers would have accepted as part of growing up.
Friction led to furious rows and the rows led to Willy demanding that he should be allowed to take a room where he could look after himself.
The RCM seemed to be prepared to go along with this, until they discovered that Willy was also in trouble with his employer, a Jeweller who caught the boy pocketing a silver cigarette case.
No excuses were offered.
Willy voiced the philosophy he had learned by experience — it was everyone for himself; if you didn't take what you wanted, no one was likely to give it to you.
It was only because his employer did not want to waste his time in court proceedings that Willy escaped probation and a possible jail sentence.
There were those in the Movement who regretted that the police were not brought in.
This was not so heartless as it might seem.
Before the Guardianship Act of 1943, the RCM had next to no real power to restrain a youngster who showed signs of getting out of control.
The police and the probation service, on the other hand, could impose sanctions, though whether they would have had any effect on Willy, who ‘was extremely rude and behaved very badly towards all authority’, is open to doubt.
In the end it was Dorothy Hardisty, ever patient but determined, who persuaded Willy to take up agricultural training in North Wales.
In this way, she reasoned, he would be removed from the temptations of the city.
Willy agreed to go as long as he was given a return fare.
He wanted to be sure he could return to London if he didn't like his new job.
His file closes with his departure to Brecon in March 1942.
Since further complaints against him would almost certainly have been recorded, it is a fair guess that he took to the open life.
As a first cause of resentment against authority, falling out with employers was as common as falling out with landladies.
Too often a job, any job, for a refugee child was seen as bestowing a great favour in return for which sacrifices were expected.
Heinz was a sheet metal worker.
In January 1945 ‘he was welding a tank which contained two gallons of paraffin.
The heat of the welding compressed the air inside the tank which, together with the acetylene flame, blew the tank open, causing a flame to shoot out and burn Heinz.’
It turned out that the foreman had not warned Heinz that the paraffin might explode.
Indeed, he had categorically denied that there was any danger.
This may have been because he was ignorant or stupid but, reading between the lines of Heinz's file, it is more likely that the foreman had taken against his young charge who was ‘very intelligent and conceited’.
(How often are those two descriptions juxtaposed in RCM reports, the apparent ‘conceit’ paraded as justification for distrusting cleverness.)
In any event, Heinz was off work for two months before embarking on a steady descent of menial jobs, ending up as a kitchen cleaner.
In 1948 he was found guilty of breaking and entering.
Despite representations from the RCM, Heinz was deported to Germany.
It was, as one refugee worker put it, ‘the easy way out’ and it solved nothing.
There were many cases where Bloomsbury House was involved not at all, or only at the last moment when it was generally too late to offer any constructive help.
When Max ‘lifted’ some cash at his hostel in north London, ‘the only person who appeared at court was the German who ran the hostel.
I didn't like him at all and we didn't get on.
He wanted to tell the judge how to deal with me, but fortunately the judge was more understanding.
I had to stay in prison for a couple of weeks before going to an approved school in Hayes, Middlesex.’
The first the Movement knew of Beno's trouble was when a sharp-eyed refugee worker spotted a news item in the Evening Standard .
Beno was brought up before the magistrate at Bow Street, accused of posing as a Russian Air Force officer, and being in possession of eleven rounds of rifle ammunition without a certificate.
As the case was held over there was just time for Dorothy Hardisty to intervene.
She told the court that she had known eighteen-year-old Beno for three years, that in 1941 he had lost his power of speech when his lodgings suffered a direct hit, and that thereafter he had lived with the fantasy of becoming an air force officer.
Beno was fined five pounds and told to get a job more suitable to his talents.
While Bloomsbury House sensibly avoided general rules for dealing with problem cases, there was one guiding principle in the campaign against delinquency.
‘At all costs’, wrote Dorothy Hardisty in one of her reports to the RCM executive, ‘we must try to dissuade our boys and girls from believing that London is the answer to all their prayers.’
Her concern was entirely understandable.
The big city was a powerful draw to youngsters who were looking for the chance to better themselves.
By the spring of 1943, there were nearly 2200 RCM children in London, an increase of one-third on the previous year.
With the labour force depleted by the military, there were jobs to be filled, and at better rates of pay than elsewhere in the country.
But London offered too many hostages to fortune at a time when all foreigners were suspect, and the police were inclined to arrest first and ask questions afterwards.
The most common offence was to break the curfew, aliens were not supposed to be out on the streets after eleven.
Seldom was any harm intended but, however genuine, excuses  were invariably noted by the police under the heading of suspicious behaviour.
When Philip Urbach was pulled in, he was on a tour of discovery of the East End.
A more ambitious escapade took Johnny Blunt and a friend on a hitchhike from London to Glasgow.
Here they were committing two sins of omission — the failure to be indoors by 11 p.m. and the failure to notify the police of a change of address.
But luck was with them.
The row blew over as it did for Kurt Weinburg, who was taken out by an older friend for a night on the town.
They had dinner at the Trocadero in Shaftesbury Avenue before taking in the late show at the Windmill Theatre.
Less fortunate was Karl, whose troubles were noted at Bloomsbury House.
Subsequently the boy was held in Brixton Prison for several weeks under a deportation order while Dorothy Hardisty lobbied the Home Office.
Eventually Karl was released and the deportation order lifted on a promise by the RCM that accommodation and a job were waiting for him.
The punishment for trivial offences could go well beyond the magistrate's ticking-off or the nominal fine.
When Charlotte, ‘a delicate and capable young person’, was caught travelling on the Underground without a ticket, it was not the 3s 6d fine that bothered her so much as the magistrate's warning that, in consequence, her application for naturalisation might be rejected.
Once more Bloomsbury House made a timely intervention, as often happened when the Movement could be persuaded that the offender was basically good at heart.
Judging by the records a full confession accompanied by a fair amount of grovelling was the surest way to create a favourable impression.
Thus, Kurt got away with receiving stolen goods to the value of £3 10s by pleading an unselfish motivation to help his girlfriend and her three-month-old baby, while Nissi, whose bearing ‘was very humble and apologetic’, was discharged after being caught red-handed taking cigarettes from a bombed-out tobacconist's.
Less fortunate was twenty-year-old Leo who, in early 1944, set up as a freelance photographer without first obtaining formal documentation from the Home Office.
The Movement took against him, not so much because he had neglected the bureaucratic niceties, but more because he was ‘a weedy, conceited, unattractive young man’ who did not respond to exhortations to join the war effort (presumably by swapping his camera for a pick and shovel).
When he applied to the court for permission to marry, as he was required to do since he was under twenty-one and did not have a recognised guardian, the magistrate at Bow Street refused ‘as he was not in favour of a British girl marrying an alien’.
The RCM expressed itself powerless to intercede.
Thereafter, Leo's  relationship with his adopted country dipped to the point where he was charged with stealing a car, sentenced to six months and recommended for deportation.
By now he was of an age to make his own decisions, the first of which was to marry the English girl to whom he had been engaged for two years.
This did not prevent his deportation.
In July 1947 he returned illegally and appealed for help to the RCM, whose representative advised him to give himself up.
On his record card appears a brief, dismissive comment: ‘It is pointless for the committee to intervene.’
Leo was sent back to Germany.
When boys tried for easy money they generally sold what belonged to others; when girls were similarly tempted they were more inclined to sell themselves.
The warning had no effect.
Within days sixteen-year-old Anita was again in a police report.
The accusation of soliciting was avoided, but she did appear to be on friendly terms with rather too many American and Canadian soldiers.
It was time for a straight talk from Dorothy Hardisty.
It was wasted effort.
Less than a fortnight later a panic call from Mrs Brodowitz revealed that Anita was engaged to a man she had known for only two days —‘a real Cockney, who appears to have a lot of money’.
The story went that he was a dealer in jewels and furs who had been discharged from the army after Dunkirk.
There was barely time for Dorothy Hardisty to draw breath before Mrs Brodowitz, now, understandably, ‘in a state of nerves’, came back with more news.
Anita's fiancé was not as he described.
For one thing he had discharged himself from the army and was listed as a deserter; for another, he had a wife and two children ‘somewhere in Norfolk’.
The only consolation and the reason why Mrs Brodowitz was so well informed was that the man had been spotted by the military police and was now in prison.
Anita took all this in her stride.
Back at Bloomsbury House for another chat with Dorothy Hardisty, she gave a dramatic rendering of ‘a blazing row’ with the other woman.
‘It was very apparent that she had thoroughly enjoyed acting the lady’, noted Mrs Hardisty.
But while Anita ‘maintained an indifferent and callous manner’ towards the affair, the RCM could do no more than appeal to her better instincts.
Dorothy Hardisty had no doubt that she was wasting her time.
Shortly afterwards, Anita left the hostel and took a room of her own.
Thereafter for three years, her RCM file records without comment a succession of job and address changes.
In 1946, Anita married an American army lieutenant and left for the States.
Her file was closed.
There were girls who persistently stayed out late, girls who kept bad company and girls who drank too much.
No doubt many more boys were up to the same tricks, but convention ruled that they were better able to look after themselves.
Hence, their files give little indication of misdemeanours, which take up whole pages when girls were involved.
This was bad luck on Helga, who got drunk with an American soldier and was not allowed to forget it, and on Hildegard, who was taken in by the police when she was seen talking to an ex-convict, but worked in favour of Martin, who made quite a business out of playing cards for money but who was judged ‘on the whole to be doing no worse than any other boy of his age in his particular Position’.
This opinion had soon to be revised.
Martin was arrested in possession of an unloaded  revolver.
He had planned to hold up the cash desk of an Oxford Street store.
Getting caught before the crime designated Martin as an amateur.
He might have learned a thing or two from twin brothers Walter and Theo who began, successfully, to take what they wanted in 1944 when they were eighteen.
Walter made quite a business from stealing rationed food from the grocer he worked for and selling it on the black market, while Theo dealt mostly in men's clothes which he shifted on to a second-hand dealer who paid ready cash.
The partnership came to an end in 1947 when Walter got away to the United States.
Theo took a shorter journey -to Wormwood Scrubs, where he did four months' hard labour.
Curiously, he was not deported, a sentence which in the two years immediately after the war was handed down to at least fifty young people who had come over on the Kindertransporte .
Once a recommendation for deportation had been made it was rare for the Movement to try to reverse the order, though the irony of sending youngsters back to the source of their unhappiest memories was not lost on refugee workers.
They seem to have taken the view that deportation was justified as a last resort when the victim had persistently ignored warnings, and when nothing further could be done to achieve his rehabilitation.
But deportation was also an option for shifting a problem to another authority.
The temptation to take the easy way out was well-nigh irresistible with youngsters who had failed to make their way (probably through no fault of their own) and who showed their resentment.
Joseph was a prime candidate for deportation.
It would have needed a later generation of social workers, free from the prejudices of war, to detect the frustration behind the mask of ingratitude and disloyalty.
In 1945 the superficial judgement invariably carried the day.
Joseph had to go.
By far the greater part of the RCM's counselling work was with youngsters who suffered physical and mental breakdown.
This was wholly predictable.
Being on a Kindertransport was, in itself, a traumatic experience that left its mark on otherwise balanced and healthy children.
But other shocks to the system followed in quick succession: a new language and culture; the insensitivity, not always unintentional, of foster parents, teachers and hostel administrators; the cruelty of other children (and some adults) who equated all things German with Nazism; the coming-to-terms with the long-term or permanent loss of family and friends who had been left behind, and the awareness that refugees could not expect to be treated other than as second-class citizens — to mention only the common causes of illness and depression.
The refugee workers at Bloomsbury House, led in this context by Lola Hahn-Warburg, did their best.
All of them volunteers with nothing but a rudimentary knowledge of psychology and, possibly, their own experience as parents to help them, they grappled with problems that challenged the skills of the best doctors and psychiatrists.
At twenty-one Renate did not have the most exciting job in the world, but with her German friends on a radio assembly line she seemed happy and settled.
She was an active trade unionist and had lately been elected a shop steward.
Then, in February 1944, her face became disfigured by red blotches and her skin started peeling.
Her doctor told her she had dermatitis and recommended treatment which had no effect.
When she called in at Bloomsbury House for a routine chat, her adviser noted that she ‘looks very dirty and neglected and is taking no pride at all in her personal appearance’.
Within a month Renate had lost her job (‘the complaint was that the girl was too slow’) and had suffered a sharp decline in health, having contracted chronic catarrh, nervous debility and eczema of the scalp ‘which made her unable to summon up the courage to get a haircut after a hairdresser had been very rude to her on the subject’.
It took over a year of counselling and treatment to restore Renate to a semblance of ordinary life.
By then she could just about face up to the knowledge she had been trying to resist since February 1944; that every last member of her family had died in the concentration camps.
Histories of debilitating ailments and depression such as Renate's  occur over and over again in the RCM records.
In nine cases out of ten, it did not take a professional analyst to detect the cause of the problem.
It was the cure that was so elusive.
What was to be done for Liselotte, who showed signs of severe mental stress from the age of five?
By late 1943, when Liselotte was approaching her seventh birthday, she had taken to banging her head, a symptom which worried her foster mother more than her doctor, who ‘could not be persuaded to view the matter very seriously’.
What was then judged professionally to be a passing phase continued for over four years.
It was not until 1946 that a psychiatrist was called in.
His entry on Liselotte's file portrays her as ‘a lively child but mentally backward’.
After detailing her mental history he added, ‘Lotte has vivid fantasies and has built a whole world of dreams.
Her head banging suggests a kind of infantile masturbation.
She is a discouraged child who needs love.’
It was a remedy frequently recommended but less often applied.
Foster parents were not always equipped to cope with the vagaries of their own children, let alone the problems of outsiders.
It was one thing to offer hospitality, quite another to extend the boundaries of tolerant understanding to dark moods and sudden rages, even when these could be attributed to horrific experiences in earlier childhood.
While children were very young it was possible to muddle through.
The boy who deliberately confused English and German to create a language all to himself, the girl who pulled off her toenails, the boy who refused to speak for days on end, the girl who hid all her possessions and swore that others had stolen them -all these and many more were classed as difficult but just about manageable.
It was when they grew up that the problems really started.
There was, for instance, Max who, as an early teenager, complained that he was without friends.
Max was said to be in the grip of some form of neurosis, but it was assumed that he would grow out of it.
A year after his first interview at Bloomsbury House, he was still saying that ‘he really  wanted some particular friend who would take a close interest in him’.
Now, however, he wanted a girlfriend.
He must have tried hard because soon afterwards there was a report of an engagement.
But it was soon broken off which ‘left him feeling rather lonely’.
And that was it until December 1946, when Max was arrested in Hyde Park.
He was charged with assault on a woman.
Suddenly, his inability to attract friends took on a new significance.
A psychiatrist was called in and Max was given the treatment he needed, but only after serving a month in Brixton.
The tendency for psychiatric disorders to show up more dramatically as the victims emerged from childhood helped to shift the focus of RCM counselling.
As the war progressed, there was greater emphasis on professional advice, a trend which accelerated sharply after Germany's defeat when the nightmare of the holocaust made its full impact on those who had been saved from the gas chambers.
One of the many who took upon himself the suffering of his parents was Norbert.
Often in trouble with the police, he was unable to keep any job for more than a few weeks.
He spoke constantly of his feelings of guilt.
Eventually he was admitted as a voluntary patient to Napsbury Hospital, where he was diagnosed as schizophrenic.
He stayed at the hospital until 1949, when a Bloomsbury House visitor reported: ‘He looks extremely well, but unshaven…he is in an open ward and has quite a lot of freedom…
Said he only saw me because he knew I would bring a present.’
Norbert was sent back into the real world, but within weeks he had registered as a disabled person and returned to the hospital.
There was talk of performing a lobotomy, a last-resort operation for schizophrenia involving the removal of tissues in the frontal lobes of the brain.
But for some reason it was decided not to go ahead.
Instead he was put in a hostel where a nurse could keep an eye on him.
The final entry on his record card reads: ‘Norbert reports regularly to the Labour Exchange, but has no intention of working.
He is not easy at the hostel and it is possible that he will have to return to hospital, but at the moment he is not certifiable.’
The question of a lobotomy was debated in every case where the patient was diagnosed schizophrenic.
The uncertain effects of the operation (though some remarkable results had been achieved) ruled out hasty decisions.
On at least two occasions a lobotomy was considered and rejected for Alfred, who became ill in late 1943.
As a certified inmate of Friern Hospital, Iris behaviour stability periodically, keeping alive the hope that time would be the healer.
But in early 1949:
The operation took place but with little to show for it.
Though ‘physically improved, a little fatter…
Alfred did not seem to understand what I said to him.
Suddenly he tried to make some sexual advances.
I had to ask the nurse to take him away…’
Alfred remained at Friern Hospital.
His file closes with routine entries on gifts of cigarettes and allocations for pocket money.
Norbert and Alfred are representative of the thirty-six young refugees held in mental hospitals in 1945.
They were joined by up to a dozen others by the end of the decade but, since the records do not give a clear indication of how far treatment was effective, there can be no precise figure for the number of serious cases at any one time.
All we know is that there were success stories, including at least one lobotomy.
More typical is the partial cure where the doctors could say that the treatment was worthwhile but the future uncertain.
This is how it was for Regina who from 1942, when she was eighteen, suffered numerous breakdowns.
First admitted to Maudsley Hospital with a ‘sudden onset of schizophrenia’ and given insulin shock treatment, she was soon sufficiently recovered to consider a return to work.
But a factory job was out because she could not stand the noise, and her preference for a more intellectual activity ‘is rather pitiful in view of the girl's lack of general education and the nature of her former illness’.
The Movement came to her aid by sending her on a secretarial  course and finding her a part-time job with a City accountant.
In 1947, when she was 23, Regina married.
A month later this apparently ‘happy and contented’ young lady was back in hospital ‘in a very confused state and confined to bed’.
A visitor reported:
Regina was back home and expecting a baby by the end of the year.
She was said to be ‘strained and suspicious’, but insisted she was well and did not need help.
Her file closes with Regina and her family emigrating to Israel.
By the end of the war, Bloomsbury House maintained a small department of welfare workers whose job it was to care for the chronically ill.
These included not only the psychiatric cases but also those suffering from tuberculosis (nineteen patients in 1945) and others con fined to hospital for long periods.
Led by Lola Hahn-Warburg, who herself was an indefatigable hospital visitor, the voluntary workers were supported by an impressive team of medical advisers who gave freely of their expertise.
Lola Hahn-Warburg could call on the services of a neurologist ‘who is at our disposal every second Thursday for a whole afternoon’, a psychologist and two psychiatric workers.
Seven other specialists were available for consultation.
There was also a link through to Archie McIndoe, one of the finest plastic surgeons of his day, who was based at the Queen Victoria Hospital in East Grinstead, where badly burned pilots were sent for treatment.
A close friend of Elaine Blond, who was later to found the Blond McIndoe Centre for Medical Research, it was not too difficult to persuade McIndoe to help where the removal of a disfigurement, usually facial, could boost a patient's confidence.
As head of the welfare department, Lola Hahn-Warburg had a wide-ranging brief.
Some of the more difficult cases turned up at her office, where she had to cope without professional help.
Lola kept track of patients whose personalities were as variable as the weather (‘One minute Paul says he does not want his wife any more and the next he has changed his mind’), she listened to their grievances (‘Josef thinks he is fit to work and look after himself; says he is being kept a prisoner…but he is very confused and deluded’) and even mediated between doctors (‘Dr Freymann said…it must be a genuine case of epilepsy…but…
Dr Sommers feels that Regina has nothing to lose and a great deal to gain if she follows his advice re support for her floating kidney’).
But the highest value was put on just being there, the willingness to sit by a bedside and to do more listening than talking, the patience with inconsistencies and sudden reversals of mood and the readiness to come back, week after week.
Nathan was seventeen and seriously ill with tuberculosis when he was taken in to Highgate Hospital in January 1942.
He stayed there until his death ten years on.
When his sister emigrated to Israel, the Movement introduced a visitor who called in once or twice every week.
They became close friends, sharing an interest in politics and psychology.
The rewards of hospital visiting were not always as apparent:
Just how much patience was needed is made clear by a story from Elaine Blond about her friend and close colleague.
Unhappy endings were more familiar to the welfare workers.
Moritz, a Polish boy born in Cologne, was a smiling, good-looking child when he arrived in June 1939.
Aged thirteen, he spent two years at a Cardiff school, where he learned English, and then trained as an electrician.
About the time he started work he became obsessed that he would never see his parents again; he feared that they were already dead.
He was probably right.
Authority, any authority, was blamed for the tragedy.
Moritz antagonised his employer, who promptly sacked him, and refused help from his friends.
In 1942 he was persuaded to go into hospital, where he was said to be schizophrenic.
A year later he was certified insane.
His letters spoke of torture, of being forced to sit alone all day, forbidden to move from his chair.
It was not quite like that.
Because no one had any idea of how to treat his illness, Moritz was kept in a locked ward for his own and for other patients' safety.
An entry towards the end of his record card describes Moritz as ‘looking very thin and pale’.
His visitor tried to talk with him, but ‘discussion is difficult as he keeps repeating whatever I say’.
In April 1946, Moritz was critically ill.
He retreated into himself or, rather, into the past.
‘He found great difficulty in saying anything, although he evidently tried very hard…
He said a few sentences in German towards the end.’
Tuberculosis was diagnosed.
Moritz died in November 1949.
Elaine Blond observed that he had committed suicide by stages.
Suicide in more conventional forms shows up prominently in the later records of the Kindertransporte , when the work of the RCM had been merged with that of the Central British Fund (CB F).
One interpretation of mental breakdown is that it is an attempt by a disturbed mind to create a breathing space for reassessment and balance; for conflicts which have been suppressed to emerge  and be dealt with.
Salomon, who had left Germany when he was nine, showed few signs of anything like this happening to him — although he was reported as ‘somewhat unsociable’ and disappeared at one stage for three days, returning well and happy.
In 1950, the final entry in his file reads:
Perhaps conflict between parents and foster parents, or religious dilemma (coming from an orthodox background, Salomon described himself as ‘only liberal’), contributed — the records give little indication.
Salomon was a studious boy, with no friends, who kept himself to himself.
Though leading outwardly normal lives, many from the Kindertransporte were still subject to emotional repercussions long into adult life.
As Dorothy Hardisty wrote in her journal, ‘…such failures exist where so great an upheaval has taken place, and it was not to be expected that the Movement's records should be free from shadows.’
In 1950, the CBF visited one woman, then aged twenty-three, and her son.
A haunted family.
Like this woman's brother, there were many who found the displacement and emotional pain overpowering.
From being able to cope just about) with everyday life they were tipped over the edge into breakdown, from which only a few were able to re-emerge.
Divided Loyalties
The RCM prided itself on a broad-minded approach to religion This suited the collective temperament of the ruling body, which was drawn largely from the liberal branch of Judaism, and made sense in terms of practical politics.
From the day of its foundation, the Movement was committed to accepting help from whatever source.
If a Christian family was willing to take in a Jewish child, then the offer was gratefully received.
To have done otherwise, it was argued, would have meant turning away young refugees because there were no homes for them to go to.
At the beginning, a special effort was made to place orthodox children with orthodox families, or with families prepared to follow strict dietary rules, and to make generous allowance for other religious observances.
But resolution faded along with the number of suitable offers.
As early as April 1939 there were reports that the orthodox community had reached the limits of its hospitality.
‘What were we then supposed to do?’
Fifty years after the events, the rhetorical question was put by Elaine Blond.
represented by the Chief Rabbi's Religious Emergency Council (CRREC) and its offshoot, the Union of Orthodox Hebrew Congregations (Adath).
Both organisations had as their chief promoter Rabbi Solomon Schonfeld, a brave and dedicated man who could take personal credit for bringing out some 250 children from Vienna and Berlin.
But Schonfeld was also a shrewd politician whose fundamentalist views, forcefully argued, appealed to simple souls and frequently offended the orthodox establishment which he claimed to represent.
Claiming to speak for the eighty per cent of Kindertransporte refugees who were clearly Jewish (though of these only twenty per cent were orthodox and at least fourteen per cent were non-practising), Schonfeld argued a policy of Jewish homes for Jewish children and, if this failed, for the RCM to devote its energies to raising money for hostels where religious supervision (of a strictly orthodox nature) could be guaranteed.
Since this policy was never implemented, the question of what would have happened if the resources for new hostels had not been forthcoming remains hypothetical.
But there were Schonfeld supporters who came perilously close to arguing that, if Jewish children could not be saved for a particular sector of the faith, they were not worth saving at all.
Failure to agree on the basic principles of caring for refugee children started a running battle between liberal and orthodox exponents of Judaism which lasted throughout the war and beyond.
Early on, the RCM tried hard to play down differences with policy statements which leaned some way towards orthodoxy without limiting the freedom of the RCM to act in what it regarded as the best interests of individual children.
When the Movement was caught out placing children in unsympathetic surroundings, remedial action was prompt.
A list of Jewish children in Christian homes circulated by the Chief Rabbi brought an immediate response from the RCM's organising secretary.
But there was trouble at Dovercourt camp when orthodox children refused to eat because the German rabbi who supervised the kitchen was not kosher enough for them.
Anna Essinger, who was impatient with religious dogma, was decidedly unsympathetic, which led the camp's religious adviser, the Reverend Dr Grunpeter, to appeal to the Chief Rabbi for ‘more tolerance and understanding of orthodox boys’.
The limit to which the RCM was prepared to go in this matter was revealed in March 1939, when Grunpeter was told that his salary was to be held to £2 a week, a sum ‘which will make it impossible to continue my work at the camp as resident minister’.
Writing again to the Chief Rabbi, he reported rumours ‘concerning the complete removal of all orthodox children’ from the camp because ‘they are too exacting for the authorities’.
This was true in so far as RCM workers were frequently driven to distraction by what they saw as unreasonable demands by orthodox children and their elders.
Even as mild a personality as Norman Bentwich was inclined to utter strong words when an entire Kindertransport was held up by Schonfeld because it was scheduled to depart from Germany on the Sabbath.
Efforts were made to anticipate religious sensibilities.
Parents who requested places on a Kindertransport were warned that orthodox foster homes were not on offer and were asked if they objected to Christian hospitality.
A representative national committee for religious education and welfare was set up to establish youth clubs, organise correspondence classes, distribute literature and generally to keep contact with refugee children in Christian homes, offering Jewish hospitality at times of festival or fast and preparing boys for Bar Mitzvah .
By December 1939 there were ninety centres  for Jewish education, employing 107 teachers and serving 3000 children.
But the conservatives were not satisfied.
In the months up to the outbreak of war a major cause of dispute was the status of non-practising Jews.
The RCM held that, if the parents of refugee children had discouraged them from religious practices, their temporary guardians should not presume to treat them differently.
Solomon Schonfeld was more inclined to regard the arrival of these children as a God-given opportunity to correct the errors of their families.
He was at his strongest when he or one of his supporters discovered that the Movement's workers had misinterpreted the wishes of refugee children or their parents, or had simply allowed inadequate foster homes to escape thorough inspection.
In March 1939 the CRREC claimed that ‘Not only are Jewish children with no particular religious affiliation being placed in non Jewish homes and schools, utterly abandoned as far as their religious education is concerned, but even children who have been brought up in a religious atmosphere…are being callously placed in non Jewish schools and homes, where they suffer mental torture which, in at least one case, has brought the child to the verge of a nervous breakdown.’
Their attack focused on St Margaret's School in Cricklewood, where they found ten refugee girls, three of whom had a religious background.
Letters were quoted from two of the girls who wanted to be moved.
As for the other children, the argument raged over whether they were truly non-denominational or whether their parents had played down their Jewishness to avoid the attention of the Nazis.
Who could say?
Invariably, in such cases, the two sides ended up where they started with the RCM pleading moderation and a softly, softly approach.
With the start of the war, there was a period of silence on the religious front which lasted all of two weeks.
Hostilities resumed when the order came to evacuate the cities.
This was a blow to the defenders of orthodoxy, who had to stand by while refugee  children from Jewish urban areas were shunted off to largely Christian rural areas.
‘There was neither time nor machinery’, wrote Dorothy Hardisty, ‘to ensure that each child was placed in the right religious environment.’
Efforts were made to send Jewish teachers with Jewish evacuees (British and refugee), and a letter went out to all RCM children who had been uprooted reminding them of their faith and upbringing.
One enterprising group prepared a correspondence course for Bar Mitzvah .
But merely to recite examples of improvised education was to reveal their inadequacy.
The Movement recognised this, as it also recognised that administrative pressures were working against a concerted attempt to preserve religious unity.
With the dispersal of the children over the country it was vital for the RCM to decentralise its activities.
Final responsibility for such matters as deciding on the suitability of foster homes was devolved to twelve regional committees formed to coincide with the boundaries of the government-designated defence areas.
Inevitably, Jewish influence on these committees was unevenly spread and at least two of them, East Anglia and the West Country, were run almost entirely by Christian volunteers.
Nor was this a short-term measure.
While many British evacuees drifted back to the cities once the threat of an invasion had been lifted, refugee children were actively discouraged from returning to the urban life.
This was chiefly at the behest of the Home Office who, according to Dorothy Hardisty, ‘urged that in their own interest [Jewish children]should not all be placed in cities like London or Leeds where they would form a conspicuous Jewish enclave’.
It was a view endorsed by the RCM, who feared the replication of the European ghettos with all that implied if the Germans did succeed in breaking through.
A strong supporting argument was the supposed harmful influence of the cities on young impressionable minds.
While Solomon Schonfeld and the CRREC were campaigning to remove Jewish children from Christian influences come what may, the Movement preferred that youngsters should enjoy a family upbringing in the country (associated with clean and decent living), rather than encounter the temptations of urban delinquency.
Partly in an attempt to neutralise the Schonfeld lobby, the RC M made a direct appeal to all Jewish organisations to support religious  education, an appeal which led to the setting up of an Emergency Committee, on which the full range of religious interests was represented, and the appointment of Rabbi Dr van der Zyl to be responsible for the religious education of Jewish children in London.
Van der Zyl, who had arrived from Germany with a Kindertransport in 1939, was a rare soul, a liberal who held the respect of the orthodox community.
There were to be times when education was to be secondary to his role as a mediator.
Sniping between the forces of liberalism and orthodoxy showed no signs of letting up.
With the RCM holding fast to its independence, offers from orthodox rabbis to take up peripatetic duties were firmly rejected.
In May 1940, the RCM general secretary wrote to the Chief Rabbi, pointing out ‘that our Regional Committees are autonomous and neither they nor the committees under them like interference in the arrangements they make for religious instruction’.
He went on to argue against sending alien rabbis (chiefly eager volunteers from the newly-formed Council of Orthodox Rabbis from Germany, Austria and Czechoslovakia) around the country when they would need police permits every time they entered a protected area.
The refusal by the Movement to let orthodox groups share In decision-making was on the assumption that their real aim was to dominate.
Hardly a week passed without Rabbi Schonfeld or his chief lieutenant and propagandist, Harry Goodman, mounting an attack against the RCM for dereliction of duty, implying that if they held the reins the race would be as good as won.
As the leading opponent of orthodoxy within the RCM, Elaine Blond enjoyed nothing better than proving that her critics were less than perfect.
In February 1940 she was writing to the Chief Rabbi to report on two of Solomon Schonfeld's children who had turned up unannounced at Bloomsbury House.
A few months later, Harry Goodman responded with a full frontal attack, claiming that 9000 children in the care of the RCM had ‘practically no Jewish contacts and that no effort had been made  over a period of years to give these children some religious education’.
Urged by Elaine Blond to respond on behalf of the Movement, Sigmund Gestetner, whose name was well regarded in orthodox circles, wrote to the Jewish Chronicle to deny the charges while offering gratitude to ‘those true Christians who felt it their duty to save these persecuted Jewish children’.
As to claims that religious education was inadequate, he pledged the Movement ‘to investigate any individual case referred to them’ and promised ‘to leave no stone unturned to make the most satisfactory arrangements possible,.
But how much were these promises worth?
Goodman tried to find out by demanding to know how many refugee children had been baptised since they had arrived in this country.
He was told that no answer was possible because no statistics were kept, though a quick glance at the minutes of the RCM executive would have shown that the conversion rate to Christianity was well into double figures.
Left to their own devices, young people were naturally inclined to veer away from any show of nonconformity.
They wanted to be like others — and the others, more often than not, were middle-of-the-road Church of England.
Who, for instance, could blame Edith and all the other girls in their mid-teens who fell in love with Christian boys and who lost their Jewishness along the way?
‘Edith does not keep her Jewish faith, as she thinks it has brought her too much trouble’, reported Rabbi van der Zyl.
He wrote to her pleading that it was up to‘the young generation to rebuild what Nazism has destroyed’, but Edith was not to be diverted from what she believed to be her only chance of happiness.
With boys there were pressures ‘not to be difficult’ at school or work in demanding special consideration.
For example, there was not much sympathy for Erwin when his employer observed that he was ‘clever but lazy’.
According to the local RCM representative, Erwin's laziness consisted of taking advantage of his Jewish beliefs in asking for time off.