

Your P45, Ma'am Is the royal family on the way out OK, YAH BOO SUCKS We name the Upper Class Twit of the Year PLUS: THE MASSES Steve Punt joins the shellsuit set at Center Parcs
country life
The sender of the first cutting published will receive a bottle of Aberlour whisky and £5.
For all other cuttings published a miniature bottle of Aberlour and £5 will be awarded.
Cuttings should be sent to Punch ,Ludgate House, 245 Blackfriars Road, London SE1 9UZ .
A gorilla in a Canadian zoo is moving in with a couple of bachelors in Texas.
Keepers hope he will establish his dominance over them and the females will choose him.
Novinpoor admitted conduct likely to cause a breach of the peace and was bound over.
For Novinpoor, Mr Peter Jackson said police completely misinterpreted his actions.
They thought he was reaching for an ornamental knife when in fact he was just picking up a pair of socks.
The foreign drivers are responsible for 4,892 traffic accidents in Bohemia and Moravia in 1990. 128 persons was killed and 224 heavy injured.
Have a nice days in our country!
11.00pm — Choral Eucharist.
This service is identical to the 7.00pm worship service except for the music, the hymns, the reading and the sermon.
‘I've never seen a lugworm like it’
The World According To MR PUNCH
How long to reign over us?
Ten days ago, I spent my 33rd birthday flat on my back, contemplating the inevitable decline towards decrepitude and death (yup, it was a happy, happy day) and wondering what my underlings would do to this column in my absence.
Master Macaulay it was who took up the baton, adopting a convincingly highfalutin' tone and laying into several powerful members of the journalistic and cultural establishments, secure in the knowledge that their rage would be turned upon yours truly, rather than the actual perpetrator.
Well, as Messrs Waugh and Ingrams could confirm, that's just the sort of treacherous, duplicitous behaviour one has come to expect from young people today (just as this shameless betrayal of an employee is typical of us incipient oldsters).
But the point that young Macaulay fails to realise is that if one is going to take potshots, there is no point in aiming a verbal blunderbuss at piddling little targets.
You've got to go for the big stuff.
Like the Queen.
The poor old dear has been having a hard time of late.
Here she is, in the year of the 40th anniversary of her coronation, and yet her subjects seem singularly short of the jubilee spirit.
David Cannadine, author of The Decline And Fall Of The British Aristocracy , claimed last week that the monarchy is ‘fundamentally out of step with the mood and realities of the Nineties’.
Author A N Wilson has detailed the benefits that would be gained by handing over the royal palaces to a republican government.
And Phillip Hall has just written Royal Fortune , a damning account of royal greed and parsimony.
In it he details the myriad ways in which the Queen and her advisers ensure that her wealth escapes any form of taxation.
But he also makes some telling comparisons between the Windsors' gleeful acceptance of baubles from foreign potentates, and the reluctance they show in giving anything in return.
In 1875–76 the then Prince of Wales visited India.
He had a personal budget of £200,000 (worth some £10m today).
He was showered with fabulous jewels by the maharajahs.
In return he handed out whips, flagons and field glasses.
After a while the British press stopped reporting the Indian gifts out of sheer embarrassment.
‘No, you can talk quite freely — there's no phone tapping these days as far as we know’
A century later, the Queen travelled to the Middle East.
The Amir of Qatar gave her a pear-shaped pearl, a gold necklace and the ultimate prezzie, ‘a bowl of lapis lazuli, mounted on two prancing gold horses, themselves being diamond encrusted.’
And what, pray, did Her Maj give the Amir in return?
Why, a silver tea tray engraved with a picture of the royal yacht Britannia and a book about Bedouin jewellery for his wives.
Golly, thanks.
The royals take an obscure pride in their penny-pinching, details of which are leaked to the press from time to time so as to suggest that they are, in fact, just like us.
But then Charles goes bonkers with the Bentley, Prince Michael bags a brand new Aston Martin, Fergie moves into her Pizza Hut palace and the whole game is given away.
Ah, Fergie…what are we going to do with her?
There are times when one feels sorry for her as one catastrophe follows another in an endless orgy of absurdity.
But perhaps we should be thankful to the Duchess.
For her actions point up much of the absurdity that underlines the whole concept of monarchy.
Here is a woman who insists upon being treated with all the formality of royal protocol.
Her own mother was reported to have bowed to her outside a London restaurant.
There are even stories — apocryphal, perhaps — that her children's toys are washed after visits from their little friends for fear of contamination by the common horde.
Now, could someone give me one good reason why I should bow to a woman who, not long ago, was a junior publishing executive with a past spent as a member of a racy set of upper-class party-lovers?
I would be more than happy to greet the Duchess with the manners and respect that any fellow human being deserves.
But I'm damned if I'll bow to anyone.
Of course, anti-royal writers invariably contrast the behaviour of the junior family members with that of the Queen.
But whereas her father earned the respect of his people by staying in London throughout the Blitz, the Queen has few positive personal achievements to show for her four decades on the throne.
She has not used her wealth and prestige to act as a patron of the arts, as monarchs have done in the past and millionaires still do today.
She seems unwilling to take any lead in furthering the social unity of Britain: while willing to be photographed next to African dictators at Commonwealth summits, she is less happy about having black or brown people in her Royal Household.
None of this is to say that the Queen is a bad or malicious person: evidently she is not.
It is merely that there is less and less justification for her position.
The notion that the royal family should be kept on because it is a tourist attraction has always been a ludicrous one.
If that were so, why not be ruled by Mickey Mouse?
In actual fact, what the monarchy does do is to reinforce Britain's position in the world as an outmoded Ruritania.
It adds to our reputation as an island still constricted by an ossified class system.
It confirms that breeding still counts for more than achievement.
A Major or a Kinnock may work for decades in the hope of a few short years at the pinnacle of our political system.
But Jamie Blandford can inherit a dukedom, a palace and a lifelong seat in the House of Lords without anything more than his blood to recommend him.
Without the royal family, titles would be just that — forms of address for the self-important to dignify themselves.
Their holders would adopt the same position of relative irrelevance that they hold in the republican democracies of Europe.
The lives of lesser citizens would change, too.
Much of our political life is founded upon assumptions grounded in our monarchist heritage.
The most potent of these is the idea that Britons are subjects, rather than proper citizens.
They live in an elective dictatorship in which the government of the day has a degree of absolute power that would be envied by rulers who are, on the surface, far more totalitarian.
Mrs Thatcher, for example, was able to impose her policies against the opposition of large parts of the population with less difficulty than President Gorbachev faced in pushing through perestroika .
Equally, Whitehall sees no need to provide its electors with basic information that is the right of every individual in a citizen-centred democracy such as America.
Such an attitude derives from a centuries-old idea that the people of this country are not free and independent individuals whose rights are inborn, but vassals of the Crown, to be granted such privileges as their rulers see fit.
And, as long as we bow and scrape to the descendants of an obscure family of German princelings, that is exactly what we will remain.
‘Anneka Rice?…
Judith Chalmers?…
Sue Lawley?…’
Melvyn: the rematch
Melvyn Bragg rang Punch to complain that his love-scenes are only ever compared with those of Jackie Collins, never of more literary authors.
We put that right
Last week we cheekily compared Melvyn Bragg's love scenes from A Time To Dance with those of Jackie Collins, Harold Robbins et al.
Mr Bragg himself sportingly phoned Mr Punch to say
a)
how much he liked his front-cover caricature,
b)
could he have a poster-sized copy of it and
c)
wasn't it a shame that no one ever compares his work with more literary love scenes.
For, as he explained, the point about literary sex is that it is invariably tacky and clichéd out of context, no matter how high-brow the author.
Ever keen to see fair play, we are happy to oblige the handsomely-coiffed Cumbrian arts supremo.
On the right are five erotic extracts.
Four are from literary classics.
One is from Melvyn's Barbour-ripping romance.
Can you tell……which novels the extracts on the right come from? * 
*Technical note: like last week to ensure a fair contest, all extracts have been given the same epistolary format that Bragg used in A Time To Dance.
The contents, however, are unchanged.
Can you spot Melvyn's love-scene among these high-brow classics?
1.
‘As my hand located what it sought, a dreamy and eerie expression came over your childish features.
You would come darkly near and let me feed on your open mouth, while with a generosity that was ready to offer you everything, my heart, my throat, my entrails, I gave you to hold in your awkward fist the sceptre of my passion.’
2.
‘Advancing toward me, you commenced rubbing your p***y affectionately, caressing it, patting it.
As you flung yourself on the bed, with legs spread wide apart, you cupped your rosebush with your hands and stroked it some more, murmuring all the while in that hoarse, cracked voice of yours that it was good, beautiful, a little treasure.
And it was good!’
3.
‘We would sink into each other as if it was the last time.
It was silent, relentless, always going as hard as we could — I was virtually holding you clear as the blows, they felt like blows, pummelled you.
And you bucked and wrenched back until sometimes I felt I would be literally thrown off…
Then standing, you bent over and me holding you open…and sometimes, the strange sight of our mirrored selves, limbs and bodies wrapped around each other.’
4.
‘Slowly, but very deliberately, the brooding edifice of seduction, creaking and incongruous, came into being, a vast Heath Robinson mechanism, dually controlled by us and lumbering gloomily down vistas of triteness.
With a sort of heavy-fisted dexterity the mutually adapted emotions of each of us became synchronised, until the unavoidable anti-climax was at hand.
Later we dined at a restaurant quite near the flat.’
5.
‘Under your frail petticoat you were naked.
You felt the glide of my cheek on your thighs and belly and buttocks, and the close brushing of my moustache and my soft thick hair, and your knees began to quiver.
Far down in you you felt a new stirring, a new nakedness emerging…the sudden quiver of me at the springing of my seed, then the slow-subsiding thrust.’
Competition: win a signed copy of Melvyn's meisterwork
We have two signed hardback copies from Hodder & Stoughton of A Time To Dance to give away.
One copy will go to the entrant who correctly matches extracts to the authors listed (eg 1b, 2e, 3d etc).
The other will go to the best parody of a Melvyn love-scene (about 250 words) that accompanies an entry.
You know the ingredients: rustic setting, wizened Lothario, coltish Romany beauty, rampaging passion, frightened sheep etc.
Send your answers and/or parodies to Melvyn Competition, Closing date is 24 February.
Don't forget to put your address.
Review of the week
VAGUE
WORLD PANIC OVER: New editor appointed.
Anna von Wintour-Pudding reports…
The couturiers and mannequins of the fashion world breathed a perfumed sigh of relief as the thin wisps of white smoke finally emerged from the muscular chimneys of the plush Legover Square headquarters of publishers Condé Nast [Can we have the article now please — Ed.]
Amid pealing bells,Miss Alopecia Schnitzel-Holstein was ordained as the new high priestess of frockdom.
Surrounded by her chic chums, Anorexia and Décolleté, the gypsy-like Alopecia thanked her handsome family — dad Stilton, mum Cedilla and sister Jason.
‘Without them it wouldn't have been possible,’ swooned the ebony-tressed editrice as she eased on her crushed-velvet  vermilion robes.
Alopecia, the Sunday Telegraph revealed, actually invented the word ‘frock’.
Barely used before, now it echoes throughout the couture kingdom.
‘It was nothing really,’ she said.
More mysterious is the news that she is preparing a new Vague column on shaving.
‘It satisfied my old GQ readers,’ she said.
‘I'm sure it'll be just divine for my new admirers.’
CORRECTIONS
Michaela Slyme
Charles Haughey is a bugger in a scandal as was 
Anthony Blunt who was a grumpy old queen as was 
Queen Victoria who paid her taxes as did 
Lester  Piggott (eventually) who's ridden a few studs in his time as has 
Joan Collins who wears funny wigs as did 
Paul Daniels who has been known to turn the odd trick as has 
Lindi St Clair whose political  prospects are grim just like 
Charles Haughey's
Pilbrow's week
‘Tell 'em it'll cost an extra 50 grand if they want me to take all my clothes off and get in bed with Lucifer’
‘There are other women, aren't there?’
Gutter gossip
Guttersnipe
A thinking man's guide to tabloid tattle by Mitchell Symons
Mr ‘Spike’ Milligan,the manic depressive, is a man of many parts — the latest of which to be revealed is that of philanderer.
He first met Ms Margaret Maughan , a person and ‘lifelong fan’, in 1967 and they embarked upon ‘an eight-year affair’ which culminated in the birth in 1976 of one ‘James’whom Mr Milligan ‘has never met’even though he is said to have ‘admitted’to newspaper reporters: ‘It's all true.
James is my son and I'm not ashamed of it.’
Mr Milligan is, of course a friend of, and hero to, his fellow depressive, the Prince of Wales who — as if we could forget — used to imitate the zany funster in revues whilst at Cambridge University.
Clearly, given Prince Charles's much-publicised neglect of his own children, he still finds much to imitate in Mr Milligan.
Mr Christian Slater , the Hollywood matinée idol (see right), has been considering the subject of romance.
Having enjoyed ‘a string of celebrity lovers’, he apparently ‘saw the light after multimillionaire basketball star Magic Johnson was found to be HIV positive.’
‘I've been an idiot many times,’ declares Mr Slater, ‘and I'm not proud of it — but AIDS has scared the s*** (sic) out of me.
To sleep around is not the safest way to play it in this day and age.’
He says of carnal intimacy with a prophylactic that it is ‘not so bad’.
This remarkable young man is now so keen to share his new-found sagacity with others that he has taken to signing autographs, ‘Safe sex, from Christian Slater’.
For young autograph hunters, it no doubt makes a change from ‘Best Wishes’ but one can't help thinking that this is rather like Mr Oliver Reed , the thirsty boulevardier, signing off ‘Sobriety, Oliver Reed’.
Mr Keith ‘Cheggers’ Chegwin,the televisionist non-pareil who not too long ago spent ‘several weeks’in a clinic being treated for ‘stress’, has once again had to seek medical treatment.
This time, he was in an infirmary for four days following an operation to have an abscess removed from his nether region.
After being allowed home, he was paid a daily visit by a nurse who, in an act of selfless devotion worthy of Florence Nightingale herself, changed his bandages.
Guttersnipe is loth to kick a man when he's down but is this episode not an outstanding example of divine retribution for Cheggers Plays Pop ?
Ms Jerry Hall , the Texan mannequin delivered of her third child, has been articulating the deep relationship she shares with Mr Michael Jagger , the confectionery-loving vocal stylist with the Rolling Stones (a once popular beat ensemble, M'lud).
‘He buys me panties, bras and garter belts that are really sexy,’ she said before going on to reveal, ‘When I was designing underwear he kept saying, ‘Make sure there are some sexy bits.’’
‘Nevertheless, when it comes to his own undergarments, her spouse is more circumspect and Miss Hall confides that ‘he won't wear boxer shorts.
Ever.
I've tried, I've tried but he's always worn briefs.’
What else did the lady expect when she married a man from Dartford with a best friend named Keith?
Meanwhile Mr Jagger has been attempting to put the record straight about his musical colleague,Mr William Wyman , the bass (sic) player, who recently declared that the belipped chanteur was ‘an egomaniac’ and then went on to dispute Mr Jagger's claim to be the author of the seminal lied , ‘Jumping Jack Flash’.
Mr Jagger responded by saying, ‘Poor old Bill's getting on a bit now, you know.
He found the Steel Wheels tour very tiring and doesn't want to continue.
I hope he'll change his mind but if he doesn't, I'll play bass.
How hard can it be?’
No harder, one imagines, than pouting suggestively and prancing around in hipsters whilst holding forth unintelligibly about diminutive rubescent poultry.
Finally, in the week that amid the freezing fog and snow of eastern France 11 passengers miraculously emerged alive from the shattered hull of an Airbus A-32, it was reported that…
Mr Vanilla Ice , the musical poet, was subject to assault with a ‘hot dog’;
Brian Jacks , the ‘sports personality’, ‘could never enjoy spur-of-the-moment sex with his house-proud missus — in case he creased her freshly-ironed bedsheets’;
Miss Rose-Marie , the micro-celebrity, is 35 years old rather than 29 as she claimed;
Miss Cleo Rocos , another micro-celebrity, ‘grabbed a cab as usual’ to attend a ‘showbiz bash’, and finally;
Mr Jason Connery , the son, won £35,000 libel damages ‘after being branded a coward’ by a ‘tabloid’and then declared his name ‘vindicated’.
What, Jason?
Who pray is…
MR CHRISTIAN SLATER?
Guttersnipe's Dictionary of International Biography
MR CHRISTIAN SLATER is a 22-year old Hollywood thespian best known for his performances in Heathers ,Young Guns II and Robin Hood: Prince of Thieves .
Despite his paucity of years, he has experienced enough to fill a lifetime.
He once spent ‘ten days in the cells’ and is currently ‘on probation’further to a ‘drink-driving spree’in the course of which he ‘crashed his car into a roadside pole’and assaulted a member of the local constabulary.
His past inamoratae include the thespiennes, Miss Winona Ryder, Miss Samantha Mathis and Miss Drew Barrymore.
However, he is now said to have been becalmed by his current companion, Miss Nina Huang Peterson who has nicknamed him ‘Thumper after the character in Bambi ’.
Mr Slater's reaction to this soubriquet is characteristically sanguine: ‘Thumper had big feet and you know what they say about men with big feet…’
What, that they become police constables?
Topical feature
Upper-class twit of the year
The definitive Punch guide to Britain's half-baked upper crust
It is now ten years since the Sloane Ranger Diary .
And more than two decades since Monty Python 's classic ‘Upper-class Twit of the Year Show’.
Our prime minister is a failed bus conductor from Brixton set on creating a classless society.
Yet the upper classes hang on like baronial barnacles.
Within the last fortnight, the Duchess of York has staggered from one tabloid headline to another.
The Marquess of Blandford's marital break-up has replaced his spell in jail as a subject of public debate.
Peter Brooke has given Gay Byrne's TV audience the dubious benefit of his singing voice.
And Nicholas Coleridge, king of the posh glossies, has appointed a new editor of Vogue who is described by the Daily Mail as ‘more hippy than haute couture’.
Vintage Hoorays in classic twit bunfight
En route, each member of the quartet has attracted varying degrees of ridicule.
The Independent On Sunday , for example, found Coleridge's fine table manners hugely amusing.
But is he a real twit?
Are any of our foursome?
We collected the evidence, calculated the Twit Factor (see below) and came up with the answers…
The Twit Factor: How to calculate it
The Twit Factor(TF) is calculated by a multiplying a Breeding Quotient (BQ), marked between 1 and 5, by the Outrage Index (OI), based upon observed behaviour, marked between 1 and 10, and then dividing the result by the Agreed Mitigator (AM), a mark between 1 and 10 assessed on the basis of redeeming features such as intelligence, professional merit etc.
Simple, eh?
Nicholas Coleridge
Age:34
Breeding:Son of David Coleridge, chairman of Lloyd's.
Mega Establishment cred but not blue-blooded
Educated at:Eton and Trinity College, Cambridge
Current position:Managing director of Condé Nast Publications.
Runs most of Mummy's fave mags, such as Vogue and Tatler 
Home:A magnificent 1840 terraced house in Notting Hill, London
Wealth:God yah!
Substantial private income augmented by vast salary and royalties from books
Twittish behaviour:Pretty sound, by and large.
Speaks in a voice half-way between a bray and a bark, and has a bit of a pash for all things Indian.
Described as a ‘stuck-up little twerp’ by some grotty Hampstead type in the Independent On Sunday , which also added, ‘He lives on a parallel planet; a glossy place where there are no poor people, where everything is fashionable, expensive, luxurious, interestingly styled, good-mannered.’
Brushes with the law:One tricky moment when jailed in Sri Lanka during an uncharacteristic bout as a foreign correspondent.
A prompt return to the social beat has ensured a trouble-free time thereafter
Spouse:Yummy!
Georgia (Metcalfe)— a clever, glamorous Pollyanna
Contribution to society:Works like ten men and fulfils valuable function keeping Sloaney hackettes off the streets.
Not a parasite
Overall assessment:Full marks for background, education, appearance.
But is bloody ambitious and no mug.
A wolf in twit's clothing
James, Marquess of Blandford
Age:36
Breeding:Son of the Duke of Marlborough.
Posher than the Windsors
Educated at:Harrow (ideal for the sort of chap who isn't up to Eton)
Current position:One isn't actually working as such
Home The Lynce, a small house in the grounds of Blenheim Palace, which will be Jamie's one day.
Wealth:Pater's got loads but Blandford tends to forget that when one buys things (like £2,699 pianos) one does rather have to pay for them
Twittish behaviour:Rather a lot, actually.
Failed to get into Sandhurst; failed to become a racing driver (behaves like one); spent vast sums on drugs; got married wearing Gucci snaffle-bit loafers; wrote pathetic letters to his ex Arabella Tait etc, etc
Brushes with the law:Jamie's saaach a naughty boy.
He's been fined twice for assaulting policemen; done for drugs; fined and banned repeatedly for speeding (following one conviction for doing 103 mph without a licence he said: ‘I was only doing 95mph.
Now is that fair?’); three months chokey for driving while disqualified; held by police following early morning disturbance outside Ms Tait's flat etc, etc ad nauseam …
Spouse:Poor dear Becky (née Few Brown).
Pater called her a ‘filthy little scrubber’.
And now they've bust up.
she never'll get to inherit Blenheim and throw those ‘really good’ parties
Contribution to society:A one-man argument for violent revolution
Overall assessment:Terminally twittish to the point of tragedy.
All in all, a sad case
The Duchess of York
Age:32
Breeding:Daughter of Major Ronald Ferguson: pretty middle-class, really
Educated at:Hurst Lodge, Sunningdale, then Queen's Secretarial College
Current position:A royal, a mother and a holidaymaker
Home:Sunninghill Park, Windsor, which isn't quite one's sort of thing to be honest, and Buck House, SW1
Wealth:Rolling in lolly.
There's the Civil List (£250,000pa), plus prezzies from the Queen, freebie flights, the odd Budgie book or Hello!sesh etc
Twittish behaviour:Apsly brill!
You should have been on the plane back from her hol — sorry, charity visit — in Florida last week.
What a hoot!!
Fergs threw sugar sachets, tissues etc at Major Ron, her seccy and her detective; stuck her head in a paper bag: poked her tongue out; did her bird and telephone impersonations and sneaked a gasper outside the lav.
Another perfectly normal day in other words, but bloody funny, what?
Brushes with the law:Pretty clean so far but what was in the ciggy in that old News of The Screws photo?
Spouse:Andy, and don't you forget it
Contribution to society:Er…ah…um…well, she raises money for charity, helps keep Hello!magazine in business and deserves an award for services to the airline industry
Overall assessment:Look, those press vultures are always being beastly about Fergie, which is jolly unfair because she can't answer back and she's only doing what any perfectly normal gel would do if they found themselves in her shoes, OK?
Rt Hon Peter Brooke MP
Age:56
Breeding:Son of Baron Brooke of Cumnor: good solid stuff
Educated:Marlborough; Balliol College, Oxford and Harvard (MBA), so he's a bit of a secret swot, but don't tell
Current position:Secretary of State for Northern Ireland and MP for City of London and Westminster
Wealth:Is a member of Lloyd's, which used to be an indication of serious cash but these days it can turn pretty iffy if one's not careful!
Twittish behaviour:Another Willie Whitelaw, really — gentlemanly, well-meaning, amateurish.
Potty about cricketing trivia.
Was Tory chairman who cocked up the 1989 Euro-elections.
Still not getting anywhere in Northern Ireland, but then, who is?
Said, ‘I am not a very political politician,’ and then proved it by singing ‘My Darling Clementine’live on Irish TV a few hours after an IRA massacre.
The Telegraph said ‘He has the eyebrows and club ties and strange-sounding vowels of the sort of old-fashioned public school headmaster with whom one feels one's boy would be safe.’
Sounds like quite a compliment, what?
Brushes with the law:None
Spouse:Lindsay (ńe Allison).
Contribution to society:Is doing his best to bring peace to Ireland
Overall assessment:Fair do's, Peter gets a bit garbled and he can't handle telly but he's a thoroughly decent and honest chap.
Frankly, the Tories could use a few more like him instead of all those estate-agent Johnnies.
An upmarket, superior quality twit.
And the winner is…
In jail or out of it, Jamie's a man who really knows the meaning of the word ‘twit’
The Twit Factor: The Final Countdown
So, our warmest congratters to Jamie Blandford, who is, by a massive margin, the Upper-class Twit of the Year, 1992!
OK…yah!!
Do the Wight Thing
Simon Fanshawe
Exploring the land where the flared trouser goes to die
Unlike George Bush, I don't get travel sick.
It may not have been the plane journey that got to him, of course.
It may have been that while in Japan he found the taste of humble pie just a little too much to stomach.
Whatever it was though, I take my hat off to Babs.
While her husband threw up violently into the lap of the Japanese Prime Minister and the world took Valium at the thought of Sandpit Dan moving into the White House, she stated for pudding.
The FBI shovelled her husband into the waiting car but Barbara sat firm.
‘Let me eat cake,’ she said.
Then she made jokes.
That's my kind of woman.
Of course, George may have had jet lag.
And I sympathise because I do get that.
And I know what I'm talking about because I went to the Isle of Wight recently.
The time difference between here and there is staggering.
The journey is half an hour on the ferry but it's like two days in the Tardis.
The entire island is 20 years behind the rest of us.
You get jet and culture lag.
People still wear flares and think they're being groovy.
I saw a picture of the town council and they all looked like members of Abba.
The journey should have prepared me.
The ferry was the most unprepossessing sea vessel I've ever seen.
I hadn't been on a ferry for years.
Not since I went from Dover to Calais with my parents in 1970, when I was 14.
That time my father was on the deck giving a dramatic blow by blow account of Dunkirk, which was overheard by a family from Stoke-on-Trent who promptly dived for their life jackets.
We found out that they thought he was the captain giving out safety instructions because we were about to sink.
However, the grandeur of the occasion impressed me and, as I was smaller than I am now, the boat seemed quite large.
So I drove to Portsmouth expecting a great camel of the ocean, a small luxury liner even, at least a boat that could hold its head up in the seafaring world.
But not a bit of it.
This thing looked like it would capsize if it collided with a rubber duck in a bath.
And far from being luxurious, it had all the style and panache of a Formica worktop.
It was a serious disappointment.
For reasons which are too complicated to bother with, I had left Scotland, where I was for Christmas, on December 30th to go to the Isle of Wight and spend that most braw, bricht, moonlicht and Caledonian of celebrations, Hogmanay in the Deep South.
Of England, that is, not America.
Although it is true that the people of the Isle of Wight are about as related to the state of civilisation as the good people of rural Mississippi.
As you arrive off the ferry, there is a big sign saying ‘Island Roads Are Different’.
Well they're not.
To anyone who has been driving on the planet earth within the last 75 years, they are just the same.
Everyone drives on the left, the traffic lights are red, green and amber and people still wait until the lights turn to green before signalling that they're turning right, leaving you stuck behind them.
The sign shouldn't say anything about the roads, instead it should say in huge luminous letters: ‘Island People Are Different’.
Because they are.
David Icke lives there for God's sake…literally.
What more proof do you need, Watson?
I am quite convinced that everyone we met there was each other 's cousin.
There were too many people who badly needed dentistry and looked like they played the banjo.
And like small, furry animals they hibernate during winter.
The tourists leave in about October and everything then closes.
We went in December and most of the indigenous population had curled up and gone to sleep.
I imagine they'll be woken at Easter by their hormones and by the sound of the Mr Whippy ice cream vans in the street.
As we wandered about, we were treated with the kind of curiosity I imagine one reserves for a chance meeting with people from the planet Zarg.
There was a fascination with the way we spoke.
Although we spoke English and they spoke English, our verbs, our pronouns and prepositions seemed to be examined as if they were foreign.
We were looked at with the same sense of distrust that must have greeted the first plumber who installed running water there.
I never saw a fitted carpet.
I expect that Ena Sharples is still in Coronation Street on their  tellies .
And everything is a tourist attraction.
There are model villages, botanic gardens, historic walks, contemporary walks, futuristic walks, which in their case probably feature can-openers, donkey-run generators and other unimaginable inventions of the space age.
And did you know that there was an Isle of Wight Pearl Centre?
Bizet needn't have bothered to go the exotic East to write The Pearl Fishers .
He barely needed to leave France.
He could have just got the ferry to Fishbourne and spent a fortnight at Butlins.
So, the Isle of Wight is the place for me.
It's another galaxy.
Next time my instinct for a holiday, as it does in so much else, cries for something hot and cheap, I shall stay my hand.
Who needs luxury and the glories of Ancient Rome or Greece when you can visit the mediocrity of a lack-of-civilisation past in the drizzle and the wind?
If flying to Japan made ol' George Bush feel kinda disoriented and a bit sick, then a visit to the Isle of Wight would probably have him in full Exorcist mode; not just projectile vomiting but his head spinning too.
Politics
Julia Langdon
Have slogan, will cavil
During election ‘92 must the parties conform to hype?
It would be wrong to assume that the divisions in the Tory Party, which became so evident after Mrs Thatcher was dumped, have been healed.
The imminence of the general election, now impinging on all aspects of political life, did lead to a temporary public truce.
But it may not last.
Those in the Conservative Party who were outraged by her dismissal and the way in which it was effected have not forgotten — nor have they been reassured by the motions of the administration.
Some of them are not going to vote Conservative this time — if at all.
Some of them will use their votes judiciously in order to bring about whichever outcome it is they seek: the defeat of the John Major government.
(No one, of course , believes that the Liberal Democrats can do any more than secure a hung parliament — but there is a very real possibility that this may happen and they are therefore a force to be considered.
Votes for the Liberal Democrats should not be cast lightly in marginal constituencies.)
The significance of this is that there is a huge body of Conservative opinion in the country, not just Westminster, which is so disgusted with the ungentlemanly way in which the Toff's Party behaved towards the lady that they will abstain.
‘Snag is, if Chelsea win in the same week as a good second Test result, he could well call a ‘feel-good’ election of the following Thursday…’
That will have a considerable effect.
The Thatcher factor will be relevant in a number of seats in the south of England.
Even more interestingly, I understand that even some of Mrs Thatcher's friends share this opinion and are proposing — some of them for the first time in their lives — not to vote for the Tories.
But will any of them stand up and say so?
It is something of which the Tories must be truly terrified.
There will be few real surprises otherwise between now and the election.
The shape and substance of the campaigns of each of the parties is slowly taking public form, having been privately settled some time last summer in the face of the possibility of an autumn poll.
It means that the parties are better prepared probably than ever before.
One of the few things we don't know, though, are their slogans.
Does this matter?
It must be acknowledged, even by the most ardent election aficionados, that slogans don't really make a difference.
They are all part of the advertising and marketing that the parties believe has an effect on the voters — while failing to notice that this effect is generally in inverse proportion to the amount of thought, work or effort that has gone into any individual contribution.
Thus party apparatchiks can spend months or years devising an appropriate slogan without anyone paying more than the most perfunctory attention when the thing is published, while some silly so-and-so can go on Newsnight and make an indelicate comment and be all over the newspapers for weeks.
Patrick Jenkin, for example, is a man who will not be remembered for his contributions to the future of British civilisation as Secretary of State for Industry, Secretary of State for Social Services or Secretary of State for the Environment.
He will merely be remembered as the man who told us, as the Minister of Energy during the four-day week in the last days of the Heath government, to clean our teeth in the dark, for heaven's sake.
Some slogans achieve notoriety for being inappropriate, and are swiftly proved as such by events.
Some are based on a wrong premise: I remember a Labour one in 1979 which pre-supposed that the world would think Mrs Thatcher was a bogeywoman and said something like: ‘The day you forgot to vote, Mrs Thatcher became the next prime minister.’
In fact the turn-out in 1979 was high and Mrs Thatcher still became prime minister.
There were unpleasant overtones of sexism here, too.
One of my favourite slogans — intended to be anodyne, but suitably exalting — was used by the Liberals in 1974.
‘One More Heave’ it declared with joyous ambiguity.
And then there was the one that never got published, back in the days when the Labour Party was the people's party and affairs were run by the National Executive Committee, which was run by the trade unions.
This NEC slogan debate was very long and very boring.
Different people kept chipping in with their ideas of what would fire the national imagination sufficiently to get the people to the polling booths.
At last a weary voice was heard from the elderly statesman ranks of the trade union bosses.
‘Ow about: Vote Labour Or Your Balls Will Drop Off?’ he asked.
Alas, the author of this historic remark is unrecorded.
There are a number of problems caused by a protracted campaign — and arguably, this election has been going on since last autumn when everyone started wondering whether Major could pull it off.
One of these problems is the very real one of cash.
The Conservative Party is as short of it as the Exchequer or the rest of us.
They have had to keep the momentum going, too.
And there is a serious deficit in the Tory accounts, as elsewhere.
Even so, it does not seem to be entirely appropriate that, as I have heard privately reported, ministers of the crown now ask to be invited to dinner parties with wealthy Arable in order to try to secure contributions to the Conservative cause.
There must surely be a better way of arranging affairs.
Our guest columnist this week is…
Mick Jagger
WHAT A DRAG IT IS GETTIN' OLD…that was one of mine, right?
I mean, I think it was but I can't remember, 'cos, like, I can't remember the Sixties at all, man.
Well, as I say to me old mate Keef (cor, strike a light, there's a crazy geezer an' no mistake!)…
If you can remember the Sixties, you weren't there, man.
Keef always laughs at that, an' then 'e wheezes a bit an', like gasps for breath an' falls over.
But once 'e's come round we talk about the good old days, an' how they're a complete blank.
An' then we 'ave a look at Bill's book to check out what it was we got up to.
There's some story about a Mars bar, apparently but we 'aven't got to that bit yet.
Zimmer
Being a bit of a senior citizen, I'm looking forward to the Oldie , Richard Ingrams's great new magazine for the Zimmer-frame set.
I saw 'im in the Observer wearing all that leather clobber and 'e looked like a man after me own heart, man.
'Cos, like, just 'cos you're gettin' on a bit doesn't mean you can't wear fab gear an' pull groovy chicks an' that.
Look at me.
I run 45 miles a day, drink Peruvian spring water an' live on a diet of nuts.
So I can 'ave my picture in Vanity Fair wearing purple an' yellow tights, an' I don't look anyfink at all like a sad old queen who's seen much better days.
Right?
Pregnant
One more fing I like about me ole mucker Ingrams: 'e 'ates young people.
So do I, an' you know why?
It's the bloody music they listen to nowadays.
It's acid this an' rap that.
Whatever 'appened to good ole rock 'n' roll?
The Pope's got more chance of gettin' pregnant than I 'ave of gettin' into the charts.
Blimey, when the Stones last 'ad an 'it single, Michael Jackson was a little black boy.
Those were the days, man.
Pity I can't remember 'em, really.
I wear Jerry's dresses
I'm as common as muck, me.
But I gotta lotta posh friends.
An' when we get together at me chateau in France, like, we all 'ave a bit of a party.
The blokes all put on frocks, like, an' the chicks get togged up in strides.
I put me son James down for Eton.
I reckon 'e should feel right at 'ome.
•Bill Wyman's left the Stones.
So we'll get that John Major instead.
'E's younger than Bill.
An' 'e's a lot more exciting to watch.
It's a funny old world
Dick Van Dyke 'as an absurd fake Cockney accent, yet young people all over the world still thrill to 'is performance in Mary Poppins .
I, too, 'ave an absurd fake Cockney accent but youngsters think I'm a sad old man an' they refuse to buy my records.
It's a funny old world, innit?
He's richer than Ferry and he's married to Jerry
Money
Oofy Prosser
A source to be Reckoning with
Judgement day for Lord Rees-Mogg's latest doom-tome
‘Gosh, that made me feel so much better — being told the whole world is in recession!’
If you've found my column occasionally depressing over the past three or so years because of my doom-mongering, you should try reading The Great Reckoning by James Dale Davidson and Lord Rees-Mogg.
This book ought to have a free razor-blade stuck to its front cover.
Subtitled How The World Will Change In The Depression Of The 1990s , its central hypothesis is that we are headed for a major depression, that deflation will return, that property prices will collapse by two-thirds, that Islam will pour into the power vacuum left by communism, that taxes will soar, that many major corporations will cease to exist, that anyone wealthy enough will flee big cities and away from the gangs controlling them, that countries like India, Canada, South Africa and Israel will fall to bits, that there will be plagues of locusts and frogs and that firstborn sons ought to head for the hills while they've got the chance.
All good sensational stuff, but the all-important question is, is it going to happen?
My guess is that, with a few exceptions, it won't but that in four years we'll have another Mogg-Davidson book claiming that they got it right all along.
Their last doorstopping epic,Blood In The Streets , predicted the recession, the downfall of communism and the stock market crash, it's said.
Well, up to a point, Lord Mogger.
In any book of several hundred pages you're bound to hit the mark occasionally.
The Great Reckoning covers a lot of the same ground as the earlier book.
They're still convinced America is about to implode under the weight of its compounding debt, turning into a bigger version of a Latin American banana republic only without the bananas.
And Mogg believes that the difficulty of ordering tea in the Waldorf Hotel these days is symptomatic of the decline of an empire, a feeling I'm sure we've all experienced from time to time.
The Thirties depression was a result of the US banking system disintegrating and the money supply collapsing by half in just a couple of years.
Mogg and Davidson are wrong in saying that governments are powerless to stop it happening again.
The Federal Reserve knows its history too and is doing just that, slashing interest rates.
There are similarities between the Thirties and what is happening now but they are still relatively thin.
If anything, the current recession is more like 1974–75 and 1980–81.
It hurts more because we had such a good time in the Eighties.
Five hundred and thirty-one pages is a lot to plough through, particularly when you're faced with sub-headings such as‘Megapolitics of grain farming’, ‘The microbes of power’ and ‘Raising the exponent in the equation of contraction.’
There's much that makes sense; there's much that is thought-provoking, even if the thought it provokes is often that the authors are off their trolley ('be alert to the strange fact that the end of each century divisible by five has witnessed a major transition in Western civilisation’).
Indeed, I have given some of the same warnings myself and, like them, have advised paying off debts and accumulating cash.
But there's even more to disagree with, particularly in the suggested preparations we are told to make for the forthcoming holocaust.
We should turn off the television and play Scrabble instead, so that our minds are challenged: ‘If the economy goes the way we think it will, your extra brain power will come in handy.’
We are told to treasure our health and to eat nourishing foods.
I'm sure the advice for the wealthy to hire a personal bodyguard is useful but I'm not quite sure if I agree with the investment possibilities of ‘Aeronautics engineer Paul Moller's flying car, the M200X, which could allow four people to cruise at 322 miles an hour’, thus allaying any fears about the collapse of the transport infrastructure.
As with so many economic megabooks, British readers are going to find it heavily skewed towards the US, which is particularly galling when it comes to the advice preparing for the slump.
Stocking tins of beans and bags of sugar is one thing.
Taking out ‘Ted spreads’ and ‘whammies’(no, I don't know either) on the Chicago Mercantile Exchange is quite another.
Consumers worried by credit-card debt and authors of economic blockbusters predicting the collapse of the American financial system will take heart from something that appears in Grant's Interest Rate Observer , one of the most highly-regarded investment publications in the States.
Although reported second-hand, it is said that one chap who's $5,000 in the red and 90 days behind with payments got a call from the card company.
He was given four options: default and risk losing his good name; pay everything immediately; make six monthly payments of $400 and they'd call it quits; send in $70 and they'd get back to him later.
A phone call confirmed that the company would indeed, under option three, settle the account for half the debt.
‘He said that he detected an implied suggestion that he might obtain another credit card from a different company and use it to pay off his card.’
The debtor decided to plump for option number four instead.
‘Asked to comment, MBNA declined, citing the need to guard trade secrets’
Money Box
SOMEONE'S SUGGESTED a clever little wrinkle that a buyer of Mirror Group Newspapers might be able to employ, were the purchaser to have a pension fund with a substantial surplus.
Merge the funds and the deficit on the Mirror fund could be offset by the existing surplus, increasing the value of MGN by at least that amount at a stroke.
You could then sell it off in a couple of years once everything's tickety-boo again.
The profit, of course, goes not back to the pension fund but instead into the company's coffers.
Were it any other company but MGN this might work.
But the reason buyers are shying away is fear of the unknown.
No one knows what the real debts are (who really owes Bankers Trust their £60m, for instance?), no one knows what the pension fund's real deficit or obligations are and no one can predict how expensive the inevitable legislation will be.
In the current anti-tycoon climate, there might be those who think it a little tactless to rob your own company's pension fund to help you take over Bob Maxwell's newspapers.
Commercial breaks
‘Frankly, John, we were hoping you'd have more to show for your German trip’
‘…and the chart on page 27 shows relative densities of time-share touts’
‘Ours was one of the one percent of holiday romances that end in marriage’
Sporting Politicos…
My game is magnificent.
Pity about the shoddy baize!
I don't like this game.
I think I'd rather watch Chelsea!
…a steady 200 mph.
I don't want to ruffle my hair.
Sport
Patrick Collins
Game, seat and match
Does being interested in sport secure politicians votes?
We saw him at the Rugby World Cup Final, consoling Carling.
We saw him at the Test matches, congratulating Gooch.
But we never really believed that John Major was a sports fan until we saw him on that bleak Sunday afternoon at Stamford Bridge.
True, it was a televised match and some might suggest that his media advisers were earning their keep, but a prime minister who endures 90 minutes of Chelsea has surely earned the benefit of the doubt.
Not so his companion, David Mellor.
He looked like a man who would far sooner be spending the afternoon at home, doing his boxes and listening to Bach.
But when the PM sends his personal invitation you can scarcely say: ‘Sorry I'm washing my hair.’
Not if you really do want to be the Chancellor one fine day.
Anyway, it does no harm for a politician to evince some passing interest in sport.
The ones who really enjoy it play the sporting card for all it's worth; the others pray that it will render them a touch more human.
And as they get ready for the Big One, the title decider, the lads will clutch at every available straw.
Like Major, Neil Kinnock's sporting credentials are beyond reproach.
Currently he is celebrating the revival, renewal, resurgence, restoration, in short, the revitalisation of Welsh rugby fortunes after that overwhelming triumph — a single-point victory in Dublin.
But he has put in many a coaching stint at London Welsh and that is a task every bit as unrewarding as watching Chelsea.
Roy Hattersley, as I believe he once mentioned, supports Sheffield Wednesday.
There is no evidence that he has actually coached his chosen club but one feels that he has spent a lifetime imbibing its history.
It is easy to visualise the adolescent Hattersley enlivening a dull Monday morning at Hillsborough High with:: ‘Who can name the Owls’ forward line in the 1907 FA Cup Final?
I jolly well can.’
And away he would go with: ‘Chapman, Bradshaw, Wilson, Stewart, Simpson.
It was a breezy afternoon at the Crystal Palace, if memory serves and our boys recruited the aid of the elements in a first half in which no quarter was asked and none given.’
The Lib Dems are distinctly short of sports fans.
One can imagine Paddy Ashdown opting for the great outdoors where a man can dream of the balance of power while doing something environmentally friendly in a boat.
But it is difficult to imagine him going to Stamford Bridge or instructing London Welsh in the value of second-phase possession.
The great outdoors surely holds no attraction for Norman Lamont.
His pallor speaks of chalk-dusted waistcoats, crafty drags at Embassy filters and swift slugs of Vladivar.
Poor Lamont wears the haunted air of one who will forever require snookers to stay in the game.
Gerald Kaufman is another who will hesitate to play the sporting card, although there are those who remember him as a midfield dynamo, eternally squabbling with the referee and being booked for ‘violence of the tongue’, an offence which he is said to have invented.
It's a game for accident-prone politicians.
Sadly, John Gummer's temperament proved unsuited to the discipline of sport.
There were those who perceived Comptonesque qualities in his batting but the illusion perished when the umpire raised his finger.
Face red, chest puffed with indignation, young John would yelp: ‘I assure you quite categorically that I never touched the ball.
That's jolly unfair!
Really, really unfair!
And, quite frankly, I'm not taking it.’
And home he would stamp with his bat beneath his arm, vowing that one day he would become Minister of Agriculture and plough up the whole bally field.
So there!
Other notables have sensibly declined to reveal their sporting fantasies.
Thus you shall never hear of Michael Heseltine's desire to drive a blood-red Grand Prix car, scattering Mansells and Sennas before him with the sublime panache of Mr Toad.
‘Poop!
Poop!
Make way for the best PM you never had!
Poop!’
Nor shall you be told of David Owen's yearning to excel at any kind of team game; selflessly drawing the best from all the other members and making sure he ran a truly happy dressing room.
The Lost Leader, of course, had not the remotest interest in sport, although she is said to look back wistfully to those distant Lincolnshire days when she would clasp the hand of Alderman Roberts as together they watched the bear-baiting.
And yet, so long as this land contains a politically-aware football manager, Mrs T will not be forgotten.
I recently listened to such a man curse the government for doing nothing to help his game.
Helpfully, I remarked that at least we now had a Prime Minister who liked football.
He snorted, unconvinced.
‘Like it?’ he said.
‘She bloody hates it!’
Patrick Collins is chief sports writer of the Mail on Sunday.
Wave review
Flood, flood, glorious flood
In a globally-warmed world the ice-caps will melt and sea level will rise.
Every last city will turn into Venice and Venice will turn into the lost city of Atlantis.
HUGH ALDERSEY-WILLIAMS on the aquatic package tours of the future.
We're all doomed, no question about it.
It's the ozone layer, or the greenhouse effect, or sunspots, or company cars or something.
Whatever it is, it's melting the ice caps and we're all going to drown.
Heigh-ho.
This is especially bad news for lovers of the seaside holiday.
There'll be no more lolling about on the Costa del Sol in future because too much Sol will have done for the Costa.
Scientists have been measuring the tide at Burnham-on-Sea, jotting down hours of sunlight, measuring the temperature to 14 decimal places and they have come to the conclusion that water levels could rise by a foot over the next 40 years.
And, God forbid, if the ice sheets at the pole collapse as well, high tide will be 15ft higher.
This will do no good for Amsterdam's tourist trade and London will be wetter than average for the time of year.
So where will the holiday brochures of the future recommend?
America: The Eastern Seaboard
THE SEABOARD IS a little less Eastern than you might have remembered it but to the enterprising Americans this is not a problem.
You start your journey by cruising down Short Island Sound (formerly Long Island Sound) to New York where the Statue of Liberty tests the waters of the Atlantic with her toes.
In Manhattan, the famous yellow water-taxis thread their way through the grid of canals to take you directly to the landing-stage of hotels in the luxuriously converted upper storeys of what were once the city's proudest skyscrapers.
Watch in delight as the city's trendiest inhabitants jetski down Fifth Avenue, or strap on your tanks and check out the exotic undersea life flitting in and out of the ruined buildings where Harlem used to be.
Some experts believe that the South Bronx could, in time, rival the Great Barrier reef as a marine habitat, turning this former urban battleground into a modern Atlantis — an unparalleled holiday destination.
But watch those underwater muggers!
Staying on the coastal highway, you come in turn to what's left of the cities of Philadelphia, Baltimore and Washington DC.
Following the flooding of RFK Stadium, the Washington Redskins have given up all hope of making another Superbowl — but the city's new Red Herrings are an increasingly powerful force in major league water-polo.
Depending on tidal conditions at the time, it may also be possible to take a gamble by crossing the causeway to Atlantic City, even if it is rather more Atlantic than City these days.
The journey south continues through Charleston and Savannah — historic and colourful cities, once major coastal ports, now each the capital of its own subtropical island, the most northerly of the new keys.
The keys once stretched south from Florida almost to Cuba, each tiny island linked to the next by a bridge.
Today, similar islands keep the special flavour of the keys along the shores of the Carolinas and Georgia.
One good piece of news is that the Ku Klux Klan has almost entirely disappeared — those robes are murder to swim in — but you can see the odd pointy hat poking out of the water here and there.
The Sea of Sacramento
THE GOLDEN GATE Bridge is the gateway not just to San Francisco Bay but to a vast inland sea — America's Mediterranean.
Squeezed between the Sierra Nevada and California's coastal hills, the Sea of Sacramento is fringed by palm trees and fragrant pines.
As you wind along the corniche roads, passing vineyards and olive groves, you are sure to be reminded of the Côte d'Azur.
OK, the radical Maoist lesbian communes of what used to be Berkeley University are rather less keen on topless sunbathing than the nubiles of Saint Tropez.
But never mind, the starlets of Hollywood, sorry, Hollyswamp aren't too far away.
And with any luck they'll skip Cannes and head for the Fresno Film Festival.
Unfortunately, like the Med, the Sea of Sacramento is shallow and polluted — bathing is not recommended.
From the southern edge of this inland sea, it is only a short haul over the mountains to Los Angeles.
Recent climatic changes have enhanced the cosmopolitan nature of this urban melting-pot with Bel Air and Beverley Hills, safe on their ground, losing their exclusivity as less privileged Angelenos have moved in from low-lying districts.
Most at risk is Venice, California, on Los Angeles's Pacific shore, where the Venice in Peril organisation welcomes visitors' support to help them to save the many cultural treasures, some of them almost 50 years old.
Florida
US VISAS ARE no longer compulsory here but Florida authorities admit only visitors in possession of a valid 25-yard swimming certificate.
Holidaymakers should set aside a day for  the glass-bottomed boat trips to Walt Disney World in the lost city of Orlando, where the spires of Cinderella's Castle rise majestically above the waves.
Taking in the rest of the Magic Kingdom, you can see many favourites from Disney's cartoons.
The Seven Dwarves may have trouble keeping their heads above water but Donald Duck is in his element as is Pluto the dogfish and his canine companion Scuba Doo.
Nearby is Sea World, the home of sea lions, killer whales and other marine animals which perform before entranced audiences.
This has been greatly expanded to provide a deeper experience for visitors.
The central new feature is Undersea World (Jacques Cousteau, prop).
Not far away lie the Everglades, America's first marine national park, renowned for their excellent deep-sea fishing.
Take a boat in search of the swordfish and marlin which offer great sport in these waters.
Incidentally, boat rental arrangements in this tour package are inclusive of a storm-damage waiver and a very thoughtful 100 free nautical miles a day.
The Sahara Wetlands
SET AT THE mouth of the mighty River Nile, Cairo is a convenient departure point for safari tours to see the wildlife of the Eastern Sahara Lake District.
Your tour driver will lead you out of the city along the Giza road to the great pyramids.
Wedded to their reflections in the waters that surround them, they look like giant gemstones set in the blue.
You will continue through vast orchards of citrus groves, one of the agricultural miracles brought by global warming to this previously arid land.
Gradually, the signs of cultivation give way to the lush wild landscapes of the Qattara Depression.
Once barren desert, this land of lakes is now home to  flamingos , crocodiles and other faunal and flora that have quickly grown accustomed to their new habitat.
Glittering in the desert sun, some of the lakes have been specially reserved for tourist enjoyment, combining warm waters for bathing and, naturally, no shortage of golden sands.
Soggy Spain
ONE OF THE few environmental benefits of global warming has been the drowning of the Costa del Sol.
As Marbella and Torremolinos crumbled into the sea, the focus of the Spanish holiday season moved to Seville, or Sevilla del Mar as it is now more properly known.
Located on the vast, beach-fringed bay of the Guadalquivir River, Sevilla del Mar is the perfect reflection of Spanish tourism's new sophistication.
And in the surrounding marshy countryside, farmers raise fighting water-buffalo that are sent all over Spain for their date with destiny at the hands of the matadors.
You'll love those richly-embroidered ceremonial wet-suits that they wear for la corrida .
London
FROM THE STRAND, once more the beach that its historic name suggests, you may board a vaporetto to take in the Houses of Parliament, Westminster Abbey, Buckingham Palace and other principal sights.
These picturesque craft are manoeuvred through London's crowded waterways by traditional Cockney seafarers in their striped sweaters and ribboned boaters.
Listen out for their traditional cry of ‘Shiver me timbers, Guv’ as they pass each other along the grand canals of the West End.
If it's hot bods you're after, why bother with Baywatch when there's so much gnarly action right at home?
On Knightsbridge, Sloanes have made way for surfers and ‘tubes’ have taken on a whole new meaning.
Radical dudes impress those bodacious babes by catching waves at Harvey Nicks and riding their planks all the way down to where Emporio Armani used to be.
There is only one Harrods?
Not any more there isn't, amigo.
We're talking wipe out with regard to this one.
Downstream on the north bank of the Thames Estuary, the bold new American-style skyscrapers of Islington Docklands rise majestically out of the river mists.
Further on, be sure not to miss a fascinating example of marine archaeology, the Thames Barrier.
This mysterious alignment of metal-clad monoliths stands as a reminder of an earlier civilisation.
Scientists today believe this strange sequence of structures was intended as a temple to the river god.
The Southeast
THE DOVER PENINSULA, a spit of land stretching from London towards the Continent, makes an ideal destination for a walking or cycling holiday.
You may enjoy the popular circular tour taking in the New Cinque Ports of Tunbridge Wells, Tenterden, Ashford and Canterbury.
There are many good beaches and a chance to bathe in warmed by Dungeness C, the underwater nuclear power station a few miles offshore.
Wildlife enthusiasts may prefer to visit the nature reserve islands of Oxney and Thanet.
The few people who still live on these remote islands practise traditional Kentish crafts, such as creative in-breeding, undisturbed by motor traffic and other aspects of mainland life.
Ely Marshlands
THE ISLE OF Ely, transformed into a notorious offshore tax haven, nevertheless houses an unequalled variety of shops selling everything from local crafts to electronics and consumer goods, all duty free.
Well served by local ferryboats, the capital Ely has become known as the Hong Kong of the West.
Departures are either from the bustling port of Peterborough, or from Milton Keynes, which has finally found a role for itself as East Anglia's answer to Blackpool.
That's gone too, of course.
But look on the bright side: we've finally found a way of getting rid of Liverpool, too.
Dazed trippers
‘'scuse me, do you speak English?’
‘It's no good — I just can't seem to think of myself as a European yob’
‘Personally, I wouldn't recommend Spain
‘Don't complain, I said.
Leave it, I said.
But oh no, not you…’
‘I reckon we'll have the house red’
‘My husband's not very keen on flying’
Get by in Japlish
The Japanese have their own version of English.
Naturally, it's smaller and doesn't break down so often.
BRANDON ROBSHAW is your guide to the world of seka hara, tarento and F*****' Gourmet
If you travel to Japan, one major difficulty will loom at you as soon as you get off the aeroplane: the language problem.
I'm not talking about Japanese, of course; nobody expects you to understand that.
I'm talking about Japlish.
Everybody speaks it and everybody expects you to understand it.
There are no interpreters to help you.
No phrase-books.
No text-books.
And no dictionaries.
Which is why the user's guide below was compiled.
It's a short course, developed on scientific principles, designed to give you a basic grounding in the vocabulary, usage and pronunciation of Japlish.
Study it carefully.
Do the proficiency test at the end.
And then, protected against the pitfalls of this curious patois, you can book your ticket to Tokyo in complete confidence.
Dear Everybody’ A hamburger, eaten when you're feeling blue, isn't very tasty.
But, when you're feeling energetic with a smile on your face, and in love…that's when hamburgers really taste delicious’ Thank you MOS BURGER.
Glossary of Useful Terms
Salaryman — this sounds like a caped super-hero who battles against the forces of evil by the power of his income.
In fact, it simply means a chap who works in an office.
Seka hara — sounds like a variation of hara kiri but actually means sexual harassment, as practised by salaryman.
Sabiro — suit, as worn by salaryman.
But how could it possibly mean ‘suit’?
Because it comes from ‘Savile Row’(See Pronunciation Guide ).
Tarento — derives from the word ‘talent’ but you don't need any to be a tarento — if anything, it would be something of a handicap in their profession, which is smirking and tittering into a microphone in TV game shows.
O-Eru — OL, or Office Lady.
In other words, a female office worker, unwilling recipient of seka hara.
Tomason — this is my favourite Japlish word and one we really should import into English.
It comes from an American baseball player named Thompson, purchased at colossal expense by a Japanese team, who, when he arrived, turned out to be a complete dud, incapable even of hitting the ball.
Since then the term is applied to anything both useless and expensive, and especially to pointless things.
There is an escalator of only five steps at a Tokyo metro station which is a good example of a Tomason.
Japlish As She Is Wrote
The Japanese write Japlish on every available surface.
It's easy to be deceived into thinking none of it makes any sense but it does make sense: a strange, twisted, whimsical, surreal kind of sense.
Some samples:
Now we are in Youth, Running through the Fields, against the Wind, Refreshing feeling with Holding pure-minded.
Seen on a packet of dried squid.
A lovely and tiny twig is a heroine's treasured chocolate born in the forest.
The sentimental taste is cozy for the heroines born in the town.
On a box of chocolates.
Room Sooks — warm up, cheer up, your nice footwear.
Seen on a pack of sooks, or socks, as we would say.
Hearty Fox in Hokkaido.
How do you do?
My name is Kon-Chan.
My lover's name is Kita-san.
We are travelling friendly in Hokkaido.
This was on a souvenir mug bought in Hokkaido.
The text is accompanied by a picture of a winsome, pointy-nosed fox.
This fan is tiny, and fancy, but the uses of this are well-nigh endless.
Spotted on a fan in a department store.
An interesting challenge to the imagination.
F*****' Gourmet.
[Our asterisks, not theirs.]
Unbelievably, this is the title of the recipe page that features in the teenage magazine Popeye .
Guide To Pronunciation
Japlish words are pronounced as they would be written in katakana , a Japanese phonetic syllabary.
A few modifications have been made to it to accommodate foreign words but, generally speaking, it is the words rather than the syllabary that get modified and some get very thoroughly modified indeed.
This leads to a number of possible confusions.
Here are some of the key ones.
b and v — there is no ‘v’ sound in Japanese, so its simply replaced by its closest alternative, ‘b’.
The sentence ‘Bile is vile’ would be a tautology in Japlish, comparable to ‘Eggs is eggs’.
si — this sound doesn't exist in Japanese.
‘Sa’, ‘su’, ‘se’ and ‘so’are no problem but the closest sound to ‘si’is ‘shi’, so they use  that instead.
‘Vitamin C’ thus becomes ‘Bitamin She’.
And unfortunately, ‘babysitter’ becomes — well, you can work that one out for yourselves.
ur — this vowel (as in ‘fur’ or ‘stir’) is rendered in Japlish by the vowel ‘ah’.
A firm therefore becomes a farm.
‘I work in a city firm’ would be ‘I work in a shitty farm’.
An the Virgin Megastore is ‘the barge-in Mega-store’.
the — not found in Japlish.
‘S’ is used in its place.
‘I'll stick with you through thick and thin' (English).
‘I'll stick with you through sick and sin’(Japlish).
l and r — Japanese doesn't have an ‘l’ sound; it just has a slightly l-ish ‘r’.
Beginners in Japlish use that sound for both ‘l’ and ‘r’, but more advanced speakers learn to distinguish between the two so that they can get them mixed up.
A pilot becomes pirate.
And hence the joke: ‘Waiter, this chicken is rubbery.’
‘Ah, sany yaw, grad you rike it.’
(Traditional)
Misleading Shop Names
The unwary traveller could easily be perplexed by the names of shops in Japan, as it's fashionable to give shops names in Japlish, with no regard — or with the wrong regard — to the word's original English meaning.
For example, you can't buy milk in the shop Milk.
That's because it's a boutique.
You can buy T- shirts with the shop's name printed on them, however, with the result that there are now hundreds of teenage girls walking around Tokyo with the word ‘milk’ blazoned across their breasts.
Here are some more to watch out for:
Joy Club — don't get excited.
It's only a restaurant.
Love — ditto.
Slug — a hairdresser's oddly enough.
They make their own Christmas cards, with the word ‘SLUG’ printed underneath a picture of Father Christmas.
Let's Kiosk — it sounds like an invitation to a rather static kind of dance — but it is, in fact, a station kiosk selling sweets and drinks.
Game and Games — you might get the impression that this is a shop where you could buy either a brace of grouse or a set of Monopoly.
But, the choice is merely between buying one board game or buying several.
Ah, Solecism
Proficiency Test
A simple test in Japlish usage for you to chart your progress by.
Below are a list of places where you might see Japlish written, and two alternatives for what you might see there.
Can you choose the most correct and most appropriate Japlish version in each case?
1.
On a litter bin 
a)
Litter
b)
Nice day, nice smokin'
2.
On a shirt 
a
Machine washable
b
We are proud to keep the national composition all over the world
3.
On a tin of soup 
a
Mother Pot — hot relaxation whenever you take a sip
b
Campbell's Cream of Tomato
4.
Outside a café 
a
Teas, cakes, sandwiches
b
Unlimited capacity for love
5.
On a jar of coffee 
a
A smooth, rich, dark blend
b
The origin of the word ‘jive’ came from playing or dancing to jazz
6.
On a birth congratulations card 
a
Congratulations on the birth of your son/daughter
b
Happy Baby for beautiful human life
7.
On a photograph album 
a
For easy going daily life, the dear and valuable memorandum
b
Photographs
8.
Over a surgical supply shop 
a
Surgical supplies
b
Hot nude collection
ANSWERS
If you got all the answers right, you're proficient in Japlish.
If you didn't, then you're not.
Parc scratchings
STEVE PUNT shoots the rapids, perfects his topspin and risks lung cancer on a Center Parcs holiday in steamy, subtropical Norfolk
Welcome to the leisure dome
It would be very easy to knock Center Parcs.
So let's get on with it.
The first clue lies in the spelling.
Center Parcs.
Neither word is English.
Center is pure American, even though Center Parcs are actually Dutch.
Despite this handicap they have, very successfully, tapped deep into the heart of the British psyche.
They have done this by asking what the British really want from a holiday.
This is easy.
First — no rain.
But more important, no foreigners.
It's the Maastricht approach to holidays — you can opt out of all the bits you don't like, such as having to tackle foreign languages or eat strange food.
And you don't have to miss EastEnders .
Center Parcs, as seen on TV, are based around tropical atmosphere, a swimming pool and futuristic dome, an idea the Dutch seem to have stolen from Jeff Tracy of International Rescue.
The Parcs are described in terms that seem to be reserved exclusively for brochures, with plenty of references to ‘lifestyle’ and ‘experience’.
The restaurants, for example, are ‘themed’(which means there is only one thing on the menu).
Essentially, they are glorified leisure centres — Butlins for the Costa Brava generation, a way of feeling like you're abroad without having to wait for three hours at Gatwick Airport.
Center Parcs have done their market research — they know that their target market want the healthy Nineties lifestyle and duly provide a huge sports hall.
Unfortunately, the target market also want to smoke at every available opportunity.
So the Center Parcs leisure experience includes playing badminton, squash or tennis wreathed in the fog of a hundred Silk Cuts.
Healthy it ain't, but then, the standard of exertion isn't generally high enough to draw the smoke in very far.
One of the great things about Center Parcs is that you get away from the ‘I'm Rubbish’ Syndrome.
This is the state of affairs at a normal sports centre, where everyone else seems to be skilled and athletic and you too embarrassed to start.
This is not a problem at Center Parcs, where everyone else is so inept that you are embarrassed to show them up.
My standard of tennis is at that level where merely returning a serve constitutes a match highlight.
Eight-year-olds call their friends and gather at the courtside to watch my forehand drives flopping limply into the net, time after time.
At Center Parcs, though, I felt like André Agassi.
Spectators gasped in awe at the sight of a ball landing back in the same court.
A rally of more than three strokes would have people fainting.
There was come-uppance at the snooker table.
Booked by the hour, the previous occupants were sitting by the table watching their six-year-old child poke a cue at the remaining balls.
‘Come away now,’ said mother.
‘Here's the next man.
He's going to play properly.’
It was another 25 minutes before the first red went in.
By mistake.
Disillusion was etched on the child's face.
I blame TV.
A sartorial warning at this point — Center Parcs' tabloid soubriquet ought to be the Costa del Shellsuit.
Virtually everybody at Elveden Forest was dressed in these crinkly bodybags in garish nylon.
Entire families wander through the Parc Plaza dressed in shellsuits.
As soon as the baby is out of nappies, it is plonked into a mini-shellsuit so as to match its brothers, sisters, mother, father and grandparents.
Not wearing a shellsuit at Center Parcs would be like running out on the pitch at Wembley in a dinner jacket.
The central attraction is the Tropical Swimming Paradise, which claims to maintain a sub-tropical climate even in the depths of mid-winter.
The climate might seem sub-tropical if one is used to taking naturist breaks in Siberia but otherwise it felt like normal swimming-pool temperature to me.
This aside, the Tropical Swimming Paradise is an excellent place, forcing you as it does, to revert to the age of ten and act accordingly.
This is no mere pool.
There are Wild Water Rapids: a long, winding channel of agreeably-warm water, down which one is swept by gravity and the force of the current, and in which one can pretend to be in the closing scene of The Towering Inferno .
The inside of the channel is coated in some sort of Teflon-like substance which ensures that no matter how hard one scrapes along the bottom or smashes into corners, remarkably little blood gets  drawn.
Going down the Rapids becomes a test of masculinity.
Not just for you but for your kids.
Despite a large sign at the top reading ‘Experienced Swimmers Only’, fathers were to be found hurling their whimpering infants into the tumult with loud cries of ‘You'll enjoy this, Darren.’
With this, the petrified toddler would disappear in the rushing water and, floundering like an asthmatic salmon, be tossed like a cork all the way down, occasionally smashing its as-yet-unhardened cranium into the wall and ending up bobbing dazed in the pool at the bottom, while other members of the family zoomed in with the Camcorder, dreaming of the £1,000 they'd win from Jeremy Beadle.
Then there are the Flume Rides; long, twisty fibreglass tunnels, down which one slid at high speed, ending in a deep pool at the bottom.
At the top of each Flume Ride is a traffic light, rather like the ones used for Olympic downhill skiers.
In order to keep a safe distance, one waits while the light holds on red.
Thus Center Parcs have managed to perfect a system which, after 150 years, still eludes British Rail.
The Dutch origins are most clearly seen in the accommodation.
The ‘villas’(Dutch for ‘chalet’) are identikit, standardised boxes, and nestled between the trees they look rather like those huts you see in documentaries about Stalin's relocation policies.
Inside, the decor is Early Seventies Porn Film chic: thick carpet, round-the-wall bench sofa, huge melamine coffee table, breakfast bar — everything, in fact, except badly-recorded wah-wah guitar and bearded blokes called Sven walking around in towels.
The villas also possess refrigerators which operate at a volume level slightly below that of a Hercules transport plane taking off with a full load.
Should the ensuing insomnia mean dropping off during the day, then again you will be awakened, this time by real Hercules transport planes — Elveden Forest, being in East Anglia, is very close to numerous air-bases and so many jets scream overhead that one expects any minute to bump into a tight-lipped Kate Adie dressed in camouflage fatigues.
I thought the noisy-fridge problem was confined to my villa but a visit to the Health Spa proved that this was not the case.
‘It's good in 'ere,’ said an invisible Liverpudlian woman in the steam room.
‘It's like sitting in a packet of Tunes.’
The conversation then turned to the Center Parcs and the same voice floated through the mentholated steam.
‘It's good in 'ere,’ she said.
‘Apart from the fridges.’
From the steam room, I went into the sauna.
Two Liverpudlian men were in conversation.
‘Good in 'ere,’ said one.
‘Yeah,’ agreed his sweaty companion.
‘I could really use a fag.’
Aside from the sports hall there are outside facilities, many of which are rather too cold to do in winter.
These consist of all the activities which look good in the brochure but no one ever actually does, like windsurfing (on a pond), clay-pigeon shooting (which costs 20 quid) or canoeing (on a pond),.
There were outdoor tennis courts, which were a quarter the cost of indoor ones and you didn't get the smoke, and also two boules alleys, or pitches, or whatever they're called.
Sadly, the spirit of 1992 had not reached the denizens of Elveden Forest; not one single person played boules the whole time I was there.
I am undecided as to whether this is because the British are an unadventurous and xenophobic nation, or whether it is because boules is a stupid game.
Or possibly Center Parcs had not quite got the hand of hiring out the proper equipment — certainly you need the jack and the balls but you should also be able to hire an old man in a beret to watch, otherwise the game cannot possibly feel authentic.
It should be said that Center Parcs are an excellent place to take children.
The Euro-influence comes into its own here; on the Continent children are acknowledged to exist and are allowed into bars and restaurants, and there are many well-designed features and facilities at Center Parcs to make their stay safe and happy.
Which makes it unfortunate that most of them were penned in watching the TV with their goggling, chain-smoking parents.
So, as they say on The Travel Show , what was the overall view of Center Parcs?
Well, there's a certain romance in floating in a warm swimming pool on a cold winter's night, looking up at the stars and wondering whether to fling oneself down the rapids or go and sit in a Jacuzzi instead.
Of such choices is modern leisure made.
Life is tough.
The law of the sand
‘And don't start giving me any of that Man Friday, racial stereotyping, bro!’
‘If it weren't for tetherball, I think we both would have died of boredom’
‘Hello Friday — just to let you know I'll be a few seconds late with the tea!’
‘Sheer hell, trapped on a desert island for 20 years with a Bonsai specialist’
WHO GIVES A MONKEYS?
A CRITICAL LOOK AT MODERN LIFE
by Richard Littlejohn
Travel Features
I've only ever been asked to write one travel feature.
I submitted 1,000 words.
About 60 of them actually appeared in print and not necessarily in the order of context I had written them.
My description of a week in Almeriá, in Spain, horrified the features editor.
He saw a lifetime of freebies turning to ashes if he dared to publish it.
‘We were actually looking for something a little more positive, old boy,’ he protested.
‘Was it really necessary to mention the asbestos factory?’
I thought it was.
The resort was a sort of Birmingham Bull Ring-on-Sea.
It was difficult to work out if the hotel had a private beach or whether the builders had simply dumped their excess sand and cement next to the water.
The journey from the airport (flight delay, three hours) took us across a desolate, scorched, spaghetti-western landscape.
‘They could have filmed The Good, The Bad And The Ugly here,’ I quipped.
‘They did,’ said the tour guide, his chest swelling with pride.
Within minutes of checking in to my room, the toilet overflowed.
Judging by the food, I assume it overflowed into the kitchens below.
The two high-spots of the holiday were watching the Heysel disaster in Spanish on television and circumambulating the swimming pool at 3.30am, throwing all the strategically-placed German towels in the deep end.
Oh, and the hire car broke down.
‘Wasn't there anything you enjoyed?’ the exasperated editorial executive pleaded.
‘I didn't have a bad curry on the last night,’ I replied, after come consideration.
By the time my article appeared, it resembled one of those selective reviews you see outside theatres.
You know, the kind which reads in full: ‘About as  riveting as watching snow melt, about as thrilling as a plate of polenta,’ and is subsequently truncated to ‘Rivetting!’and ‘Thrilling!’.
By the time it had been carefully re-written, my feature described in glowing terms the ‘Hollywood film-set scenery’(but no mention of The Good, The Bad and The Ugly and ‘exotic cuisine’(on the strength of a passable chicken tikka masala eaten at a restaurant some distance from the hotel).
Just remember that next time you are tempted to book a holiday on the strength of something you read in one of the Sunday supplements.
Portrait of the month
Steve Goodall
George Bush
He flew to Japan ion search of trade concessions and amazed the world with his rendition of that old favourite,If You Spewed Sushi Like I Spewed Sushi .
On his return to the States he discovered that the recession had not ended, but his chances of re-election probably had.
George Bush is our man of the month, but only because we're not American 
Charivari
Punch's weekly guide to the arts, entertainment, media and more…
Freebie thinkers
The features editor of a glossy magazine was once invited on a trip to the Caribbean.
On the plane she found herself sitting next to the Knitting correspondent of a women's magazine who was on the same press jaunt.
You will have spotted straight away that the Caribbean is not exactly renowned for the quality of its knitwear.
The knitting correspondent was taking a well-earned break from the strenuous world of woollens, courtesy of her travel editor.
This is the key to an understanding of travel writing.
Most travel writers are not travel writers at all.
Some are not even writers.
They are simply people who are lucky enough to have landed a free trip to a holiday destination, a trip paid for by an airline, a tour company, a hotel chain or any combination of the three.
In return for this hospitality, all they have to do is write a glowing report of their experience.
The routine of most press trips is the same.
They are bar and beach holidays cruelly interrupted by visits to view the spacious rooms and extensive facilities of a recently-constructed hotel, or to inspect a distant beach.
Despite this, they always appear in print as extraordinary adventures in a romantic, far-off, sun-kissed land.
You may have nodded off in the bus on your way to a dusty ruin where street-traders pestered you until you retired to the coach in a huff, but in print you will have enjoyed the delights of a ‘bustling street market’, selling ‘delightful local crafts’ in the shadow of ‘one of the forgotten wonders of the world’.
It is important to use the word ‘local’ as much as possible.
Local wine should always be ‘rough’ or ‘robust’(as, indeed, it nearly always is).
Local food is an equally important subject, especially the ‘local speciality which can only be found in this charming, family-run restaurant to which our helpful taxi driver introduced us.’
Taxi drivers are always a good source of copy.
Real travellers will have discovered that most taxi drivers have only a cursory grasp of English so it may come as a surprise to learn that foreign cabbies ‘drive at breakneck speed’ while talking eloquently of ‘local proverbs and giving handy hints about what to buy in the local market.’
If you visit the market, mention the handicrafts.
If you can find a gnarled peasant woman making shabby  artefacts from twigs, point your readers in her direction.
Other tips for travel writers include the following:
Alliterate: witty Whicker's wonderful way with words has a lot to answer for.
Some travel writers cannot go anywhere without swimming and sunbathing under the swelter of the sizzling sun, as palms sway and swish along the sandy shoreline.
Give helpful information about excursions: ‘The Giants Grotto on the north side of the island makes a splendid day out — take a picnic.’
Most travel journalists will not have been to the Giants' Grotto, of course, but they will certainly have seen the handy paragraph in the travel company press pack.
Resist the temptation to avoid words like ‘unspoilt’ and ‘paradise’.
It was true, after all, when you visited.
It's only when your 2.5 million readers fly to paradise island that it will begin to look like Butlins on a bank holiday.
And you can always boast afterwards that you knew it when it was quiet and unspoilt.
Watch the world go by.
TV travelogues are particularly prone to this.
A typical sequence will show a series of leisure activities — water-skiing, parascending or wind-surfing — after which the reporter slumps exhaustedly in a pavement café, drinking some dreadful concoction through a plastic straw.
‘And of course,’ says the reporter, ‘you can always just sit at one of the city's many charming little cafés and just watch the world go by.’
‘Well, you've got a nice sunny day for it, Icarus’
Whatever you do, don't mention anything unpleasant about your trip.
Pick little holes, by all means, if your shower tap was a little stiff or the beach a trifle shingly, but never voice real criticism.
You may be doing your readers a favour but you will never be invited on a freebie again.
Ever.
David Cheal 
David Cheal travelled to Punch magazine courtesy of London Underground.
Typical fares: day return from Kilburn to Blackfriars, £2.40.
Contact your local London Underground booking office for details.
Charivari wireless
The cry that came in from the cold
SHORT OF HOLDING an arts festival down the darkened drains of Guildford, it is hard to think of a less promising cultural centre than the Arctic Circle.
No orchestras, no opera, just loads of seal meat drying on every available ice slab.
It is pitch black round the clock and everyone is depressed, drunk and stinks of fish oil.
The hardest job of the ‘Northern Lights Festival’ on Radio 4 fell to Kaleidoscope in Greenland , where Paul Allen set off to examine the arts scene, heaven help him.
He arrived at a town surrounded by icebergs and with no road out.
It has a population of 4,000 people, he told us grimly, and 8,000 dogs who howl in the night.
Then a hunter passed with a dead seal on a sledge so, for lack of anything more obviously artistic., Mr Allen described that ('Its silver-grey nose peeping…etc, etc’).
Basically, he found a Stone Age culture dying out.
(You are not supposed to say, ‘Hurrah, at last.
What took them so long?’
You are supposed to say, ‘Oh how tragic,’ and blame the whole thing on America).
In the good old days, Eskimos used to wash their hair in urine and share a bowl of seal blood.
When insulted, they stripped to the waist, put on hideous driftwood masks and sang nasty songs at each other.
Today, this exquisite ancient culture has been replaced by Bulgarian rock bands singing funereal versions of ‘Amazing Grace
.
It is hard to decide which is preferable.
To his credit, Mr Allen did not go mad and even managed to find an Eskimo poet who returned from Copenhagen in the revolutionary year of 1967 to see what was happening in Greenland ('Nothing’).
The Arctic Players perform a torrid sound poem version of the shipping forecast.
South South East four…mist six miles…one one two five and falling!
For further information, we are indebted to Vaughan Purvis who was not supposed to be in this festival at all.
He was supposed to be crossing the Atlantic in a rubber boat.
‘Simon’, a BBC producer, had lent him recording equipment to make a bit of a programme out of this endeavour.
Sadly, Purvis capsized and washed up in Greenland where he went comprehensively native.
In no time he was raving about free love and ‘Fat Maria’ Who ‘smiles with pleasure  whenever I help her out of her underwear under the blankets at night.’
The whole scene suited Purvis down to the ground.
He informed us that Eskimo sexual licence goes far beyond any idea of free love or promiscuity.
‘It is better to say nothing because no one in the outside world will understand: and it might be better to stay here.’
(Is there a Mrs Purvis listening to all this?)
We then heard intimate whispers, doubtless from his fat friend.
His documentary (pretentiously entitled Vaughanssaga ) is blighted by his belief that he is some kind of Broadcasting Artist.
‘Nowhere have I been presented with so many extraordinary opportunities for startlingly fresh and original material for radio,’ he says of Greenland, where he borrows a cassette and goes out recording ‘wild track’(a technical term that he expects us to know, meaning the sound background you hear when the broadcaster mercifully shuts up.)
Unfortunately, none of this startlingly fresh and original material surfaced in the programme.
Perhaps it was all drowned out by the howling dogs which are such a feature of the district.
Purvis suggested that he and Simon were creating a ‘sound poem’ of pretty high quality.
But then, tragically, they omitted to actually do it.
Eventually, Purvis sounded as depressed as the Eskimos themselves.
When, oh, when is this festival going to end?
Big Ears 
‘The SAFEWAYS…’
by Paul Thomas
FRESH FROM HIS MOUNTAIN TOP DEFLOWERING OF THE SEVENTEEN YEAR OLD SELINA MURTAGH.
GEOFFREY SAFEWAY WAS BARING HIS SOUL TO HIS AMPLE-BOTTOMED FATHER, ALBERT, IN THE GARDEN OF THE  SAFEWAY'S OLD HOUSE IN STOCKWELL, SOUTH WEST LONDON…
BUT IT WAS SO MUCH MORE THAN JUST A DIRTY WEEKEND , FATHER — I'VE NEVER EXPERIENCED ANYTHING LIKE IT!
I STILL CAN'T BELIEVE THAT YOU INTEND TO CARRY ON SEEING THE TART BEHIND LAURA'S BACK!
BASTARD!
I KNOW — THAT'S WHAT I'VE BEEN TELLING MYSELF, BUT IT'S NO GOOD.
I'M OBSESSED WITH HER…
HUH!
LOOK, TRY AS I MIGHT , I CAN'T JUST WRITE OFF WHAT HAPPENED BETWEEN US ON THAT ROCKY CUMBRIAN OUTCROP…
HOW CAN I FORGET THE INTENSITY OF OUR PASSION FOR EACH OTHER, OR THE WILD SLAMMING JOYOUSNESS OF OUR WIND-TOSSED LOVE-MAKING
YOU'RE MAD !
MAYBE SO, BUT I'LL NOT REST UNTIL, ONCE , I TASTE THE BUTTOCK-CLENCHING THRILL OF BEING CAUGHT IN Flagrante Delicto BY MELVYN BRAGG …GOOD GOD !
YOU'RE BACK OFF UP TO THE LAKE DISTRICT ?
NO —HAMPSTEAD HEATH !
television
Lovejoy is a many splendoured thing
How McShane puts the swoon into Sunday
THE SEX APPEAL of Ian McShane, the leathery-voiced star of Lovejoy , has been questioned by some male critics recently.
Garry Bushell, a tabloid journalist, even went as far as to doubt Mr McShane's status as a ‘serious sex symbol’.
Coming from the face-fungus-clad Mr Bushell, this is bit like Grace And Favour 's Mr Humphries complaining that Frank Bruno is a bit of a weed.
However, after conduction an informal poll, I can report that quite a few women of a certain age think Mr McShane is hotter stuff than most of the antiques he sells.
Part of the secret of Lovejoy 's success is its Sunday night scheduling, which the increasingly undemanding nature of the show suits perfectly.
The nearest one gets to a decent plot these days is Lady Felsham clipping her roses.
But the formula does work, not least because it so successfully creates an idyllic world of eternal sunshine, preserved countryside and sumptuous houses.
It offers access to monied and aristocratic lifestyles, it has the atmosphere and tension of auctions, and it judiciously slips in technical explanations about antiques.
Lovejoy himself is firmly in the tradition of the likeable rogue — no first name for a start.
His redeeming qualities are his keen aesthetic sense and his carefree response to failure.
McShane also has a peculiar gait, accentuated by a distinct tummy — a jaunty little waddle with a hint of wide boy.
But all the jollity doesn't totally obscure his illegal activities; Lovejoy did begin the previous series with a spell in jail.
His scams and cons, however, are not always abortive and the profit he makes is not always snatched away at the last minute.
His two chums, betweeded boozer Tinker (Dudley Sutton) and leather-clad biker Eric (Chris Jury), are in turns enchanted and infuriated by his inconsistency but their buddy-buddy joshing deftly bowls along.
The show's main frisson is usually supplied by Lovejoy's relationship with Lady Felsham (Phyllis Logan).
Her husband is often away, leaving her alone, but any alliance with Lovejoy remains frustratingly unconsummated.
Until the recent arrival of Joanna Lumley, the only thing Lovejoy was likely to leap into was his open-topped Morris Minor, but for the last few episodes he's been gleefully doing more bedding than bidding.
Compared with BBC's recent Sunday romp A Time To Dance the Lovejoy romance was highly affecting.
Underplayed, affectionate, tenderly middle-aged…it was far removed from the cringes of Lake District love-making.
Sadly, last Sunday saw Lovejoy's fling end abruptly as Ms Lumley set off, once more, for Peru.
Not even a woman, it seems, can come between Lovejoy and his antiques.
Perhaps Mr Bushell has a point after all.
Sean Macaulay 
Charivari music
A Holiday package without reservation
THERE HAVE BEEN SOME GREAT sufferers in popular music — Leonard Cohen, Morrissey, Michael Bolton.
But nobody ever suffered like Billie Holiday.
Holiday was in many ways the first modern pop vocalist.
She wasn't a pioneer with rhythm or phrasing like Louis Armstrong and Bing Crosby were, but she embodied and invaded lyrics and exuded a peculiar pain which tormented rock stars have tried to emulate ever since.
Few singers have ever matched her musical intelligence or her strange, foggy timbre, and her exquisite agony has made her into something of an icon.
The Complete Recordings 1933 — 1940 (Affinity), an exemplary new set of eight CDs, tells the first chapter of her story on record.
Holiday had a hopeless life.
She was born in Baltimore in 1915 and began singing in 1930 after moving to New York.
It's hard to divine the facts of her early life since her autobiography,Lady Sings The Blues , is full of tawdry details which are as likely to be figments of a pulp imagination as they are the truth: the way she tells it, she was routinely mistreated and beaten, recruited for a brothel and more or less saved only by a small talent for holding a tune.
Her early records reveal a tiny voice, pale in the shadow of her acknowledged influences: Armstrong and Bessie Smith.
Columbia's brilliant young talent scout John Hammond recorded her with Benny Goodman and Teddy Wilson, and it was with Wilson, a dapper, politely swinging pianist, that she made most of the records to be found in Affinity's collection.
Teddy organised small-group backings that creamed off some of the best New York musicians of the day — men such as Lester Young, Buck Clayton and Ben Webster — from the resident big bands.
All of the songs from these sessions follow a similar sort of pattern: Holiday sings a chorus or two, the musicians share a couple of solos between them and that's it.
While some have remained as classic standards, plenty have been forgotten altogether.
Yet Holiday manages to make something out of nearly all of them.
Her sense of time is utterly bewitching: she floats phrases across bar-lines, stretches vowel sounds or shrinks a line in such a way that indifferent melodies are made to sound stronger than they are.
Her much celebrated affiliation with saxophonist Lester Young is affecting nor for any sentimental reasons but because their thoughts were so close in musical terms.
Fine songs such as‘Mean To Me’ or ‘I Can't Get Started’appear to be close to perfect here but such trifles as ‘With Thee I Swing’and ‘You're Too Lovely To Last’are just as charming because the singer gives them the same sensitive treatment.
The set ends at just the point where she was becoming a fashionable figure and, eventually, a popular one on a wider scale; by the end of the Forties, she must have been one of the most admired singers of her day.
But she'd already started to dissipate the beauty of her voice with various kinds of addiction — narcotics, alcohol and companions who weren't altogether kind to her — and the last ten years of her life (she died in 1959) find the light, drifting delivery of the pre-war years shrivelling into the croak of a haggard ghost.
It is this later Holiday which most recognise and her admirers point to her last years as her most compelling.
Maybe they are.
Her legend has certainly been built around them.
But one listens to her final records with dismay after hearing the fresh, uncanny beauty of the early ones.
If it is easy to despise the cult of Holiday, which even the singer herself seemed to fall victim to at times, one can still listen to these unassuming youthful records and marvel at the serenity of her musicianship.
Richard Cook
film
The Stone ranger
Oliver's controversial crusade to uncover the truth about JFK
IT IS NOT THE FIRST time the American cinema has dealt with the assassination of President John Kennedy but the research involved in, and the detail of JFK (15, Empire), make it extraordinary — as do the direction and the playing of a cast led by Kevin Costner.
Director Oliver Stone, joined in the screenplay by Zachary Sklar, used two books involved with the official investigation as the basis for his narrative.
The film, however, is not a fictional elaboration of facts but a comment on history.
And it excites.
Of course it is controversial.
It asks, as everybody has asked, ‘Who?’
But also, as the world has asked just as urgently, ‘Why?’
The events which surrounded the murder have persisted in memory and strengthened speculation.
Because of this, what we see on the screen seems not so much acting as existing.
We feel there is little division between the players and the images of fact.
The faces hold you: guarded, apprehensive, expectant, confident, resolute.
They don't solve the mystery but they fill in the background.
The cutting, too, has meaning: fast, significant, hinting, pausing for an instant on an idea then darting away as if to shrink from a risky suggestion.
JFK is superbly made: at over three hours long it seems short.
It lacks one thing.
You long for a recognisable villain.
And there is no villain.
Except of course, American politics.
There is another notable film out this week.
Ma Nuit Chez Maud (12, Renoir and NFT) was made by Eric Rohmer in 1969 and it came early in his studies of human relations.
A man takes a friend to meet a woman he knows.
They talk about God, about Pascal, about love.
And it is quite wonderful.
The players are Jean-Louis Trintignant, Francoise Fabian.
At the Cannon Oxford Street,Driving Me Crazy (12).
A straightforward man (Ed O'Neill) agrees to drive his girlfriend's son home from boarding school for Thanksgiving.
But the boy (Ethan Randall) is cocky and obstreperous: the trip ends in a wrecked car.
Written by John Hughes, of Home Alone fame, directed by Peter Faiman it is reasonably entertaining.
Dilys Powell 
Oblivion, here we come
Hot tips from the Smash Hits 1984 Yearbook
Phil Thornally:As Fred Trueman said of Indoor League, ‘I'll sithee’.
Bourgie Bourgie:Appallingly-titled jazz quartet that got its just reward.
Seona Dancing:First gig was in the bar of University College, London.
Their appeal is now more selective.
Virginia Astley:Her ‘piano, flute and birdsong music’ was just resistible.
Physique:Muscle-bound, and, sadly, dumper-bound were this hunky trio.
Compiled by John ‘Who?’
Naughton of Q Magazine
Agent Orange by Haldane
THE CUBA AFFAIR: V
STORY SO FAR AGENT ORANGE HAS BEEN SENT TO A CUBA ON A MISSION TO RUB OUT CASTRO — HIS AMIGOS HAVE BEEN CAPTURED
YOUR FELLOW AGENTS WERE INTERCEPTED BY CASTRO'S MEN YESTERDAY — TODAY THEY ARE BEING FED TO THE CRABS
BUT THIS ISN'T REAL.
IT'S AN EXERCISE .
WE WERE SITTING TWIDDLING OUR THUMBS AT HQ…
WE HAD TO DO SOMETHING !
WE'RE HAVING BIG TROUBLE JUSTIFYING OUR LARGE SALARIES SINCE WE STOPPED SPYING ON THE RUSSIANS!
YOU MAY THINK IT'S AN EXERCISE, YOUR SUPERIORS HAVE OTHER IDEAS
THEY ASKED US TO CONTACT YOU.
WE ARE THE C.C.C., THE CUBAN CAPITALIST COMMANDOS — C.I.A.
FUNDED BY THE WAY
WE WISH TO REMOVE CASTRO AND REPLACE HIM WITH A WEALTHY RIGHT WING ENTREPRENEUR
WE CUBANS ARE SICK AND TIRED OR FEEBLE SOVIET IMPORTS
…
THIS POOR CHILD IS NINE YEARS OLD AND SHE'S NEVER SEEN A BARBIE DOLL!
WE WANT WESTERN STYLE LUXURIES, WE WANT A SECURE FUTURE FOR OUR CHILDREN, WE WANT FREEDOM OF CHOICE BUT MOST OF ALL WE WANT…
GENUINE PERSONALIZED NUMBER PLATES!
Charivari theatre
Some of our stagecraft is missing
ONCE AGAIN, ARTHUR MILLER gets a better production than he deserves, with David Thacker's fine mounting of All My Sons , a play about the evil men do in a past that reaches its strangling tentacles into the present.
Though the Young Vic's small theatre-in-the-round is hardly the best place for a tense domestic drama, this tightly-controlled production keeps the dread steadily rising and nicely paces the outbursts of emotion against the background of rumbling resentment.
Not that this is an easy job.
Theatre architecture is far less of a handicap to the absorption of an audience in the plight of Miller's characters than his creaky dramaturgy and reverence for the banal and the hokey.
For example, at the outset of All My Sons , the central figure, Joe Keller, asks his son, who is reading the book-review section of a newspaper, ‘Every week a new book comes out?
All different?’
A friend who has just seen a Don Ameche movie informs the local doctor of the plot: ‘He worked in his basement discovering things.
That's what you ought to do.
You could help humanity.’
You the punter may want to quit while you're ahead.
Though Joe's literary knowledge is shaky, he has a reputation as a smart operator, and not only in the airplane business, where he has made his fortune.
His partner has gone to prison for knowingly selling the US Air Force defective parts which have caused the death of 21 fliers.
Briefly imprisoned himself, Joe has been freed on appeal and now plays cards with the Midwestern neighbours who shunned him.
But the disappearance of his son, Larry, in the war has passed its own sentence on the family.
Ann, the daughter of Joe's partner, was Larry's fiance/1e, and now wants to marry Joe's surviving son, Chris, who has come through the war unscathed.
The obstacle is Joe's wife, Kate, who, three years after Larry's plane has gone down, believes him to be alive.
Yet Kate's near-demented insistence that her son is not dead has a logic and awareness that, unknown to the others, is holding the family together.
Joe's behaviour can also be s\described as mildly odd: his fear of returning to prison shows in his encouragement of the local children to play policeman games, telling them he will put bad boys into his private jail, and a sense of contrition over the faulty aircraft parts means he cannot bear having anything the house that ought to be thrown away.
Miller poignantly captures the variety and conflict of feelings that followed the war — the mixture of relief, sorrow, dissatisfaction, and what came to be called survival guilt.
Kate throws herself into her delusion that her son will come back; Joe heartily espouses being realistic and burying the dead.
Chris is so emotionally paralysed that he has spent two years wooing Ann, who has been working in New York, through the post.
‘We're, like,’ he says, ‘at a railroad station, waiting for a train that never comes in.’
ALL MY SONS
MATTHEW MARSH as Chris Keller
IAN BANNEN as Joe Keller
You don't need to have taken in the fact, planted early on, that Joe keeps a gun, or have noticed the required sign in the foyer warning that shots will be fired (can't the nanny state keep its paws off anything?) to know that retribution is coming, and on elephant feet.
Miller piles on the earnestness, and then piles on some more, with not only dialogue but devices that reek of awkward purity — an unmotivated confession and a letter kept secret for years.
The indignation has a strained and petty air about it: Joe's greatest crime does not seem to be his contribution to the deaths of 21 servicemen but his letting down his son, who can no longer regard him as a hero.
Though Chris is the play's voice of conscience, he is, ultimately, a rather quavery one: Miller never confronts him with his  own reluctance to grow up, his willing collaboration with a domineering father and a mother who ignores him to worship her dead son.
As Joe, Ian Bannen smiles rigidly and often, and acts with stiffness rather than solidity.
Marjorie Yates is a much stronger figure as the alternately homey, vulnerable, and fiercely possessive Kate.
Matthew Marsh is entirely convincing as the easygoing but dogged Chris, and Amanda Boxer, with her sardonic, off-centre delivery, provides desperately needed comic relief.
But, rather than spend the money and trouble on another of these exercises in exhibitionistic virtue, could we all just gather at some shrine, shout, ‘Thank you, Arthur Miller, for being so much better than us!’ and go home to dinner?
The nights are getting pretty cold now.
SOME SORT OF MOVEMENT is obviously at work to provide Sîan Phillips with plays even more atrocious than her acting.
Tina Howe's Painting Churches shows her in full flight, as the wife of a distinguished Boston poet and the mother of a women painter who has come to do their portrait.
Instead of a freeze-dried New England accent, Phillips gives us a combination of weird sister, deranged Southern matron and Mary Martin on a bad day.
All that happens in Howe's whiny drama is that the daughter finds out her flamboyant, selfish mother has a tough row to hoe, as her father is declining into senility.
(An understandable state, since he is described as having ‘led the way’ for Robert Frost — whose revered poetry is misquoted — which would make him at least 110).
The play never suggests there is anything unpleasant, or even tough, in the characters of the husband and daughter — hardly credible of two huge successes in art and literature.
And the wit strains one's credibility: after the father recites Yeats's ‘The Song of Wandering Aengus’, the mother says, ‘That's lovely, dear.
One of yours?’
Bertie Wooster, where are you when we need you?
Rhoda Koenig 
Also runs — and rans
Our critic on what else is on in London 
A Dybbuk For Two People
Undernourished and overbearing version of the Yiddish play of erotic possession.
Spread A Little Happiness
A festival of the epicene — tinkly tunes and pallid lyrics in this weak Vivian Elles revue.
Frank Thornton is a delight, though.
drink
East side story
The Russians may not be coming but their wines certainly are
POLITICIANS MAY BE squabbling over who owns the bombs and ordinary Russians and  Ukrainians may be queuing for three hours for a sausage, then three more for a potato, but some good news is coming out of what was once the Soviet Union.
In 1988, some time before the USSR began to crumble, Martyn Assirati set up the Russian Wine Company in London and travelled east to see what he could find.
At the time, the CCCP was considered to be the third, fourth or fifth largest wine producing country in the world; any reliable figures were buried in bureaucratic tangle.
Nobody else was importing much beyond a few bottles of sweet red sparkling stuff from Crimea, so he had the field to himself.
But there were a few hurdles to jump first.
Everything from wine to paperwork had to go via Moscow.
What started out as fresh, clean white wine made from Aligoté or Rkatziteli grapes in Georgia or Moldavia had to be tankered up to the capital for bottling.
It lost all fruit along the way and by the time it received an export licence it was beyond drinking.
It wasn't until last autumn that the producers were able to say ‘Forget Moscow; deal directly with us.’
It will take a while to install the proper temperature-controlled and sterile treatment facilities that fresh white wines demand, so they are not in the portfolio just yet.
Nor strangely — in view of the company's name — is any Russian wine.
At the moment it's all from three wineries in Moldavia.
Kodru 1987 (from the Krikova winery) is a ripe, juicy wine with bags of fruit, a blend of Cabernet Sauvignon and Merlot (£4.49 from Grog Blossom).
Krikova's Krasny Reserve 1983 (£6.95 from Butlers Wine Cellar in Brighton) combines Pinot Noir with Merlot and Malbec in a rich wine that tastes like chocolate dipped in tar; a drink to satisfy those who still hanker after old-style beefed-up Burgundies.
Occasionally, some bottles from a particularly fine vintage were put to one side.
There was, of course, no commercial motive for this; the wines were kept for curiosity, party bosses or state functions.
But the value of old stock is beginning to be realise.
One of the best of these ‘Collection Wines’ is a 1969 Negru de Purkar (£8.95 from Butlers Wine Cellar) that blends Cabernet Sauvignon with native Saperavi and Rara Niagre grapes.
What other drinkable 22-year old wine would you find for under a tenner?
And this is more than just drinkable, it is an enormous, fruit-packed wine, smelling sublimely of ripe blackcurrants.
Form an orderly queue please.
Jim Ainsworth 
Punchbag
Letter of the week
Re: Mr Punch's article ‘Obese in our time’(8–14 January).
Since it's open season on those poor old lardbuckets, let's hear some more.
How about fattycakes, wobblebottoms, porkers, dumplings, dragbellies, roly-polys, thunderthighs, or cellulite dumpers?
The mind boggles.
What are you, some kind of chubby-chaser?
Still, as you have managed to describe the bodily state of 90 per cent of the Punch staff we're sending you the Jim Beam
Bob's your rankle
I find it very amusing to see Mr Punch describe Robert Maxwell as a ‘lying, cheating, bullying, drunken conman’.
This is all true, but it comes from the same Mr Punch whose magazine proudly carried a Maxwell tribute the week after the fat man died.
Could this shameful tribute be something to do with the fact that your boss Lord Stevens was a business associate of Cap'n Bob?
No, of course not.
You might say that, but we couldn't possibly comment.
As it happens, the tribute to which the cover-line referred was an altogether more tasteless memorial to Cap'n Bob, in which the words ‘lying’ and ‘crook’were prominent.
After the cover had gone to press, the piece was dropped because we felt, on reflection, that the Maxwell family deserved at least one week of post-mortem respite.
Normal service has since been resumed.
Facing up to it
I am an avid Punch reader, but enough is enough.
Mr Bargepole: I am a close friend of the tax man.
He knows who you are.
Confess.
You have been warned.
Mr Prosser: for God's sake, turn around.
It can't be that bad.
However, if it really is I will take up a collection for the medical fees.
The time has come gentlemen.
Stand up and be counted.
Alas, Mr Prosser must preserve his identity, not his disfigurement.
And Bargepole, as you well know, is generally incapable of standing up.
In a right old state
I am an ex-pat living in the most unfriendly part of the most unfriendly state in the Union.
The local farmers dress completely in black and drive horse-drawn buggies because the motor car is ‘ungodly’.
It is only my subscription to Punch that stops me from taking a midnight walk off the roof.
Keep up the good work.
Are you sure that isn't Transylvania?
BARGEPOLE
The damned finch thinks it's a woodpecker.
It is, in finch terms, 285 years old.
I could understand its thinking it is a vampire but a woodpecker ?
Tap tap tap all bloody day long, when it's not singing or falling off its perch.
One day soon I will rip its beak off and glue it onto the end of my own fine aquiline conk, and, secure in my new disguise, I'll be down to the Inland Revenue Enforcement (B) in Barrington Road and scrabbling frantically at my tax inspector's trousers (I may be wrong, but I picture them as that specially rich shade of brown polyester-and-worsted that only Dunn & Co can achieve) before you can say, ‘Well, what's got into you , dearie?’
There is said to be, always, one bright spot on the horizon.
In my case it is the bathroom cabinet.
Don't you agree that you never know what you are going to find there but on the other hand if you ignore the expiry date and crunch it all up with a lot of jam, or even a lot of Nivea, it all goes down the red lane and things start to brighten up?
Not any more, they don't.
They remain precisely the same.
I defy anyone to enter upon altered states of reality with nothing more than a bottle of Trumper's shampoo and an almost-empty tube of Guerlain's Habit Rouge face balm.
So I suppose I shall have to rely for my silver lining upon Carrie Schlegel of Capistrano Beach, California, who was kind enough to write to this magazine to say that I was God.
In normal times, I might have been on the next flight out and by morning Miss Schlegel — a schoolgirl, yes, but what a schoolgirl, probably tanned, certainly firm and bouncy, and unquestionably an amateur theologian of weird and savage genius — would have found herself thickly slathered in Noxzema Regular Protective Shave Formula and roped to a groyne.
But these are not normal times.
Women are crawling out of the woodwork but they are duplicitous and wizened, swamp people and ratbags, and they can blacken and turn leathery before I will condescend to them.
People are petitioning for interviews but I do not wish to talk to them.
A man I do not wish to write for wants me to go to Vientiane, where virgins are $10 a go, and a woman I do wish to write for says it would never work because she is emotionally involved with me.
Well, huh.
It takes three to tango.
At least.
Absolute minimum.
As a matter of fact, as I was larding my toast with the old Maria Schneider this morning, preparatory to sprinkling it with Ecstasy, I worked out a scenario involving eight women, providing one of them was Indian and none were dressed as Carmelites.
Abnormal times?
Yes.
The finch has just crashed to the floor of its cage with its wing clasped in its beak (not for much longer, chickabiddy) and I take it as an omen.
So little Miss Schlegel will have to languish alone, ripening slowly in the California sunshine until one day I will turn up and have my way with her, quite possibly shouting, ‘This one's for Gloria Steinem!’ as I do so.
In the meantime, I shall nurture the fondest avuncular feelings for Miss Schlegel, and do my best to ensure that her mind remains unpolluted by the filth they teach her in America, and will thus be beautifully blank and receptive to the sort of filth to which I personally incline.
‘It's a doddle you said — we'll sell up, move down here and do a Peter Mayle you said!’
First thing, Miss Schlegel, is: do not believe in relativism.
This is what your teachers will try to tell you is true but they are just sucking up to you.
They are sucking up to you because they never grew up, and they never grew up because (if men) they are ashamed that they are not like me or (if women) have never been admitted into full womanhood by being slathered with Noxzema Regular Protective Shave Formula and roped to a groyne.
Can you respect adults who never grew up and wish to suck up to you?
Of course not.
They are fools and liars and will tell you that everyone is entitled to his own opinion, except they will probably say ‘his or her,’ so that you don't feel left out, being a young, firm, tanned and bouncy woman with a mind of fathomlessly inventive depravity, even if you don't know it yet.
Is that patronising, or what?
They will also try to inculcate you with a spurious respect for a ‘culture’ which not only fails to distinguish between what is good and what is profitable but which cannot distinguish between substance and insubstantiality.
These people, Miss Schlegel, invented Disneyland and now want to turn the rest of the world into a theme park, too, by bribing ancient and civilised peoples to caper and prance for thuggish tourists.
All you need to know, Miss Schlegel, is that Socrates was right.
Happiness is achieved through virtue, and virtue (from the same root as ‘virility,’ though they won't teach you Latin in case you find that out) is acquired by the right knowledge of things.
The Socratic method, coupled with unremitting hedonism, will see you through until I get there, my dearest Carrie.
I bet you can hardly wait.
Pick of Punch
Laughter from the archives
January 25th, 1978: Richard Gordon put us all off travelling abroad when he outlined some common holiday hazards and where to find them…
Typhoid:The illness which produced the Widow of Windsor, from an insanitary state of the drains there, which has not been greatly improved upon in much of the world.
Yellow Fever:In deepest Africa and deepest South America.
A romantic condition to die of.
Cholera:The super-trots.
Liable anywhere along the road from the Med to Mandalay.
Treatment improved since it nearly lost us the Crimean War.
Gradually vanishing, as governments grow more sensitive and put it down as summer diarrhoea.
Malaria:Spread by the Anopheline mosquito, which buzzes by night from the Rio Grande to Rio de Janeiro, from Dakar to Durban, and the Persian Gulf to the Pacific.
One bite is enough, like rabies.
A danger lies in arriving home and baffling the local medical profession with an intractable high fever.
Worms:Warmer parts of the world crawl with an interesting variety of worms.
The round one is in your salad.
The fluke infests crabmeat.
The hookworm is an explorative beast.
It gets into your feet, swims along your veins, surfs through your heart into the lungs, crampons its way up the rings of your windpipe, skis down your gullet and settles in your duodenum to suck your blood.
Gippy Tummy, Delhi Belly, the Rangoon Runs, the Tokyo Trots, Mexican Heartburn, etc:Squitters may not kill the traveller but it does disrupt his social life.
It arises from the innocence of his guts towards bugs which the locals have been ingesting since birth.
You can either hit these germs with an antibiotic, or paralyse your bowels and win through passive resistance.
January 29th, 1947: Entrepreneurs were already investigating the extraordinary benefits of a prototype mobile-phone…
‘Do you mind having hake again, dear?’
Caption Competition
Winners Number 1145
MY MAN, GO TELL THE CHANCELLOR WHERE HE CAN STICK HIS TAX DEMAND
1881 Caption — Hawker.
‘Book o' the words, my lady.
Hortherised copy.
The dam o' Cameleers!’
Mrs Jones (for the benefit of the bystanders).
‘Oh no, thank you.
We've come to see the acting, we do not wish to understand the play!’
I'M SORRY, WE HAVE RUN OUT OF COPIES OF THE CHIPPENDALES' COMMEMORATIVE PROGRAMME IN BRAILLE.
1938 Caption —‘You might ask them if they've got two ringside seats left?’
Number 1148
The sum of £25 will be awarded for the best new captions to the cartoons below, which were first printed in 1881 and 1938.
Jot your entries on a postcard please, addressed to 