

FREE INSIDE!
OUR GREAT ELECTION GAME! *
SPECIAL OFFER
Buy this magazine and YOU could become the next Prime Minister Remove here and go to Number 10 * in association with Wild Turkey
Contents
18–24 March 1992
Features
Landslide — The Amazing Punch Election Game Order, order!
Any time is party time with the boardgame that's the toast of Westminster.
Roll the die, answer a question and move up the greasy pole to Downing Street.
Knocking On The Dour Matthew Parris looks at parliamentary candidates who make a rosette-coloured spectacle of themselves as they learn the art of doorstep canvassing
Columns
The World According To Mr Punch
Review of the week Guttersnipe aims to sleaze
Money Everyone's chasing the profits of doom
Politics Under Speaker's orders…and they're off!
Sport I want to be a football manager.
I used to be Napoleon
Punchbag Better a has-Beam than a never-was
Bargepole Life isn't all baby oil and cream crackers, y'know
Pick Of Punch Relative values
J & B Competition The ancient of phrase
Charivari
Annie Nightingale passes weighty judgment on Heavy Metal.
Plus the Punch guide to the arts, media and more
COUNTRY LIFE
The sender of the first cutting published will receive a bottle of Aberlour whisky and £5.
For all other cuttings published a miniature bottle of Aberlour and £5 will be awarded.
Cuttings should be sent to Punch .
Sexual Harassment Training School.
Wednesday, 6th May at AUT Head Office.
Does anyone want to participate?
All expenses paid including child care costs.
H S MACLEAN (Manchester Association of University Teachers Newsletter )
Police at Ames, Iowa, are looking for a one-legged burglar who stole a three-legged Labrador dog from an electrical contracting business and got away in a stolen pick-up truck.
P M SMITH (Yorkshire Post )
‘That bit about him putting his arm around the Queen has been blown up out of all proportion,’ Fay Shaw said.
‘In England you treat the Queen like royalty.
It's just not like that in Australia.’
M J TARRY (Guardian )
The young actress whose steamy love scenes in a major new drama look set to shock television viewers says she may quit showbusiness if parts dry up.
K L ADAMS (Shropshire Star )
‘Put me down as a ‘don't give a monkey's’’
The World According To MR PUNCH
Democratic blights
Roll those dice, it says on the cover.
To which subscribers may say, ‘What dice?’
Owing to postal problems, we haven't been able to stick a die on covers of subscription copies.
But if you are currently aching to play our exciting, educational, fun-for-all-the-family boardgame, Landslide (order an extra copy now for your friend or household pet!), but are unable to do so due to an embarrassingly die-free domestic situation, all you have to do is write a letter to me, addressed to Oi!
Where's My Free Die, Then?,
Punch, Ludgate House, etc, And we will send you that very die forthwith.
Now, onto the election.
And herein lies a problem.
We're having to go to press early this week so that hundreds of off-season Santa Clause gnomes can stick dice onto magazines (they're a damn nuisance these dice, and no mistake).
So we know that Major's called an election, but that's all we know.
And who can say what will be going on by the time you read these words?
Things change so fast.
For example, when I started this column yesterday, I thought that Norman Lamont had pulled a brilliantly sneaky Budget trick by making the rich pay a little more tax and letting the poor pay a whole lot less.
John Smith was now committed to clobbering the poor by reversing their tax cut as soon as Labour got in.
The way I saw it, Neil Kinnock replied to the Budget with the look of a man who had got out to bat against Curtly Ambrose, only to discover, as he took a particularly nasty delivery in the meat-and-two-veg, that he had left his box in the pavilion.
‘Pained’ was the adjective that came to mind.
But then a group of people in Slough were shown on the telly saying that the Budget was a total disaster and they were all going to vote Labour.
They felt that the help to the poor would benefit the rich — er…sorry?— and that the Budget hadn't done nearly enough for them.
They wanted big increases on mortgage interest tax-relief, less tax for them and lots of help for the building trade and the NHS.
Whatever the qualities of an incoming Labour government there is not the teensy-weensiest chance of it raising the £30,000 ceiling on mortgage tax-relief, nor will it lower the rate of personal income tax.
And, as the Chancellor patiently explained at the beginning of his speech, the Budget deals with income, not expenditure, which is precisely why he wants to change it.
So neither he, nor even that nice Mr Smith could, under the present system, give more to hospitals or Mr O'Malley the builder.
Looking at the BBC's sample of a dozen or so voters, one realised that people still have an abiding and entirely irrational belief in government as a form of magic fairy.
Whoosh!
It waves its magic wand and suddenly the pumpkin that is the British economy is turned into a glittering coach.
Yes!
You shall go to the ball.
And everyone will live happily ever after.
These fantasies are not confined to Britain.
Three-quarters of all Germans now believe that the government has a duty to provide them with a job and a house.
The fact that the government is financing all their perks with a national debt that will bankrupt their children and a taxation policy that will see all their factory jobs being given to cheapo Moroccans and Poles has not yet struck home.
Boy, do they have a surprise coming their way.
‘Kinnock made him switch over and Major put him to sleep’
The self-evident gap between fantasy and reality — which is that no government, anywhere, of any political complexion has got the first clue about how to organise society in the post-Cold War world — has led to an aimless disgruntlement, a poisonous mixture of envy and ennui .
All over the Western world electorates are, to put it simply, pissed off.
The don't like anyone who's in power.
Kohl, Mitterrand, Bush, whoever happens to be this week's Italian or Japanese prime minister — it doesn't matter, they hate 'em all.
And that is probably what the people of Slough were really saying.
When push comes to shove, they're not daft.
They don't really expect Labour to make things any better.
They just want someone to blame.
And since the  Tories have been parked in Number 10 for the past 13 years, they'll do as targets when the custard pies come to be thrown.
Since, however, no one really trusts the opposition (and this also appears to be true all over the world), little of this dissatisfaction rubs off to anyone else's advantage.
It's anyone's guess who'll win the election.
But if it is a hung parliament, this will be because we don't really want anyone to have any power.
The message is: we want instant gratification, but we don't think any of you can deliver it.
Get lost.
Cynicism will triumph.
It's all going to be ghastly.
But, you know what?
As long as Goochie and the boys keep on stuffing the Aussies, I really don't give a damn.
SAVE OUR LIBRARIES
Sssshhhh…
PS:Stephen Fry has just confessed to taking cocaine.
He has also made a film telling young people not to do the same.
But if I were a teenager and I saw a TV star telling me that he had taken coke, I would reckon that there must be a reason why the famous spend a fortune on this drug.
And the reason I would come up with would be that it must make you feel stonkingly great.
Then I'd wonder why people kept telling me not to take it and conclude that they just wanted to keep it all for themselves.
So I'd thank Mr Fry for his kind advice and start saving for my first toot  toute  suite …
…
Today newspaper on 11 March carried an article called ‘Rejection Slip-ups’.
The paper had sent publishers extracts from P H Newby's Booker Prize-winning novel Something To Answer For .
Everyone had rejected it.
Funnily enough,Punch ran exactly the same spoof, with the same book, on 10 April 1991.
If the imagination-free hacks at Today need any more decent ideas, I'd be happy to supply them with a few more of our back numbers at a very reasonable rate.
Embarrassing photos of the rich and famous
Could it be the mysterious international assassin they call ‘The Silver Fox’?
No, it's handsome NIGEL DEMPSTER !
With hair!
And who is this thin, sober young man?
Yes, it's the one who didn't make it to Hollywood — pouting PETER COOK 
The Foldie
Letter from the Editor (in easy-to-read OAP typeface)
Don't you see?
I'm the editor of the Foldie.
I'm an important person.
I am.
Stand up straight when I'm dribbling.
Nurse!
Nurse!
My teeth, they're slipping…
Young people today, they're a ruddy shower.
Have you seen their hair?
You can't even tell if they're girls or boys.
They're blithering idiots, brats, oiks!
Pathetic!
Nurse!
Nurse!
I'm ventilating…bibble, bobble…
I used to be Evelyn Waugh, you know.
The colours, the colours…
Look man, they're in the trees, they're coming!
My prosthesis…
Nurse!
Nurse!
Help!
Help…
(You're retired )
Review of the week
As the electoral time-bomb ticks away, there is every danger that politicians will stoop to new lows in exchanging tawdry personal insults and making outlandish claims.
But just in case they don't, we've been busy cooking up campaigns that even Tory Central Office and Labour HQ might think twice about.
Such as…
Socialism makes you bald!
They'll raise your taxes and your hairline
Vote Labour and kiss your hair good-bye.
It's sunglasses all round as our richly-coiffed Tory front benchers try to fight eye-strain caused by their chrome-domed pinko opponents.
This bizarre red plague even gets to the women.
Margaret Beckett, the shadow chief secretary to the treasury, has got a suspiciously high forehead and she's a girlie!
Commie chrome
And it's just the same abroad.
Lenin, Khrushchev, Gorbachev, Mitterrand — toupee-cases, every one.
Not like the Conservative Party.
After 13 years of sound government, the Cabinet is packed with men of distinction, talent…and hair.
Major, Hurd, Lamont, Heseltine, Baker, King — you name 'em, they can keep a barber busy.
So, if you're worried about hair loss, Vote Conservative.
John Smith — slaphead
Neil Kinnock — cootlike
Robin Cook — not-so-ginger nut
Sam Galbraith — hair-free
Gerald Kaufman — rugless
TORIES CAN WRECK YOUR MARRIAGE
If you care about family values, don't vote for those zipper-crazed Conservative sex-machines
The Labour Party is proud of its unbeatable line-up of happily-married family men.
Neil Kinnock has remained loyal to the lovely Glenys since their far-off student days.
John Smith goes home to Edinburgh and his wife and three beautiful daughters.
Bryan Gould is as good as gold and Gerald Kaufman is a happy-go-lucky bachelor who's still waiting for the right girl to come along.
Pants off
But that's not how they do things in the Conservative Party.
Oh no.
Thirteen years of Tory misrule have left the Right's matrimonial affairs looking about as secure as a drunk on a unicycle.
Mrs Thatcher was a second wife.
Mr Lawson's had a brace.
So have Douglas Hurd, social security nonentity Tony Newton, Chelsea boy Nicholas Scott, Heseltine flunky Michael Mates and chubby Lynda Chalker.
Hers were husbands, of course.
We won't even mention Cecil ‘Oops!’
Parkinson and Alan ‘The Childish Incident’ Amos.
So, vote Labour, the party that knows how to keep its trousers on.
Lawson and Hurd.
Sure they believe in family values.
They believe in family values so much they've had more than one family.
REEVE
‘Hey, it's Joan Collins before she looked great for her age’
‘You're 32 years old, Gerald’
Gutter gossip
Guttersnipe
A thinking man's guide to tabloid tattle
by Mr Mitchell Symons
Miss Lindsey Drew , the artiste and erstwhile editrice of Penthouse , a gentleman's publication, has encountered the strong arm of the law.
Miss Drew, whose nom de plume is Linzi, was sentenced to four months incarceration for her part in promoting the kind of graphic material which Victorians euphemistically described as facetiae .
Using her natural talents Miss Drew provided would-be subscribers to the ‘postal porn service’ with a synopsis of the productions.
While conceding her part in the enterprise was not as extensive as her paramour accomplice,Judge Kenneth Rubin did say, ‘Quite clearly you were not a passive person.’
Quite clearly.
Most reassuring is the news that the forces of truth and justice subscribed to the ‘video’ service for a whole year before making any arrests.
One can only applaud the selfless dedication of our law-enforcers.
Mr Alan Amos , an elected member for the people of Hexham, has resigned following a ‘caution’ after being apprehended by police in the woods in Hampstead Heath.
The rustic spot is well known as a congregating point for the legions of Sodom.
But Mr Amos, a bachelor, denied he had a musical and sensitive sensibility.
Instead, he called his resignation a victory for ‘squalid reporting’ and accused the Press of having ‘sordid appetites’.
So much for hopes of a clean election campaign.
Patrick Van Den Hauwe , the Association professional (see below), is apparently not just forsaking intimacy before matches, but at all other times as well.
An authoritative source avers that his inamorata ,Ms Mandy Smith , the former spouse of Mr William Wyman , is not in sufficiently robust form to ‘make love’.
Using language normally seen in missives asking for one's child to be excused from games, Ms Smith's mother,Mrs Patsy Smith was quoted as saying, ‘Mandy can't have sex because she's not well enough.’
It was left to Ms Smith's physician to explain that, ‘Mandy has a hormone problem known as Premenstrual Syndrome.’
At the risk of indelicacy, one would suggest that such a condition usually accounts for some five or six days of inactivity.
One is perplexed how it affects the rest of the lunar cycle.
The carnal exploits of Mr Nicholas Nolte , the testicularly uplifted (see Guttersnipes passim)— colonial tragedian, have been revealed by Ms Sharyn ‘Legs’ Haddad , a person to whom Mr Nolte was once betrothed.
Ms Haddad reveals,inter alia , that Mr Nolte's preferred erotic fantasy was for poses plastique in which she played a ‘schoolgirl’ and he a ‘teacher’.
Perhaps more bizarre is Ms Haddad's recollection that her husband ‘spanked’ her ‘22 times’on her ‘22nd birthday’.
The reasons for their subsequent divorce were not vouchsafed.
But one would have thought that any gentleman who links corporal punishment with his lady's age is unlikely to have his twilight years shared.
Finally, in the week that our nation, while stifling under the weight of depression, looked to the Chancellor and his Budget for hope in crawling out of the pit of fiscal horror and penury, it was reported that:
Raquel Welch has trouble opening pickle jars;
Barry McGuigan , the ex-pugilist, didn't thank his manager Mr Eastwood in the libel courts;
Mr John Cleese , the vertically-unchallenged depressive, revealed he was not deflowered until the age of 24;
Ms Brigitte Nielsen , the augmented embonpoint, ‘belted’ a ‘fan’who tried to give her a ‘kiss’;
Mr Red Rum , the equine athlete, is ‘more famous than the Chancellor’;
Miss Ellie Lane , the Essex ‘funny girl’, says ‘it's getting harder and harder to make people laugh’;
Mr Martin Kemp , the musician turned schauspieler , can understand the ‘high’ of serial killers having experienced those ‘adrenalines’; and Ms Roseanne Barr , the person of size, would not ‘mind the odd nude scene’of herself.
Unlike the public.
Who pray is…
PATRICK VAN DEN HAUWE?
Guttersnipe's Dictionary of International Biography
PATRICK VAN DEN HAUWE is the professional Associationist born on 16 December 1960 in Dendermonde, Belgium (although he represents the principality of Wales at ‘international level’).
A ‘full-back’, he began his career as an ‘apprentice’ with Birmingham City, making his ‘full league’debut in the 1978/79 season.
Unhindered by colour disposition he was able to join Everton Football Club where he won medals for two ‘League Championships’ and one ‘European Cup-Winners Cup’.
He currently plays for Tottenham Hotspur ‘FC’ where he proceeded to embark upon an intimate friendship with the nutritionally-disordered Ms Mandy Smith.
This led to divorce from his wife, who could perhaps be permitted some schadenfreude at the fact that Van Den Hauwe's relationship had, perforce, become platonic.
‘Remember the Bay City Rollers?’
Money
Oofy Prosser
A Tory win — nipped in the Budget?
Lamont may live to lament 10 March.
Oh yes
The first-ever Rip Van Winkle Budget was a clever idea, Mr Lamont.
Was it your own suggestion to make the whole thing so tedious that it sent the nation to sleep until after the election?
Unfortunately, the Budget was so unbelievably boring that it had the opposite effect.
Everyone stayed awake instead, believing that something exciting had to be just around the corner.
Sadly that corner, like the proverbial corner the economy keeps bumping against, was not turned.
I am, however, rather pleased that my crystal ball behaved so well this year.
In the Punch of 4 March, I wrote: ‘What would grab the hearts and wallets of the voters would be a new, lower starting rate of 20 per cent income tax.
True, it would run counter to the idea of simplifying the tax system, but Lamont can always claim that the middle band will be steadily reduced until it, too, is 20 per cent.’
The abolition on stamp duty for house purchases wasn't made permanent, as I thought it might be, but inheritance tax was ameliorated and he did bring in transferable tax allowances between spouses.
A couple of weeks ago, I might have expected the Tories to scrape through to election victory with such a Budget.
Now, I'm not so sure.
The tide appears to be turning, albeit slowly.
Faced by the prospect of losing power, surely Lamont could have forgotten his principles and chosen Budget au Lapin from the available menu.
A few more rabbits out of the hat could have done the trick.
I am now very much afraid that it may not matter what he said on 10 March.
With Labour, like Lamont, pledged to abolish the Budget as such, we may just have heard the last Tory Budget of all.
What a shame it couldn't have been more of a humdinger.
It is a pity that the Budget legislation may not be enacted, for one of the measures did cheer me up, namely the removal of the £3,000 restriction on the amount that can be invested in unit and investment trusts through a Personal Equity Plan.
As you know, I have been wildly opposed to PEPs since their introduction, in part because I'm a great believer in removing tax breaks rather than distorting the investment climate by introducing new ones.
But I have also railed against them because instead of investors being able to handle their investments themselves, they have had to buy through a registered plan manager.
These hideous creatures have charged such extraordinarily high fees for running PEPs that, for the majority of investors, the tax benefits have been far outweighed by the charges.
The idea was that PEPs would encourage individuals to invest in British industry, receive annual reports and be able to vote at the AGMs.
Most of the plan managers won't let their investors do any such thing without still further charges levied on top.
The admin, they argue, is too fiddly.
By comparison, unit trusts and, to an even greater degree, investment trusts, are much more reasonably priced.
Someone investing in only one or two shares, whether through a PEP or not, is exposed to a much greater risk than if they put the same sum into some form of collective investment.
Investment trusts, with their lower charges, have always seemed to me to be better value than unit trusts but both are eminently sensible vehicles for PEPs and the ending of the discrimination against them is welcome.
Labour doesn't seem to have made its mind up on PEPs.
Some of its members say they're going to get rid of them.
Some want to keep them.
We shall have to see if one of the more interesting measures in the Budget ever becomes reality.
I can't be the only one to find the subject of Lloyd's of London one of the most tedious under the sun.
The place has given off a bad odour for years and I have always avoided it like the plague.
I did, however, find fascinating the figures produced by Lloyd's showing that many of those syndicates that have performed badly had hardly any Lloyd's insiders connected with them while the ones that performed best were stuffed full of professional working Names.
It seems pretty damning that the nine syndicates with the greatest expected losses in 1989 had only between four and nine per cent of working Names while the ten most profitable 1988 syndicates (the last for which we have figures) had an average of 18 per cent of working Names, one having 26 per cent, another 36 per cent and one 48 per cent .
I'm sure it's pure coincidence, but I doubt if all those outside Names staring ruin in the face will see it quite that way.
‘Bandit, angels 32, three o'clock high!’
PhotoSynthesis Caplin & Jeremy
Roll up!
Roll up!
Try your luck at the fairest, squarest state lottery of them all!
I'm your lucky dipstick tonight
Aaargh!
So much for electoral reform
Politics
Julia Langdon
A chairing thought that brings little joy
Parkinson, Gummer, Patten…who's next in the hot seat?
The most political job you could seek in a political party is probably that of chairman.
Is, or, perhaps, should be.
The chairmanship of the Conservative Party is a very political job indeed, yet it is difficult to find a Conservative politician who would volunteer to fill it.
As for the chairmanship of the Labour Party — does anyone know who holds it?
The last chairman of the Tory Party who was glad to get the job was Cecil Parkinson.
He was very pleased because he didn't realise that Margaret thought so highly of him and he was flattered.
He had actually planned to resign from Parliament at the 1983 election and had to revise his intentions rather swiftly.
Alas, poor Cecil; better form him, maybe, had he stuck to his original scheme.
Still, he enjoyed the chairmanship and gets very cross if anyone suggests that it would have been difficult for anyone to have thrown away a Tory victory in post-Falklands Britain with a Labour Party led by Michael Foot.
The next incumbent was John Selwyn Gummer, who doesn't really count.
He may have been pleased to get the job — but he was only shot into the spot in order to stand up for good, Christian, family values and to restore party morale in Cecil's wake.
A real politician, in the person of Norman Tebbit, was the only chosen to fight the election.
He relished the fight, like he relishes getting stuck in, but didn't really enjoy the job.
At the time of the last election, he and Douglas Hurd, then the Home Secretary, drew up a list of the jobs they would seek not to do after the election.
They both headed the list with the responsibilities they had at the time.
Next there was another safe pair of hands: the cheery, avuncular figure of Peter Brooke who was also clearly an interim choice, awaiting the bruiser for the election.
It was Kenneth Baker, a smoothie bruiser, but — probably to his relief — the change in leadership at the top brought the Prime Minister's pal, Chris Patten to 32 Smith Square for the election.
There are a number of reasons why His Friend Chris is perhaps not the ideal chairman for the election.
He's not naturally aggressive — he's not a friend of John Major's for nothing — and he's not nasty enough; he's been trying, no doubt psyching himself up in the mirror in the mornings —‘I will be beastly to them!
I will!
I will!’
He also has the awkward problem of a narrow marginal seat in Bath which desperately needs nursing in the ordinary course of events, let alone during an election.
It will be a fine thing if the Conservative chairman loses his seat whatever the outcome of the election.
And the Labour chairman?
It is John Evans, MP for St Helens North — there now you've learned something you didn't know.
If the Tories were to form the next government then Chris Patten would be found a seat, if necessary.
It would probably be a great relief to him to be able to stop worrying about his constituency and start worrying about other things.
The things that he would particularly like to start worrying about are in Northern Ireland.
He wants to be Northern Ireland secretary.
This may sound like one of the least desirable jobs  in British politics, but not to those who love the place.
Dr Brian Mawhinney, the minister of state for Northern Ireland, occupies a seat of considerable importance in this election.
He is the incumbent for Peterborough, the seat which, arithmetically, need to fall to Labour if they are to form the next government with an overall majority.
The current opposition has to capture 94 seats to secure an overall majority — and Peterborough is the 95th.
Dr. Mawhinney has become accustomed over the years to bring in the middle of political contention and has taken very good care to cultivate his patch.
He also carefully counts the local council votes in all the wards which affect his constituency to see what they can tell him about the likely outcome of the parliamentary election.
He says he is home and dry.
I offer this merely as a piece of information.
The onset of a campaign has brought to mind some of the horror stories of the trail.
There are those who claim that canvassing the votes of the electorate is a waste of time: that they are at least as likely to vote for you if you leave them alone as they are if you go round and bother them at night.
On the other hand, this point of view has to be balanced against those who protest that they only ever see politicians at election time and that if they don't even call then they are undeserving of a vote.
One of the best stories I recall was related by Norman Willis, the general secretary of the TUC, who once had the enlightening experience of watching a leaflet he had just delivered catch fire.
He pushed it through the letter box and saw it flame up as it went through.
The door then opened to reveal an irritated householder who was about the business of blow-torching the other side of his front door.
‘Oh hello,’ said Mr Willis, with great presence of mind, ‘I was calling on behalf of the Conservative Party…‘
Norman Willis had his own problems when he was an unknown foot-soldier in Labour's army.
A friend of his who was a district nurse in the area where he lived once spotted him chatting to a shopkeeper in his usual congenial fashion.
She happened to be in her uniform.
She stopped her car and bustled up the pavement.
‘Come on now, Mr Willis, time to go back to the hospital…oh I hope he hasn't been a bother…come on now, dear, in the car please…’ she said.
In vain did he protest to the shopkeeper that it was all a joke.
‘Yes dear, he understands,’ she said, ‘come along now…‘
For more canvassing traumas, see page 30.
Dispatch Box
WELL, YOU CAN SAY ONE thing for John Major: after ducking the date on two occasions when he might have won, he can't be accused of lacking courage in calling a general election when his party is at best level-pegging with Labour and, possibly, is even behind in the polls.
Julia ‘Lucky’ Langdon, the political bookmaker, declares herself a little worried about this on his behalf.
It is a known and established fact that political parties do not pick up in the polls once an election is under way.
It is also worth bearing in mind another old saw, which wouldn't be an old saw but for the fact that it is proved by practice: Oppositions do not win elections; governments lose them.
Labour needs to win an extra 94 seats to secure an overall majority in the House of Commons.
Lucky Langdon, who is not normally a cautious person, believes this is unlikely, given the current opinion poll rating, and that the best bet wold be the Conservatives winning the most seats, but without an overall majority — thus returning them to power as a minority government.
I could be wrong.
Ooh!
It's going to be fun.
This week's guest columnist is…
STEPHEN FRY
He isn't short, he likes a snort
GOOD MORNING.
AND may I just say how very much I hope, trust and, indeed, cuddle, that this is a splendidly fluffy, golden and slender-thighed morning for you, as it is, in a very real sense, for me too.
Did I make myself clear?
I only ask because I have had educational advantages, courtesy both of Cambridge and the fresh, clean-limbed members of Her Majesty's prison service, that may have been denied to readers who, while possessed of many excellent and succulently moist personal characteristics are, perforce, less verbally erudite than moi .
Folk
These poor folk, whose lack of privilege is just one of the many thrusting reasons that have sent me to the bosom, not to mention the buttocks, of today's quite heavenly Labour Party, may find that my pronunciamentos become somewhat impenetrable once past the ninth, tenth, or even twenty-third of their constituent subordinate clauses, so that the very juicy and surprisingly supple points that I make are lost amidst their attendant persiflage.
That is why I cherish the work of Messrs David Alford and Ted Hynds of the People , who condensed my musings on the subject of my nasal ingestion of the powdered and refined fruits of the coca leaf into the terse, pithy and intriguingly erect motto, ‘Cocaine And Me, By Funny Man Fry.’
The charming compliment implied by the phrase ‘funny man’ was enough to give an extra spring to my wrist as I dunked my toast soldier into my Sunday morning boiled egg.
Speaking of dunking, I feel I ought to  apprise readers of this pert little nipple of an  hebdominal magazine of my current orientation concerning the beast with two backs — or three on a good night.
As matters stand, some 27.4 per cent of my sexuality is of the Grecian or musical persuasion; 71.6 prefers a quiet evening in with nothing more erotic than a gardening magazine and a steaming mug of Mr Horlicks's malted beverage, whilst the remaining one per cent has become attached to one of Miss Esther Rantzen's saucy root vegetables.
My main concern, however, on this throbbing morn, is to reassure any of my admirers whose opinion of me may have been diminished by David and Ted's startling revelations concerning the use to which I have been known to put my sinuses.
Snuff
Let there be no misunderstanding.
When I took a rolled-up sample of legal tender, printed by the Royal Mint, applied one end to my right nostril, placed a restraining finger upon my left nostril, rested the other end of the said note upon a mirror or any other shiny reflective surface, upon which was displayed a slender tranche or ‘line’ of exotic Colombian snuff, and breathed in as deeply as my lungs would allow, I was merely relaxing in a manner by no means untypical amongst overworked show-business operatives.
And I'm sure that many another highly-principled, left-leaning, apple-cheeked member of my beloved Groucho Club would know exactly what I mean.
It's the TV Jeeves with the pricey sneeze!
It's a funny old world
MR JEREMY Beadle is a law-abiding family man whose personal habits are beyond reproach.
Yet he is held up as an object of ridicule and loathing throughout the land.
I am a convicted credit-card fraudster and self-proclaimed drug-taking homosexualist.
Yet I am universally loved.
It's a funny old world, is it not?
HOLTE
‘Cruel twist of fate…loves gardening, but he's agoraphobic’
‘He's gone private’
FOOTBALL MANAGERS' FINISHING SCHOOL
The lads done terrific…!
Sport
Marcus Berkmann
Man and supermanager
To succeed in football all you need are loafers, cufflinks and a perm
It was, I believe, that notable philosopher and moustache Yosser Hughes who first coined the phrase ‘Gissa job — I can do that.’
The man clearly spoke great sense.
There are, indeed, countless jobs we all think we could do, given the opportunity and a bit of luck.
Prime minister…chairman of British Rail…head of BBC Light Entertainment…well, who couldn't do better than the current incumbents?
But if there's one job we all know we could handle, given a double-breasted suit and a few handy clichés, it's that of football manager.
Just look at some of the people who have managed to hold down the job over the years: Tommy Docherty, Malcolm Allison, Bobby ‘Rattling Dentures’ Robson, most of the 1970–71 Leeds side (although none of them for very long), Alan Ball and various sad, ex-midfield maestros who later became senior sales executives (North Lincolnshire Region) for foot-salve manufacturers and double glazing distribution companies.
Here is a job for which virtually no candidate ever seems to be properly qualified.
Every appointment seems to be an outrageous shot in the dark, either because the person appointed has no experience, or because he has far too much experience, having been fired from 43 other clubs (three times from QPR).
If someone's a brilliant coach, they say he's no good at the more administrative side of the job.
If he's a skilled boardroom apparatchik, they say he's not much cop as a coach.
If he's young, he's too young.
If he's not young, he's past it.
If he's no been a manager for a while, having worked ‘outside football’, people start gossiping about his inability to sell foot-salve.
And if he's simply got tired of the pressure and gone off for six months to play golf and be with his family, they usually say he's short of bottle.
Unless they say he's on the bottle.
It's hard, then, not to feel sympathy for Kevin Keegan and Peter Shilton, both of whom have recently abandoned pleasant existences (as wealthy horse-breeder and plucky net-minder respectively) to don shiny suits and shiny smiles, and stand beside worried-looking club chairmen at press conferences to promise greatness ahead for their new teams.
Neither has previously managed anything very much before, although I'm sure their vital experience as successful footballers in the Seventies (opening boutiques) will stand them in good stead.
But, with the weight of expectations likely to get even heavier over the next few months, I; m sure both of them are, not to put too fine a point on it, bricking themselves.
So what makes a successful manager?
Some would say experience, intelligence, motivational skills and things like that — and, of course, these do have their place.
But it's all rather more subtle than that.
Cufflinks.
All new managers recognise that, before you even get a few decent players in your team, you must first nip down to Ratners and buy yourself a really flashy pair of cufflinks.
Players may admire you for all your footballing achievements, but unless your cufflinks are bigger, shinier and nastier than everyone else's, respect will forever elude you.
Ron Atkinson may look a bit odd, but he knows the management business — and his cufflinks are bigger than some players' cars.
Hair.
It has been said that Ian McShane has a footballer's haircut, but in fact what he now has is a football manager's haircut.
Even third division footballers don't have those curly bits at the back any more, but Shilton and Keegan still do.
Notice also that Keegan has hired as his assistant Terry McDermott, who may be equally lacking in management experience, but at least goes to the same hairdresser.
Loafers.
Expensive-looking loafers, preferably made out of an endangered species, remain essential for any aspiring manager.
Here is another way in which you can lord it over you players.
Whenever they appear in public, they usually have to wear hideously-hued tracksuits, or even show off their knees.
Managers, on the other hand, can wear okapi-skin watchstraps, which is why the ‘tracksuit manager’ is a thing of the past.
Trainers, needless to say, are for trainers.
No identifiable brain at all.
‘It's a game about 11 men and a ball, Elton’ is enough to get you quoted on Saint and Greavsie , but anything cleverer should be kept to yourself.
Club chairmen, don't like anyone who is more intelligent than them, and as they're club chairmen, virtually everyone is more intelligent than them.
Keegan and Shilton should be fine.
But then most of us could probably bluff our way into a second division club with a bit of nous.
Repeat after me: ‘It was the right result on the day, Saint.
And all credit to the lads, they done terrific…‘
Well — what's it to be, Sir!
Lighter cuff-links, or a non-silk shirt?
Steve Way
‘He's in that awkward stage between Bart Simpson and the next craze’
‘Huh, who said that the white ball is easier to see’
LANDSLIDE
RULES & PARLIAMENTARY QUESTIONS
IN ASSOCIATION WITH WILD TURKEY
RULES
HOW TO START — Remove the board and playing cards from the magazine.
Pull out the Rules & Questions.
Fold the four playing tokens (pictures of party leaders) at the base to make them stand.
A paper clip slipped along the narrow fold makes the players stand more easily.
Place the 25 Seat and 50 seat cards on the board where marked.
Place the Point of Order cards (marked with Ayes and Noes) on the large Point of Order box.
WHO CAN PLAY — Up to four people can play Landslide, more if you play in teams.
Choose which party you wish to represent (Conservative, Labour, Liberal, Monster Raving Loony) and place the playing tokens on the START square.
Each player or team should take two 25 seat cards from the pile.
You are now ready to start.
HOW TO PLAY — The object of the game is to get to Number 10 Downing Street at the centre of the board.
This is done by moving clockwise around the board and answering questions of political trivia.
A player can make a bid for Number 10 (by answering more questions) when they have collected 325 seats.
Players collect 25 seats each time they pass clockwise through START.
BALLOT BOX — A player landing on a Ballot Box must answer a question for either 25 seats (quite difficult) or 50 seats (absolutely bloody impossible).
The back of each card contains six question numbers.
The number already on the dice shows which question to answer.
If you answer correctly, keep the card and play passes to the next player.
If you are wrong, return the card to the bottom of the pile.
Questions can be asked by The Speaker (see below) or the player who has just thrown (or would have just thrown)
POINT OF ORDER — Points of Order are divided into the Ayes and Noes.
A player landing on a Point Of Order square must decide whether they want an Aye or No before picking a card and carrying out the instructions on the card (for example—‘David Owen backs you, lose 50 votes’).
Once you have carried out the instruction, your turn ends (if you are sent back three spaces and land on another Point of Order, for example, do not pick another card).
Turn the card over and put it at the bottom of the pack
SAFE SEATS — On Safe Seats, play passes to the next player.
BLACK SQUARES — A player landing on one of the black House of Commons gate squares may throw again, unless they have more than 325 votes and are trying for Number 10.
WINNING — When a player has 325 seats, they must first declare themselves then attempt to land on a black square.
They must still compete for more seats and they must still risk Points of Order.
When a player reaches a black square, they must answer three questions to reach Number 10.
The first two questions will be 25 seat questions, the third a 50 seat question.
If they fail to answer a question correctly, they remain on the square they have reached but play passes to the next player.
If a player collects 400 cards they can proceed (on their next turn) directly to a black square to try for Number 10.
COALITION — When a player has 325 votes, any two other players can form a coalition and play using only one token (it doesn't matter which).
No coalition can have over 325 votes, but coalition members can give up votes to stay within the limit.
THE SPEAKER — Ideal job for someone who just likes to watch.
A Speaker takes charge of the Questions, so when a player lands on a Ballot Box they simply pick a number (there are 120 questions for 50, 216 questions for 25) and the Speaker asks questions (giving clues if necessary but making sure no question is asked twice).
The Speaker can also control Points of Order, asking whether players want Ayes or Noes and reading the cards.
WARNING — Aspects of play not covered by the rules will have to be fought out between the parties.
Tough decisions may have to be made, friends may be lost.
Still that's politics!
50 seats
1
Who said and on which occasion: ‘In church on Sunday it was lovely, and the sun was coming through the stained glass window and falling on some flowers.
It just occurred to me that this was the day I was not meant to see’
2
John Betjeman, according to his biography, had a crush on which future Labour labour at Oxford?
3
Who said, after his election as prime minister: ‘I'm sick of pol'tics.
There isn't any sense in 'em.
I'd sooner be a Red Indian any day’.
4
Which MP disappeared in 1974, leaving his clothes on a beach in Miami?
5
Which prime minister's son-in-law became ambassador to Washington in 1977!
6
Who was jailed for passing secrets to the Guardian in 1984?
7
Who was economical with the truth?
8
Which building did an Archbishop of Canterbury tell MPs would ‘cast the blight of gritty soot and sulphurous fumes on London's parks and noblest buildings’?
9
Which prime minister ‘liked to go to bed with a Trollope’?
10
Dr Beeching is notorious for cutting the railways.
What position did he hold?
11
Which electoral distinction is shared by Lt Cdr Bill Boaks and Dr Kailish Trivedi?
12
Mr F R Lees set a political record in 1860.
What was it?
13
Who was the first woman appointed to a British cabinet?
14
Which country has the oldest legislative body in the world?
15
How many peers form a quorum in the House of Lords?
16
How many MPs must be present for a quorum in the House of Commons?
17
Who wrote this of themselves:
‘Few thought he was even a starter
There were many who thought themselves smarter
But he ended PM
CH and OM
An earl and a knight of the Garter?
18
‘You are a very offensive young man,’ a judge once told a barrister later to become Lord Chancellor.
‘We both are,’ replied the lawyer.
‘The only difference between us is that I am trying to be, and you can't help it.’
Who was the young lawyer.
19
How did Winston Churchill once describe naval tradition, in a phrase later used by The Pogues?
20
Who was described thus: ‘About 5ft 8in or 9in, blonde with a light, thin moustache, walks with a slight stoop, cannot speak any Dutch, during long conversations he occasionally makes a rattling noise in his throat’?
21
Which MP was once a farmhand in The Archers ?
22
Which British prime ministers are said to have given rise to the phrase ‘Bob's Your Uncle’?
23
Which former Conservative minister's daughter reached Number 5 in the charts in 1975?
24
Which ‘here today, gone tomorrow politician’ got up and went in 1982?
25
Who said ‘Ulster Will Fight, and Ulster Will Be Right’?
26
Who was ‘inebriated by the exuberance of his own verbosity’?
27
Who reported the Dunny-in-the-Wold election for the Country Gentleman and Pig Fertilisers' Gazette ?
28
Captain William O'Shea divorced his wife Kitty, naming which leading Irish politician as correspondent?
29
Scottish Labour MP Jenny Lee was married to which Labour Cabinet Minister?
30
A Tory prime minister is said, when in office, to have met an old school friend on a train.
‘And what are you up to these days?’ said the friend.
Who was the PM?
31
Which minister was killed in Britain's first railway accident?
32
Whom did Gavrilo Princip shoot in June 1914?
33
Which former Labour Party leader was described as: ‘a good man fallen among politicians’?
34
Which Labour Party leader once lost his seat to Manny Shinwell?
35
Tom Driberg claimed to have had oral sex with which former Labour minister?
36
Which ex-MP, at 32, was the youngest brigadier in the British Army during World War II?
37
Which former Australian prime minister appeared as himself in Barry McKenzie Holds his own ?
38
The brother of which veteran Conservative MP was executed for treason in World War II?
39
Which one of the following never stood for Parliament as a Liberal: Ludovic Kennedy, Robin Day, Richard Dimbleby, John Arlott?
40
In the TV series Yes Minister , what is the surname of Bernard, Jim Hacker's loyal secretary?
41
In the passage of a Bill through the House of Commons, which stage follows the Report stage?
42
Which political leader has the initials JJDA?
43
Starting with the first, place the following in the chronological order of which they were President of the Cambridge Union: Leon Brittan, Norman Lamont, John Selwyn Gummer, Kenneth Clarke.
44
When US president Abraham Lincoln's father sold his farm, what did he take most of his payment in?
45
Who, in a 1986 by-election, succeeded John Golding as MP for Newcastle-under-Lyme?
46
Which member of the shadow cabinet was the victorious Labour candidate when Dick Taverne finally lost his seat in Lincoln?
47
Which controversial TV playwright was East Herts Labour candidate in the 1976 Election?
48
How many US Presidents have been bachelors?
49
What does Michael Heseltine have in common with Cher, Albert Einstein and Susan Hampshire?
50
Of whom did Harold Wilson say ‘He immatures with age’?
51
Who is the only 20th century British prime minister to have also held — concurrently — the post of foreign secretary?
52
In which year did Enoch Powell stand for the leadership of the Conservative Party?
53
Which Labour MP used to be a Tiller Girl?
54
Which poet described a politician as ‘an arse upon which everyone has sat except a man’?
55
How many Liberals were elected to Parliament in the 1970 General Election?
56
Which leading member of the British Green Party lives in France?
57
Which controversial Conservative MP appeared as herself in the TV series News Hounds ?
58
How many married couples are there currently sitting as MPs in the House of Commons?
59
Which member of the shadow cabinet wrote a book abut movies entitled My Life In The Silver Screen ?
60
Which State did Robert Kennedy represent in the Senate?
61
Which exclusive boarding school did Lynda Chalker attend?
62
How many MPs were there in the House of Commons in 1991 with the surname Marshall?
63
Who is the only prime minister since World War II to have previously held the three major offices of chancellor, home secretary and foreign secretary?
64
Which bird did Benjamin Franklin propose in 1782 as symbol of the USA?
65
Which former Tory cabinet minister published a collection of his poetry entitled Dancer's End and The Wedding Gift ?
66
Which member of the shadow cabinet used to be a ship's steward?
67
Which member of the SDP's ‘Gang of Four’ didn't make it back to the House of Commons at any time in 1983?
68
Which MP, while a student, won the Observer Mace for University Debating in 1982?
69
Which MP is the son of the actress Dinah Sheridan?
70
Which Labour MP lost a libel action against the Observer partly because he'd been educated at Berkhamsted School?
71
Which former prime minister's surname does Teddy Taylor have as a middle name?
72
Which former party leader was once editor of the London Evening Standard ?
73
Which Labour MP — a former cabinet Minister — attended the same school as John Lennon?
74
The father of which Conservative MP emigrated to Britain as an anti-Franco refugee during the Spanish Civil War?
75
Which party held Orpington before 1961?
76
Under what pseudonym does Tory MP Rupert Allason write books about espionage?
77
Which current Conservative cabinet minister was reputed to have said of John Stonehouse's faked suicide, ‘This goes to show that old politicians never die, they simply wade away’?
78
Which former Labour MP won the Richard Dimbleby award at BAFTA in 1985?
79
Who is currently Father of the House?
80
Who was the Guardian 's Welsh correspondent before she became Labour MP for Cynon Valley?
81
After the 1987 general election who was the last in an alphabetical list of MPs?
82
Which former defence secretary became chairman of Lazard Brothers?
83
What have the athletic MPs Dennis Canavan, Jonathan Aitken, Rhodri Morgan and Gerald Howarth all done?
84
Which political party got Kenny Everett's support in 1983?
85
Which two former prime ministers were mentioned in ‘Taxman’ by The Beatles?
86
Which former Tory cabinet minister became chairman of the Royal Fine Arts Commission in 1985?
87
Which future prime minister did Harold Wilson beat to become leader of the Labour Party?
88
What is the English translation of Sinn Fein?
89
Which member of the shadow cabinet was president of the National Union of Students from 1969–71?
90
Which former cabinet minister started the Conservative ‘Centre Forward Group’?
91
Which Labour MP was the What The Papers Say Columnist of the Year in 1982?
92
Which Sixties Labour transport minister couldn't drive?
93
Which US president kept a bottle of bourbon in his desk, but rarely offered a it to visitors?
94
Who became the youngest MP when he won the Louth by-election in 1969?
95
Which Conservative MP became a steward of the British Boxing Board of Control in 1987?
96
Whom did David Steel beat in the 1975 Liberal leadership contest?
97
What was the surname of the Tory mother and son who were both elected to Parliament in 1983?
98
Which right-wing French politician was horrified when his ex-wife posed naked for Playboy ?
99
Which British prime minister was called ‘The Old Turkey’ on a French satirical TV show?
100
Which Scottish Tory lists his hobbies as ‘drawing brains and scanning bodies’?
101
Which Labour MP was general secretary of War On Want from 1983 to 1987?
102
Which Hollywood star once caused a commotion when she claimed to have had an affair with a Labour cabinet minister?
103
Which Tory was editor of the Spectator from 1954–1959?
104
Which novelist ran (unsuccessfully) for the presidency of France in 1848?
105
For which two sports did Colin Moynihan win Blues at Oxford University?
106
Which 20th Century US President was adopted?
107
Who was the first woman MP to be elected to Westminster?
108
What was Michael Foot's dog called when Foot led Labour?
109
What was the date of the Limehouse Declaration?
110
Who was the last prime minister of Northern Ireland?
111
Which Liberal supporter owned a dog called Rinka?
112
Who was deputy leader of the Labour Party under both James Callaghan and Michael Foot?
113
Which Tory MP won the Sydney to Hobart yacht race in 1970?
114
Whom did Charles Dickens represent in Parliament?
115
Which major political event occurred during a performance of Our American Cousin , a play by former Punch editor Tom Taylor?
116
Who recorded the election fought between The Rt Hon Samuel Slumkey, of Slumkey Hall, and Horatio Fizkin, of Fizkin Lodge?
117
Of whom was it said: ‘He was not only a bore, he bored for England’.
118
Of whom was it said: ‘Old politicians never die, they simply wade away’.
119
Of which revolting district council was Dennis Skinner a member before becoming an MP?
120
What is the connection between John Major, Ken Livingstone, and Tony Banks?
25 seats
1
Which British prime minister was apparently named after an English cathedral?
2
Match the politicians to the football teams they support: David Mellor, Michael Foot, Roy Hattersley, Peter Mandelson — Plymouth Argyle, Hartlepool, Chelsea, Sheffield Wednesday
3
What is the connection between Tricia Howard and Frances Stevenson?
4
Who promised to give the voters ‘9d for 4d’?
5
Which three of the following were in Mrs Thatcher's first Cabinet?
6
Which minister was first to be sacked from Mrs Thatcher's Cabinet?
7
Name three of this century's nine pre-World War II prime ministers.
8
Which chancellor resigned in 1947 after accidentally leaking budget details?
9
Who was the first woman MP to take her seat at Westminster?
10
Which minister opened the first Labour exchange?
11
What was the name of Geoffrey Howe's dog when he was chancellor (when Sir Geoffrey was chancellor, that is, not the dog)?
12
Who was the youngest member of the Cabinet this century?
13
Who was the oldest MP to hold Cabinet office this century?
14
Who was the last Governor of Northern Ireland?
15
How did Mark Twain justify carrying a bottle of Wild Turkey bourbon in a suitcase he claimed carried only clothes?
Did he say:
a)
‘I keep it…just in case’
b)
‘It's the only thing that suits me’
c)
‘It's my night-cap’?
16
Whose campaigning daughters were Sylvia and Christabel?
17
What was Mr Pankhurst's first name?
18
What was Mr Balfour's poodle?
19
Who coined the phrase ‘Gnomes Of Zurich’?
20
Who was worried about walking naked into conference chambers?
21
Which river did Enoch Powell see foaming with blood in 1968?
22
What did the Soviet newspaper Red Star call Mrs Thatcher in 1976?
23
When wasn't Labour working, according to advertisement hoardings?
24
Which holder of the Bulgarian Peoples Republic Order Stara Planina (1st class) was once chairman of the House of Commons Catering Sub-Committee?
25
Mrs Michael McAliskey was the youngest woman ever elected to the House of Commons as MP for Mid Ulster in 1969.
By what name was she then known?
26
Who resigned from the Labour Party to form the New Party in 1931?
27
Which MP is the author of The Smile On The Face Of The Tiger ,Scotch On The Rocks ,Palace of Enchantments ,Vote To Kill , and The Truth Game ?
28
Who contested Devon North for the Dog Lovers Party in 1979?
29
Of whom did Queen Victoria complain, ‘He speaks to me as if I was a public meeting?
30
Which prime minister had a bag named after him?
31
Which members of John Major's Cabinet have the middle names
a)
Dibdin?
b)
Hughson?
c)
Wilfred?
32
Which political parties have their headquarters at
a)
Smith Square?
b)
Cowley Street?
c)
Walworth Road?
d)
Cathedral Road?
33
The last Viscount Stansgate is better known as what?
34
Which MP claimed to be the first in a thousand generations of his family to have been to university?
35
Only one of the three main party leaders in 1992 has never unemployed.
Which is it?
John Major, Neil Kinnock or Paddy Ashdown?
36
Whose official residence is No 12 Downing Street?
37
What is the Steward of the Chiltern Hundreds?
38
What colour are the seats in the House of Commons?
39
What colour are the seats in the House of Lords?
40
What is the first name of Mrs Harold Wilson?
41
Which MP's friend simply loved Minced Morsels?
42
What is the connection between these constituencies: South-East Cardiff, Bexley, Huyton, Huntingdon, Finchley.
43
Which three people said after the 1983 general election:
a)
‘It is wonderful’
b)
‘It is a national disaster’
c)
‘We demand an inquiry into the unfair voting system’?
44
Who was Britain's youngest prime minister?
a)
Robert Peel
b)
William Pitt
c)
John Major
45
How heavy (to a stone either side) was Britain's fattest-ever MP?
46
East Nottingham Tory Sir Louis Gluckstein was Britain's tallest MP.
To within an inch, how tall?
47
When are Prime Minister's Questions held in the Commons?
48
Who didn't riot, but got on his bike and looked for work?
49
Who is the odd man out: Alec Douglas-Home, Harold Wilson, John Major, Roy Plomley, James Callaghan, Michael Parkinson?
50
Who was Neville Chamberlain's secretary at the time of the Munich Agreement?
a)
Philip Mountbatten, later Duke of Edinburgh
b)
Anthony Eden
c)
Alec Douglas-Home
51
Who was the leader of the Labour Party before Harold Wilson?
52
Who had ‘the eyes of Caligula and the lips of Marilyn Monroe’.
53
Which minister stopped councils supplying free milk on the rates?
54
What was the length of the longest continuous speech in the House of Commons?
55
Sir Francis Knollys was Britain's longest serving MP.
He died in 1968 after how many years as an MP (five years either side allowed)?
56
What is the paternal connection between Lord Hailsham, Winston Churchill, Tony Benn, Douglas Hurd, Paul Channon?
57
Which of these MPs is not the son of a clergyman: David Steel, Tony Blair, Andrew Faulds?
58
Which one of these Labour MPs did not attend a public school: Tony Benn, Dr Jack Cunningham, Giles Radice, Dr John Gilbert?
59
Which former Chancellor had a name which was an anagram of ‘We all sign on?’
60
To which party did Sir Cyril Smith belong before he rejoined the Liberal Party?
61
Match the MP to his hobby: Nicholas Ridley, Kenneth Baker, Harry Greenway: salmon fishing, parachuting, writing poetry
62
Who was the last British prime minister to be assassinated?
63
Who was the Socialist candidate when Valery Giscard D'Estaing was elected President of France in 1974?
64
Who was ‘a semi-housetrained polecat’?
65
Two of the following do not have statues erected in their memory in Parliament Square.
Which are they?
Disraeli, Peel, Palmerston, Gladstone, Ramsay MacDonald, Abraham Lincoln, Churchill
66
Which barrister and playwright said ‘I'm thoroughly in favour of Mrs Thatcher's visit to the Falklands.
I find a bit of hesitation, though, about her coming back’?
67
Which one of these two constituencies doesn't exist?
a)
Barnsley, West and Penistone?
b)
Barnsley, East and Prickley
68
Which politician owns the number plate DS 5121?
69
What is Vigdis Finnbogadottir?
70
When did Britain join the EEC?
71
Who is the only man in the 20th Century to have been Prime Minister under three different monarchs?
72
Which British Prime Minister appeared in an episode of The Archers 
73
Which embarrassing item of clothing did Sir Geoffrey Howe once leave on a train?
74
What is the Welsh name for the Welsh Nationalist Party?
75
President Theodore Roosevelt holds the record for the number of hands shaken at an official function?
To 500 either side, how many did he shake?
76
Which TV-am reporter is Britain's first black woman MP?
77
Britain's first coloured MP belonged to which party?
78
Which of the following has NEVER stood for Parliament: Eric Morley, Jonathan King, Pamela Stephenson, Ben Elton?
79
What background do Tam Dalyell, Mark Fisher, Douglas Hurd, and Jeremy Thorpe have in common?
80
Which MP is known  as ‘The Beast of Bolsover’?
81
What is the amount of the deposit parliamentary candidates must pay?
(To within £50)
82
Who said in 1988 ‘I went to Oxford, but I've never let it hold me back.
83
Which Home Secretary was chairman of a company belonging to disgraced architect John Poulson?
84
Which Commonwealth country first introduced the practice of paying the leader of the Parliamentary Opposition?
85
Which one of these MPs is not an accomplished magician: Simon Hughes, Greville Janner, John MacGregor?
86
What did Mrs Marcia Williams become in 1976?
87
Which US President had wooden false teeth?
a)
George Washington
b)
Abraham Lincoln
c)
Theodore Roosevelt
88
Which 20th Century US President spoke fluent Chinese?
a)
Calvin Coolidge
b)
Herbert Hoover
c)
Woodrow Wilson
89
Which party won the 1981 Warrington by-election?
90
Which former Hereford United goalkeeper and prospective parliamentary candidate announced he was the son of God, then said he was a snowplough instead?
91
In which city would you find the constituencies Blackley, Withington and Wythenshawe?
92
Which survivor from Mr Heath's Cabinet lasted the longest in Mrs Thatcher's Cabinet?
93
Which prime minister was previously secretary of state for administrative affairs?
94
Name the civil servant who had a much-publicised liaison with James Hacker MP.
95
Who first spoke of ‘two nations, the rich and the poor’
a)
Keir Hardie
b)
Disraeli
c)
Lloyd George
96
Whose autobiography was called Against Goliath ?
97
Whose autobiography was called A Sparrow's Flight ?
a)
Lord Carrington
b)
Rhodes Boyson
c)
Lord Hailsham
98
The mother of which MP wrote the World War I classic,A Testament of Youth ?
99
What relation is former Labour leader Michael Foot to the Daily Mirror columnist Paul Foot?
100
Which trade union was founded by wartime foreign secretary Ernest Bevin?
101
The Liberal Democratic Party has been through many name changes since the 1987 election.
What is it called at the moment?
102
Which Cabinet post was held by Sir Winston Churchill's father, Lord Randolph?
a)
home secretary
b)
chancellor of the exchequer
c)
secretary of state for war
103
Which school did Winston Churchill attend?
a)
Eton
b)
Harrow
c)
Marlborough
104
Which Duke was Sir Winston's Churchill's grandfather?
105
Who was the last Viceroy of India?
106
Who stood against Mrs Thatcher in a party leadership contest in 1989?
107
Which political movement was inspired by Quintus Fabius Maximus, the Roman general who avoided pitched battle?
108
Who was the first leader of the parliamentary Labour Party?
109
There was one Labour member of Lloyd George's war cabinet.
Was it:
a)
Ramsay MacDonald
b)
Keir Hardie
c)
Arthur Henderson?
110
When was payment for MPs first introduced:
a)
1890?
b)
1912?
c)
1926?
111
The Daily Mail printed a letter, four days before the 1924 general election, from a Russian bolshevik leader urging British socialists to ferment revolution.
It was later found to be a fake, but who was supposed to have sent it?
112
Which minister resigned after giving an interview to the Spectator about Europe?
113
Why was Mrs Thatcher nicknamed ‘The Iron Lady’?
a)
Because of her chemistry degree
b)
Because she reversed a decision cutting scientific grants
c)
Because she took electric baths
114
Liberal Party leader David Steel told his 1981 conference to ‘go back to your constituencies and prepare for government’.
How many seats did the Liberal Party win at the next election?
115
Who was secretary of state for trade in Mrs Thatcher's first Cabinet?
a)
John Nott
b)
Nigel Lawson
c)
John Biffen
116
Which member of Mrs Thatcher's first cabinet was also in John Major's first cabinet?
117
Who made his daughter eat a hamburger to prove that she would not catch Mad Cow Disease?
118
Who told us that nearly all eggs contained salmonella?
119
The mother of which British prime minister invented the Manhattan bourbon cocktail?
a)
John Major
b)
Winston Churchill
c)
Herbert Asquith
120
Which former football referee became ‘Minister of Weather’?
121
Which reptile-fancying MP owns Edwina, a giant tree-frog?
122
What is the connection between the following companies: Amersham International, Associated British Ports, British Airways, British Telecom?
123
The highest bank base rate when Mrs Thatcher was prime minister was:
a)
14.5 per ?
b)
17 per ?
c)
15 per ?
124
Which waggish Conservative candidate is the author of Yaroo !,
Great Sexual Disasters ,The Books of Mistaikes , Knitability  , is founder of the National Scrabble Championship, and is three times holder of the record for the world's longest after-dinner speech?
125
In which year was the House of Commons first televised?
126
Which Conservative candidate holds two Olympic gold medals at 1500m?
127
Which was the first country to give women the vote?
a)
Finland
b)
Canada
c)
New Zealand
128
The first woman prime minister ran which country?
a)
Portugal
b)
Israel
c)
Ceylon
129
Which US president spent Bedtime with Bonzo ?
130
Match the politicians to their Desert Island Discs luxuries: Lord Home, Lord Carrington, Clement Freud, Jeremy Thorpe; binoculars, a violin, an armchair, a still.
131
Name the first woman prime minister of France?
132
How many Welsh seats are there in the Commons?
133
Which Cabinet minister unwittingly rented a flat to a masseuse?
a)
Norman Lamont
b)
Norman Tebbit
c)
Norman Fowler
134
What is the connection between Tory MPs Peter Bottomley and Nicholas Winterton?
135
The father of which actor was Lord Chancellor and president of Wimbledon Football Club?
a)
Anthony Andrews
b)
Nigel Havers
c)
Griff Rees-Jones
136
Which MP was photographed wearing ladies' underwear in the News Of The World ?
137
Which MP wrote the William Hickey column?
a)
Gerald Kaufman
b)
Tom Driberg
c)
Randolph Churchill
138
John Cleese appeared in a party political broadcast for which party?
139
Which party did Alf Roberts, of Coronation Street , represent on Weatherfield Council?
140
The prime minister of which country is called Bert Reynolds?
141
How many prime ministers have there been during the reign of Elizabeth II
142
The MPs for Mansfield and Brecon & Radnor had the smallest majorities in the 1987 general election.
To the nearest five, what was the majority?
143
Which 1987 party manifestos were entitled:
a)
The Next Moves Forward?
b)
Britain Will Win?
c)
Britain United — The Time Has Come?
144
By what names were Joseph Vissarionovitch Djugashvili and Vladimir Illych Ulyanov better known?
145
Which prime minister had a boot named after him?
146
Which prime minister had a beef dish named after him?
147
How many prime ministers served under the reign of Queen Victoria?
a)
15
b)
10
c)
12
148
Including those who served more than once, how many US presidents were there before George Bush?
a)
40
b)
35
c)
38
149
Which TV programme was presented by Tory MP Jeremy Hanley's sister?
150
What is the connection between Tory MPs Edwina Currie and Teresa Gorman, and former Tory MP Jeffrey Archer?
151
Which minister of transport introduced beacons at pedestrian crossings?
152
School days set aside for staff administration are named after which education secretary?
153
In which direction did Michael Heseltine claim to have no ambition?
154
Which MP is married to Jeffrey Archer's literary agent?
a)
Kenneth Baker
b)
Michael Foot
c)
David Owen
155
Which MP has released a rap single called ‘I Feel Liberal’?
156
What according to the advertisement, was more flexible than Cyril Smith?
157
What is the connection between Leslie Titmuss MP and Horace Rumpole?
158
Whose nickname at school of was ‘Snobby Roberts’?
159
Which soloist's Jaguar has the registration number DEG 5Y?
160
Which three of the following prime ministers had a moustache when in office?
Attlee, Lloyd-George, Churchill, Thatcher, Wilson, MacDonald
161
Who destroyed Graham Sutherland's portrait of Winston Churchill?
162
Which prime minister won the Nobel Prize for Literature?
163
Which publishing house was founded by Michael Heseltine?
164
Which MP is portrayed on Spitting Image as a slug?
165
Which MP was the Miniature for Sport?
166
Who was described by Harold Wilson as ‘the best prime minister we never had’?
a)
Hugh Gaitskell
b)
R A Butler
c)
Alec Douglas-Home
167
Enoch Powell was a Tory minister, but which party did he represent at the end of his career?
168
Which MP is the author of Billy Graham and The Church of Rome ,No Pope Here , and The Massacre of St  Bartholemew  ?
169
Whom did Willie Whitelaw describe as ‘a very religious man’
a)
John Selwyn Gummer
b)
Norman Tebbit
c)
The Archbishop of Canterbury
170
Which home secretary is credited with founding the modern police force?
171
Match the MPs to their father's occupations: Margaret Thatcher, John Major, Norman Tebbit, David Steel; shopkeeper, concrete gnome manufacturer, pawnbroker, vicar
172
What is the connection between the following MPs: Dennis Skinner, Aneurin Bevan, Patrick McLoughlin, Roy Mason?
173
What is the connection between Winston Churchill, Dave Nellist, Airey Neave?
174
What do the letters TD stand for?
a)
Talking Disaster, Denis Healey's nickname for Tony Benn during the 1983 general election
b)
Teachta Dala, the Irish for Member of Parliament
c)
Televised Debates, the company which prepares Parliament for TV transmission
175
Who are: a Red Ken b Red Ted c Red Robbo
176
Of whom was it said, ‘There but for the grace of God goes God’?
177
Which make of raincoat did Harold Wilson favour when prime minister?
178
What did Ernest Marples do in 1959 to promote a boom in traffic cone production?
179
Who told reporters: ‘You won't have me to kick around any more’?
180
Why did the following men have such a big impact on Parliament: Bates, Catesby, Winter, Wright, Fawkes, Percy?
181
Who sailed Morning Cloud?
182
What is the connection between newspaper columnists Joe Haines and Bernard Ingham?
183
William Boot, hero of Evelyn Waugh's Scoop , is said to be based on which former cabinet minister?
a)
Lord Deedes
b)
Lord Hailsham
c)
Lord Whitelaw
184
Who tried to hide during the 1984–85 miners' strike by wearing a bag over his head?
185
Why was Mrs Thatcher upset when her son went for a drive in 1982?
186
In which hotel was Mrs Thatcher staying when it was bombed by the IRA?
187
How many by-elections have there been during the 1987–92 Parliament?
188
‘Where there is error, may we bring truth.
Where there is despair, may we bring hope’.
Whom did Mrs Thatcher quote when elected prime minister in 1979?
189
How much money did Jeffrey Archer arrange to hand over to prostitute Monica Coghlan at Victoria Station?
190
At which London railway station did Jeffrey Archer arrange to have cash handed over to prostitute Monica Coghlan?
191
What did House of Commons speaker Bernard Weatherill do before he was an MP?
192
Which MP wrote The Maker's Mark , a romp through three generations of the Hattersley family?
193
Who is the speaker of the House of Lords?
194
Who won the 1947 FA Cup?
a)
The Labour Party
b)
Benjamin Disraeli
c)
Charlton Athletic
195
Match the politicians to their Desert Island Discs books: Clement Freud, Lord Carrington, Jeremy Thorpe,The Decline and Fall of The Roman Empire , Damon Runyon's short stories,Alice in Wonderland 
196
What do the following have in common: Brian Walden, Matthew Parris, Robert Kilroy-Silk.
197
John Major was the youngest prime minister this century when he took office in November 1990.
How young was he?
198
How many O-levels has John Major?
a)
eight
b)
six
c)
none
199
Which former Labour MP was president of the European Commission from 1977–81?
200
Which MP shares the middle name Winston with John Lennon?
a)
Tony Banks
b)
Denis Healey
c)
John Major
201
How many Scottish constituencies are there?
202
How many times were the Houses of Parliament damaged by air raids in World War II?
203
How heavy, to the nearest two tons, is the bell Big Ben?
204
Which London club was once the headquarters of the Conservative Party?
205
Tory lord chancellor Lord Birkenhead frequently visited a London club to use the lavatory despite not being a member.
When challenged, he said he was ‘surprised to learn it was a club as well as a lavatory’.
Which was the club?
206
What is the prime minister's annual salary, to the nearest thousand?
207
What is a backbench MPs annual salary, to the nearest thousand?
208
Who said: ‘I am deeply sorry for the unkind things I said about Liverpool.
I had not seen Leeds at the time’?
209
From which city did Neville Chamberlain get his piece of paper?
210
Name the SDP Gang of Four?
211
Which is the most highly paid post in the Cabinet?
212
Which state did Jimmy Carter govern before he was elected President of the United States?
213
Who thought it was a ‘funny old world’?
214
Which MP played Rocket pilot Jet Morgan in BBC Radio's Journey Into Space ?
a)
Andrew Faulds
b)
Clement Freud
c)
Austin Mitchell
215
Which prime minister wrote Sybil and Vivien Grey ?
216
Who was the Spycatcher?
What they say…and what they mean
A CRITICAL LOOK AT MODERN LANGUAGE
BY MICHAEL CONWAY
Toryspeak
What they say: ‘Whatever the opposition may promise, the people know the only prudent choice is Conservative.’
What they mean: Our bribes are less obvious.
‘We definitely are not running out of steam.
When it comes to radicalism you ain't seen nothing yet.’
We've got more ‘Citizen's Charters’.
‘We are not saying the Labour party organised the poll tax non-payment campaign.
What we are saying is — it was organised.’
But please, please forget who organised the poll tax.
‘In John Major you have a pilot at the helm who knows where he comes from and where he is going.’
Yes, he is rather common.
‘The rate of increase in decline is decreasing.
The recession shows definite signs of coming to an end.’
But not this century.
‘If we have made a mistake, it is simply this: we did not tackle the education issue early enough.
We must bring back the Three Rs.’
The rope, the rack and the rotten borough.
‘In Norman Lamont we have a quiet man, but do not underestimate his contribution to getting the country out of slump.’
He'll be the fall-guy in the first reshuffle.
‘More criminals are going to prison than ever before, and the unit of resource has been significantly reduced.’
We're packing them in like sardines.
‘The National Health Service is truly safe in our hands.
More beds are being used in real terms than ever before…‘
Yes.
More private beds.
‘Labour's policy of high interest rates and higher taxes will beggar every family in the land.
It's a double whammy.’
Yo!
We're after the youth vote.
CHURCH OF THE LATTER DAY FAX BUREAU
‘Great fashion accessory you turned out to be’
Hell's bells
Sick of politicians lining up to press your flesh?
Don't worry, so are they.
MATTHEW PARRIS, former MP for West Derbyshire, reports
Knocking on the dour
The late Martin Stevens always reminded me of a sort of roly-poly Noel Coward.
Martin, who represented Fulham in the Conservative interest, lived in some style at the Albany in Piccadilly and liked to remark that ‘every passing year — don't you find, dear boy — is just more fun than the last?’
His habit of electioneering from a white Rolls Royce sometimes attracted comment and he told me he had a silver-tipped cane with which to tap at doors of council flats in Fulham, though I was never sure whether to believe him.
Actually a kind and conscientious man, he hid these political defects marvellously.
Canvassing one day in a by-election in Essex, Martin was asked to cover a street of drab brick semis.
He threw himself with good grace into everything, even this.
Knocking at the first door, he was greeted by a woman with a cigarette in her mouth, curlers in her hair and flour on her hands.
Keeping the door on its chain, she peered through the crack and rasped, ‘Whadyerwant?’
Martin consulted the relevant page from his voters' roll.
‘Do I, by any lucky chance,’ he beamed, extending a plump hand past the chain, ‘find myself addressing Mrs Muriel Jones?’
Mrs Jones's fag quivered contemptuously on her lower lip: ‘You might be,’ she spat.
‘And is there, perhaps,’ asked Martin, pressing her floury hand into his, ‘a happy man in this household who has…’he paused, ‘who has the honour to call himself Mr Jones?’
Martin had style.
He also understood what few canvassers of the more earnest sort admit, even to themselves: that canvassing in a parliamentary election is not supposed to change electors' minds.
Canvassing has nothing to do with electors.
Canvassing is undertaken to keep up the spirits of the candidate.
The 21-day polar night of a general election is a bleak concern, God knows, for all of us.
But for the candidates themselves it is perfectly horrid.
Imagine just one morning in which everyone you encounter says to you ‘And what are you going to do for me, then?’
Imagine how it feels (if you are the incumbent MP) to know that, that very morning, thousands of people are devoting their whole attention to getting rid of you.
Or how it feels (if you are the challenger) to learn that an even larger number of men and women have organised themselves into teams with the sole purpose of stopping you getting anywhere.
Imagine the indignity of trying to learn by heart, over breakfast, a set of opinions, which you will later claim as your own, on such subjects as your party's policy on the amateur status of Rugby Union, female circumcision and devolution of power to the regional arts boards…and all morning your party agent sending you urgent messages that your whole campaign's falling apart.
Imagine what it's like (if you are a Tory) to be unable to drive down the street without every red or orange poster in every window appearing to leap out and stab you in the heart.
A morning in which at least a third of the colour spectrum becomes a personal reproach, many flower-beds a matter for regret, every marigold a tiny disappointment and even nasturtiums cast aspersions.
By noon, the failure of colour technicians to invent Day-Glo blue seems a scientific catastrophe.
I remember a morning like that in Derbyshire…a morning with so much Day-Glo orange cardboard sprouting on poles from so many fields that by 11am I was near suicide — a mood that ended with the discovery that the posters were for a popular brand of fertiliser.
Now imagine three whole weeks of this.
And remember that most of the candidates in most of the constituencies believe throughout, in their secret hearts, that they cannot win — while most of the remainder are looking only to resume the dismal MP's job they had before, once this is over and out of the way.
You will agree, I think, that parliamentary candidates need a way of cheering themselves up.
So they ‘canvass’.
And it does cheer them up.
It was Geoffrey Howe, I am told, who knocked on one door while canvassing at a by-election in Epping, to be greeted by a tiny, wrinkled old lady rushing at him with arms outstretched: ‘Oh Geoffrey at last I've met you, my fluffy, cuddly little teddy bear!’
Apparently the foreign secretary (as he then was) was moved almost to tears.
Old ladies are a reliable source of fun for canvassers.
Dare I repeat a story I've told before about a friend, an unscrupulous bloke, canvassing with me for a local election in Wandsworth?
A frail old dear enquired of us, with trembling voice, whether ‘it is true that if Labour get in they'll bring in compulsory euthanasia?’
I prepared to reassure her, but my friend elbowed me aside.
‘My dear,’ he said, ‘I must be frank.
It's not in their manifesto.
But it's just the sort of thing they'd do.’
I encountered an old lady of a more awkward sort while canvassing for the Tory candidate in Crosby — a by-election subsequently  won for the SDP by Shirley Williams.
‘I'm fed up with you Tories,’ she said, ‘this time I'm going to vote for that nice Mrs Williams.
‘Why?’
I asked.
‘She'll bring back hanging and do something to get rid of all those blacks,’ said the lady.
I responded with a patient and well-informed explanation of how and why the SDP had no such plans and it was the last thing Mrs Williams would do.
‘Well I don't like blacks and I do believe in hanging and you're not promising me anything with either, are you?’
‘No,’ I said.
‘I'm voting for her anyway, then,’ smiled the old lady, closing the door.
I had learned something about the protest vote.
The loss of this old lady's vote was cancelled out a few streets further on, by a young chap who came to the door and told me he was a soldier.
‘Personally,’ he said, ‘I support the Labour party but the armed forces are sworn to uphold the government of the day, so I'll vote Conservative, of course.’
‘Of course,’ I said, ‘thank you,’and moved quickly on.
By far the rudest electors, in my canvassing experience, are old, white, working-class men.
In the experience of friends who canvass for the Labour party, old, white, middle-class men are the rudest.
Liberal chums tell me that old, white, military men top the bill.
I think we can eliminate blacks, women, and the younger voter from our enquiries.
Certainly my own identikit picture of the classic nasty old git a Tory faces is about 68, wears a string vest and the trousers of an old suit, bears remnants of a tattoo on one shoulder and comes at you from the door of a council house with an unkempt garden in Mansfield, waving a stick and blaspheming mightily.
And I forget which of my old colleagues it was who was canvassing, blue rosette ablaze, in a particularly Labour-dominated council estate in Sheffield, when he came upon an elderly voter planting primroses by the door.
‘Ah,’ said the Tory, anxious to find a topic of mutual interest, ‘primroses!
Primroses were Mr Disraeli's favourite flower, you know.’
‘Was they?’ said the old boy, looking up from his gardening.
‘Then I'll dig them oop again.’
The idea that ‘the youth of today’ are exceptionally ill-mannered is not borne out by political canvassing.
Young people will admit (where the middle-aged seldom will) that they don't give a toss who wins, but they are almost never intentionally rude.
Another widely-held theory about door-knockers' experiences must also, I'm afraid, yield to the evidence.
Canvassers rarely, if ever, get laid.
Ivan Lawrence, through, the Tory MP for Burton on Trent, reports that while his team were marching up the street loudspeakering in Yoxall, his wife knocked on one door to be greeted with ‘It's open.
Come upstairs.’
Mrs Lawrence went upstairs.
‘Come in,’ called a lady's voice from behind a door.
Mrs Lawrence opened it.
The lady was lying, naked, in the bath.
‘Oh,’ she said, disappointed.
‘I thought it would be Mr Lawrence…
’ But that's the closest anyone seems to have got.
Perhaps a candidate's body language is wrong.
Which brings back a curious memory, of canvassing a young man in a tracksuit in Cromford, Derbyshire, who stood before me arguing about education, with what John Major would call a very considerable erection.
You can't hide that sort of thing, in a tracksuit.
I stuck to party policy, of course, but the problem only seemed to get worse.
Never before or since have my views on education produced this effect.
Charivari
Punch's weekly guide to the arts, entertainment, media and more…
Heavy-handed editing
The following touching message was published in a recent edition of RAW , one of the country's top heavy metal magazines:
‘VENUE: Annihilator, Marquee.
MESSAGE: To the blond guy with the new Megadeth T-shirt.
You caught me when I staged dived and looked after me when I got knocked in the eye.
Please get in touch.
CONTACT: Jane (girl with green combats) Meade Cottage, Chandlers Lane, Yately, Camberley, Surrey.’
Other entries in their double-page dating agency feature included:
‘VENUE: Enuff Z’ Nuff, Bristol.
MESSAGE: To the two girls I asked the way to the offy.
Sorry I was so quiet but I didn't know who I liked best.
CONTACT: Nick, 55 Claremont, Newport, Gwent.’
A brave man, our Nick, to give his full name and address, clearly unafraid of retaliatory hate mail from New Metal Women.
Jennifer and Lynne in Dundee made their tender appeal through RAW edition 68, page 55.
‘To Genital Grinder and Toxic Foetus Eater.
Nice names, shame about the faces — or is it the other way around?!’
Kerrang , sister paper to RAW , is market leader among the eight British national heavy metal magazines, appeals to a slightly older heavy metal fan, and specialises in funny spelling.
Kerrang haz lodes ov pul-owt pix ov grupes lik Ciss, Zorry…
Kiss, an Aliss Koopa.
An otha grupes hoo awl have lonng hare an r ztripped 2 th wayst.
An powting.
An wareing lipztik.
An lotz ov lather.
The letters page is headed ‘Kommunication’, the leader column is called ‘Komment’ and the video page is titled ‘Kulture’.
Well, in Kerrang it would be, wouldn't it?
But krisis recently hit Kerrang and RAW , in that both magazines found themselves editor-less.
The advert for the new editors which subsequently appeared in the Guardian stipulated that the applicants for both jobs ‘should have a tremendous enthusiasm for and encyclopedic knowledge of the metal/rock scene.’
And what else was Kerrang looking for in an ideal editor?
Dave Henderson, general manager of both magazines explained:
People think we sit around drinking Jack Daniel's all day.
Which, of course, we do.
We've been looking for someone who can cope with the 24-hours-a-day rock ‘n’ roll lifestyle.
We play very loud heavy metal in the office all day long, so bad hearing is an advantage.
‘After the office, it's over to the pub, then a gig, then to a club.’
It should be said that Kerrang has its own club, or rather ‘klub’, at the Marquee every week.
‘Also with Kerrang spelling all c's as k's and all s's as z's,’ Dave continued, ‘the editor has to sort out problems with the typesetters who are always trying to correct our copy.
‘Then there's football.
You need to be playing for Inter- Kerrang .
We've been thrashed mercilessly recently by Iron Maiden.
But it has to be said that their bass player Steve Harris does have his own football pitch and his own pub!
‘Another requirement is to have the right attitude towards our competitors who run the six other heavy metal magazines.
We go out drinking with them but we all hate each other.
‘The editor we've been looking for will also have to be able to cope with Alice Cooper dropping into our offices, plus other heavy metal groups who've been into the heavy metal jewellery shop, the Great Frog which is in Carnaby Street beneath our offices.
‘We had around 40 applicants for the editor of Kerrang , which included postmen and milkmen.’
And the successful applicant?
Wait for this .
It's…a girl.
‘She paid her own ticket from Australia for the interview, and has been running a much-respected heavy metal magazine there,’ said Dave.
‘Her name is Robyn Doreian,’ Must have been the spelling that clinched it.
Ann Nightingale 
‘Sorry, Nuk.
Not much of a fly-past’
Charivari wireless
The art of Feedback -biting
HOW TO WRITE A LETTER to Feedback (R4), rule one: always be incandescent with rage about something so minor that a normal person would not even notice it, let alone write to complain.
Last week the long-suffering Chris Dunkley read out a letter from ‘one of Feedback 's faithfuls’, C Howse of Curlsdon.
She was furious about trailers that advertise forthcoming programmes.
‘One Saturday we were kept waiting for TWO MINUTES for Science Now on Radio 4 which then ran its full 30 minutes.
So I missed the first two minutes of Jazz Record Requests on Radio 3.’
Rule two: the letter must be small-minded, with the world view of a parish councillor outraged by a repainted bus stop.
‘Too often on the Today programme an interesting interview is cut short with the words ‘I'm afraid we are running out of time.
And now we have a message about a serious accident.
Please telephone…mutter, mutter, mutter, God isn't this a waste of my talent?
And now — impressive voice — here is Dumbo Numbskull to tell us what is on Radio 4 today.'’
THE DESK OF A REGULAR ‘FEEDBACK’ CONTRIBUTOR
Rule three: do not worry if your letter is unreasonable and bigoted.
Last week listeners were complaining about the supposed increase in American accents on Radio 4 (‘I am sick to the back teeth of hearing these American voices’).
Rule four: be as personally abusive as you like.
Danny Baker's new breakfast show Morning Edition (R5), provoked comments that we were downright insulting: ‘He is no more that just a loutish version of Jonathan Ross.’
This brings us to rule five: only ever praise somebody (a) in order to condemn someone else (‘Danny Baker is genuinely witty and not childish like so many Radio 1 ‘personalities'’) or (b) if they have just been sacked (‘I found the previous presenters stylish, informed and witty, creating just the right atmosphere.
Why has this been changed to sound like just another of the many jarring yobbish stations?’).
Feedback is a very clever idea.
Its correspondents are such irritating pedants that we listeners always feel completely on the BBC's side.
It has, for example, turned me into a complete Danny Baker fan.
Part of his charm is that you think this  must be Jonathan Ross, so similar are their voices.
But he has a definite style of his own.
‘We are not afraid to ask the dumb questions on this show,’ he proclaims.
‘Where is Seattle?’
He also has an encyclopaedic grasp of trivia.
Keith rang in with a question that was designed to floor him: ‘Who are the three England footballers in the Sixties with three ‘o's in their surname?
That will give you something to chew on during the day.’
But not so.
Without a pause Danny reeled them off ‘Osgood, Woodcock and Ian Storey-Moore.’
Exit Keith.
In my view Feedbackers got the wrong Baker.
With Richard I can quite see there are forceful grounds for objection.
There he is, week after week,Comparing Notes (R4) with people you have never heard of: obscure little triangle players of one sort or another.
And why does Nick Baker always find things so very amusing on his Radio 4 series examining the backwaters of the magazine publishing world?
During his session with the unfortunate staff at Caterer and Hotel Keeper he was always wheezing with laughter at something that did not really seem to warrant it.
Twice I thought it was local interference or a plane passing overhead and twiddled the tuning knob.
Dear Feedback , it is up to the listener to decide how funny things are and not loutish Mr Baker.
There, getting the hang of it now?
Big Ears
The SAFEWAYS
by Paul Thomas
television
A view to a bill
A few tips for the politician who's about to go on TV
WITH THE PRE-ELECTION brouhaha gaining momentum, Brendan Bruce has produced Images Of Power (Kogan Page, £16.95) a well-timed look at the presentation of politicians.
For any would-be telegenic demagogue, Mr Bruce offers a lot of practical advice, most of it garnered when he was the Tories' director of communications.
It is not a profound book, but it is amusing.
The Institute of Public Relations, he wagers, has yet to acknowledge Paul Joseph Goebbels's claim to being the first ‘fully-fledged image-maker’.
It was Goebbels who persuaded Hitler to send gramophone records of his speeches to the Nazi faithful, a tactic not used again until 1959 by Harold Macmillan.
He also explains why newscasters glance down at their notes occasionally.
It is not to maintain the pretence that there is no autocue; it is because continuous looking at the camera apparently produces a disconcerting ‘super-stare’ of hostility.
Dressing for television is covered at length(ties made from madder silk and with an Olney knot at the best for keeping the microphone in place).
And there is a good account of the infamous Nixon/Kennedy TV debate when Kennedy's aide even turned up the heat in Nixon's dressing-room to make him sweat more.
But most pertinent are the reflections on the images of English politics.
Neil Kinnock, he says, constantly thrusts his chin forward when speaking which causes serious vocal cord tension and an unnatural emphasis on words.
Major's problem is more nasal.
Oh yes.
The main election battleground now would seem to be the political interviews on television.
The Arthur Scargill technique is not entirely without merit, as his 1983 clash with Peter Snow shows:
‘Have you read the full text of my speech in Moscow?’ asked Scargill.
‘Yes, I have,’ fibbed Snow.
‘Have you?
I don't believe you,’ said Scargill continuously until Snow sheepishly confessed that, ‘to be quite honest’, he had not.
‘Right,’ said a triumphant Scargill.
‘Now I will answer your question, now you have admitted you have not seen the full text.’
Then there is the alarmingly bequiffed Brian Walden and his weakness for answering his own questions and his ‘notorious’ summaries — the tell-tale preface is ‘Let's just see if I understand you.’
On the other grand inquisitors, Mr Bruce thinks Sir Robin Day is susceptible to flattery as he ‘thinks he is more important than the interviewee’, and he rates ITN's Michael Brunson and Radio 4's James Naughtie as the least egotistical interviewers.
The last opinion is a little hard to swallow.
Mr Naughtie insists that his name be pronounced ‘knock-tee’ and as Richard Littlejohn pointed out in his old Evening Standard column, this means that one of our great comic novelists is, in fact, Evelyn Wok.
Sean Macaulay 
Sir Robin Day: an interviewer more susceptible to flattery than battery
Charivari music
No longer at their Level 42 best
I LIKE LEVEL 42.
A few years ago they were making some of the best pop singles you could play on a jukebox: ‘Something About You’, ‘Leaving Me Now’, ‘Lessons In Love’, all the kind of thing that you felt you were going to be sick of hearing before long but which still sounded good after the thousandth time.
It's the hardest trick in pop to pull off and, sure enough, their hit-making noise has deserted them.
They're a shadow of their old selves.
This week, they play three nights at London's Town & Country Club, which isn't bad, but it's a high step down from the dizzy heights of packing out Wembley for several shows on the trot as they did five years ago when they were one of the biggest bands in Europe.
They formed in 1980 as a purely instrumental jazz-funk band and their excellent playing always kept them interesting as a live band: I know ‘they can really play their instruments’ is a boring credential, but it can count for something.
Bassist and singer Mark King had a knack for orchestrating good tunes into invincible pop nuggets.
VERY BORING PEOPLE No 1
…
AND ANOTHER THING, ‘THE LEVELS’ CAN REALLY PLAY THEIR INSTRUMENTS
WHO CARES
I met King around the time of Running In The Family , the follow-up to the all-conquering World Machine .
He's one of the funniest and most charming men in the business.
His line on playing live is one of the canniest you can come across: ‘There's always one element that's not quite right.
You go out there, you're playing great, the road crew love it, but the audience are completely cold.
Or you go out, come off feeling it was rubbish, but the crowd are going wild and the road crew love it again.
Or you go out, you're feeling great, the crowd are steaming, and then you come off, and the roadies say, ‘Well…‘’
What went wrong, after that?
Level 42 have never quite got the magic back again.
They lost two founding members, the Gould brothers, who wrote some of the best stuff, and the records missed the ounce of excellence which had seemed effortless before.
King and keyboard man Mike Lindup have soldiered on, but loyal fans will recall ‘Something About You as the  high point and it's dispiriting to have a five-year-old record and you one great pleaser in the locker.
What happened to them was the not-so-mystery ailment that cuts down more pop stars than drugs or fast cars ever do: overwork.
Embattled by constant touring and overwork expectations, fatigue wore the shine off their subsequent music.
King demonstrated for me how easy it was to knock up a backing track in his home studio and then erase it again at the touch of a button.
When it comes this easy mere professionalism drains off the sparkle in band's work.
Some of their later records have produced a few hits but though it is thoughtful, well-made music, something's missing.
I asked King how many albums he thought Level 42 would be good for.
He looked me in the eye and said, ‘Two more.’
It's not likely that they'll fall entirely from grace, and this isn't meant to be a sob story of any sort.
The good years have left them wealthy men.
But a friend put some perspective into it when he told me of a recent visit to the Half Moon, a venerable pub venue in Putney: ‘There were all these posters on the wall of bands from 20 and 25 years ago, and I thought, ‘Cor, they must be valuable.’
But when I looked a bit closer, I saw they were advertising gigs that were happening there next week.’
Richard Cook 
Level 42 are at the Town & Country Club from 19–21 March.
film
The twinning formula
Kieslowski's Double feature never fails to satisfy the imagination
IN THIS COUNTRY we first knew Krzysztof Kieslowski as director and co-writer of two imaginative but sharply realistic pieces:A Short Film About Killing , a painful record of capital punishment, and A Short Film About Love , a study of a misunderstood attachment; both dealt with concrete interpretations of the Ten Commandments.
It is startling to find in his new work,The Double Life Of Veronique (15, Curzon Mayfair) what looks like a fantasy of love.
Two girls are born, one in Poland, one in France: their parents don't know each other, there is no connection whatsoever between the two families, but the girls grow up identical in appearance, nature and character.
One dies of a concealed heart malformation: like a twin, the French Veronique experiences the other's feelings and knows how to avoid their cause; she is conscious of the other's presence, she is never alone, her life is guided; it is guided, really, to love.
She is played, as is her double, by Irene Jacob, and the enchantment of the film owed much to her personality; she is not only beautiful, she communicates beauty.
And the narrative is tenacious.
An impossible tale?
Nothing is impossible in a world which, science tells us, began from the primaeval slime and, taking its time, produced both Shakespeare and Hitler.
Let's accept the linked lives and enjoy the film.
But I don't myself think it is simply a love fantasy.
I think it is about the universal sameness which the director talks about in interviews.
The film chooses an exaggerated case, but it is about the sameness of people.
The remote grows nearer still.
The Horse Thief (ICA) comes, under Chinese control and censorship, form Tibet.
Directed (1986) by Tian Zhuangzhuang with Wu Tianming as executive producer, it tells the story of a hunter from the Mongolian plains who prays on merchants and nomads and steals horses.
One day he fails to give what is due to the temple and is exiled from his clan.
The film, shot on location with non-professional actors, throws light on distant life: ‘sky burial’ and masked child-dancing are among rituals here astonishingly recorded.
Dilys Powell
The unsung contribution of Dorset to popular music
Media stuntman Jimmy Cauty of the KLF was born in Totnes .
Vainglorious Eighties swordsmen Ten Pole Tudor shot their last video in Lulworth Cove .
John Lennon bought his Aunt Mimi a bungalow in Poole .
Hippy strumster Robert Fripp and the thinking punk's crumpet, Toyah, live near Wimborne .
The ‘baker's boy’ Hovis ad was filmed in Shaftesbury and starred Mark Price from All About Eve.
Cruel observers may remark that he's been going downhill ever since.
Compiled by John ‘Ride A White Swanage’ Naughton of Q Magazine.
Charivari theatre
A Heart without a soul
‘WAS IT ONE OF THEM IN-DEPTH things you have to really think about?’ asked the cabbie who drove me from A Hard Heart .
Well, yes and no.
Although ‘in-depth’ may not be part of Howard Barker's vocabulary, I am sure he believes his play is far from superficial.
On the other hand, I didn't have to think about it at all to decide it was flamboyant, asinine pretentiousness.
Yet again, the Almeida gives its designer — in this case, Anthony Ward — the chance to create a dazzling set, three classic reliefs of caped, naked horsemen and a dropped ceiling that splits and lowers to display a map of nameless walled city.
Its queen, Praxis, summons Riddler, a visionary architect, for help in repelling an enemy massed outside the gates, but Riddler, an old boot who would be too tough for Charlie Chaplin in The Gold Rush , wants to destroy the city in order to save it, pillaging the Temple of Culture for war material and finally blowing it up.
For her efforts, Riddler wins an exemption from military service for her son, Attila, a delicate type who slopes about in a dressing gown, wringing his hands.
Meanwhile, Riddler has to fight off the attentions of Seemore, a vagrant who has been driven mad with desire for her body.
As you may already realise, once again the Almeida has gone in for a lot of posh posturing got up as a drama of social consciousness.
Howard Barker is described in the programme as a playwright ‘known for his robust stance’— feet apart, biceps raised?—‘against the tide of TV obsessed populist drama,’ but the dialogue in A Hard Heart sounds as if it came from the violet-ink-filled pen of Oscar Wilde.
‘It is so lonely being a god,’ says Riddler.
‘No wonder we require the adoration of the mortals.’
Riddler's son, she tells Praxis, is ‘the product of a single night of love — if love it is when strangers collide in chaos.’
You might think this a true conversation-stopper but the Queen has a comeback: ‘I should like us to be friends.’
The stereotyped characterisations of the writing are emphasised by the one-note acting.
When Riddler says that the tea they drink is called that ‘even if it's made of privet…a sort of memory,’ she is harsh and spiteful as she is about everything else instead of evincing any rue or regret.
Nor does Anna Massey express any sensuality that could explain why even a bald, bulky vagrant would want to ravish a woman who looks like the world's oldest pixie.
Barker's drama does deliver a message  even simpler than his point about the importance of the national soul.
Attila reveres the strength of the mother who crushes him, and whom he hysterically, jubilantly betrays.
Like the other playwrights whose response to Thatcherism and brutality has been some hand-wringing of their own, Barker is too infatuated by his heroine's strength to humanise her withe vulnerability and too in awe of her for a passionate or coolly detached opposition.
If A Hard Heart is unintentionally comic, though, it did remind me of other people's genuinely amusing lines.
When Queen Praxis tells Riddler, ‘You are so adamantine and impermeable,’ I could hear W C Fields sweetly explaining, ‘I was only fooling and pretending.’
When Seemore declares that his fingers ‘want to run amok in all your garments,’ he irresistibly brought to mind Franchot Tone sighing to Jean Harlow, ‘I want to run barefoot through your hair.’
And, when a guard protests to Riddler that, ‘without the temple, we are practically without our wits,’ who would not recall Dorothy Parker's question, on learning that Calvin Coolidge was dead: ‘How could they tell?’
THE POCKET DREAM, by Elly Brewer and Sandi Toksvig, is a TV sketch of no freshness or wit extended for a few hours, like a sausage that is half cereal and half donkey meat.
Actually, a paean to half-hearted amateurishness, in which all but two members of the cast of A Midsummer Night's Dream go missing on opening night, leaving the other parts to be taken by the stage manager, the company manager, a stagehand, and the prima donna 's boyfriend.
Much ostensible merriment is extracted from garbled line-readings, spats and kisses that mirror off-stage relationships, and unco-operative scenery.
Comedy involving falling facades and wayward mechanisms normally depends on the precision and energy with which things go badly wrong, but here Toksvig's listless floundering in her Puck harness embodies the show's embarrassed giggles about itself.
At the end, the play is turned over to genuine amateurs, as the patrons are coerced into waving their arms, donning toadstool hats, and making dog noises.
Instead of a lobby warming against gunshots, could we not have a more useful piece of theatre legislation, making audience participation a violation of union rules?
RATHER THAN SIT THROUGH ten minutes of The Pocket Dream , any sensible person, unlikely as it may sound, would prefer three hours of wife-beating, child abuse, paranoia, and the rape of a mentally-retarded woman in The Crackwalker , the first drama by the Canadian playwright Judith Thompson to be seen here.
James Macdonald's searingly-acted production gives us Kathryn Pogson as Sandy, an elegant collection of angry bones who is even more frightening than Joe the husband who punches and kicks her, then tells her to take  off her clothes.
Theresa, who doesn't mind being called a whore but starts screaming if anyone calls her retarded, is the kind of character who seems to promise a fate worse than rape, but the greatest violence reside in Al, who tries to calm himself with images of lambs, only to have them open their mouths to show him teeth and worms.
Thompson's dialogue is realistic without being dull, vivid without being implausible, and pathetic without being sentimental.
It's a play that looks unflinchingly not just into the mouth of lambs but into the abyss.
Rhoda Koenig 
A Hard Heart is at the Almeida; The Pocket Dream is at the Albery Theatre; The Crackwalker is at the Gate.
Also runs — and rans
Our critic on what else is on in London
The Road (Cochrane Theatre ): The Talawa Theatre Company's first offering in its new West End theatre — a piece more atmospheric than effective.
Uncle Vanya (Cottesloe ): Passionately acted, with forceful Eric Porter and superb Ian McKellen.
Too bad about Anthony Sher's cheeky Dr Astrov.
Charivari food
Bacon whoopee
On the trail of decent country fare at the Country Living Fair
LAST WEEK I WANDERED off, rather against my better judgment, to kill a few hours at a thing called the Country Living Fair.
My cynicism about the event burgeoned as I walked past stalls displaying rustic-effect patio furniture, cushion covers embroidered with pheasants, and the kind of waxed country overwear that is increasingly seen sported by commuters on the tube these days.
As I tutted disparagingly at each new display, my senses were suddenly arrested by an overpowering and delightful smell of gently sizzling bacon.
I immediately took this to be a delusion — a sign that I was shortly to withdraw forever into a blissful lunatic world of favourite food fantasies.
I turned to my nearest fellow browser, intending to ask her politely but firmly to lead me to the nearest padded cell, but it came out wrong.
‘Can you smell bacon?’
I heard myself ask.
‘Yes, it's coming from the food tent — over there.’
Things were looking up.
Like an overgrown Bisto kid I sniffed and aaahed my way to the source of the oaky-smokey smell, where I met a man whom I am very pleased to know.
Bill Reynolds runs an organic farm in Somerset and makes arguably — though I'm not arguing — the best bacon in England.
I sampled the oak-smoked back — quite the most succulent, aromatic and potentially habit-forming rasher I have ever had.
Bill can also sort you out with some lovely sausages, home-cured hams, pâtés and salamis, as well as any cuts you care to name of naturally-reared organic pork, beef, lamb or chicken.
He delivers weekly to London and most of his products are also available by mail order.
as if one superlative were not enough for a single day, just across the way from Bill's place I found a stall serving some unusual flavours of ice-cream.
Caramelised carrot and Cointreau sounded unlikely enough to be worth a try — it was delicious.
Coffee is my favourite ice-cream flavour — theirs was one of the best I have had.
On enquiry, I discovered the ice-cream also has West Country origins.
Rocombe Farm is the brand name and Devonshire the source; the flagship shop is in Torquay.
Organic farming is again the secret.
All Rocombe Farm ice-cream is made with whole milk and double cream from the farm's organic-fed Jersey herd.
The Torquay shop apparently makes a new flavour of ice-cream every day of the year.
The current flavour count is 1,350 flavours and rising.
On the grounds that as it never rains it must be about to pour, I went in search of a third gastronomic grail for the day.
I found it in an unexpected place.
Crabtree and Evelyn is not a name I would instantly associate with culinary excellence — though I always knew they could make you smell nice.
But a large plate of bread slices, nearly invisible beneath a glossy coating of dark red jam, caught my eye as I walked past their stall.
Having tasted one or three of the strawberry, I tried a couple, or maybe half a dozen, of the raspberry.
The jam, it turns out, is home made.
Ingredients listed on the jar are reassuring: ‘Raspberries, Sugar.’
Those of you who thought jam was jam should head straight for your nearest stocklist of C&E.
Their Spiced Almond Thins aren't half bad either.
Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall
Bill Reynolds's bacon is available from Swaddles Green Farm, Hare Lane, Buckland St Mary, Chard, Somerset.
The Rocombe Farm Shop is at 123 Union Street, Castle Circus, Torquay, Devon.
The ice cream is at Harrods, Selfridges and specialist food shops around the country.
Crabtree and Evelyn have stockists nationwide.
‘I'll have the ribs’
Punchbag
Letter of the week
The Third Annual Punch Egothon (Spring Edition): while it presumes to expose the year's most overbearing, vain, egocentric celebrities, all it actually does is to unwittingly credit these attributes to your own good selves.
It ranks highly with the ‘20 things…’ style of a lightweight publication like the Sun .
However, credit where credit is due.
You are only catering for the mindless buffoons who find Simon Fanshawe a greater stimulus than Shakespeare.
Keep up the good work — these people must be kept off the streets.
A A LEACH
London SW1
The Sun?
Lightweight?
But they have Richard Littlejohn and he weighs at least as much as a bison.
Jaci, oh!
One of Jaci Stephen's gems (Spring Edition) you omitted was the  occasion she suggested that one man's motive for daring to criticise her was a size limitation in the manhood department.
But how did she know?
The man lived in Gateshead.
I'm quite a fan, really.
TIM HOPKINS
Luton, Beds PS The anagram of ‘Jaci Stephen’ is ‘cheap in jest’.
By completely spooky coincidence, the anagram of Tim Hopkins is ‘hot skin imp’.
Flowers power
As an American I can only hang my head in shame over the Bill Clinton sex scandal.
I say, buck up, Bill — if you're man enough for Gennifer, you're man enough for me!
JAMES McCANN
Bristol
Can't say  pharaoh than that
‘As an avid Punch reader’— does everyone who starts off their letter in this way get it published?
Or perchance ending it with that old adage, ‘Keep up the good work’?
Here's hoping.
RACHEL FRANCES READ
Cairo, Egypt
Nah.
Out of Ma'am's way
How dare your ‘gay-sympathetic’ editor, David ‘Gayvid’Thomas, criticise Her Majesty.
Talk about one queen having a go at another!
I'll slap his legs if I see him.
LENNIE ‘THE OSTRICH’ DAVEY
London NW7
Apart from some eye-liner aberrations as a teenager, Mr Punch, it must  be said, is absolutely straight as a die.
NEXT WEEK IN PUNCH
How desperate are our MPs to gain re-election?
Our resident pranksters John Hind and Stephen Mosco offered a variety of campaign services to find out.
Would ex-health minister Kenneth Clarke take up a freebie from ‘Tummies & Tone-Ups’?
Did Neil Kinnock feel the need for ‘Ra-Rah's Dancing Girls’ to jazz up his walkabouts.
And was Virginia Bottomley tempted by our lycra-clad hunks ‘The Roosters’?
Plus:We roadtest the Rent-A-Rant MPs of Westminster and reveal who is Britain's most opinionated MP.
Is it Geoffrey ‘Something Must Be Done’ Dickens?
Or maybe Anthony ‘It's An Outrage’ Beaumont-Dark?
And are they a patch on Bernard ‘Hang 'Em All’ Manning?
Ease your pre-electoral tension with the best in cartoons and sharp topical comment.
Good moods cost less at Punch.
Now that's what I call canvassing!
Bargepole
I went on a freebie last week and think I am in love again.
She's slender, elegant, responsive, unadorned with trickery and flim-flam, and can stop the United States Air Force in its tracks.
Hell, though, it's humiliating.
I'm a high-power man myself, always have been.
Never mind your down-and-dirty, hands-on, feel-the-response nonsense for me.
I do it by the book.
Compton One-Charlie departure, squawk 7026 and contact London Control, maintain flight level three nine zero, descent checks complete, good morning Frankfurt Tower, established on the localiser, flap 30, reverse thrust, thank you very much.
It has its price, of course.
The call the night before:Mohammed can't fly tomorrow, his gland has come up again, anyway, he mentioned your name, said you're rated for the 35, wonder if you could make it £200 cash and your exes?
Yes?
Great, great, can you be there for an 8am departure, and make sure you wear your epaulettes?
Great, by the way, it's seven passengers and they're sales executives from Gross & Swettie .
And then the alarm call, the minicab, the cold airfield.
And the grisly, whey-faced businessmen, queasily jocular, and what do they expect, drinking like pigs and pretending they travel by private jet every day?
They all want to go to brothels in the evening and they think I know where they can be found.
Me?
Know about commercial sex?
Of course I know about it.
I just resent the assumption.
Paris?
Play your cards right and I can get you into the Le Roi René.
Antwerp?
A rather nice house on the outskirts; just mention my name.
Chantal Sommer in Freiburg will see you right, La Vida in Cologne, Studio 1001 in Düsseldorf, Sudfass in Frankfurt, just mention my name.
But they don't like it, these businessmen.
They'll complain about the price, and be gauche and horrid with each other and with the girls.
They want brothels like they want to drink and stay up late: because in Britain such things are Not On, foreign, disreputable, on a par with rabies, garlic and sodomy.
What I usually do is compromise, sending them, all unknowing, to the local gay heavy S&M club.
There is always a local gay heavy S&M club.
Some of they find a taste for it.
Some pass the evening chatting to a Member of Parliament on a fact-finding mission.
There is always a Member of Parliament on a fact-finding mission.
Most of them turn up chastened the following morning.
They are ashen.
There is turbulence on the way back.
I find it rubs the point home.
You have to kick out the yaw damper and put in some twinky footwork on the rudders, but it has a salutary effect.
But I now realise that I, too, have been a whore, now that I am in love.
My new love is not a sleek, $5m jet, but a glider.
I went in it at Hinton-in-the-Hedges, on the edge of the Cotswolds.
You get in, and an old Pawnee tows you up to 3,000 feet, and then you drop the tow-rope and you're on your own, with Mike, the chief instructor, sitting in the back saying, ‘Stop, overcontrolling it,’ and ‘Use some rudder, damn it,’and ‘Thought you said you were a pilot?’and ‘There you are, see?
Piece of piss.’
You land, just, and Gary the landing critic opens a book on whether you die next time.
Gary is qualified to criticise; following in the footsteps, as it were, of Douglas Bader, one of his earlier flights involved an embarrassing thud followed by a wheelchair, which Gary says is an advantage in many ways because now he can stay aloft at great heights without getting cold feet.
When I tried this sort of stuff before, I had one flight in a sort of plywood packing-case painted the colour of the blue stuff they used to paint on your balls when you got crabs and spent the rest of the day hanging around with a pack of strangle-voiced bores in bobble hats.
But this is different.
You go up, you go round, you come down and there is the old Pawnee, waiting to take you straight up again.
Mike the chief instructor, an aerodynamicist by profession, says he can train an absolute beginner to solo standard in a week, simply by eliminating the hanging around.
You shell out £350-odd, book into a farmhouse for a week, and at the end of it you'll have had 35 flights and be ready to go it alone.
And it's real flying .
No jerk businessmen; no roger wilco bullshit; just sheer unadorned flight.
This is the stuff that skiing is a poor substitute for.
You don't have to hang out in some dump like St Anton or Gstaad, surrounded by barking yuppies on the verge of bankruptcy, or priapic, fat-arsed Essex burglars in fluorescent clothes.
There's no yacketing.
No crowds.
No ten-quid drinks.
Almost best of all, there's no bloody snow .
Absolutely best of all, USAF Upper Heyford grounds its F111 jets while you glide silently around the edges of their field.
Try it.
Try it.
071–706 2434 is the number to call and unlike the brothels of Mannheim, you don't even have to mention my name.
‘I'm having trouble with my cashflow’
Pick of Punch
Laughter from the archives
20 March 1935:Punch introduced an invaluable service for those sick of their nearest but not-so-dearest …
FOR IMMEDIATE DISPOSAL: one aunt, family peace-maker variety.
Wonderful collection of bright sayings, suitable for almost every occasion.
Specialises in self-sacrifice of every description.
Would gladly exchange for two white-mice.
Exhausted.
WANTED: A WIFE.
advertiser offers quite country home, with help for rough work, to suitable wife.
Must be young, cheerful, beautiful, preferable an orphan, economical and not fond of travelling.
Intelligent without being clever, and a good listener.
Optimist, Dulce Domum, near Hull
GRANDPAPA: genuine old timer, magnificent specimen, long white beard, skull-cap if required, willing to be photographed, interviewed, quoted.
Splendid variety of full-length reminiscences, including grouse-shooting over Belgrave Square and news of Waterloo as first received by the inhabitants of Little Yokel in Rutlandshire.
Also good personal anecdote of Mr Gladstone cutting down small cherry tree but being unable to lie.
Old-world courtesy as, and if, desired.
Senex, Ye Olde Thatched
WANTED VERY BADLY: a nice, old-fashioned nurse complete with spectacles and grey hair.
Offered in exchange: free choice of any number of bright young college things, all fully-equipped child-psychologists, handicraft-workers and advanced thinkers.
Tired Twins, The Homestead, Hampstead
20 March 1974:Any desperate measure in a recession …
‘Live within our means!
My God, don't say it's come to that’
J&B Caption Competition
WINNERS Number 1152
THANK YOU GORBY, THAT WILL BE ALL FOR NOW
1881 Caption —‘A dull season?
I think not!
So many people have given dances you know!’
‘Not in our set, at all events — for we've not been asked to any!’
KEEP BACK MILLICENT — I THINK THIS MAY BE THE START OF A PAL COMMERCIAL!
1938 Caption —‘You haven't met the vicar, Angela.
Here he comes with that idiot Gladys White.’
Number 1155
Two bottles of J&B will be awarded for the best new captions to the cartoons below, which were first printed in 1881 and 1938.
Jot your entries on a postcard please, addressed to Caption Competition 1155  to arrive by first post on 27 March.