

Wage and price determination
Before discussing the various economic theories of unemployment and inflation, it is necessary to examine the determination of employment levels, wage rates and product prices in a modern economy and, in particular, to understand the institutional influences on employment, wages and prices in the UK.
In section 2.1 of this chapter, we discuss the characteristics of labour as a factor of production and examine the different ways of delineating labour markets.
In sections 2.2 and 2.3, we outline the determinants of the demand for and the supply of labour and the factors which contribute to the determination of wages in the UK, including a discussion of the role of trade unions.
In section 2.4, we turn our attention to the determination of product prices in theory and practice.
Labour and labour markets
Labour is a factor of production.
Together with the services of capital and land, labour services are employed by firms to produce goods and services.
To appreciate the importance of the labour input, consider Fig. 2.1 which illustrates the working of an economic system in a simple flow diagram.
Households are depicted as the owners of all the factors of production whose services they sell to firms in exchange for income (wages and salaries for labour services, interest and profits for capital services and rent for land services).
Firms use the-factor inputs to produce output which they sell to domestic households (the consumption flow), to other firms (the private investment flow), to overseas buyers (the export flow) and to the government (the government expenditure flow).
Of the income received by households, some is spent on this domestically produced output and some is spent on imports, the rest being saved or taken in taxation.
It should be clear from Fig.  2.1 that the services of labour are crucial to the working of an economic system.
Labour provides the effort, skill and enterprise which, together with capital equipment and natural resources, enable millions of different types of goods and services to be produced and distributed to people in society.
The labour input can be defined as consisting of all the human attributes which are used in producing goods and services and, as such, it differs from the inputs of the other factors of production in one major respect.
Unlike land resources and the capital stock, a country's labour force consists of human beings with widely differing skills and aspirations whose welfare is affected by changes in both employment levels and the conditions of employment.
In particular, any reduction in the employment of labour which results in redundancies can lead to hardship and misery for the people concerned.
This is not a consideration which applies to other factors of production: there is far less concern about the proportion of a country's capital stock which is lying idle than there is about the proportion of the labour force which is unemployed.
Unemployment and other problems associated with labour have a direct bearing on social welfare.
A labour market can be defined as the area in which buyers and sellers of labour services come into contact with one another .
The labour market in the UK, therefore, consists of all the people  who wish to work (whether currently employed or not) and all the firms who wish to employ workers in order to produce goods and services.
This represents a very big, complex and highly aggregated market within which can be discerned a very large number of smaller labour markets.
Some of these are specialised and do not compete very much with other markets, whilst others are closely related and highly competitive.
The analysis of labour markets is complicated further by the fact that they can be defined by reference to one or more of a number of characteristics.
For example, a labour market can be defined simply in terms of its location : thus, we can refer to the labour market in the south-west of England or to the London labour market.
Second, a labour market can be defined by skill or occupation : we can speak of the market for economics lecturers or the market for car workers.
Third, a labour market can be defined by sex ,age or social class and we can refer to the female labour market or the market for young, middle-class executives.
It is important to stress that in the UK there is not just one but a very large number of overlapping labour markets.
It is important to remember that labour is heterogeneous in the sense that different workers possess different skills and abilities.
Also, many skills are job-specific — that is, they are only useful in certain types of jobs.
The heterogeneity of labour and the job-specificity of skills tend to create a strong linkage between workers and their employers and, in some cases, cause firms to fill as many of their vacancies as possible by means of internal promotions.
Firm-specific or segmented labour markets of this kind are called ‘internal labour markets’.
The existence of internal labour markets is sometimes used to explain labour ‘hoarding’(the practice of employing more labour than is actually required) because firms do not wish to break the link between workers and the firm, thereby losing the skills acquired by workers over the years; and is also put forward as a cause of a reduction in the overall level of competition in the aggregate labour market and, therefore, a possible reason for the inflexibility of wage rates, particularly in the downward direction.
The demand for and the supply of labour
The demand for labour
The demand for labour by firms is one of the most important factors determining the level of employment and unemployment in  an economy.
In this book, we are particularly interested in the determinants of the aggregate demand for labour — that is, the total quantity of the labour input (measured in person-hours) which all firms in the economy are willing to employ.
To examine this, however, it is useful to look first at the determinants of an individual firm's demand for labour.
An individual firm's demand for labour can be thought of as a derived demand — it is derived from the consumers' demand for the firm's product.
Thus, other things being equal, an increase in the demand for a firm's product should lead to an increase in the firm's demand for labour and, conversely, a decrease in the demand for the firm's product should lead to a decrease in the firm's demand for labour.
For the economy as a whole, therefore, there should be a direct relationship between the aggregate demand for labour and the aggregate demand for goods and services.
Since, in equilibrium, the aggregate demand for goods and services will be equal to the rate of national income (which measures the total value of goods and services produced in the economy over a given time period), we can expect a direct relationship between the aggregate demand for labour and the rate of national income.
This is illustrated in Fig. 2.2, where D L is the aggregate demand for labour, given the structure of real wage rates.
It is also true that, for a given rate of national income, a change in the real wage will be likely to cause a change in the demand for labour.
To show this, consider an individual firm which-is operating in perfectly competitive labour and product markets and  suppose that all jobs and workers are homogeneous.
The conditions for perfect competition are that:(a) there should be many small firms producing identical products (so that no individual firm can influence the price of the product or the wage rate);(b) there should be many individual workers (so that no one of them can influence the wage rate);(c) there should be perfect mobility of all factors of production;(d) all labour and jobs should be homogeneous;(e) there should be perfect information on the part of all buyers and sellers;(f) wages and prices should be perfectly flexible, upwards and downwards.
What will be the firm's demand for labour on the assumption that it wishes to make the biggest possible profit?
To ensure that it earns maximum profit, the firm must only employ workers who add more to revenue than to cost.
The addition to total revenue resulting from the employment of one extra worker is called the marginal revenue product of labour (MRPL).
This is equal to the marginal physical product of labour (MPPL), which is the addition to the firm's output resulting from the employment of one extra worker, multiplied by marginal revenue (MR), which is the addition to total revenue from selling one extra unit of output.
That is, 
Since the firm in our example is operating under conditions of perfect competition, in which price equals marginal revenue, we can write  where P is the price of the product.
The cost to the firm of employing one additional worker in a competitive labour market is the prevailing money wage (W).
The profit-maximising firm will, therefore, hire additional workers up to the point at which the MRPL = W.
This rule for profit maximisation is illustrated in Table 2.1 where an individual firm is producing good X. As more and more workers are employed, with a given stock of capital equipment, the MPPL declines.
This is an example of the ‘principle of diminishing returns’.
As the price of the product is constant at £5, it follows that the MRPL also declines: the first worker adds £50 per week to total revenue, the second adds £35, the third £25, the fourth £15 and the fifth only £5.
If the wage were £25 per week, the firm would employ three workers (the fourth and fifth workers would clearly add more to cost than to revenue).
If the weekly wage were £15, however, the firm would employ four workers.
These results    are illustrated in Fig. 2.3 where it is evident that a fall in wages means a rise in employment and a rise in wages means a fall in employment.
These results only apply, of course, if the price of the product remains constant.
A fall in price would reduce the MRPL at every level of employment, the MRPL curve would shift left and employment would fall for a given weekly wage.
Similarly, a rise in price would raise the MRPL at every level of employment, the MRPL  curve would shift right and employment would rise for a given weekly wage.
Since , another way of writing the profit maximising rule is as follows: the firm will employ workers up to the point at which  or at which  That is,the firm will hire workers up to the point at which the real wage equals the marginal physical product of labour .
An increase in the real wage will reduce employment and a decrease in the real wage will increase employment.
The firm's demand for labour will, therefore, be a negative function of the real wage.
The aggregate demand for labour for the economy as a whole will be the sum of all the individual firms' demands for labour.
This will also be a negative relationship, as illustrated in Fig. 2.4 where the aggregate demand for labour curve D L is drawn for a given rate of national income.
An increase in the rate of national income would shift the demand for labour curve to the right from D L to D′ L .
Similarly, a decrease in the rate of national income would shift the demand for labour curve to the left.
In what follows, we shall assume that the aggregate demand for labour is inversely related to the real wage and directly related to the rate of national income.
The supply of labour
The supply of labour can be defined as the quantity of labour services (measured in person-hours) offered for hire by individuals over a given time period.
The total supply of labour in an economy depends on the following three factors:
The size of the ‘potential labour force’
At present in the UK, this consists of all men between the ages of sixteen and sixty-five and all women between the ages of sixteen and sixty who are capable of working.
The size of the potential labour force depends on the size and structure of the population.
For example, a change in the age distribution of the population which increases the number of people between the school-leaving age and the retirement age will expand the potential labour force.
Similarly, of course, any change in the school-leaving age or the retirement age will also affect the size of the potential labour force and therefore the supply of labour.
The ‘participation rate’
This is the proportion of the potential labour force which is actually working or actively seeking work.
The participation rate depends on many factors including the real wage, the level of unemployment benefit relative to wage rates, and customs and attitudes concerning, for example, the participation of women in the workforce.
The supply of hours
This is the average number of hours that each worker is willing to supply over a given time period.
The supply of hours is likely to depend on the standard real wage, the overtime real wage and workers’ preferences for income and leisure.
For example, a rise in real wages makes work more attractive and so may lead to an increase in the number of hours of work offered.
On the other hand, some individuals may take the opportunity offered by a higher real wage to enjoy more leisure and so may offer fewer hours of work.
We saw above that the real wage is one of the major determinants of the demand for labour.
We consider now in greater detail the relationship between the supply of labour and the real wage.
The supply of labour and the real wage
To examine the nature of the relationship between the supply of  labour and the real wage, consider the effect of an increase in the real wage.
We have seen above that it is possible that some individuals may wish to work fewer hours and take more leisure as a result of an increase in the real wage.
At the same time, other workers may be induced to offer more hours of work so that the final effect on the supply of hours is uncertain.
However, an increase in the real wage is also likely to induce people who are not initially participating in the labour market to enter the market and seek jobs.
On this argument, it is probable that the aggregate supply of labour will have a positive slope as shown in Fig. 2.5.
A rise in the real wage will induce an increase in the supply of labour in the economy as a whole.
Similarly, a fall in the real wage will induce a decrease in the supply of labour.
Wage determination
We have seen that, under conditions of perfect competition in the aggregate labour and product markets, no individual firm or worker would be able to influence the equilibrium real wage.
Instead, the real wage would be determined by the interaction of the aggregate demand for labour and the aggregate supply of labour.
This is illustrated in Fig. 2.6 where the equilibrium real wage is (W/P)1 and equilibrium employment is OL 1 .
Given the assumptions of perfect mobility of factors and perfect information, this equilibrium should be consistent with zero unemployment.
In practice, the conditions for perfectly competitive labour and product markets do not apply.
Instead, labour and jobs are heterogeneous, labour markets are segmented and there is only limited mobility of factors of production between markets; many firms have some degree of monopoly power in the product markets; many workers are organised into trade unions; and there is imperfect information.
Under these circumstances, the wages of many different types of labour are determined by the process of collective bargaining.
The result is a complex structure of wage rates, characterised by a system of wage differentials.
Trade unions and collective bargaining
In the UK, there are over 400 trade unions which have over 40 per cent of the labour force as members.
Trade unions are associations of workers which represent their members in all negotiations with employers.
Their main objectives are:
1
To raise the basic wages of their members.
2
To keep all their members in employment.
3
To improve members' conditions of service by promoting such benefits as pension schemes, longer holidays and a shorter working week.
4
To promote industrial democracy in UK industry.
5
To influence government policy in ways that will benefit their members.
In addition, some unions seek to operate a ‘closed shop’ so that only union members may be employed.
It is argued that this gives unions a greater degree of control over their members and greater bargaining strength.
Unions have some degree of monopoly power in their control over the supply of labour.
To illustrate this, suppose that a particular trade union submits a wage claim for a 9 per cent rise, but receives an offer of only 3 per cent from the employers.
The union will engage in negotiations with the employers in an attempt to persuade them that the wage claim is justified.
If this fails, the union can turn to some form of industrial action.
For example, it may instruct its members to go-slow or work-to-rule or it may call for selective strikes (in which certain groups of workers stop working for a specified time period); or all the union members may be called out on a one-day strike .
As a last resort, if the union believes that its members are being unfairly treated, it may decide that an all-out strike for an indefinite period is necessary.
This is likely to be damaging to the workers (who lose pay) and the firms involved (who lose output, sales and profits).
The wage rise which is finally agreed upon (between 3 and 9 per cent) depends on the relative bargaining strengths of the two sides.
The process of negotiations between unions and employers is called collective bargaining .
To show the effects of this process, consider a labour market in which there is a powerful trade union which resists wage cuts and uses its bargaining strength in an attempt to raise its members' real wages.
This is shown in Fig. 2.7 where the equilibrium real wage is (W/P)1 and equilibrium employment is OL 1 .
Now suppose that the union is successful in raising the real wage from (WIP)1 to (WIP)2 and, at the same time, opposes any reduction in employment.
In other words, the real wage rises, but employment remains unchanged at OL 1 .
The new combination of employment and the real wage is represented by point D in Fig. 2.7: this is a disequilibrium which will persist because of the restricted competition in the market.
It should be pointed out that, because the employing firms are themselves not perfectly competitive but possess some monopoly power, the union's actions will not necessarily result in losses for the firms involved; however, it will of course reduce their profits and result in a redistribution of income from profit-earners to wage-earners.
Wage differentials
If all jobs and workers were homogeneous and there were perfect information and perfect mobility of labour, then it is reasonable to suppose that all wages would be equal.
If any single firm were to raise the wage rate it offered above the rates prevailing in all other firms, there would be an immediate increase in the supply of labour to this one firm which would drive the wage rate back down again.
Similarly, if any single firm were to reduce its wage rate below that prevailing elsewhere, there would be an immediate decrease in the supply of labour to that firm which would drive the wage rate upwards again.
We have seen, however, that in practice jobs and workers are heterogeneous , there is imperfect information and only limited mobility of labour.
It is for these reasons that wage rates differ from one job to the next.
Different jobs require different skills and physical abilities and workers vary in the levels of their innate abilities, acquired skills, training and physical characteristics.
The segmentation of labour markets referred to in section 2.1 means that many groups of workers can be viewed as ‘non-competing’ groups.
It is the demand and supply conditions in these segmented markets which help to determine the wage rates of different workers.
For example, an increase in the demand for the services of carpenters in Scotland will drive up the wages of  Scottish carpenters.
The supply of carpenters in Scotland will not immediately increase: it takes time to acquire carpentry skills and existing carpenters in other parts of the UK may be reluctant to move away from their own area, partly because of the cost of the move and partly because they do not wish to leave their families and friends.
Also, the lack of information may mean that many carpenters in the UK are unaware of the opportunities in Scotland.
There are a number of other factors which influence wage differentials:
l
Different jobs have different non-monetary advantages and disadvantages.
For example, compare the working conditions experienced by an office clerk with those experienced by a coal miner.
2
Some workers are supported by strong trade unions whilst others have only weak unions or are not unionised at all.
In addition, some workers are members of professional organisations which are able to restrict entry into the profession and so keep salaries high.
3
Some jobs require many years of training which restricts the supply of labour.
This, together with a given or increasing level of demand, keeps wage rates high.
Price determination
In microeconomic theory, the price charged by a firm for a particular good depends on the objectives of the firm and the market structure within which it operates.
Under conditions of perfect competition, as outlined in section 2.2, firms which must attempt to maximise profits in order to survive are too small to influence the market price which is determined by the interaction of-demand and supply in the market: such firms (sometimes called price-takers ) maximise their profits by producing output levels at which price equals marginal cost.
Firms which operate in imperfectly competitive markets (such as monopolies and oligopolies) usually do have some say in the prices that they charge.
To illustrate this, consider the case of a pure monopolist, the sole producer of a good for which there are no close substitutes.
As the firm reduces price, the quantity demanded for the firm's product is likely to rise.
This is shown in Table 2.2 where column 1 shows the price (decreasing from £8 per unit to zero), column 2 shows the quantity demanded over some time  period (increasing from 40,000 units to 200,000 units) and column 3 shows the monopolist's total revenue (that is, price x quantity) over the same time period.
Column 4 provides information about the firm's costs of production.
As output and sales rise, so does total cost and, in this example, total cost rises at a constant rate from £220,000 when 40,000 units are produced to £700,000 when 200,000 units are produced.
All the information shown in Table 2.2 is illustrated graphically in Fig. 2.8.
To show that the price charged by the monopolist depends on the firm's objective, consider the following possibilities:
1
Profit maximisation .
If the firm wishes to maximise profits, it should produce and sell 70,000 units at a price of £6.50.
(You should be able to confirm that this is the only price-quantity combination at which marginal revenue equals marginal cost, the condition for profit maximisation.)
The maximum profit level is £145,000.
2
Sales revenue maximisation .
If the monopolist were less interested in profits and more interested in maximising the firm's sales revenue, then it would produce 100,000 units at a price of £5.
This would maximise total revenue and result in a profit of £100,000.
3
 Satisficing  .
It is possible that the firm may not be interested in maximising profits or sales (or anything else for that matter), but may simply aim to achieve satisfactory or ‘target’ levels of profits and sales.
For example, the firm may wish to attain  profits of at least £140,000 and sales of at least £480,000.
A price of £6 and a quantity of 80,000 units would achieve both targets.
4
Breaking even .
If the firm is a public sector firm (or nationalised industry), it may be required to operate in the ‘public interest’ and so may attempt to produce as much as possible without making losses.
Such a firm would produce and sell  123,800 units at a price of £3.81 and would then just break even.
Clearly, different objectives lead to different prices.
The monopolist in our example is in the fortunate position of being able to set any price between £3.81 and £9.20 and still make some profit.
This is quite a wide range of profit-making prices.
Many firms will not be in this fortunate position and will have to be very careful in determining their prices if they are to avoid losses and possible bankruptcy.
This problem of setting the most appropriate price to achieve the firm's objective is compounded in practice because of imperfect information.
In practice, firms do not normally possess accurate information about the demand curves for their product.
Thus, they are unable to calculate the marginal revenue curve accurately or to draw the total revenue curve as we did in Fig. 2.8.
Similarly, accurate estimates of the marginal costs of production are often very difficult to obtain.
How then do firms determine their prices in practice?
How can they achieve maximum or target levels of profits or sales without precise information concerning their revenues and costs?
One possible answer to this question is that in practice firms may apply a rule-of-thumb pricing method and then use a trial-and-error technique over time to close in on the price and output combination which achieves the chosen objective.
For example, consider the monopolist discussed above and suppose that the firm's executives wish to maximise profits, but have only limited information about the true revenue and cost functions.
Suppose in fact that they can only estimate accurately the total and average cost of the output level the firm is currently producing.
The executives decide to start with an output of 100,000 units and they estimate correctly that the total cost of production will be £450,000, giving an average cost of £4.50.
As a rule-of-thumb pricing method, they decide to add a 10 per cent profit margin or ‘mark-up’ to average cost and so set a price of £4.95.
We know from Table 2.2 that the firm will be able to sell the entire 100,000 units at this price.
Total revenue will be £495,000; thus, with a total cost of £450,000, profit will be £45,000.
Over time, the executives will come to realise that there is an excess demand for their product: this will reveal itself in the form of orders which cannot be met.
An assessment of their monopoly power may also lead them to the conclusion that a substantial rise in their profit margin and consequent restriction of demand may increase their profit.
They may therefore reduce output to, say, 80,000 units at a total cost of £340,000, giving an average cost of  £4.25.
An increase in the profit margin to 30 per cent would give a price of £5.52.
Table 2.2 confirms that the entire 80,000 units can be sold at this price, so total revenue will be £442,000 and total profit will be £102,000, a considerable improvement on the first round.
Further adjustments of the output level and the profit margin as the firm becomes more acquainted with the market within which it operates, given sufficient time, may enable it to reach its objective.
It should be remembered, however, that in a dynamic market where demand and supply conditions are continually changing, it is extremely difficult for firms to find the price and output levels which achieve their objectives.
The pricing method used in the above example is a very common one in practice.
The addition of a profit margin to an estimate of average cost to determine price is called cost-plus pricing, mark-up pricing or full-cost pricing .
Price is then defined simply as:  If we denote the profit margin as K, we can write this expression as:  This pricing method is used in most cases where prices are determined by sellers rather than buyers; that is, in nearly all manufacturing industry where the seller sets the price and the buyer accepts it.
There are some markets (for example, the market for wool) where prices are determined by means of an auction and there are other markets where the price is fixed by a public marketing authority (for example , the Milk Marketing Board).
But these are exceptional cases.
In the final section of Chapter 6, we construct a simple model of inflation in which we assume that all prices are cost-plus prices.
As indicated above, this does not mean that firms are acting irrationally.
Indeed, for all firms there must exist output levels and profit margins which maximise their profits.
The profit-seeking firm faces the difficult task of searching for the appropriate profit-maximising output and profit margin.
Unemployment: its measurement and costs
In Chapter 1, we defined unemployment as the number of people who are willing and able to work but are unable to find jobs and we pointed out that the unemployment percentage (or rate of unemployment) is the number of people unemployed expressed as a percentage of the labour force.
In sections 3.1 and 3.2, we discuss the meaning of unemployment in greater detail and consider the problem of measuring unemployment.
This is not at all the simple task that it may at first seem: we shall see that considerable care must be taken in interpreting the official statistics on unemployment.
In section 3.3, we examine the structure of unemployment and present some recent statistics for the UK.
Finally, in section 3.4, we describe some of the major social and economic costs that a high level of unemployment may have on a nation.
The meaning and measurement of unemployment
In defining unemployment, it is important to recognise that it may be involuntary or voluntary .
Involuntary unemployment can be defined as all those persons who are not in paid employment, but are actually seeking jobs at the prevailing rate of real wages .
Such people may be keen to work, but unable to find jobs because none are available in their occupation or in their geographical area, so that re-training or re-housing would be necessary to increase the chances of employment.
It could also be that there is a general deficiency of demand for labour throughout the economy, in which case the involuntarily unemployed workers will face fierce competition for the jobs that do become available.
It is not surprising that involuntary unemployment may be long term.
Voluntary unemployment can be defined as consisting of all those persons who are not in paid employment and are receiving some form of social security benefit, but are not actually seeking jobs at the prevailing rate of real wages .
This includes those who are temporarily between jobs and drawing unemployment benefit to tide them over until the new job is taken up.
It also includes those who prefer to remain unemployed, believing that their incomes from social security benefits do not make it worthwhile to take up a job.
In the UK since October 1982, the number of people unemployed has been measured for official purposes as the number of ‘people claiming benefit (that is, unemployment benefit, supplementary benefits or national insurance credits) at Unemployment Benefit Offices on the day of the monthly count, who on that day were unemployed and able and willing to do any suitable work’.
These statistics are available in the form of computerised records.
The official definition of the Unemployment Percentage Rate in the UK can be stated as ‘the number of unemployed expressed as a percentage of the latest available mid-year estimate of all employees in employment plus the unemployed at the same date’.
Thus, the following formula is used to calculate the unemployment percentage (U):  The numbers unemployed and the unemployment percentage for the UK, 1965–85, are shown in Table 3.1.
As we mentioned in Chapter 1, the trend of unemployment over that twenty-one-year period was steadily and ominously upwards, with the period 1980–83 seeing the most rapid rise in unemployment ever experienced in the UK.
The calculation of unemployment statistics is somewhat different in Australia, the United States, Canada and Japan where sample surveys are taken to estimate the total number of people who are without jobs but have actually been searching for work during the sample period.
In Australia, for example, a series for the unemployment percentage is compiled from the results of a sample survey which covers about one-third of 1 per cent of the population.
In the survey, an unemployed person is defined as anyone aged fifteen and over who was not employed during the week before the interview and who had actually looked for full-time or part-time work.
Table 3.2 shows figures for the estimated unemployment percentages in 1984–85 for selected countries.
Among the countries listed, the UK is seen to have the highest percentage.
It should be emphasised that although these statistics are interesting for purposes of comparison, they should be treated with caution because of the differences in the methods of compilation.
The major source of statistics on employment and unemployment in the UK is the Employment Gazette , published monthly by the Department of Employment.
This gives a wealth of information, including a breakdown of employment and unemployment figures by industry, by region and area, by duration and age, and by occupation.
The monthly unemployment figures for the UK as a whole are quoted in three ways: not seasonally adjusted and including school-leavers; not seasonally adjusted and excluding school-leavers; seasonally adjusted and  excluding school-leavers.
The crude figure of the total number claiming benefit includes school-leavers and is not seasonally adjusted.
A case has to be made, therefore, for seasonally adjusting the monthly figures and for excluding school-leavers.
A case for seasonal adjustment exists where recognisable seasonal variations occur year after year with a fixed period and where the increases and decreases occur at about the same time and in about the same proportion each year.
Seasonal rhythms are generally much more regular than cyclical rhythms and so can be measured and forecasted more accurately.
The argument for seasonally adjusting monthly unemployment figures is that only then can the observer tell whether a given monthly increase in unemployment is the normal variation for that time of year or an unusual rise which policy-makers should be concerned about.
For example, unemployment figures generally rise in the winter months as industries such as construction and tourism reduce their demands for labour.
Any given rise in unemployment in the winter months, therefore, can only be shown to be significant if it can be demonstrated that the rise is over and above that which is normally expected at that time of year.
Seasonally adjusted figures provide this information at a glance.
Seasonal variations, of course, normally occur over the period of one year: annual unemployment figures, therefore, cannot be seasonally adjusted.
However, a case can be made out for cyclically adjusting such figures so that the long-term trend of  unemployment may be observed.
The exclusion of school-leavers from the unemployment figures is a more contentious issue.
The argument is that school-leavers are mainly only temporarily unemployed and in the first few months of work are likely to switch jobs as they search for the ones that suit them best.
This high turnover means that they come on to the unemployment register for short periods and so distort the figures.
The counter-argument is that seasonal adjustment will itself take care of much of the distortion (as it will eliminate the predictable seasonal rise in unemployment in July and August when school-leavers come on to the register).
It is also true that in the late 1970s and early 1980s unemployed school-leavers have become a longer-term and therefore more serious problem.
Table 3.3 shows the number of school-leavers unemployed in January (that is, six months after the peak of school-leaver unemployment in July) during the period 1974–85.
This number is seen to be much higher in the later 1970s and in the 1980s, supporting the view that more and more school-leavers were then finding it increasingly difficult to obtain jobs in the first six months after leaving school.
Interpreting the unemployment figures
There are reasons for believing that the official UK unemployment  figures, measured as the number of people claiming benefits, may understate the actual number of people unemployed.
This is because there are undoubtedly some people who are out of work and seeking jobs, but are not claiming any form of social security benefit: such people are not counted in the official statistics.
On the other hand, it is arguable that the official UK figures overstate the ‘true’ unemployment problem by including people who are not seriously unemployed.
In this section, we consider these two possibilities.
People register as unemployed in order to draw unemployment benefit, supplementary benefits or national insurance credits,and to receive information about what jobs are available; they can also receive help and advice on their job prospects.
Those who are not eligible to claim benefits, therefore, may or may not register — in either event, they will not now be counted as being officially unemployed.
This group of ‘uncounted unemployed’ is likely to consist largely of women and school-leavers who have not worked before and so are not eligible for unemployment benefit.
There is no reason to suppose, however, that unemployment among this group creates so few problems that we can ignore it.
It is true that the cost to the Exchequer is below average because no benefits are paid (though there is still a loss of potential taxation), but the unemployed may suffer from lack of income, boredom and depression in just the same way as the counted unemployed; furthermore, since they are capable and available for work, they represent a loss of potential output.
Estimates of the uncounted unemployed are provided up to 1981 by the annual General Household Survey .
The proportion of the unemployed identified by the survey who were not registered in the period 1978–81 is shown in Table 3.4.
In addition to those unemployed who are not claiming benefits, another form of ‘hidden’ unemployment exists among those people who are in paid employment, but whose services and skills are being underutilised.
This may be because they are not working full-time or are not doing jobs which make full use of their abilities.
The size of this type of unemployment is obviously extremely difficult to estimate, but it may be quite substantial, particularly in those industries with powerful trade unions where employers are reluctant to lay off workers for fears of initiating an industrial dispute.
Given the existence of the uncounted unemployed and the under-utilised labour force, we might reasonably conclude that the official statistics seriously underestimate actual unemployment.
However, it has to be recognised both in collecting unemployment data and in interpreting the figures that the unemployment pool is constantly turning over.
As some people join, others leave so that even though the total number of unemployed may have remained unchanged from one month to the next, the composition of that unemployment may have changed considerably.
This means that it is important in analysing unemployment to take account of the average duration of unemployment spells, as well as the total number unemployed.
Unemployment is clearly a more serious problem the greater is the number of unemployed and the longer is the average duration of unemployment spells .
Consideration of the duration of unemployment leads us to the possibility that a significant proportion of the unemployed could be short-term — perhaps less than four weeks in duration.
Should such short-term unemployment be counted in the official figures?
It still represents a cost to the Exchequer and a loss of potential output, but it can be argued that it is not particularly distressing to the people concerned and, for the economy as a whole, it may actually result in a more efficient use of labour: this is because high short-run unemployment may be a reflection of greater mobility of labour between jobs and areas and consequently may result in the labour force being more suitably and productively employed.
Some economists have argued that short-term unemployment should be excluded from the official figures in order that the statistics be made more useful to policy-makers.
The UK unemployment figures do exclude adult students (registered for vacation employment), the temporarily stopped and those seeking part-time work.
It can also be argued that other candidates for possible exclusion are those who are unfit for work for one reason or another.
In the General Household Survey of 1981, about  10 per cent of the registered unemployed declared that they were ‘economically inactive’, mostly for reasons associated with their age, health or because of family or domestic responsibilities.
This group would also include occupational pensioners who are people who have retired early, but are still eligible for benefits or national insurance credits.
There is a good case for excluding these economically inactive people since they cannot really be described as capable and available for full-time work.
It goes without saying that it would also be desirable to exclude from the unemployment figures those who are employed but are making fraudulent claims for unemployment benefit or supplementary benefits.
Since such fraudulent claimants are not actually unemployed, it is wrong that they should be counted as so.
Unfortunately, it is very difficult to estimate the number of fraudulent claims for obvious reasons).
Estimates suggest that the number is relatively small, probably no more than 3 per cent of the total unemployed.
One possible way of overcoming some of these disadvantages of the official UK unemployment figures would be to adopt a survey method of measuring unemployment, similar to the method used in Australia or the United States.
The survey method would have the advantage that no one who could reasonably be described as unemployed would be excluded and no one who was clearly employed would be included.
However, the results would suffer from ‘sampling error’.
So long as this error can be minimised, a strong case exists for adopting a survey method in the UK.
The structure of unemployment in the UK — some statistics
There are many different ways of categorising the pool of unemployed workers in a country.
An analysis of the age and sex structure of unemployment and its locational distribution is of value because it may throw some light on the reasons for the growth of unemployment and the policy measures which may be most effective.
It is also useful to analyse the average duration of unemployment because, as we noted above, long-term unemployment is a more serious problem than short-term.
Table 3.5 shows the numbers-of males and females unemployed for the years 1977–85.
It can be seen that female unemployment accounted for between 25 and 32 per cent of total recorded unemployment during the period, though it was growing at a somewhat  faster rate than male unemployment.
Notice that 16.1 per cent of the male labour force was recorded as unemployed in April 1985, but only 10 per cent of the female labour force was so recorded.
Table 3.6 shows the age distribution of unemployment in the  UK in April 1985.
A striking feature of these statistics is the high proportion of youth unemployment, due mostly to the decline in job opportunities for young people during the recession.
In the 1960s, the under-twenties accounted for only 5 or 6 per cent of total unemployment: in April 1985, the figure was 15.6 per cent and this was not untypical of the early 1980s.
It should also be noted here, however, that the average duration of unemployment tends to increase with the age of the unemployed.
Thus, although youth unemployment is high, it tends to be of shorter duration than that among the older age groups.
Table 3.7 shows the regional disparities of unemployment throughout the UK in April 1975 and 1985.
In 1985, Northern Ireland, the North, Wales, the North West and the West Midlands were the regions with the highest unemployment percentages (all 15 per cent or over).
The South East, which includes London, had the lowest with 9.6 per cent.
All the regions had very much higher unemployment percentages than in 1975.
Furthermore, the relative dispersion of the unemployment percentages (as measured by the coefficient of variation) was lower in 1985 than in 1975: this is evidence of a narrowing of the differentials between the regions, possibly a result of recent regional economic policy initiatives.
The duration of unemployment in the UK and unemployment flows
A series of statistics published in the Employment Gazette provides information about monthly flows into and out of the pool of unemployment and these enable more accurate calculations of the average duration of unemployment spells to be made.
The statistics summarised in Table 3.8 show that in the first four months of 1985, the number of people entering unemployment averaged 347,525 and the number leaving averaged 338,750 against a total unemployment figure of just over 3 m.
Table 3.9 shows the duration of uncompleted unemployment  spells in April 1985.
Notice that over 40 per cent of those people unemployed on the day of the count had been without work for over a year.
The costs of unemployment
Unemployment is harmful  because it imposes costs on society.
The costs of unemployment to a nation can be categorised under three headings: the social cost; the cost to the Exchequer; the economic cost.
We briefly consider-these in turn.
The social cost of unemployment
The social cost of involuntary unemployment is incalculable.
For an individual, the demoralising effect that it can have clearly depends upon whether the period of unemployment is short-term or long-term.
Short-term unemployment may have no serious effect on an individual; long-term unemployment can be devastating.
In 1979, a survey carried out by the Manpower Services Commission showed that 65 per cent of those people unemployed for more than one year were over thirty-five years of age.
Many of them believed that they were failing to find jobs because they were too old and a large number of the older respondents had become reconciled to the prospect of never working again.
A major problem, of course, is that as job-searchers become more and more pessimistic about their chances of finding work, so their motivation is reduced and their chances of succeeding in finding jobs become even more remote.
According to the survey, many of the longer-term unemployed become bored, idle, lose their friends and suffer from depression.
One respondent to the survey stated, ‘It's not just the money.
Work gives you something to do.
I'm just wasting away.’
There is also evidence of increased family tensions leading in some cases to violence, divorce and family break-ups.
Unemployment can also lead to homelessness as in some circumstances building societies may foreclose on a mortgage if the repayments are not kept up.
One can only speculate on the effect of long-term unemployment on vandalism, football hooliganism and the crime rate in general.
In countries without adequate welfare provisions for the poor, unemployment may be very much more severe in its effects.
It may lead to a considerable degree of social deprivation and a miserable existence for the families involved.
In extreme cases (for example, where unemployment means no income at all ), it can lead to starvation.
The cost to the Exchequer
The cost of both voluntary and involuntary unemployment to the Exchequer is more readily quantifiable than the social cost.
It consists of the following three components:(1) Benefits which have to be paid to the unemployed: these include unemployment benefit, supplementary benefit, housing benefit, government contributions to redundancy payments and payments to those men aged between sixty and sixty-five who no longer register as unemployed.
(2) The loss of tax revenues which would otherwise have been received: this consists mostly of lost income tax, but also includes lost indirect taxes because of the reduction in spending.
(3) The loss of national insurance contributions which would otherwise have been received.
In a recent study, Fraser and Sinfield estimated these components of the total cost to the Exchequer in the UK for the period 1984–85.
They estimated that the cost in terms of benefit paid amounted to £7.44 bn; the cost in terms of lost taxes amounted to £7.27 bn; and the cost in terms of lost national insurance contributions amounted to £5.20 bn.
This adds up to a total cost of just under £20 bn, or about £6,600 per unemployed person.
Perhaps of more significance was their estimate of the cost of the rise in unemployment from 1979 to 1985: they estimated that if the figure had remained at the 1979 level, the cost to the Exchequer in 1984–85 would only have been £7.5 bn.
The economic cost
So far as the economic cost is concerned, unemployment represents a waste of resources and means that the economy is producing a lower rate of output.
than it could do if there were full employment.
Figure 3.1 shows a time-series of actual gross domestic product in the UK measured at 1975 prices since 1960.
The trend line drawn through the peaks of the time-series can be regarded as providing a rough estimate of the economy's potential output during the period.
Potential output is that rate of gross domestic product which would result if all resources were fully employed.
The shaded area between the actual time-series and the trend line in Fig. 3.1 is called the output gap and is a reflection of the output of goods and services which has been lost as a result of the  unemployment.
It is clear from Fig. 3.1 that the output gap has been steadily increasing in size since 1960, apart from a period of full employment in 1973–74.
This means that society is increasingly experiencing a lower standard of living than would be possible without rising levels of unemployment.
The loss of potential output resulting-from involuntary unemployment is clearly a serious matter for an economy.
Resources which are willing and able to work in order to raise the rate of output and to boost living standards are failing to be employed.
T his is a true waste of resources.
It is not so clear, however, whether the loss of potential output through voluntary unemployment is so serious.
It may simply be that more people are taking advantage of higher social security benefits to spend more time searching for suitable jobs.
It may be argued that the longer people search for jobs, the more satisfied they will be with their eventual choices.
They may consequently be more content in their work and more productive.
Causes of unemployment
It is useful for the purposes of discussing the main causes of unemployment to identify a number of different types of unemployment.
This division is intended only to simplify the analysis and should not be taken to imply that the aggregate level of unemployment in a country can readily be divided into completely separate and distinguishable categories.
Indeed, empirical attempts to categorise unemployment in such a way have met with many difficulties.
It is convenient to discuss the causes of unemployment under three main headings: ‘natural’ unemployment, demand-deficient unemployment and excessive real wage unemployment.
Natural unemployment is considered in section 4.1: it is defined and then divided into four further categories (search unemployment, structural unemployment, seasonal unemployment and residual unemployment).
In section 4.2, demand-deficient unemployment is defined and explained in the context of a Keynesian model and its possible causes are discussed.
In section 4.3, excessive real wage unemployment is examined.
Finally, in section 4.4, a simple model is developed which draws on all three approaches.
It is this model which is used in Chapter 7 in the discussion of anti-unemployment and anti-inflation policies.
Natural unemployment
The level of natural unemployment can be defined as the number of persons who are unemployed even when the labour market is in an equilibrium state: that is, when the total demand for labour is equal to the supply of labour at the prevailing level of real wage rates.
In this situation, people may be unemployed because:
1
they are between jobs and are taking time to search for the most appropriate job with the highest wage (search unemployment);
2
the industry in which they have traditionally worked has experienced a structural decline (structural unemployment);
3
there has been a seasonal decline in the demand for their labour services (seasonal unemployment);
4
they are regarded as being ‘unemployable’ for one reason or another (residual unemployment).
Consider these four types in turn.
Search unemployment
This is the unemployment, sometimes called frictional unemployment, which occurs because workers are searching for the jobs which suit them best.
Some of these workers may have just entered the labour market from school, some may have been made redundant from their previous jobs, some may have been sacked for one reason or another and many will have quit their previous jobs in order to create time to search for more satisfactory ones.
All unemployed workers are, of course, searching for new jobs (apart, that is , from those ‘discouraged workers’ who regard themselves as having withdrawn from the labour market).
This does not mean, however, that all unemployment is of the ‘search’ type.
Search unemployment can be seen as part of the annual turnover of the job market — firms rid themselves of workers who have proved to be unproductive or unsatisfactory in some way, and workers quit jobs which have failed to meet their expectations or which were intended only as stop-gaps in the first place.
There are two main reasons why these unemployed workers do not find jobs immediately.
First, there is imperfect knowledge and the collection of information is time-consuming.
Second, most workers believe that the more time they spend searching for a job, the more likely it is that they will obtain one which meets their requirements, particularly in so far as the wage rate and working conditions are concerned.
Thus, the search for jobs is not a period of inactivity — it involves finding out what jobs are available, sending off application forms, going to interviews and perhaps attending courses, all of which make job-searching a very busy time.
The economic theory of job search has grown into an important aspect of labour economics in recent years.
This theory sees the unemployed person as continuing the job search (that is, remaining  unemployed) so long as wage offers are less than a certain ‘reservation wage’.
The reservation wage is the minimum wage the individual is prepared to accept.
It will depend to some extent on the net costs of searching — the lower the search costs, the higher the reservation wage is likely to be and, therefore, the longer the spell of unemployment.
This is illustrated in Fig. 4.1 where it is assumed that wage offers increase over time as the individual searches.
The initial reservation wage is RW 1 and the expected length of the unemployment spell is Ot 1 .
Higher net search costs (caused, for example, by a reduction in unemployment benefit) reduce the reservation wage to RW 2 and so reduce the expected duration of unemployment to Ot 2 .
Other things being equal, the higher the average for the length of time a person is unemployed, the greater will be the number unemployed at any moment in time.
It should be mentioned that many economists regard search unemployment as inevitable and, at least in one sense, desirable.
They see it as an indication that workers are moving out of jobs where they are no longer very efficient to areas where they are more productive.
This improved allocation of resources should raise real output in the economy as a whole.
Structural unemployment
This is a very much more serious type of natural unemployment and is caused by changes in the structure of demand for goods and services in an economy and by technological changes, both of  which affect the composition of the demand for labour.
To illustrate more clearly what is meant by structural unemployment, consider a region within a country which has traditionally specialised in ship-building.
Suppose, as has in fact happened, that the world demand for ships decreases and shifts to more efficient producers overseas.
Although the demand for other goods and services may increase at the same time, this does not immediately help the obsolete ship-builders.
As they become unemployed, they find that there are few jobs available in their local area and no jobs at all which require their specialised skills.
They face the prospect of having to accept unskilled jobs at lower wages or of retraining, in either event, they may have to move to another part of the country.
The fact that certain regions in the UK have come to depend on declining industries explains in part the regional disparities of unemployment which we referred to in Chapter 3.
Structural unemployment persists mostly because of the geographical and occupational immobility of labour.
The major causes of geographical immobility include social ties and a reluctance to move away from family and friends; indeed, the problems and costs of moving to a new location may be prohibitive for many people.
The major cause of occupational immobility is the fact that many skills are not easily transferable from one occupation to another.
The occupational mobility of labour can often be overcome by a period of retraining, but this takes time and may be costly for the unemployed worker.
Also, workers may be reluctant to retrain until they are convinced that their present skills are not sufficient to enable them to find work.
Lack of information is another reason for the persistence of structural unemployment, being itself one of the causes of geographical and occupational immobility.
Often the unemployed are not aware of the opportunities available in other parts of the country or in other occupations.
In recent years, a great deal of emphasis has been placed on technological progress as a cause of structural unemployment.
Advances in automation, the development of word-processors and the many other applications of information technology have all been blamed for rising unemployment.
It is true that these developments are likely to reduce the labour-capital ratios in a wide range of industries.
This implies that the number of jobs associated with any given level of output in the economy will be smaller than it would have been without the technological advances.
However, the increased productivity of labour may help many firms to cut costs, enabling them to reduce prices and to expand their levels of output, thereby increasing their demands for all factor inputs, including  labour.
The final effect on the overall level of unemployment is uncertain.
For this reason, it would not be appropriate to discourage technological progress on the grounds that it is likely to increase structural unemployment.
Indeed, discouraging technological progress within a particular country would make the country's goods less competitive in world markets and this may lead to an even greater increase in unemployment.
An extensive retraining scheme for those who enter the unemployment pool with the ‘wrong’ skills would be a more efficient way of reducing this type of natural unemployment.
Seasonal unemployment
At any given time of the year, there are always likely to be some workers who are temporarily laid off because of a seasonal fall in demand for their services.
In the winter months, for example, many building workers find themselves without work because of bad weather and many workers in the tourism industry are also laid off.
Similarly, in the summer months, workers associated with the winter sports industry and with the rush to produce and sell goods and services during the lead-up to Christmas find that their services are no longer required.
This type of unemployment can undoubtedly cause hardship to the workers involved; also, it represents a waste of resources and is a drain on the Exchequer.
It should, therefore, be some cause for concern.
On the other hand, seasonal employment is thought by many to be a convenient source of casual work which enables extra income to be earned without the ties of a more permanent job.
Residual unemployment
This is the label given to that group of unemployed workers who suffer from mental and/or physical disabilities which considerably limit the number of job opportunities available to them.
Demand-deficient unemployment
As its name implies, demand-deficient (DD) unemployment occurs when there is a general deficiency of the demand for labour in the economy such that it is impossible for all those who are seeking work to be employed.
It was emphasised in Chapter 2 that the  demand for labour is a derived demand — it is derived from the demand for goods and services.
Thus, when we say that unemployment is caused by a general deficiency of the demand for labour , this is equivalent to saying that unemployment is caused by a general deficiency in the demand for goods and services.
The importance of DD unemployment was emphasised by Keynes in 1936.
It is because of this that DD unemployment is sometimes referred to as Keynesian unemployment.
To explain this type of unemployment more fully, we must make use of a model of the economy within which the level of DD unemployment is determined.
Thus, our main task in this section is to develop such a mode!.
This means that we have to specify a number of assumptions, and those we have chosen are intended to conform with the Keynesian view of how the economy works and at the same time to simplify the analysis in a way which enables us to see clearly how DD unemployment can arise.
Assumptions
1
The model is a short-run model in which there is no economic growth and in which producers respond to changes in the demand for their products by changing the quantities they produce rather than their prices.
Workers who face a reduction in demand for their services become unemployed rather than reduce their asking wages.
This means that prices and wages may be assumed to be fixed in the short-run.
2
Household spending on consumption (C) and household saving (S) are both directly related to household after-tax income.
3
Taxation (T) depends directly on national income (Y) because of the existence of income taxes.
Government expenditure (G) is under the control of the central authorities and so is regarded as an exogenous variable in the model.
4
Investment spending by firms (I) depends inversely on the rate of interest (r).
This is because a higher interest rate increases the cost of borrowing; at the same time, a higher interest rate reduces the ‘present value’ of the expected yields from investment projects.
Both impacts will make investment projects less profitable at higher interest rates.
5
The demand for imported goods (M), being a part of household consumption spending, also depends directly on household disposable income.
The demand for exports (X), however, is assumed to be an exogenous variable as it depends on incomes and demand conditions overseas.
6
The money supply (MS) is also exogenous — it is assumed to be under the control of the monetary authorities and does not respond to changes in r or Y.
7
Money is demanded both to finance day-to-day transactions and as an asset, perhaps being part of an individual's or firm's speculative activity.
Thus, the demand for money (MD) depends:(a) directly on national income (as a rise in national income will reflect a rise in the total value of transactions and so will increase the demand for money to finance these transactions); and (b) inversely on the rate of interest (as a rise in the rate of interest will make it more attractive to hold financial assets, and less attractive to hold money, whether as part of an individual's wealth holdings or as an outcome of a speculative activity).
8
It is possible to identify a ‘zero DD-unemployment’ rate of national income Y O .
; As its name implies, this is the rate of output at which there is no deficiency of demand and so at which unemployment is at its natural level.
If the equilibrium rate of output Y e should be less than Y O , then DD unemployment would exist.
What do we mean by the term ‘equilibrium rate of national income’ or ‘equilibrium rate of output’?
Our simple macroeconomy may be said to be in equilibrium when aggregate demand (i.e. the total demand for final goods and services in the economy) is equal to national income (i.e. the total value of all final goods and services produced): this is often referred to as equilibrium in the goods market .
A more general equilibrium also requires the total demand for money to be equal to the total supply of money : this is referred to as equilibrium in the money market .
Consider these two conditions for equilibrium in turn.
Condition 1
Equilibrium in the goods market requires that aggregate demand should equal national income.
Aggregate demand for the economy's goods and services is the sum of all the demands for home-produced goods, and can therefore be written as .
National income, when received by households, is either spent on home-produced or imported goods, or is saved or is taken in taxes: the national income can therefore be written as .
It follows that equilibrium in the goods market requires that:  
For a given rate of interest (which determines the level of 1), this equilibrium condition is illustrated in Fig. 4.2.
The line labelled  horizontal because none of the three variables of which it consists depends on national income.
The line labelled  has a positive slope because all three of the variables  depend directly on national income.
The rate of national income at which the two lines intersect, Y e , is the equilibrium rate of national income,for a given rate of interest .
Condition 2
Equilibrium in the money market requires that the demand for money should equal the supply of money.
We have assumed that the demand for money depends directly on national income and inversely on the rate of interest, and that the supply of money is exogenous.
Thus,for a given rate of national income , equilibrium in the money market can be illustrated graphically, as shown in Fig. 4.3.
The MD line has a negative slope because of the assumed inverse relationship between the demand for money and the rate of interest.
The MS line is horizontal because the money supply is assumed not to depend on the rate of interest.
The rate of interest, r e , which equates MD and MS in Fig. 4.3 is the equilibrium rate of interest,for a given rate of national income .
The set of diagrams (i-iii) shown in Fig. 4.4 illustrates an initial equilibrium position at which there is no DD unemployment.
Graph (i) shows the determination of the equilibrium rate of interest (r e ) in the money market for the given rate of national income Y O .
Graph (ii) shows how this rate of interest determines the level of investment which, together with the exogenous levels of government expenditure and exports, determines the position of  the  line in graph (iii).
The  line intersects the  line at Y o .
It was pointed out above that DD unemployment will arise when Y e is less than Y o , where Y o is the zero DD-unemployment rate of national income.
This is because it is to the equilibrium rate of national income (Y e ) that we can reasonably expect the macroeconomy to tend.
To investigate the causes of DD unemployment, therefore, we need to examine the possible causes of a decrease in the equilibrium rate of national income.
Consider the following possibilities.
Possibility 1 : A decrease in G or X or I .
If the government decides to cut its expenditure, or if there is a loss of export markets, or if domestic firms decide to invest less at all interest rates (perhaps because they are less confident about future economic prospects), then the  line will shift downwards.
The effect of this is illustrated in Fig. 4.5 where the new equilibrium rate of national income Y′ e is below Y o , indicating that DD unemployment will have been created.
Note that this is not the end of the story.
The fall in national income will lead to a fall in the demand for money which will shift the MD line to the left in Fig. 4.4(i) and so reduce the equilibrium rate of interest.
The fall in the rate of interest will raise the rate of investment spending and so cause the rate of national income to rise again.
Although this will of&et the first-round effects to some  extent, the net result is still likely to be a fall in the equilibrium rate of national income.
The level of DD unemployment will rise because firms experience a fall in demand for their products.
They recognise this by observing an involuntary accumulation of their stocks of unsold goods.
Given that prices are assumed to remain fixed, their reaction to the building up of stocks in the short-run will be to cut back on output and lay off workers, thereby creating DD unemployment.
Possibility 2 : An increase in S, T or M Other things being equal, any increase in the desire to save.by households, or in the amount of taxation taken by the government, or in the amount households spend on imports, will shift the  line upwards, as shown in Fig. 4.6.
Since this also has the effect of reducing the equilibrium rate of national income below Y o , increases in S, T or M may also be regarded as potential causes of DD unemployment.
Possibility 3 : A decrease in the supply of money If the monetary authorities should decide to reduce the nominal money supply, the effect of this will be to raise the equilibrium rate of interest.
This is shown in Fig. 4.7 where the money supply falls from MS to MS′ and the interest rate rises from r e to r′ e in graph (i).
This rise in the rate of interest leads to a fall in investment spending, as shown in graph (ii), which in turn causes the  line to shift downwards thereby reducing the equilibrium rate of national income in the same way as in Possibility 1 above.
The fall in the equilibrium rate of national income from Y o to Y′ e is shown in Pig.
4.7 (iii).
Possibility 4 : An increase in the demand for money .
With a given money supply, an increase in the demand for money will also raise the equilibrium rate of interest.
This will, therefore, have the same effect as described in Possibility 3.
The above analysis has demonstrated that, in the absence of price adjustments, DD unemployment can be caused by:
1
a decrease in spending;
2
an increase in saving, taxation or imports;
3
a decrease in the money supply;
4
an increase in the demand for money.
As we shall see in Chapter 7, the obvious policy solution is for the government to increase aggregate demand by increasing government expenditure or by reducing taxation, or to increase the money supply (which will also increase aggregate demand).
However, we shall see that such a policy may suffer from the disadvantage of being inflationary.
Excessive real wage (ERW) unemployment
In recent years, there has been some return to the classical view that the real wage is too high and that unemployment is ‘voluntary’ in the sense that it is caused by workers refusing to accept wage cuts.
This is illustrated in Fig. 4.8 where (W/P)1 is the prevailing real wage: it is clear that there is an excess supply of labour at this real wage.
This means that the total level of unemployment exceeds the natural level — i.e. the level of unemployment which would still have existed even if the real wage had been at the level (W/P)0 which cleared the labour market.
According to this approach, the solution to high unemployment is a cut in the real wage, achievable either by cutting the money wage or by allowing the price level to rise more rapidly than money wages.
There are two major objections to this argument.
1
It may be applicable to an individual firm, but not to the economy as a whole — if real wages were reduced throughout the economy, this would reduce aggregate demand and so may increase rather than reduce the actual level of unemployment.
However, neo-classical economists have stated the argument for the economy as a whole as follows.
If money wages are cut and real wages fall, employment and output will start to rise: this will create an excess supply of goods and services and so exert downward pressure on the price level.
The result will be  a general deflation of both money wages and prices which will leave real wages unchanged, but which will:(a) increase the real value of the country's money supply; and (b) raise the real value of people's money holdings (the so-called real balance effect ).
Neo-classical economists have stressed that it is the increase in the real money supply and the real balance effect which will lead to an expansion of aggregate demand and so eliminate ERW unemployment.
Keynesians have remained very sceptical of this mechanism, arguing that neither the increase in the real money supply nor the real balance effect will have a significant effect on aggregate demand- and so cannot be relied upon to reduce unemployment.
2
The real wage in itself does not fully reflect the true cost of labour to employers.
Also important are the National Insurance contributions paid by employers and any changes in labour productivity.
In spite of these objections, there may be some truth in the statement that UK labour costs have been too high in recent years and that this has made UK industries less competitive in world markets.
A reduction in the real cost of employing labour may make UK industries more competitive and this may help to reduce unemployment.
The unemployment — income curve
So far in this chapter, we have examined three explanations of unemployment: that it is caused by ‘natural’ factors, that it is caused by a general deficiency of aggregate demand and that it is caused by excessive labour costs.
In this section, we adopt the view that there is some truth in all of these approaches, but that no one of them can fully explain the causes of unemployment.
Our objective in this section, therefore is to develop a simple labour-market model which draws on aspects of all three approaches and which enables us to construct a link between the unemployment percentage and the rate of national income.
This model will be put to work in Chapter 7 where anti-inflation and anti-unemployment policies are discussed.
The demand for labour
In developing our simple model, we shall assume that the demand  for labour (D L ), which we shall define here as the number of jobs being offered by all firms in the economy, depends directly on the rate of national income (Y) and inversely on real labour costs (RLC).
By ‘real labour costs’ we mean not just the real wage, but the total cost of employing labour, including the employers' National Insurance contributions, deflated by an appropriate price index, and with an allowance being made for changes in labour productivity.
Using functional notation, we can write:  which states that the total number of jobs on offer is a function of, or depends on, the rate of national income and real labour costs.
For given real labour costs (RLC 1 ), a rise in the rate of national income will lead to a rise in the demand for labour.
This relationship is illustrated in Fig. 4.9 where D L is the demand for labour curve.
If real labour costs should increase, say to RLC 2 , the demand for labour curve would shift downwards, say to D′ L , as firms would substitute capital or labour in their production processes.
Similarly, a cut in real labour costs would cause the demand for labour curve to shift upwards.
The unemployment function
The next stage in developing our simple model is to identify the main determinant of the unemployment percentage (U).
We propose that in the short-run this depends inversely on the demand for labour, assuming that the labour force remains unchanged.
We can now write in functional form that:   
This relationship can best be explained with reference to Fig. 4.10: the shape and position of the curve are determined by the following factors:
1
When the demand for labour and the labour force (L) are equal, the only unemployment is natural unemployment.
Thus, the unemployment percentage is equal to the natural unemployment percentage (NUP) at the point where D L = L.
2
When the demand for labour is less than the labour force, there is a general deficiency of the demand for labour and unemployment rises above the NUP.
3
When the demand for labour is greater than the labour force, unemployment falls below the NUP.
4
As D L falls, the unemployment percentage increases.
Similarly, as D L increases, the unemployment percentage falls but is unlikely ever to reach zero.
Thus, the curve never quite reaches the horizontal axis.
Deriving the unemployment — income curve
The final stage is to develop a link between the unemployment percentage and the rate of national income.
This link is represented graphically by the unemployment-income curve which tells us the unemployment percentage that will be associated with any rate of national income, given real labour costs.
The curve is derived in the four-quadrant diagram shown in Fig. 4.11 where graph (i) shows the demand for labour function and graph (iii) shows the unemployment function; graph (ii) depicts a 45 ° line which enables us to switch the demand for labour axis from being vertical in  graph (i) to being horizontal in graph (iii).
Starting with a rate of national income equal to OY 0 , it is clear from graph (i) that the demand for labour is OL (actually just equal to the labour force).
With a demand for labour of OL, unemployment is OU N (the natural unemployment percentage) as shown in graph (iii).
Plotting OU N against OY 0 gives us one point on the unemployment-income curve (point A in graph (iv)).
To find a second point on the unemployment-income curve, let the rate of national income rise to OY 1 .
Now the demand for labour rises to OM, as shown in graph (i).
From graph (iii), it is clear that a demand for labour of OM (greater than the labour force) leads to an unemployment percentage of OU 1 .
Plotting OU 1 against OY 1 on graph (iv) gives us a second point on the unemployment-income  curve (point B).
Generating other points in a similar way yields the unemployment-income curve, labelled U′ in graph (iv).
As expected, the unemployment-income curve has a negative slope, indicating that a high rate of national income is associated with a low unemployment percentage and that a low rate of national income is associated with a high unemployment percentage.
It must be remembered, however, that the unemployment-income curve has been derived in Fig. 4.11 on the assumption that real labour costs remain unchanged.
A rise in real labour costs would shift the demand for labour curve downwards to D′ L in graph (i).
Now repeating the derivation of the unemployment-income curve, as described above, yields the curve U″ which lies vertically above the original curve.
It follows that, other things  being equal, an increase in real labour costs will shift the unemployment-income curve upwards; similarly, a decrease in real labour costs will shift it downwards.
Finally, consider the effect on the unemployment-income curve of an increase in the NUP.
This is shown in Fig. 4.12.
The demand for labour curve is not affected by the increase in the NUP, but the unemployment curve in graph (iii) shifts vertically upwards.
It follows that the unemployment-income curve will also shift vertically upwards, from U′ to U″ in Fig. 4.12, similarly, a decrease in NUP will shift the curve downwards.
We shall return to the unemployment-income curve in Chapter 7 where it will be used in our discussion of anti-unemployment and anti-inflation policies.
Inflation: its measurement and effects
In Chapter 1, we defined inflation as a persistent rise in the average level of prices and we pointed out that in the UK the rate of inflation is normally measured as the annual percentage increase in the Retail Price Index.
In section 5.1, we explain what is meant by a price index and show how the UK Retail Price Index is constructed and how it is used to calculate the rate of inflation on a month-to-month basis; other ways of measuring inflation are also briefly discussed.
Section 5.2 is concerned with the effects of inflation.
First, the costs of inflation to a society are discussed in detail; these include adjustment costs, balance of payments problems, redistribution effects and reduced economic efficiency.
Secondly, some of the benefits which are claimed to result from a moderate inflation rate are considered.
Price indices and the measurement of inflation
A price index expresses the average price of a selection of goods in one period as a percentage of the average price of the same goods in some previous period (known as the ‘base’ period).
It is, therefore, a means of measuring the percentage change in the average level of prices from the base period to the current period.
For example, suppose that the time period involved is a year and that the base year is chosen to be 1980.
The index is set equal to 100 in 1980.
If the index is calculated to be 125 in 1985, say, this simply means that the average price of the goods included in the calculation has risen by 25 per cent during the period 1980–85.
In constructing a price index, there are two important initial steps.
The first step is to choose the appropriate collection (or  ‘basket’) of goods and services whose prices are to be included in the calculation.
Those actually selected depend on the type of price.
index to be constructed: for example, if a consumer price index is required, then a basket of all kinds of consumer goods and services would have to be selected; if a food price index is required, then a basket of all kinds of foodstuffs would be selected; and so on .
The second important step is to choose an appropriate base period.
This should preferably be a fairly recent period of relative stability: since the base period is acting as a point of reference, it would be inappropriate to choose a period in which the price level was affected by any abnormal events, such as a war or a long dock strike which created a serious shortage of imported goods.
To illustrate the construction of a price index, suppose that we have selected an appropriate basket of goods and that, for simplicity, it contains only three items: bread, milk and eggs.
Hypothetical prices and quantities purchased by the ‘average’ household for these items in 1984, 1985 and 1986 are shown in Table 5.1.
Suppose that 1984 is chosen as the base year so that the price index is set equal to 100 in that year.
We now wish to compute the price indices for 1985 and 1986.
Consider the following simple methods by which this computation can be performed.
The ‘simple aggregate’ method
The simplest method of calculating the price index for 1985 is to find the total of the unit prices charged in 1984 (by adding up the three prices for that year) and the total of the unit prices charged in  1985 and then to express the latter as a percentage of the former.
The formula being applied is then: Price index in 1985 =  This can be evaluated as: Price index in 1985 = For 1986, the price index would be calculated in a similar way: Price index in 1986 =  To construct a general formula, denote the current year's prices by P 1 and the base year's prices by P 0 .
We can then write: Simple aggregate price index = 
Although possessing the advantage of simplicity, this method suffers from a serious disadvantage .
It assumes that the average household's basket of goods consists of an equal number of units of each item.
In reality, of course, purchases of some items take up a relatively large proportion of household spending while purchases of other items take up only a very small proportion.
This means that to calculate a more useful index, we should ‘weight’ the unit prices of each item in such a way that the weights reflect the relative importance of each item in the average family's budget.
The quantity of each item purchased per time period constitutes an appropriate weight.
There are two possible ways of computing a weighted aggregate index: first, we can use base-period quantities as weights (the Laspeyres method); secondly, we can use current-period quantities as weights (the Paasche method).
The Laspeyres method
To calculate the Laspeyres price index for 1985, a number of steps must be followed:
1
Multiply each unit price in 1985 (P 1 985) by the corresponding quantity in the base year (Q l 984).
2
Add up these products to find .
3
Multiply each unit price in 1984 (P 1 984) by the corresponding quantity in 1984 (Q l 984).
4
Add up the resulting products to find .
5
Insert the results in the following formula:
Laspeyres price index in 1985 =  For 1986, the index would be calculated in a similar way: Laspeyres price index in 1986 =  Denoting the current year's prices by P 1 and the base year's prices and quantities by P 0 and Q 0 respectively, we can write the general formula as: Laspeyres price index = 
The main advantage of the Laspeyres index is that the quantity weights are kept constant period after period: this means that the costs of constructing the index are kept low since new weights do not have to be estimated every period.
However, the weights may soon become out-of-date: in particular, the Laspeyres index will tend to give too much weight to those goods whose relative prices have increased over time since increases in relative prices are usually associated with decreases in quantity demanded.
The Paasche method
To calculate the Paasche price index, the method described above for the Laspeyres index can be used except that current-year quantities must be used as weights.
The 1985 and 1986 indices can be computed as follows: Paasche price index in 1985 =  Paasche price index in 1986 =  The general formula can be written as: Paasche price index =  where Q 1 represents the quantities purchased in the current period.
The Paasche index is more expensive to compute than the Laspeyres index because the weights need to be re-estimated every period.
Also, the Paasche index tends to give too little weight to those goods whose relative prices have increased over time.
The UK Retail Price Index
The Retail Price Index is compiled and published monthly by the Department of Employment.
It measures the monthly changes in the average level of prices of 350 goods and services purchased by households in the UK.
In computing the index, two types of households are excluded: ‘pensioner’ households (for which a separate index is calculated) and very high income households (covering approximately the top 4 per cent of income earners) whose expenditure patterns are thought to differ significantly from the average.
The actual goods and services selected include a wide range of food items; alcoholic drinks; tobacco; housing costs (including mortgage interest payments); fuel and light; durable household  goods (such as furniture, television sets and hardware); clothing and  footwear ; transport and vehicles (including petrol and oil); a large selection of miscellaneous goods (including books, newspapers and stationery); services (which include postage and telephone charges, and all entertainments); and meals bought and consumed outside the home.
Note that the index-concentrates on retail prices.
It does not include such items of expenditure as income tax payments, life insurance premiums, doctors' and dentists' fees or trade union subscriptions: it cannot, therefore, be regarded as a ‘cost of living’ index.
Having decided upon the items to be included in the calculation, the next step is to obtain the monthly price quotations.
About 150,000 price quotations are collected for the 350 items on a specified Tuesday near the middle of every month.
Many of these are obtained by the staff of employment offices in over 200 locations around the country.
The prices obtained are those actually charged in the selected retail outlets and an attempt is made to ensure that the prices collected relate to goods and services of the same quality every month.
Before the 150,000 price quotations can be converted into an index, it is necessary to determine the weights to be used in the calculation.
The weights are determined from the results of the annual Family Expenditure Survey which covers about 7,000 households selected from all parts of the UK: each member of the household over sixteen years of age is asked to provide information on his or her spending behaviour over a period of a fortnight and also to describe any longer-term expenditures.
The weights used in the index calculation are revised every January on the basis of the most recently available results of the Family Expenditure Survey.
The weights used in 1975 and 1985 are shown in Table 5.2.
Notice that they are standardised so that they sum to 1,000.
It is interesting to compare the weights used in 1975 with those used in 1985: note, for example, that a smaller proportion of household expenditure went on food and tobacco in 1985 than in 1975, but a larger proportion went on housing and transport and vehicles.
We turn now to the method of bringing together all the collected information: that is, the estimated expenditure weights and the 150,000 price quotations for the 350 separate items of goods and services.
As an example, suppose that we wish to calculate the Retail Price Index for April 1985.
The first point to note is that since the weights are revised every January, the index for April 1985 is calculated first of all using January 1985 as the base period.
To do this, the following steps are involved.
1
The several price quotations which have been collected for each of the 350 items in the ‘basket’ must be averaged and then divided by the average price of that item in January 1985.
This yields a price relative for each of the 350 items.
Thus, for tea, say, the price relative is: 
2
Using the weights estimated from the Family Expenditure Survey, the 350 price relatives are collected into sections to produce ninety-one section indices.
Then weighted averages of the section indices are calculated to find eleven group indices and the all-items index.
Since, at this stage, the weights used.
are the ones estimated in January 1985, the method being employed is similar to that of the Laspeyres index described above.
3
The final stage is to link the movement of prices in 1985 to the movement of prices in previous years back to the base date which in 1985 was 15 January 1974.
The actual published index for April 1985 is obtained by multiplying the index for  April 1985 relative to January 1985 by the index for January 1985 relative to January 1974 and dividing by 100.
Thus, the published index for April 1985 is no longer a simple Laspeyres index because, since 1974, the weights have been revised every year.
The UK Retail Price Index can be described as a monthly weighted average of price relatives in which the weights are revised annually .
The all-items index is shown annually for the period since January 1975 in column l of Table 5.3.
Calculating the rate of inflation from the Retail Price Index
The rate of inflation can be calculated as the percentage annual increase in the Retail Price Index (RPI).
Thus, to calculate the rate of inflation from January 1984 to January 1985, the appropriate formula is as follows:   Computing the rate of inflation in this way for all the years since 1975 yields the figures shown in column 2 of Table 5.3.
Note that since the Retail Price Index is published monthly, it is possible to derive a monthly series for the rate of inflation.
Other measures of inflation
In this book, we use the percentage annual rate of change of the Retail Price Index as our measure of the inflation rate.
There are, however, several ways of measuring the general price level in the UK and this means that there are several ways of measuring the UK inflation rate.
Consider the following.
The annual percentage rise in the Tax and Price Index .
The UK Tax and Price Index was introduced in 1979 and aims to measure changes in real spending power which depend both on what is happening to retail prices and on what is happening to after-tax incomes.
The index can be seen as measuring the increase in gross taxable income required to compensate taxpayers for any increase in retail prices, taking into account any changes in direct taxation (including employees' National Insurance contributions) which have occurred at the same time.
It is doubtful whether this index provides an appropriate basis for measuring the rate of inflation.
For example, if retail prices should rise by 10 per cent in a single year, but at the same time after-tax incomes should also rise by 10 per cent as a result of cuts in direct taxation, then the Tax and Price Index method would record a zero rate of inflation.
This would be an inappropriate measure for most purposes as most of the effects of a 10 per cent inflation rate (discussed later in this chapter) would still apply.
The annual percentage rise in the Producer Price Index .
The Producer Price Index is published in two main parts: first, an index which measures the changes in the prices of the raw materials and fuel purchased by UK industries; and secondly, an index which measures the changes in the ‘factory gate’ prices of manufactured goods (the ‘home sales’index).
As might be expected, changes in the ‘materials and fuel’ index tend to come before (or ‘lead’) changes in the ‘home sales’index which, in turn, tend to lead changes in the Retail Price Index.
Thus, although it would in principle be possible to use the producer price indices for measuring the rate of inflation, it is more appropriate to regard them as indicators of the likely future trend of inflation.
The annual percentage rise in the implicit gross domestic product deflator .
Gross domestic product measures the value of all final goods and services produced during a particular period of time in the UK.
To construct the ‘implicit deflator’ of gross domestic product for a particular month, we need to obtain two gross domestic product figures for that month:
1
The gross domestic product which was actually observed in that month: this is called nominal gross domestic product (or sometimes money gross domestic product or gross domestic product at current prices ).
2
The gross domestic product which would have been observed in that month if the prices in the selected base period had prevailed: this is called real gross domestic product (or gross domestic product at constant prices ).
The implicit deflator of gross domestic product is defined as: 
The annual percentage increase in the implicit deflator of gross domestic product would measure the price changes for all the goods and services included in the measurement of gross domestic product.
This is a far wider range of goods and services than those covered in the Retail Price Index.
The main problem with an implicit deflator is that the quantities which are involved in the calculation are not kept fixed from one month to the next.
To calculate an implicit deflator, two value aggregates are compared; thus, the movement in the deflator from one month to the next reflects both price and quantity changes.
In spite of this, estimates of the rate of inflation using the implicit deflator of gross domestic product do not differ significantly from estimates using the Retail Price Index.
Effects of inflation
Inflation: a macroeconomic problem
Inflation is regarded as a serious macroeconomic problem and governments (and economists) around the world spend a great deal of their time, energy and resources in devising and applying policies to combat it.
Many countries have found that the application of certain anti-inflation policies has the effect of curbing the rate of economic growth and raising the level of unemployment.
Why is it that governments are so concerned about high inflation rates that they are prepared to put so much effort into its control and even tolerate a rise in unemployment?
One possible explanation for governments' concern about inflation is that they are fearful that a rising rate may get out of control and develop into a ‘runaway’ inflation or hyperinflation .
In a hyperinflation, the price level rises so rapidly that money very quickly becomes almost worthless and people with savings in monetary form find that their money holdings cease to have any real value.
To see how destructive such an inflation can be, one only has to look at the hyperinflation which occurred in Germany in 1922–23.
Large military spending took place during the war years of 1914–18, followed by the Allied countries' demands for huge reparations in the Treaty of Versailles.
These events, together with an apparent lack of understanding of the consequences of printing more and more money to cover such payments, led to an incredible rise in prices in the period from July 1922 to November 1923.
In that period of about sixteen months, the level of prices rose by approximately 7,500 m. times.
At the height of the inflation, prices were rising by the hour so that the price of a meal in a restaurant could rise by as much as 25 per cent in the time it took to eat it!
The price of an egg (about 10 pfennigs before the war) had risen to about 80 million marks by November 1923.
People found that their savings became completely worthless and that salaries, once received, declined in value so rapidly that workers became desperate to convert currency into goods as soon as they could.
As well as causing a breakdown in the economic system, the inflation led to a spread of corruption; it meant humiliation for many thousands of families, whilst a few successful speculators found themselves with untold wealth.
The inflation led to social destabilisation on a massive scale and so embittered the German people that it undoubtedly contributed to the fall of the Weimar Republic and the rise of Nazism in the 1930s.
One important feature of the German hyperinflation (and indeed all hyperinflations) was the massive increase in the quantity of money in circulation that accompanied the rapidly rising wages and prices.
It is generally believed today that hyperinflations can be avoided by the maintenance of a reasonable degree of control over the supply of money.
We shall return to this method of controlling inflation in Chapter 7 where the major anti-inflation and anti-unemployment policies are outlined.
It is obvious why governments wish to avoid the economic and social destruction of a hyperinflation.
But what about a moderate  rate of inflation?
Are there costs to society which result from an annual rise in the price level of, say, 10 per cent?
Most people agree that a 10 per cent inflation rate is too high, but many are unable to explain why such an annual rise in the price level may be harmful.
We now consider the ‘costs’ to a society of a moderate inflation rate.
Costs of adjusting to inflation
Even when the inflation rate is fully anticipated there will be costs of adjustment which will fall on both individuals and firms.
Suppose that the actual inflation rate is 10 per cent and that this has been expected by all economic agents, with the result that it has been fully accounted for in wage bargaining, in the activities of borrowing and lending and in the tax system.
In other words, money wages, interest rates and-tax payments have all been adjusted to allow for the 10 per cent rise in the average level of prices.
Even under these extreme circumstances, inflation imposes some costs on a society.
First, there are administrative costs incurred by individuals and firms as they attempt to adjust to the new set of prices.
Individuals have to search more intensively for the most favourably priced goods, and firms have to determine their new prices (not easy when production costs are continually changing) and then disseminate the information.
This will mean additional advertising costs as well as the extra costs involved in preparing new labels, brochures and price lists.
Secondly, there is the cost of economising ‘on money holdings .
Wealth-holders are faced with the need to keep as little of their savings as possible in the form of cash or current accounts in banks because money in these forms earns no interest and so loses value in a period of inflation.
For example, with 10 per cent inflation, a sum of £100 saved in cash at the start of a year is worth only £100/1.1 = £90.91 at the end of the year.
Individuals are thus faced with a cost in terms of the time and effort spent on ensuring that they keep in money form only the amount required to cover their day-to-day transactions.
This, in turn, may lead to a further Cost of inflation.
Having decided to hold as little of their wealth as possible in ‘money’ form, savers then have to decide how best to invest their savings.
They may choose to invest in financial assets (such as government bonds or building society deposits) or in real assets (such as property or antique furniture).
In the case of financial assets, savers can be certain of receiving a given interest return on specific dates in the  future.
In the case of real assets, the expected return may be less certain (i.e. riskier) but potentially greater as, for example, if property values are expected to soar ahead of the rate of inflation.
Deciding how best to invest personal savings is far more complex and time-consuming in a period of inflation than in a period of stable prices.
Balance of payments and exchange rate problems
If a country is experiencing a-higher rate of inflation than its major trading partners, then either its balance of payments or its exchange rate or both will be affected.
This is a particularly important consideration for the UK where international trade is a major component of the economy.
Given a fixed exchange rate and a UK inflation rate higher than that in the rest of the world, UK exports will become less competitive in world markets while imports will become more attractive to UK buyers.
These changes in the international competitiveness of UK exports and imports are likely to lead to the development of a UK balance of payments deficit .
If the exchange rate is kept fixed, the deficit will be financed by a loss of the foreign exchange reserves held by the Bank of England or by overseas borrowing.
If the deficit persists, this loss of reserves and/or additional borrowing becomes undesirable as reserves are finite and foreign exchange borrowing opportunities are not unlimited.
Governments which maintain fixed exchange rates often find that they are compelled to use expenditure-reducing fiscal and monetary policies in the attempt to control inflation and to reduce spending on imported goods and services.
Such policies may hinder attempts to achieve economic growth and may increase the level of unemployment.
It is for this reason that many countries, including the UK, have adopted more flexible exchange rates.
With flexible exchange rates, any tendency towards a deficit on the UK balance of payments (which would imply an excess supply of pounds on the foreign exchange market) will cause sterling to depreciate in value against other currencies.
This depreciation should tend to offset the effects of the domestic inflation.
it makes exports cheaper to foreign buyers and imports more expensive to domestic buyers.
There are, however, some disadvantages of allowing the exchange rate to depreciate to offset domestic inflation.
1
Individual traders can no longer be certain of the value of the exchange rate in the near future: this means that they face the risk that it will change in the time.between entering into a  contract and the settling of the final account, involving one of the parties to the trade in a loss.
Although it is possible to ‘hedge’ against this risk by operating on the ‘forward’market, this involves traders in additional costs which would not exist if exchange rates were fixed.
It is possible, therefore, that some importers and exporters will be discouraged from trading.
2
Flexible exchange rates may encourage destabilising speculation.
To show this, suppose that the UK has a relatively high rate of inflation and that, as a result, the pound is depreciating: speculators who expect the pound to continue depreciating will sell pounds and buy stronger currencies so as to make a capital gain later.
This activity will tend to put greater downward pressure on sterling and may cause a depreciation to occur which is greater than is necessary to offset the inflation.
Under certain circumstances, these fluctuations in the rate of exchange could become very unstable and contribute further to the discouraging of international trade.
It is clear that countries with fixed exchange rates and those with flexible exchange rates face difficulties when they experience inflation rates higher than those of their major trading partners.
Redistribution effects
The problems discussed above arise even when inflation is fully anticipated by all economic agents.
Of course, it is normally quite impossible for all economic agents to anticipate fully the annual rise in the general price level.
Instead, some individuals or groups in society will fail to forecast inflation correctly and so may, for example, seek money wage increases which are lower than necessary to maintain their real wages; other individuals or groups may not have the power to gain full compensation for inflation even if they do predict it correctly.
Where inflation is not fully anticipated, there will clearly be a number of redistribution effects.
1
There will be an arbitrary redistribution of income .
Gainers will be those groups whose incomes rise more rapidly than the general price level: examples include those workers who are represented by strong trade unions or who are employed by benevolent employers.
Losers will be those groups whose incomes rise less rapidly than the general price level: examples include workers who are not represented by unions or who are only weakly unionised but face strong employer resistance to wage claims.
Note that this redistribution of income is entirely arbitrary and therefore potentially inequitable.
2
There will be an arbitrary redistribution of wealth .
People whose wealth consists of assets with a fixed money value (such as building society deposits and government securities of various kinds) will be losers, while debtors (borrowers) gain from the decline in the real value of their debts.
People whose wealth consists mainly of real property, on the other hand, are likely to find that the value of their wealth rises at least as rapidly as the general price level.
Once again, the redistribution is completely arbitrary and hence potentially unjust.
Economic inefficiency
We mentioned above that inflation creates additional administrative costs to households and firms, both in the search for the most favourably priced goods and in the time and effort involved in determining and disseminating new prices.
It is equally true that firms and households are less likely to operate efficiently in a period of inflation, for a number of reasons.
1
Firms are less likely to set profit-maximising prices for their products when faced with rising raw material prices and labour costs as it is more difficult for them to estimate their expected revenues and costs.
2
Firms are less likely to make the right choice between alternative investment projects because inflation adds considerably to the uncertainty of expected future yields.
Indeed, if inflation should rise to rates which have not been experienced in the recent past, firms may lose confidence and decide to cut back on all their investment plans.
A general fall in aggregate investment may lead to a rise in unemployment and so contribute to the phenomenon of ‘stagflation’.
3
Households will face difficulties in a period of inflation in allocating their incomes among goods and services in a way which maximises their utility.
To achieve their objective, they have to rely on the efficient working of the price mechanism such that prices give them the appropriate ‘signals’.
These ‘signals’ occur via changes in relative prices.
With no inflation, all price changes are relative price changes.
But with inflation, it becomes impossible for consumers to distinguish between a price rise that is a true relative price rise and one-that is just part of the general upward movement in prices.
Thus, the price mechanism is unlikely to operate as efficiently as a signal to households under inflationary conditions as under conditions of stable prices.
Institutional adjustment costs
Many of society's institutional arrangements are based on the assumption of stable prices, and institutional arrangements are often very slow to change.
The tax system, the accounting system and the legal system, for example, are all likely to be affected by inflation.
So far as the tax system is concerned, some groups in society will suffer if tax rates are not fully adjusted for inflation.
For example, if progressive income tax rates (or thresholds) are not adjusted, more and more people will be pushed into higher tax bands because of rises in their money incomes even though their real incomes remain unchanged.
Thus, the Chancellor of the Exchequer has to make a special effort in every budget to ensure that tax rates (or thresholds) are adjusted in line with inflation — unless, of course, he particularly wishes to increase the tax burden of these groups as part of his economic strategy.
So far as the accounting system is concerned, the traditional accountants' concept of profit is no longer true profit when inflation is present.
Firms then have to adopt ‘inflation  accounting ’ techniques in which all costs, revenues, profits and losses are fully adjusted for inflation.
Finally, in the legal system , the fines and penalties imposed, and the compensation payments awarded by courts, soon get out of date in a period of inflation.
Legislation is usually required to adjust these.
We can sum up by saying that inflation distorts many of society's institutional arrangements and these distortions lead to adjustment costs in addition to those discussed above.
Are there any benefits of inflation?
There are two possible benefits which may result from a moderate rate of inflation or from learning to live with the prevailing rate of inflation rather than adopting policies to reduce it.
1
Since wages and prices tend to be ‘sticky’ in the downward direction, the only way that the price mechanism can work and give the appropriate signals is for the prices of different goods and services to rise at different rates.
Thus, where there is a shift in demand towards good X and away from good Y, when prices are ‘sticky’ downwards, the price of X can only rise relative to Y if the money price of X rises more rapidly than the money price of Y. If economic agents are reluctant to reduce  prices, then the price system will fail to operate unless there is at least a moderate rate of inflation.
2
In Chapter 6, we shall discuss the possibility of a trade-off between the rate of inflation and the unemployment percentage.
If such a trade-off exists, one benefit of tolerating a higher rate of inflation will be a lower level of unemployment.
As we shall see, there has been much debate about whether unemployment can be reduced permanently by following policies which increase aggregate demand and in so doing raise the rate of inflation.
Causes of inflation
There are two major sets of theories in modern economics which attempt to explain the causes of inflation: the monetarist approach and the cost-push approach.
In sections 6.2 and 6.3, these two approaches are considered.in turn.
In section 6.4, we develop a simple model which draws on aspects of both sets of theories and which enables us to develop a link between the inflation rate and the unemployment percentage (the inflation-unemployment curve ).
It is this model which is used in Chapter 7 to discuss anti-inflation and anti-unemployment policies.
We shall see that an important feature of both the monetarist approach and our simple model is the so-called augmented Phillips curve.
This is an extension of the original Phillips curve, a statistical relationship between the unemployment percentage and the rate of money wage inflation examined by the New Zealand economist, A. W. Phillips in 1958.
It is appropriate, therefore, that we should begin this chapter with an explanation of the original Phillips curve.
The original Phillips curve
Phillips analysed the relationship between the annual rate of change of money wage rates (or the rate of wage inflation) and the annual average unemployment percentage, using data for the UK from 1861 to 1957.
It was a major statistical study and Phillips concluded that there was an inverse and non-linear relationship between the two variables, as illustrated in Fig. 6.1.
The main theoretical arguments underlying the original Phillips curve can be described as follows.
1
When the demand for labour and supply of labour are equal (so that unemployment is at its ‘natural’ level), there will be no  pressure on wages to change: the rate of wage inflation will be zero.
2
When the supply of labour exceeds the demand for labour (so that unemployment is above its ‘natural’ level), there will be pressure on wages to fall: the rate of wage inflation will be negative.
3
When the demand for labour exceeds the supply of labour (so that unemployment is below its ‘natural’ level), there will be pressure on wages to rise: the rate of wage inflation will be positive.
4
The greater the excess supply of labour (the higher is unemployment), the greater will be the downward pressure on wages, though this is likely to be tempered by institutional resistance to wage cuts.
5
The greater the excess demand for labour (the lower is unemployment), the greater will be the rate of wage inflation.
These arguments yield the curve in Fig. 6.1, sloping downwards from left to right, becoming less and less steep and cutting the horizontal axis at the natural unemployment percentage.
During the 1960s, the Phillips curve was interpreted by many as providing governments with a policy choice between unemployment and inflation (given a close link between wage inflation and price inflation).
Assuming that the Phillips curve is stable over time (that is, it does not shift its position from one time period to  another), we-could say that a lower unemployment percentage could be achieved at the cost of a higher rate of inflation.
Similarly, a lower inflation rate could be achieved at the cost of an increase in the unemployment percentage.
As can be seen from Fig. 6.1, according to Phillips's estimates, wage inflation would be zero if the unemployment percentage reached 5.5 per cent.
In other words, the relationship suggests that there is a trade-off between unemployment and inflation and that the main task facing policy-makers is to choose their preferred combination of the outcomes for two problems and to seek policies which might have the effect of shifting the curve towards the origin.
Further studies in the 1960s tended to confirm Phillips's findings, though there was also some evidence that the Phillips curve was not completely stable but tended to shift its position from one time period to another.
The breakdown of the original Phillips curve
One of the major critics of the original Phillips curve was Milton Friedman, who pointed out that the main determinant of the demand for and the supply of labour is the expected real wage, and not the money wage (see Ch. 2).
This being so, we can say that when the demand for and the supply of labour are equal (so that unemployment is at its ‘natural’ level), there will be no pressure on real wages to change.
But a constant real wage does not necessarily mean that the money wage is constant .
In fact, workers and employers will see real wages as being constant if money wage inflation and the expected rate of price inflation are equal.
This implies that the original Phillips curve is the appropriate curve only when the expected rate of price inflation is zero .
If the expected rate of inflation is greater than zero, then the appropriate Phillips curve will be shifted upwards by that amount.
This is illustrated in Fig. 6.2 where PC1 is the Phillips curve when the expected rate of inflation is zero and PC2 is the Phillips curve when the expected rate of inflation is 5 per cent.
The argument that the position of the Phillips curve depends on inflationary expectations may provide at least part of the explanation for the empirical breakdown of the original Phillips curve in the late 1960s.
That the original Phillips curve did break down in the late 1960s is clearly illustrated in Fig. 6.3 where the curve estimated by Phillips is shown together with the observed combination of the unemployment percentage and the rate of wage inflation  from 1966 to 1985.
The introduction of inflationary expectations into the Phillips relationship created what is known as the expectations-augmented Phillips curve and this plays an important role in the monetarist approach to inflation.
The monetarist theory of inflation
One of the principal tenets of monetarism is that inflation results whenever the rate of growth of a country's nominal money supply exceeds the rate of growth of real output .
In other words, money supply growth is the main cause of inflation.
Monetarist explanations of inflation are based on the following propositions.
1
Money is just one of a number of assets which people hold as wealth.
In addition to money, wealth can be held in the form of interest-bearing accounts in financial institutions, bonds (such as government securities and company debentures), equities (or company shares), real assets (such as antique furniture and property) and ‘human capital’(defined as including the mental and physical attributes that enable people to earn a living by selling their labour services).
2
The nominal demand for money is a stable function of a list of variables which might include the following:(a)Total wealth (W).
Since money is seen as one component of total wealth, we can expect the demand for money to be directly related to total wealth so long as money is regarded as a ‘normal good’ by wealth-holders. (b)Rates of return on financial assets (R).
Since the rates of return on bonds and equities represent the opportunity cost of holding money, we can expect an inverse relationship between the rates of return expected by wealth-holders and the demand for money.
(c)The price level (P).
Since the purchasing power of a given sum of money depends inversely on the price level, there will be a direct relationship between the price level and the nominal demand for money.
(d)The ratio of human wealth to non-human wealth (h).
It has been argued that human wealth is so illiquid that the greater is this h ratio, the greater will be the demand for money to compensate for the limited marketability of human wealth.
Now denoting the nominal demand for money by MD, we can write in functional form:  A simplified version of this function can be obtained by using real national income (Y) as an indicator of total wealth and by  assuming that h is constant and that the function is homogeneous of the first degree in P. We can then write the real demand for money as:  Monetarists generally believe the demand for money to be fairly unresponsive to interest rate changes (and this is supported by empirical evidence).
A fall in the interest rate on bonds, for example, will lead to an individual rearranging his wealth portfolio, but this will not necessarily involve a shift from bonds to money (as in the Keynesian case); it may involve a shift from bonds to some other financial asset or into property.
3
The supply of money is assumed to be under the control of the monetary authorities and is not influenced by changes in national income or in interest rates.
4
Changes in the money supply are neutral in the sense that they do not affect real output in the long-run.
This can be illustrated by considering a version of the original ‘quantity theory’ of money.
In this theory, the real demand for money is proportional to real output (and does not depend on interest rates at all).
Thus, we can write:  where k is a constant.
Or  In equilibrium, the nominal demand for money equals the nominal money supply so that:  (1) Now any increase in the nominal money supply will create an excess supply of money which will lead to an adjustment of portfolios as people attempt to spend their excess money holdings.
It is this extra spending (or increase in aggregate demand) which leads to a rise in the price level.
With k remaining constant, the equality between the supply of and the demand for money can only be restored if P or Y increase.
The monetarist view is that in the short-run there will be some increase in both P and Y, and that as Y rises, unemployment will fall.
In the long-run , however, unemployment and real output will return to their ‘natural’ levels, so that the full effect of the increase in the money supply will then be on the price level.
To examine proposition 4 in greater detail, we turn our attention to the expectations-augmented Phillips curve.
Expectations-augmented Phillips curve
In section 6.1, we referred to the empirical breakdown of the original Phillips curve in the late 1960s and we pointed out that one explanation for this involves bringing inflationary expectations into the argument.
To examine this in greater detail, we will describe the theory proposed by Milton Friedman in 1968.
Consider an economy in which there has been no inflation in the recent past (so that none is currently expected) and in which the unemployment percentage is at its natural level.
Since the expected rate of inflation is zero, the appropriate Phillips curve is the original one depicted by A in Fig. 6.4: the economy is at point D where NUP is the natural unemployment percentage.
Now suppose that the government of this country believes that curve A represents a permanent trade-off between unemployment and inflation and chooses therefore to reduce unemployment to U* by increasing the rate of growth of the nominal money supply.
This monetary expansion leads to an increase in aggregate demand (as explained above) and firms begin to increase their prices; they also raise their money wage rates in order to attract more labour.
Since unemployed workers are expecting zero price inflation, they perceive  the rise in money wages (4 per cent in Fig. 6.4) as a rise in real wages and some of them accept job offers which they might otherwise have refused.
In the short-run, then, unemployment falls to U* and output rises.
The government at first believes that its policy has been successful: unemployment has been reduced at the cost of 4 per cent inflation.
The economy has moved from point D to point E.
Friedman points out that in this economy, workers are suffering from money illusion : they believe that real wages are rising when in fact both money wages and prices are rising, leaving real wages unchanged.
In the long-run, this money illusion will disappear as workers come to realise that price inflation is depriving them of their perceived increase-in real income.
Inflationary expectations will be revised upwards, eventually to 4 per cent according to Friedman, and the appropriate Phillips curve will shift upwards to curve B. As it does so, unemployment rises back to the NUP and the economy moves to point F. At this point, the actual and expected rates of inflation are 4 per cent, and inflation will stay at this rate so long as the new money supply growth rate is maintained.
If the government remains determined to reduce unemployment to U*, it will have to increase the rate of growth of the money supply even further and so push the inflation rate to 8 per cent(at point G).
But this also will only be a short-run position as inflationary expectations will be revised upwards to 8 per cent in the long-run and the Phillips curve will shift upwards again, this time to curve C.
It follows that if a government should wish to keep unemployment below the NUP, it must keep on increasing the rate of growth of the money supply and will have to tolerate an ever-increasing rate of inflation.
Clearly, this would soon become intolerable.
It is argued by Friedman, therefore, that any trade-off between unemployment and inflation can only be temporary and that the long-run Phillips curve must be vertical at the NUP.
This.vertical Phillips curve (labelled LPC in Fig. 6.4) can be regarded as a warning to policy-makers that continued attempts to reduce unemployment below its natural level can only lead to higher and higher inflation rates and no long-run decrease in unemployment.
Now reconsider equation (1).
We used that equation to argue that an increase in the money supply must lead either to an increase in P or Y or both.
It follows from the above account of the expectations-augmented Phillips curve that in the short-run , both Y and P rise (and unemployment falls), but that in the long-run , unemployment returns to the NUP and Y falls back to that level associated with the NUP.
This means that in the long-run , the full effect of any monetary expansion will be on the price level.
Adaptive and rational expectations
The above description of the expectations-augmented Phillips curve allows for the existence of a short-run trade-off between unemployment and inflation, but not for a long-run trade-off.
The reason for this is that inflationary expectations are revised according to what has happened to inflation in the past.
So when the actual rate of inflation rises to 4 per cent in Fig. 6.4, people continue to expect zero inflation for a while and only in the long-run do they revise their expectations upwards towards 4 per cent.
This assumption concerning the formation of expectations is called the adaptive expectations hypothesis .
According to a simple version of the adaptive expectations hypothesis, the expected rate of inflation is revised each period by adding on some proportion (say,w ) of the observed error in the previous period, where w lies between zero and one.
For example, suppose that last year people expected a rate of inflation this year of 10 per cent ; if the actual rate turns out to be 16 per cent , the expectation will have been in error by 6 per cent .
According to the adaptive expectations hypothesis, this year's expectation will be equal to last year's expectation (10 per cent) plus some proportion (w ) of the error.
So if w = 0.5, this year's expected rate would be 13 per cent; if w = 1, this year's expected rate would be 16 per cent (in this case, the expectation is said to have been fully adjusted); if w = 0, the expectation would be 10 per cent (that is , it would not have been adjusted at all ).
The proportion w is sometimes referred to as the adjustment parameter .
One result of this method of expectation formation is that the expected rate of inflation always lags behind the actual rate; though if the actual rate should remain constant, the expected rate would eventually come to equal it.
It is this result which enables us to conclude that a short-run trade-off between unemployment and inflation exists, but that (so long as w is greater than zero) no long-run trade-off exists unless a continually rising rate of inflation is tolerated.
One problem with the adaptive expectations hypothesis is that it presumes that people do not learn from their past mistakes.
To show this, consider an individual for whom w is 0.5 and suppose that the individual's expected rate of inflation for this year was 8 per cent, but that the actual rate is 16 per cent .
This year's  expectation for next year will be 12 per cent.
Now suppose that the actual rate increases by 8 percentage points every year for the next three years as a result of annual increases in the nominal stock of money.
The actual and expected rates are shown in Table 6.1.
It is clear that the individual is not acting rationally in this example: the expectation error is increasing every year and the individual is failing to predict inflation even though it is rising by a constant amount every year and is caused by the same factor (monetary growth) every year.
It was this criticism of the adaptive expectations hypothesis that led to the development of the rational expectations hypothesis .
According to this hypothesis, individuals (and all other economic agents) take all the information available to them into consideration in forming their inflationary expectations, not just past inflation rates.
In other words, they take into account such information as what is happening to the money supply (assuming that they believe, money supply growth to be a cause of inflation) and what is happening to such factors as world oil prices, trade union militancy and the exchange rate (depending on which of these are perceived as major determinants of inflation).
Thus, they are viewed as having in mind an analytical model which they believe explains how the economy works.
In some macroeconometric models (for example, the Liverpool model of the UK economy), inflationary expectations are based on the models' own predictions of the future inflation rate.
With rational expectations formation there will be no systematic prediction errors and the inflation rate is likely to be predicted more accurately and more quickly.
This implies that a trade-off between unemployment and inflation may exist only in the very short term.
Indeed, some New Classical economists (who subscribe to the rational expectations hypothesis) claim that even the short-run Phillips curve may be vertical.
Critics of the monetarist approach to inflation
We have seen that monetarists hold the view that inflation is caused by excessive money supply growth and that attempts to reduce unemployment below the NUP will be futile in the long-run because the long-run Phillips curve is vertical.
Post-Keynesian critics of this view have tended to place more emphasis on increases in government spending, in domestic private spending or in export demand as the sources of excess demand inflation, and less emphasis on monetary growth.
Indeed, it has been argued that the government is the most likely source of excess demand inflation: through its policy measures, it can finance its own spending by raising taxes, by borrowing or by printing money.
Households and private firms can only increase their spending by using their savings or by borrowing — they are not in the position of being able to raise taxes or to print money for themselves.
Monetarists have attempted to counter this by arguing that any increase in spending by one group in the economy, with no accompanying increase in the money supply, will tend to raise interest rates and so ‘crowd out’ spending by some other groups.
Post-Keynesian critics of the monetarist approach also reject the idea of a vertical long-run Phillips curve, arguing instead that the long-run Phillips curve slopes downwards from left to right even though it is likely to be steeper than the short-run curve.
This is illustrated in Fig. 6.5, where LPC is the long-run Phillips curve and SPC1 and SPC2 are short-run Phillips curves.
The main reason why the long-run Phillips curve may have a negative slope is that workers may continue to suffer from money illusion in the long-run and so be prepared to accept money wage increases which fall short of the actual inflation rate.
Keynes himself pointed out in the General Theory that workers who would nor be prepared to accept money wage cuts may be prepared to accept real wage reductions caused by price inflation.
In section 6.4, we develop a simple model of inflation which incorporates elements of the expectations-augmented Phillips curve: in doing so, we accept the post-Keynesian view that the Phillips curve retains some negative slope in the long-run.
Other critics of the monetarist approach adopt a completely different view of inflation, arguing that rising costs are the main cause.
It is to these inflation theories that we now turn our attention.
Cost-push theories of inflation
Cost-push inflation is said to exist when rising production costs are passed on to consumers in the form of higher prices, regardless of the state of demand in the economy.
In cost-push theories, most attention has been directed to rising money wages as the main cause of inflation.
Increases in money wages are seen to result from the activities of strong trade unions who make use of their monopoly power in the control of the supply of labour to push for wage increases in excess of those required to compensate workers for rising prices and rising productivity.
There are many different versions of this approach to inflation.
The following three stress trade union militancy as a cause of rising prices.
1
leap-frogging approach .
In this approach, proposed by Kahn in 1976, each trade union is seen as being in competition with other trade unions for bigger and bigger wage increases in an attempt to achieve and maintain a higher position in the wages ‘league table’.
As one trade union succeeds in a wage claim and so moves up the ‘league table’, other unions immediately put in similar wage claims in an attempt to restore their relative positions.
Thus, unionised groups of workers are seen to be leap-frogging one over the other in the struggle to keep real wages rising.
Kahn believes further that the large number of trade unions in the UK is an important cause of  inflation.
He writes: ‘Our trade-union structure is quite extraordinarily intricate and irrational.
We have far too many trade unions.
One of the laws of the jungle is that the greater the number of groups in the competitive struggle, for each to secure bigger increases than the others, the faster will wages rise.’
It follows that any increase in the militancy of trade unions which intensifies the competition between them will also tend to raise the rate of inflation.
2
The wage leadership approach .
This is similar in some respects to the leap-frogging approach.
To illustrate it, suppose that all industries can be divided into two types: ‘leading’ industries, which are characterised by above-average productivity growth, and ‘following’industries, which are characterised by below-average productivity growth.
It is reasonable to suppose that the ‘leading’ industries will be willing to concede money wage increases to their workers equal to the rate of productivity growth: this will not in itself be inflationary as the average price level in these industries can be held constant.
However, when the trade unions in the ‘following’ industries observe the wage increases being gained in the ‘leading’industries, they will be likely to push for similar wage increases for their members.
This activity, in so far as it is successful,will be inflationary because, to maintain their profit margins, the ‘following’ industries will be forced to raise their prices.
Once again, the more militant the unions are in both types of industries, the greater will be the resulting rate of inflation.
3
The class struggle .
In this approach, trade unions are viewed as pushing for wage increases in an attempt to gain a bigger and fairer share of the national income for their members.
Thus, unions are seen to be engaging in a conflict with firms’ managements as part of the class struggle between workers and capitalists, with workers aiming to raise the share of wages in the national income and capitalists aiming to raise the share of profits.
Only if productivity increases is it possible in the long-run for both groups to be successful.
It follows that any increase in trade union militancy, which reflects an intensification of the class struggle, may lead to an increase in the rate of inflation.
In all three approaches, the major determinant of the rate of wage inflation is the degree of militancy exerted by trade unions.
A serious problem arises in attempting to test this hypothesis empirically: how can trade union militancy be measured?
In 1964, Hines  used the ‘rate of change of the labour force unionised’ as a proxy variable for union militancy.
Other studies have used ‘strike activity’(such as the number of stoppages due to industrial action) as an indicator of militancy.
Such studies have yielded mixed results.
Other cost factors
In addition to rising wage costs, other cost increases may be sources of inflationary pressure.
For example, rising import prices and the rising costs of the world's resources.
Consider these in turn.
1
Rising import prices .
For countries, like the UK, which rely heavily on imported raw materials and foodstuffs, a rise in the price of imports may have a considerable effect on the domestic inflation rate.
The rapid rise in the price of oil in the 1970s, for example, contributed to inflation in many countries around the world — oil price rises not only push up petrol prices, of course , but also affect the cost of all transport services and virtually all manufacturing and service industries.
Under certain circumstances, a currency depreciation can also have a serious effect on the domestic rate of inflation: it will raise the domestic prices of all imported goods and increase the demand for exports and import-substitutes.
2
Rising costs of the world's resources .
As the exhaustion of certain of the world's non-renewable resources approaches, it is inevitable that the real cost of producing such resources will increase.
But it is not only non-renewable resources (such as fossil fuels and minerals) whose supplies are being depleted: the depletion of the world's supplies of timber and fertile agricultural land will also raise costs and so affect the inflation rates in many countries.
There has been much debate about whether increases in costs can be inflationary without an accompanying increase in the money supply.
Monetarists argue that without monetary growth to finance the increased payments, higher production costs will lead to unemployment rather than inflation.
It may be for this reason that governments committed to full employment are likely to allow the money supply to rise when faced with excessive wage claims or with rising import prices in the economy.
In a situation where excessive wage claims and rising import prices, accompanied by an increase in monetary growth, have led to inflation, it is extremely difficult to determine which is the major cause of the inflation.
The inflation-unemployment curve
We have seen that there are two main competing groups of theories which attempt to explain the rate of inflation.
In this section, we adopt the view that there is some truth in all of these theories, but that no one of them can fully explain the causes of inflation.
Of course, some factors are more important than others: it is the job of empirical economists to investigate which are the most important factors and which policy measures are likely to be most successful in tackling the inflation problem.
The link between price inflation and wage inflation
In order to formulate our simple model, we must first consider in more detail the link between the rate of price inflation and the rate of money wage inflation.
To do this, we assume that all firms determine their prices by adding a profit margin to the cost of a unit of output.
As we saw in Chapter 2, such prices are sometimes referred to as ‘cost-plus’ prices.
Thus, for every item included in calculating the price index used to measure the inflation rate, we can write: Price = 
Average cost can, however, be divided into three main categories: average labour cost, the average cost of domestically produced material inputs (such as raw materials and fuel) and the average-cost of imported material inputs.
From our simplification that every price is a cost-plus price, it follows that the average cost of domestically produced material inputs to any single firm is determined by the average labour costs of other firms.
Thus, for the economy as a whole, average cost can be divided into two categories only:average labour cost and the average cost of imported material inputs .
Thus, we can write: Price =  (2) Now consider average labour cost : this is defined as total labour cost divided by output.
Thus, we have: Average labour cost =  Dividing the numerator and denominator by the number of people employed, we can write: Average labour cost = But the numerator now represents ‘average wage earnings’ and the denominator the ‘average productivity of labour’.
In other words: Average labour cost = (3) Substituting (3) into (2) gives the following expression for average price level: Price =
It follows that, other things being equal, the average price level will rise if there is an increase in average wage earnings, an increase in the average cost of imported material inputs, an increase in firms' profit margins or a decrease in the average productivity of labour.
In other words, the rate of price inflation (p) depends
1
directly on the rate of change of average wage earnings (or the rate of wage inflation, w );
2
inversely on the rate of change of average labour productivity (l);
3
directly on the rate of change of the average cost of imported material inputs (m); and
4
directly on the rate of change of firms’ profit margins (k).
This relationship can be written more concisely in functional form as follows:  (4)
The determinants of the rate of wage inflation
The next step in formulating our model is to examine the determinants of the rate of wage inflation.
To do this, we make use of the Phillips relationship according to which the rate of wage inflation depends inversely on the unemployment percentage.
However, the original Phillips curve described in section 6.1 is not  satisfactory for our purposes for two main reasons.
First, Phillips took little account of the degree of trade union militancy in deriving his relationship: according to the cost-push theories outlined in section 6.3, an increase in union militancy will raise the rate of wage inflation independently of the state of demand.
Secondly, Phillips took no account of the expected rate of inflation in his analysis, a variable which, as we have seen, is now believed to be an important influence on the inflation rate.
In this section, we take the view that the rate of wage inflation depends in part on the state of demand in the labour market (as reflected by the unemployment percentage ) and in part on the degree of trade union militancy and the expected rate of inflation .
That rate of: wage inflation which can be attributed solely to union militancy can be regarded as resulting from the power struggle between unions and employers for a bigger share of the national ‘cake’ and between the unions themselves for higher places in the wages ‘league table’.
This wage inflation can exist even when there is high unemployment and when there are no inflationary expectations.
The introduction of demand pressure (in the shape of lower unemployment) and positive inflationary expectations will add further to the rate of wage inflation.
The relationship we have in mind is illustrated in Fig. 6.6 and can be written in functional form as follows:  (5) where w is the rate of money wage inflation, p e is the expected rate of inflation and T is a measure of trade union militancy.
The curve shown in Fig. 6.6 is an augmented Phillips curve which lies vertically above the original Phillips curve (represented by the broken line) by a distance,z , which depends on the degree of trade union militancy and the expected rate of inflation.
Any increase in the degree of trade union militancy and/or the expected rate of inflation will shift the augmented Phillips curve upwards; any decrease in the degree of trade union militancy and/or the expected rate of inflation will shift the curve downwards.
Determinants of the rate of price inflation
Substituting the functional form (5) into the functional form (4) gives us the following relationship:  (6)
This relationship states that the rate of price inflation depends on six main factors:
1
The unemployment percentage (reflecting the state of demand in the economy).
2
The expected rate of inflation.
3
The degree of trade union militancy.
4
The percentage increase in labour productivity.
5
The percentage increase in the cost of imported material in-puts.
6
The percentage increase in firms' profit margins.
In Figure 6.6, we were able to represent the function  as an augmented Phillips curve.
The function  can also be represented as an augmented Phillips curve and we shall refer to this relationship as the inflation-unemployment curve .
For given values of p e , T, l, m and k, the curve is shown in Fig. 6.7.
This curve will also lie vertically above the original Phillips curve by a distance, h, which depends on the values of p e , T, 1, m and k.
The effects of changes in these five variables on the inflation-unemployment curve are summarised in Table 6.2.
In addition, note that the position of the inflation-unemployment curve depends on the natural unemployment percentage since, as shown in Fig. 6.8, the rate of inflation is equal to h at the NUP.
If the NUP should increase from NUP′ to NUP″, the inflation-unemployment curve would shift to the right from p′ to p″.
Similarly, a fall in the NUP would shift the inflation-unemployment curve to the left.
Finally, notice that the curves shown in Figs 6.7 and 6.8 are labelled short-run inflation-unemployment curves.
For the purposes of our policy discussion in Chapter 7, we shall assume that the long-run inflation-unemployment curve also has a negative slope, but is steeper than the short-run curve.
In other words, in our model we accept the view that the inflation-unemployment trade-off  is less favourable in the long-run than in the short-run, but we do not adopt the more extreme view that the trade-off disappears completely in the long-run.