

Chapter Two
When James Halden led Sarah away from the scene of her father's death she had never felt so ashamed.
She looked with horror at the fingers which had cruelly raked Bill Yardley's face, and heard her own voice uttering words not even fit to be heard in the alleys.
Her mother would never have forgiven her.
‘Always speak kindly, Sarah,’ her ma had said.
‘Remember the meek shall inherit the earth.’
Ma had known her Bible thoroughly and had been fond of quoting it.
When she had taught Sarah to read and write it had been her textbook, and it would have broken her heart if she'd heard such a tirade after all her patient teaching.
Sarah twisted away from the physician's grasp and darted back inside the foundry to where Bill Yardley still sat on the trough.
‘I'm right sorry,’ she cried, falling to her knees on the rough floor in front of him.
‘You were shocked like me and I said such awful things.’
The man touched her lovely dark head.
‘It's all right, Sarah girl.
I understand.
Reckon Paddy was lucky to 'ave a daughter like you.
He were proud of you, yer know.’
‘It wasn't your fault.
He was always fighting.
Ma told me he killed a man once and that's why they had to leave Ireland.
I'm so sorry for what I said.’
She began to weep, hiding her head on the black, oily trouser-legs until the young physician came and once more drew her away.
‘It wasn't fighting that killed your father, Sarah.
He had some kind of seizure.’
James Halden bent his leonine head to make himself heard above the hissing steam.
‘Now come away.
You need some air.’
There was authority in his voice and she felt a great surge of relief, as if he were plucking at her pain and releasing it.
Paddy Byrne had been a fighting man all his life.
He had fled to London in 1828 after the Catholic emancipation bill had been passed, forced to leave his beloved Ireland because his Catholic fervour had led him to kill a Protestant in an argument during the celebrations.
He had brought his wife with him, and settled her in the poverty of the Clerkenwell alleys where later Sarah, their only surviving child, was born.
Her ma had been a lovely well-bred, dark-haired colleen then, with eyes as green as the meadows in which she'd played before Paddy Byrne had won her heart.
Her family had tried to stop the marriage, but she would have followed him anywhere in the world.
In London her colour had gradually faded away until only unhealthy red spots stained her cheeks and the cough she developed got worse.
Sarah had nursed her mother until she died two years ago.
After that Paddy's temper became more fiery than ever.
‘If you'd just keep away from the dog fights, Pa,’ Sarah had begged.
‘You'd have me stop drinking, too, I've no doubt.
May as well ask a man to stop breathing.’
Then he had met Maggie.
He had taken her off the streets and given her a home because he was besotted with her; the home that Sarah's mother had kept clean and cheerful even when her health was failing.
The Lord knew what it was like now.
She shrivelled inside at the thought of having to tell Maggie about the accident.
She hated the woman.
Her father had only married her to give a name to the child she was expecting, and now he would never see it.
Scalding tears brimmed over, and James Halden checked them with the cushion of his thumb.
‘Who's going to tell me father's wife?’ she asked.
She could never bear to give her a name.
‘We'll leave it to the factory manager,’ James said.
‘You've had enough for one day.’
‘I must see that he 'as a decent burial.’
‘It'll be seen to.
Your father worked for a good man.’
She couldn't bear to think of Pa lying under the cold, hard earth, silenced for ever.
The glow from the furnace in the steam-filled room was like the flames of hell licking out to show her the place where her father had gone.
His covered body was taken out to a cooler resting place, and suddenly the foundry seemed to be going round and round.
Sarah pressed her palms to her temples to make it stop.
‘Pa, if only I'd made it up with you,’ she cried.
‘If only you'd never married that whore.’
A choked cry escaped her before she fell to the ground, her legs no longer able to support her.
The next thing she knew James Halden was carrying her out through the yard in strong, muscular arms.
Her tears had dampened his immaculate waistcoat.
It was the first time she had been so near a man with sweet breath and the scent of success about him.
His black velour coat was soft and rich, his stock made of silk, and the buckskin trousers fitted him to perfection.
The novelty took her breath away.
She wriggled with sudden embarrassment.
He was a stranger.
Her body became hot, and quite extraordinary feelings affected her limbs and stomach.
She was conscious of her own serviceable but dowdy clothes provided by Mrs Bradford, the black dress with the big kitchen apron covering it.
‘I've got to go back to work,’ she said.
‘Put me down.
I can walk.’
But he didn't put her down.
He continued to carry her out of the gate to his carriage, and lifted her up to the seat.
She gripped his hand to steady herself and felt the strong bones.
It was the first time she'd been in such a grand vehicle, and when she looked over the side she seemed so high up she was dizzy.
‘Sit still,’ he commanded, climbing up beside her and taking the reins.
‘I work in Newcastle Place.’
‘You're not going back there yet.’
‘But I 'ave to.
If Cook complains to Mrs Bradford I'll get the sack.’
‘They'll understand,’ James said.
He handed her a blanket as she had no shawl and made sure it covered her  head to keep out the cold.
When he tucked in strands of dark curly hair her skin tingled at his touch.
‘You're in no fit state to work straight away after the shock you've had.
I've a visit to make.
You can come with me.
It'll help to take your mind off what's happened.’
She'd never met such a man.
There was no arguing with him, and it was very pleasant to have someone caring, so she sat back in the seat without further protest.
They set off, passed under St John's Gate and turned right to join traffic heading northwards.
Travelling along at such a pace was an experience she would have enjoyed no end on a happier occasion, and even now she savoured the luxury of sweeping by those on foot as if she were royalty.
He drove out past the gardens of Bagnigge Wells House.
The derelict remains of the old building were as depressing as the weather and the bare trees dripped with melting frost like chilling tears.
He encouraged her to talk about Paddy, asking questions as if he was really interested, and by the time he pulled up she was beginning to feel much better.
Just spilling out memories of Pa right back to her childhood eased away some of the pain and she was able to relax a little.
‘Now,’ he said, turning to her.
‘I'm going to visit a lady whose mind is very troubled.
She came to St Bartholomew's Hospital to be operated on, but it's her mind that interests me.
I'm sure she'll get better quicker if something can be done about her mental state.’
‘Do you mean she's mad?’
‘No.
A lot of people are classed as mad and shut away without any need.
I don't want this lady to be one of them.’
‘You're real clever.’
‘I wish I was.’
He jumped down and tethered the horse.
‘Come with me.’
‘Not to see a mad woman.’
‘Sarah, you didn't listen to what I said.
Have faith in me.’
He looked at her with those sensual eyes and she knew how Ma must have felt when she first met Pa.
James Halden had a charm which was irresistible.
She let him help her down from the carriage and lead her inside a shop where there was a strong, pastoral smell of grain, and Sarah  wrinkled up her nose to sniff it.
The man who came to serve them was a dealer in songbirds.
‘Which one would you like?’
James asked her.
There were birds in cages all around, mostly linnets and canaries, and they warbled incessantly, their throat feathers ruffled.
‘I like 'em all,’ said Sarah, gazing at them with fascination.
‘Which one in particular?
I'm buying you one.’
‘You can't do that.
You don't know me.’
‘I want to know how you look when you smile.’
His masterful manner caused goose-flesh of a most agreeable kind to affect her limbs, and a small, sweet smile tipped the corners of her lovely mouth.
His own lips curved to match it.
‘That's better.
I knew we could salvage something out of today.
Now please choose a bird.
‘It's very kind of you, but I'd not be allowed one.’
She could imagine what would be said if she arrived with one at the house in Newcastle Place.
‘I can see you're a very obstinate woman,’ he said.
Minutes later the gift was paid for and placed in her arms, and James went upstairs to visit the man's sick wife.
The linnet she had chosen stopped trilling and sat on the bottom of the wicker cage, its little brown body huddled unhappily beneath the perch.
Sarah understood its dejection.
This generous man with guinea-gold hair had come into her life so unexpectedly, but she just knew that like a guinea he would slip through her fingers before she had a chance to know him better.
The likes of Dr James Halden wouldn't take more than a passing interest in a common domestic servant.
James Halden was hastening towards the Bagnigge Wells Road when he heard the cry that a man had fallen in the furnace at Smith's.
He turned his horse and drove under St John's Gate, anxious with the keenness of youth to see if there was anything he could do, but it was obvious from the start that the poor man was beyond all earthly help.
He was about to leave the foundry and continue his  journey when an apprentice came rushing in with the loveliest girl he had seen in a long while, and his heart seemed to stop.
She was tall and had a slender enough waist for him to have spanned it with his hands, and he was amazed at how strongly he wished he could be given the chance.
Then he learnt that she was the man's daughter, and frivolous thoughts were swept away on a tide of sympathy.
She wasn't wearing a shawl, and dark hair escaped from a maid's white mob cap which had slipped half off her head.
Her wet boots made footprints on the dusty floor and she still wore an apron over her black skirt, but she had a fine air about her.
The trappings of a domestic servant made her seem like a dove clothed in starling's feathers.
She faced the tragedy with courage, acting with dignity even though she was obviously in great distress.
James had just finished his years as a medical student and took his vocation very seriously.
He hoped eventually to concentrate on diseases of the mind so he was constantly  analysing people's actions.
He did it automatically when the girl attacked the man who'd been fighting with her father, recognizing it as a natural reaction to shock and grief.
And when she was overcome with remorse and apologized so sweetly a few minutes later his admiration for her was boundless.
Sarah was a girl with character as well as beauty and he couldn't wait to get to know her better.
He tried to give comfort but it was difficult to find words after such a bizarre accident, except to explain what had happened.
‘Your father had some kind of seizure,’ he said, sure enough of his diagnosis to be confident.
‘He might already have been dead when he fell on the fire, in which case he wouldn't have known anything about it.’
‘You're very kind to tell me,’ Sarah said.
He took her with him on his visit because he couldn't bear to let her disappear without finding out more about her.
The feel of her body close to his in the carriage made him want to hold her, and he was tempted to cover her attractive though work-worn hand with his.
Such  temptations were unfamiliar to him.
He'd been working too hard to spend time with women, and the courting of his wife had been very proper and unexciting.
Since marrying her he hadn't cast an eye on anyone else.
Until now.
Sarah affected him with such unexpected desire he couldn't understand himself.
He was certainly too surprised to  analyse his own emotions.
When they were driving along he encouraged her to talk about her father and from what she told him he knew it had been a struggle for her even to get a servant's position.
It was when she told him where she was working that he was taken aback.
‘I'm with the Bradfords in Newcastle Place,’ she said.
‘They're right kind to me and I like it there.
I was real lucky to get the job.’
He knew the Bradfords.
His wife was anxiously encouraging him to strengthen the acquaintance as they were influential people, but he was not yet sufficiently advanced in his profession to feel he ought to push for invitations.
He had to tread carefully.
So when he bought Sarah Byrne the songbird he didn't deliver her straight to the door of the Bradford house of employment just in case anyone should recognize him and pass comment on the fact that he had taken one of the servants out driving.
He apologized and helped her down at the end of the road.
‘Forgive me, I must get back to the hospital,’ he said.
‘I'm already late.
But I shall inquire the date and time of your father's funeral and if possible I'll be there.’
‘I don't know how to thank you,’ she said, giving him back the blanket.
She held the bird by the ring at the top of the cage and it had started to trill again.
‘I'll be very honoured if you can come, but I'll understand if you can't.’
Her eyes were as blue as the patch of bright sky which had suddenly emerged from between the clouds and when she looked at him he was sure there was invitation in their depths.
In spite of the iciness of the day he felt warm and exhilarated, and he was determined that nothing would prevent him from attending.
Maggie Byrne had bought herself a black silk dress from a secondhand clothes shop in Seven Dials to wear for Paddy's burial.
Her figure was ungainly in the late stages of pregnancy but she wrapped her red wool shawl well round and kept her hands clasped in front so that it was not so noticeable.
Her straw bonnet had a large brim which was usually turned back from her face, but today she didn't want people looking at her grief so she had tipped the brim down.
She was a brown-haired woman of twenty-eight, and not unlike Paddy's first wife.
Or so he had kept on telling her.
‘Maggie, you're as lovely as the mornin', so ye are.’
He would pat her cheek and touch her breast, his beguiling smile warming her.
But then the smile would fade, and the melancholy would settle on him.
‘You're like my Eileen.
My beautiful Eileen.
She had the looks of an angel when I first married her.’
Well, now he had gone to find her, but if his Eileen was really an angel she doubted they would meet, for Paddy had been no saint.
If he had been she wouldn't have fallen in love with him.
The manner of his death ensured that more than the usual number of people were at the funeral.
A hole had been dug for the coffin, next to the place where Eileen had been buried only two short years ago, and boards propped the soil up at the sides.
The smell was terrible, worse than anything Maggie had ever known, and on this frosty morning steam came up as if from a dung heap.
It seemed to bring a coppery taste to her mouth.
She looked across the open grave at Sarah, her stepdaughter, and it saddened her even more that the gulf between them had never been bridged.
At sixteen Sarah was quite beautiful, but she didn't make the most of herself.
Surely she was too thin by far for a man's taste, yet the one at her side today was a toff and no mistake, and it was obvious he cared about the girl by the way he kept looking at her with concern in his eyes.
Maggie was intrigued.
Sarah had a high opinion of herself, and  always stood with her shoulders back and her pretty nose pointed skyward as if she was better than everyone else.
Now here she was with a toff!
Her father would have had something to say about that.
But Maggie had a warm heart and she looked for the best in people.
She had always sensed the goodness in Sarah Byrne and for Paddy's sake wished they could be friends.
Clods of earth were thrown on to the stout elm coffin, and the mourners began to leave.
Maggie waited.
Men Paddy had worked with at Smith's trooped past; so did the neighbours who had stood here before when he had buried Eileen.
One or two offered sympathy and would have taken her along with them, but she stayed on with her head bowed until only Sarah and the fair-haired man were left.
When she looked up she met Sarah's tear-filled eyes.
She stretched out both hands, as a mother might, unable now to check her own tears, and the girl came round the grave.
‘Your father was a good man,’ Maggie said.
Her lips quivered.
‘He gave me pride in meself and made me feel wanted.
No one had ever done that before.
I don't know what I'll do without 'im.’
Sarah almost took her hands, then drew back.
‘You'll be able to go back on the streets,’ she said.
The young man frowned, wordlessly reproving her, but Sarah lifted her chin a little higher.
‘I'll have 'is child to bring up very soon.’
Maggie's voice was still quiet and dignified.
‘The streets'll never see me again, not the way you mean.
Will you come home with me?
There's a few things of yer father's you might like to keep.’
‘I'll take you both,’ said the toff, extending his hand.
‘I'm Dr Halden.
My carriage is at the gate.’
Maggie was never one to reject a friendly overture.
‘Pleased to meet you, I'm sure.
Yes, I could do with a ride.’
‘I'd rather go back to work,’ said Sarah.
But it seemed the doctor could persuade Sarah to do anything, for it didn't take much argument to convince her that it was wrong to be ungracious.
‘This lady can't go back home alone,’ he said.
‘I shall  drive her, and if you don't care to come, Sarah, I'm sure you won t mind walking.’
A bright colour relieved the paleness of Sarah's cheeks.
Shadows of indecision flitted across her face, and she looked down at her feet, but the bitterness was seeping away like the ugly water from the trench where her father's coffin lay.
‘All right, I'll come,’ she said.
She took a deep breath, then slipped her arm through Maggie's.
‘Let me help you.’
Paddy's daughter was tall like him, and she had the same air of self-assurance.
In Maggie's heart there had always been a prayer that they might be reconciled.
Well, perhaps a start had been made, even though it was too late for Paddy.
They walked together towards the street, her body heavy but her heart lighter than when she had come.
The alley was too narrow for Dr Halden's carriage.
He left it in Turnmill Street where it attracted the interest of a horde of children, and he gave a boy a coin to mind the horse.
Garbage was piled high in corners, and Maggie watched Sarah stepping carefully so as not to tread in the filth.
She wondered if she had been as particular when she'd lived here.
Most of the timbered houses had windows patched with rags, but the one Maggie entered was slightly cleaner.
Sarah hesitated, then drew in her breath and followed.
‘I'll wait outside,’ said the physician.
‘You'll want to talk privately.’
The floorboards groaned, the narrow stairs creaked.
Maggie went to the room Paddy had rented for nigh on sixteen years, the only room in the tall lodging house that didn't accommodate more than one family.
He had been proud of that.
She knew Sarah had been expecting the place to be unfit to live in and was pleased to see her eyes widen in surprise.
When she'd gone to work for the Bradfords Paddy had been left on his own and it had got worse than a pigsty then.
Now the floor was scrubbed, and instead of sacking round the bed there was a proper curtain slotted on string.
A pewter pot and clean cups and saucers were on the table, and there was a rag mat in front of Paddy's chair which he'd said he had carried on his back from Hungerford Market.
The chair bore the sagging  impression of his big body, and the girl touched it, misty-eyed again.
‘I loved 'im, yuh know,’ Maggie whispered.
‘I looked after 'im well.’
‘I s'pose it was better than 'im being lonely.’
The admission was grudging, but Maggie's spirits lifted a little more.
Sarah went round the room, picking up objects and putting them down again.
Each one must have held memories of her father, but she seemed to be looking for something special.
‘What's happened to 'is fiddle?’ she asked.
The battered instrument had been Paddy Byrne's most treasured possession and he had played it like a genius when his belly was full of beer.
Every Saturday night he had played in a tavern, and he'd been known to take it to protest meetings in Clerkenwell Green to stir up radical fervour with songs.
But Maggie had heard him draw notes out of it which rent the air with their sadness, and through his music she'd seen a side of him he'd kept hidden from the world.
‘I've wrapped it up,’ she said.
‘It's the only thing I want,’ said Sarah.
She found it behind the chair and picked it up, but Maggie tried to take it from her.
It was one of her most treasured memories of Paddy.
‘You can have anything but that.
I want to keep 'is fiddle.’
But Sarah wouldn't relinquish it.
‘Me ma gave it to 'im when they was married.
It should be mine now.’
‘No,’ cried Maggie.
In spite of her bulk she moved swiftly to grab the instrument, and she stepped back for fear it should be taken from her again.
The worm-eaten stairs were only a few paces from the open door but she didn't give them a thought.
A moment later she fell down them, unable to find the rope against the wall which might have saved her.
It was the fiddle which escaped undamaged.
‘She must be got to hospital,’ James Halden said.
He had been the first to reach Maggie, though her screams had brought people running from all the neighbouring tenements.
Sarah was crying as he lifted the heavy body into his arms.
‘Let me come with you.
Don't let her die.’
Maggie had no colour at all.
It looked as if she had no life in her either, but she moaned as James carried her and laid her gently on the seat of his carriage.
He was taking her to St Bartholomew's, the hospital where he was a junior physician.
‘There's no room for anyone else,’ he said.
‘Stay here and I'll come back when there's news.’
She watched him whip his horse and drive away at breakneck speed.
Then she went back inside and sat in her father's chair, shaking with shock and recriminations.
If Maggie died she would be entirely to blame.
Selfishness had made her want to have the fiddle, and she would never forgive herself for what had happened.
Mrs Bradford had given her the complete day off for her father's funeral and she didn't have to be back at the house in Newcastle Place until six o'clock.
She closed her eyes and tried to pray for Maggie, but didn't know where to start.
Only yesterday she hadn't cared a farthing for the woman.
Maggie wasn't so bad after all.
She wasn't a slut.
And she had made Paddy happy in the last few months of his life.
Amidst the noise of children shouting, women calling across the alley, and dogs barking, Sarah seemed to hear her father condemning her for the way she had behaved these last months, and her misery grew.
He needn't have got married.
He could have kept Maggie to warm his bed and no one would have thought the worse of him for it.
But Paddy had respected her.
‘She's a decent woman who's had no chance to better herself,’ he had said, on the day he invited Sarah to witness the simple ceremony before a registrar of marriages.
‘Oi can't give her much, but oi'll give her me name, so oi will.’
‘You're doing it for the child she's foisting on you.
You're a fool, Pa.’
‘Oh, the child's moin right enough.
She's lived here with me since you moved out.’
‘Well, if you put that woman in Ma's place I'll never forgive you.’
‘Maggie's nothing loike yer Ma.’
‘I don't know how you can even speak of her in the same breath.’
Sarah had refused to go to the wedding.
And that was the last time she had seen her father alive.
She couldn't bear to remember the dreadful things she had said that day, any more than she could think about what was happening to Maggie now.
And only hours after Paddy had been laid in his grave.
Nor did she dare to dwell on what James Halden must think of her.
She was ashamed of her false pride.
It had seemed so important to make a good impression, to show him that she had risen above the way of life in the alleys, but it was a selfish, uncaring side of her he had seen.
And after he'd been so kind, too.
When he'd left her at the entrance to Newcastle Place the day Pa died she'd ached with disappointment that she might never see him again.
She hadn't really expected to see him at the funeral, though she had looked forward to the possibility with unseemly excitement considering the solemnity of the occasion.
There'd been no call for him to attend.
Paddy Byrne meant nothing to him, yet he'd appeared at the graveside this morning.
Of course, it was because he'd felt sorry for her, but whatever his motive Sarah had been pleased and grateful.
Her feet and hands were so cold they didn't seem to belong to her, but that was nothing to the coldness inside.
She had never felt so wretched and she vowed that if Maggie recovered she would make it up to her somehow.
In fact the time to start was now.
She couldn't sit around doing nothing while she waited.
She looked around but could see nothing prepared for the arrival of a baby Maggie seemed to have had no nesting instincts at all.
There was nothing that could be used for a cradle so obviously she intended keeping it in bed with her, but Sarah had heard tales of babies being smothered like that and she was surprisingly anxious that her newly expected brother or sister wouldn't end up that way.
She went down to the next floor and called Rosa Kenny.
‘Rosa, have you got a box you don't want?’
The five Kenny children came crowding round like little goblins, dirty and ragged, but squealing happily.
‘Me old man's got one from the market to burn but you can 'ave it,’ said Rosa, who had already started with her sixth child.
‘If she comes 'ome Maggie'll need a bit of warmth.’
‘I want it to make a cradle.’
‘Waste of time.
There won't be no baby after a fall like that.’
Nevertheless Rosa produced a wooden box which was just the size, and Sarah went back up to the room that had been her home since childhood.
Her ma's sewing bag was still in the cupboard and when she brought out the cotton and needles there was a lump in her throat.
Ma had taught her to sew.
A hole in the mattress yielded enough stuffing to make a pillow, and Sarah lined the bottom of the box with it.
Next she took off one of her two petticoats which had tucks and embroidery round the hem, and this she cut to cover it and make a frill round the edge.
Concentrating on the stitching helped to ease her mind, and the hours passed.
James Halden returned just as she was finishing the last frill, and she jumped up as soon as she heard his steps on the stair.
‘James,’ she cried, forgetting that she had never used his name before.
‘Tell me everything.
How is she?
And the baby?’
‘Maggie Byrne will live,’ he said.
‘And so will her son, though he's no bigger than a rabbit.’
‘Thank God,’ she breathed.
Then: ‘What if you hadn't been here?’
She had known him less than a week, yet it seemed natural to turn to him.
He was so tall he had to incline his head to avoid hitting the beams, and his nearness made her tremble.
‘If neither of us had been here she would have gone her time.’
His tone was critical.
‘That poor woman showed great courage today.’
‘It sounds like you're blaming me.’
‘I didn't say that.’
‘You don't need to.
I ain't all that proud of meself one way and another, but there's no cause for you to tell me.’
‘Perhaps if you could learn a little tolerance.
All Maggie Byrne talked about was how she hoped you would accept her.
She needs you.’
Sarah drew herself up, full of indignation that he should presume to judge her.
‘I was trying, honest I was.
But it really ain't none of your business.’
Suddenly the stale air in that tenement room was charged with passionate emotion.
From being polite strangers they had become like sparring lovers speaking their minds with a familiarity which was extraordinary in its intensity.
Sarah was trembling with anger and roused to a state of excitement she didn't understand until without warning he stopped her in mid-sentence by kissing her soundly.
She was so surprised she froze to the spot.
‘What is it about you, Sarah?’ he demanded.
He gripped the tops of her arms, and his voice was hoarse.
‘From the moment I set eyes on you I haven't been able to think of anything else.
I couldn't wait to get back here to you.’
Her senses were in a whirl but she tried to hold on to her sanity.
He was going too fast for her.
‘For your information I've been making a cradle for Maggie's baby while you was gone,’ she said.
‘I ain't heartless like you seem to think.’
He looked round and saw the froth of white cotton in the corner, as pretty a cradle as any woman could want.
‘What an extraordinary girl you are.’
She had always kept herself aloof from men, hating their sly looks, their winks and coarse talk.
But James Halden was different.
His cultured voice and charming manners aroused feelings she had never experienced before.
She was becoming agonizingly aware of her body, and she was dismayed by a treacherous longing which made her ache so  strangely.
Never expecting to meet him again, she had indulged all the week in fond dreams of him, as if he were a character in a journal story, but the reality was infinitely more exhilarating.
The way he looked at her sent shivers down her spine.
She'd pictured giving herself to a man, but not until the right time and the right one came along.
Well if ever there was a right time it was now.
She liked this man more than anyone she'd ever met.
He was kissing her again, but with urgency now, the way his lips moved over hers calculated to set up a craving for more.
They trailed over her neck to create almost unbearable delight, and she clung to him.
He stripped off his coat and her fingers splayed across his back, savouring the warmth of his skin through his shirt.
Children appeared in the doorway, chanting and cheering, their dirty faces alight with smiles.
When he let go of her to shut the door her impatience for him to return was almost more than her body could stand.
He pulled the curtain away from the bed and drew her on to it while their mouths still met.
‘You're so beautiful, Sarah,’ he murmured.
James was a powerful lover.
He took her virginity with care, giving her so much ecstatic joy in the taking that she scarcely noticed pain.
Lying with him was like discovering a miracle.
The unleashing of passion brought undreamed of excitement.
The uninhibited joining of their bodies was more glorious than anything she had imagined, and the culminating spasm which rocked and arched her body made her cry out with exquisite agony.
In the aftermath she nestled in his arms, forgetful of the time.
She revelled in the warmth of his skin, and her fingers twined through the surprisingly dark hair on his chest and down over his flat stomach to his loins.
He had the most wonderful body.
‘We must find somewhere more comfortable to meet,’ James said.
He looked with distaste at the rotting timbers above them.
The mattress was as lumpy as a bag of onions.
He turned on his side and clasped her more tightly as a new wave of passion stirred him.
‘If only I had the means to set you up in a house where I could visit you.’
‘You mean you'd let me be a kept woman?’
‘I'd be very good to you.’
‘But you'd never marry me because I ain't good enough, is that it?’
He stroked her hair which massed in thick dark curls on the pillow.
He kissed the lobe of her ear, taking it between his teeth and teasing it with his tongue.
‘If only I'd met you a year ago.’
‘What difference would it have made?’
He was silent a moment.
Then: ‘I have a wife.
It was a marriage of convenience.
Had I met you sooner I doubt I would have entered into it, but Maud's father is influential and I hope to gain a better position at the hospital on his recommendation.’
Sarah struggled away from him with unreasonable disappointment and anger, all joy gone.
For all his fine talk he had used her like a whore.
‘I think you'd better leave, James Halden.
I ain't the sort to be taken for granted, and I sure as hell don't want to be someone's fancy woman.’
She was pulling on her petticoat, and he sprang to his feet and tried to stop her.
‘Sarah, come back to me.
Let's talk sensibly.’
‘There's nothing to talk about.
You took what you wanted and now I'm asking you to go.’
‘Don't say you weren't willing.’
‘No, I ain't saying that, but you've got a wife and that's the end of it.
If you've a hankering for something more you'll have to look elsewhere 'cause I ain't obliging.’
He got up and arranged his clothes.
‘What did you expect?
A wedding ring?
You've a mighty high opinion of yourself for a kitchen maid.’
‘I ought to 'ave known the likes of you wouldn't do all the things you've done for nothing.
Well I've learnt a lesson good and proper and I 'ope I never see you again.’
‘Don't worry,’ said James.
‘There are plenty more like you if I need amusement.’
He departed in such a hurry that a flurry of dust flew up in his wake.
Sarah shouted down the stairs after him.
‘I'm a respectable girl, and I shan't always be a kitchen maid.’
Rosa Kenny's children sniggered on the lower landing and jumped aside to let him pass.
Shouting was nothing new in Stone Alley.
When Sarah got back to the attic bedroom in Newcastle Place the first thing she did was open the window, letting in damp, wintry air.
Then she picked up the wicker bird cage and took it to the sill.
The linnet lifted its beak and uttered a few melancholy notes as she opened the cage door.
It hopped tentatively to the entrance, then spread its wings and flew away.
Her heart felt as empty as the cage in her hands.
Maggie's baby was a puny infant, but he thrived against all the odds and was baptized Patrick after his father.
Sarah took to visiting whenever she had time off, which was two hours every other Sunday, and she never went empty-handed.
Cook had been moved by Sarah's grief when she got back from her father's funeral, and when she heard how Maggie had given birth on the very same day she had taken pity.
‘You're a good girl, Sarah,’ she said.
‘Your concern does you credit, and I'll see to it you have a few things wrapped up for the poor woman when you go to see her.’
‘Thank you very much, Mrs Martin.
She'll be very pleased.’
‘Not a word to anyone, though, mind.’
‘No, ma'am.’
‘I wouldn't do it for anybody else on the staff, but you're the best worker we've had here.’
The first few days after the burial she had felt like dying herself, mostly of shame, but she had set about her tasks with the same efficiency as always, and if she didn't speak to anyone it was because words would have brought fresh tears.
She grieved for her father and worried about Maggie, but most of all she fumed and cried over the affair with James Halden.
She ought never to have trusted him.
Patrick was three months old when Sarah knew for sure that she would have James's child before the year was out.
The knowledge terrified her.
She'd been feeling sick a morning or two, but not so as it interfered with her work, and no one remarked on it.
At first she'd given no thought to missing for a month, putting it down to the trauma of losing Pa, but by the time nothing showed for the third month running there could be no doubt that the worst had happened.
She was definitely pregnant.
She didn't know how she would live with the shame when it began to show.
She started hiding food away instead of eating it so as not to put on any weight, but hunger forced her to have a good meal at least once a week.
The Bradfords would soon put her out of the door when they heard she was having a baby, but she didn't know where she would go.
There'd been neither sight nor sound of James since that fateful day and no doubt he had forgotten her as quickly as he had taken her, but he must be told there was going to be a child.
She would have to have some money to support it, and it was only right he should pay for the pleasure he'd had.
At the beginning of April she didn't go to Maggie's, but walked instead to St Bartholomew's Hospital.
It was such a big place and nobody seemed to know the whereabouts of the junior physician she was asking for.
She wandered through corridors, completely lost and tired, until a short, elderly man with a red face and gold-rimmed spectacles took pity on her.
‘Who are you looking for, girl?’ he asked.
‘Dr Halden, sir.
No one seems to know where 'e is.’
‘I'm sure they don't.’
The man took off his spectacles and wiped them on a snowy white handkerchief.
‘Were you a patient of his?’
‘Yes, sir.’
She hoped she wouldn't have to go into details.
‘Well I'm afraid he's out of the country so whatever you want to discuss with him will have to wait.’
‘Out of the country!’
Sarah echoed in dismay.
Nausea welled up in her and she put a hand to her throat.
‘Will 'e be away long?’
‘Young lady, you are impudent to ask, but since the matter seems important to you I'm prepared to say he won't be back much before Christmas.
Dr Halden is married to my daughter and has taken her on an extended tour of the Continent.’
‘Oh, my goodness.’
‘Is there anything I can do to help?’
‘No,’ said Sarah.
‘No, sir, thank you.’
She picked up her skirt and fled from the hospital before letting herself think what James's absence meant.
By Christmas her child would be several weeks old, but she'd been forced to survive on her wits since before her ma had died, and she would survive now.
There was nothing else for it.
One Sunday in May Sarah walked to Turnmill Street with a slice of meatloaf, a fruit pie and various other luxuries tied up in brown paper to look like laundry, By then she was five months into pregnancy, though no one would have guessed, although she didn't climb the stairs with her usual briskness.
She listened for Patrick's cry but the only noise was from the Kenny children as they squabbled over a piece of bread, and Maggie was sitting on the bed with the baby sucking in vain at her scrawny breast.
He'd been so sickly from birth and Sarah ached with sadness to see her tiny stepbrother losing hold on life.
Maggie crooned to him and stroked his head.
He began to cry fitfully with a keening sound.
’‘E don't grow,’ she said.
‘Here' e is five months old and hardly any bigger than when he was born.’
Sarah looked at the mite, and pity drove out every other thought.
‘I'll get some warm water to wash 'im,’ she said.
An acrid smell polluted the room, and the ragged blankets on the bed showed how Maggie had lost heart.
‘It might make 'im better.’
‘It'll do no good.
He's hot and 'is bowels keep running.’
She was propped against the cold, damp wall with the baby in one hand and a bottle of gin in the other.
‘Give 'im to me,’ Sarah said.
Maggie held Patrick closer with maudlin despair.
‘You can't do nothing for 'im.’
She rolled her eyes and took another swig of gin.
‘But you're a good friend.
A real good friend, Sarah Byrne, though I never thought I'd say it.’
She slid down on the sagging mattress.
Sarah took the gin bottle away and went downstairs.
She heard the rattle of a milk pail in the next alley, and the familiar cry of: ‘Any milk here?’
She bought some and took it back for the baby, dipping her finger in for the mite to suck.
He was ravenous.
‘You need looking after yourself,’ she said to Maggie, sitting beside her on the bed.
‘Do you eat the food I bring you, or give it to Rosa's kids?’
She didn't need an answer.
The extent of her stepmother's generosity surprised her.
This time she made sure Maggie ate the meat and the pie herself, and forced her to drink a cupful of milk.
‘You can't feed Patrick if you don't feed yourself, and I'll bet the poor little scrap hates gin as much as I do.
If you love ‘im, Maggie, treat yourself better than you've been doing.’
Gradually Maggie's colour improved and she leaned her head against Sarah's shoulder.
‘You're good to me, girl,’ she said.
‘I don't know why.’
This was the day Sarah had made up her mind to speak to her stepmother about her own problems.
It would be two weeks before she got another chance so she had to take it now whether Maggie was sober or not.
She made her sit up.
‘Maggie, there's something I've got to say to you.
I need your help.
I need it bad.’
The effect of the words was profound.
Maggie Byrne was a woman with plenty of love to give, and the best stimulus of all was to know that she was needed.
‘Whatever it is you can count on me, Sarah, you know that.
Not just for yer father's sake neither.’
Her lethargy disappeared and her eyes cleared.
‘What is it you want, ducks?’
‘I'm having a baby meself,’ Sarah said.
‘Around September.
I'll 'ave to give up me job soon and I ain't got anywhere to live.
Can I come here with you and Patrick?’
Tears brimmed on to Maggie's cheeks and she brushed them away hurriedly.
‘Dearie, there ain't anything I'd like better.
This is your 'ome, always 'as been and always will be.’
She didn't condemn even though she was shrewd enough to know who was responsible.
‘It were that doctor with the yellow hair, weren't it?’ she said.
‘Well, I can't say I blame you.
He was a right handsome man, and a kind one.
And I could see 'e thought a lot of you.
Does 'e know?’
‘No, and 'e never will.’
Sarah told her about the visit to St Bartholomew's.
Maggie put Patrick in his cradle and took her in her arms with motherly concern.
‘Well, it ain't the end of the world, ducks.
It 'appens to a lot of us and everyone ain't as lucky as I was.’
A ray of sunshine filtered through the dirty window, slanting across the table which hadn't been scrubbed since Paddy died.
Two weeks later Sarah told Mrs Bradford that she would have to leave, making Maggie the excuse.
‘I'm sorry, ma'am, but me stepmother's got a sickly baby and she ain't well enough to look after 'erself, never mind him.
So I'll have to take care of her.’
Mrs Bradford was a rather severe Christian woman who admired a sense of responsibility in others and was always fair.
‘I'm so sorry, Sarah,’ she said.
‘You've been getting on very well here and I've had glowing reports from Mrs Martin about your work, but if you feel it your duty to go home I understand.
And I respect you for it.’
‘Thank you, ma'am.’
‘Perhaps you'll be able to return to work a little later on when your stepmother's health improves.
I heard that she was widowed a few days before the baby was born.
‘Yes, ma'am.
Me father died in the furnace at Smith's.’
‘So dreadful.
Dreadful.’
Mrs Bradford went to a drawer and brought out a small inlaid box.
From it she took a shilling and gave it to Sarah.
‘This may help a little.
And  when you feel able to work again I hope you'll return here.’
‘Thank you very much, ma'am,’ said Sarah, and bobbed a curtsey before leaving.
She felt guilty accepting the money, but took it gratefully.
She settled in Stone Alley with reluctance, though Maggie made her more than welcome.
For the last few weeks the baby inside her had been making itself felt.
Now, as if objecting already to the place where it would take its first breath, it kicked against her stomach wall quite forcibly.
She ought to have hated the child she was carrying, it being the cause of her return to squalor after the effort she had made to rise above it, but since she'd felt it move she couldn't reject it.
As it grew she would put her hands on her belly and talk to the baby.
‘Reckon you'll be as good-looking as yer father,’ she would say.
‘Not that he'd care, even if 'e knew.
Toffs never admit to their bastards, do they.
We'll 'ave to just get by on our own.’
Whenever she thought of James Halden a shameful wave of physical longing washed over her until she remembered he had used her and discarded her.
But at least her baby would come from decent stock.
She began to think of it as he , and wondered if he would make something of himself later on in life.
Maybe he'd want to be a physician like his father.
The weeks passed and Sarah and Maggie took in washing to pay the rent, but there was never enough money left to buy more than bread and a few vegetables.
Sarah's arms and legs were getting thinner every day, and the rag mat she'd started making for the hearth became too heavy to have on her lap.
But she was relieved to see Patrick thrive at last now that Maggie had been weaned off gin, and when Rosa's sixth baby arrived she helped with it, gaining experience for when her own time came.
The more tired she became the more bitterly she blamed James.
To think a few minutes of thoughtless pleasure could end in this.
At the end of the summer she was so hungry she hadn't the energy to move further than Paddy's dilapidated chair and she stitched a baby's gown from her  only decent petticoat.
Maggie scrounged what food she could, and when Sarah dipped a crust of bread in the cabbage soup she'd made she could see the cracks in the bottom of the dish through the thin liquid.
They were like a map of Europe, and that was where James Halden was enjoying a luxurious, carefree holiday with his wife.
Sarah's daughter was born on the last day of September.
The midwife rolled up her sleeves and toiled all night by the light of candles stuck in turnips, and just before dawn the baby was delivered on to the same straw mattress on which she had been conceived.
Her labour was not unduly difficult.
Sarah pushed and thrust to get rid of the burden she had carried for nine long months, and she screamed until Maggie forced gin down her throat to quieten her.
In each lull between contractions memories of James tormented her, and with each new onslaught of pain she mentally tried to inflict the agony on him, cursing him for what he had done to her.
When at last it was over she lay back in a sleepy state, as a result of too much gin rather than weakness from the birthing, but she no longer felt like cursing James.
The baby had arrived safely and she couldn't continue blaspheming against the man who had fathered it when one glimpse was enough to capture her heart completely.
‘You're so beautiful,’ Sarah crooned, the next day.
‘I think I shall call you Angel.’
The little girl had intensely blue eyes like her own, and a covering of golden down on her head which set Sarah's lips tingling when they brushed over it.
She loved this tiny creature so much she didn't know how to contain it, or how to show it enough.
She rocked the baby in her arms, refusing to put her down for a minute, and she sang snatches of lullabies she remembered her mother singing so many years ago.
If Maggie was envious she tried not to show it, but it was hard not to make comparisons.
‘She'll grow up with rickets like the rest of 'em,’ she said, rubbing Patrick's thin legs which failed to support him when he attempted to pull himself up against his father's chair.
‘No she won't.
I won't let her.’
‘There'll be no way you can help it with only charity to live on.’
Sarah rummaged under the bed for a tin box, opened it and brought out a piece of patchwork lined with blanket.
‘Me ma made this with bits left over when she took in sewing.
When I was little I had it on me bed.
Now it's Angel's.’
‘Well, that won't feed 'er.’
‘It'll keep' er warm though.’
She snuggled the baby in it and rocked her to stop a persistent whimpering.
Two days passed and Angel's cries became more unhappy.
Two more, and it was plain that she was hungry, just as Patrick had been in the first few weeks of life.
Sarah began to panic.
There wasn't enough milk in her breasts to satisfy the mite.
There was no money to buy nourishing food for herself, and no hope of working to earn any.
Cow's milk had saved Patrick's life, but when she gave it to Angel she became sick and feverish.
‘I'd feed 'er meself if I didn't 'ave me latest,’ said Rosa.
‘I ain't never been short of milk yet.’
Angel's keening cry became weaker and she lay listlessly in the cradle which Patrick had outgrown, scarcely waking when Sarah tried almost in vain to feed her.
‘There must be somethingI can do.’
She appealed to Maggie desperately.
‘Tell me.
Please.’
‘Find yer fancy doctor,’ said Maggie.
‘He's the one who should be providing money to get you out of 'ere.’
‘I said I'd never ask 'im for anything.’
‘Do you want to keep that child alive or don't you?’
‘More than anything in the world.’
Once more Sarah trudged to St Bartholomew's, but James hadn't returned and she daren't ask if he was likely to be much longer.
She couldn't wait anyway.
She had to find some other way to save Angel's precious little life, and find it quickly.
Maggie had another suggestion.
’‘Course there's always the Foundling Hospital.’
The words hung like icicles in the humidity of the autumn afternoon.
They brought a terrible chill to Sarah's heart.
‘But I'd never see her again if I took 'er there.
I 'eard the Foundling's a dreadful place.’
‘You take yer choice.
If she stays here like as not you'll lose her anyway.
There's more dies than lives in these alleys, if you ask me.
One of Bertha Hobbs's kids is down with a fever again.’
‘I'd have to leave 'er in a basket at the gate.’
‘Where've yer been, ducks!’
Maggie scoffed.
‘They don't do that no more.
Neither do you 'ave to pay a hundred quid like I 'eard it cost at one time.’
She put an arm round Sarah's shoulder.
‘It's a good place.
The best there is for kids like Angel.’
Sarah drew Angel closer and eyed her stepmother with suspicion.
‘If it's such a good idea, why didn't you take Patrick to the Foundling?’
‘Because I was married to 'is father.’
Maggie's tone levelled a rare touch of criticism at the girl she had sheltered these last four months.
‘They wouldn't have taken 'im even if I'd been willing to part with 'im, me being a widow.
It ain't fair.
They only take bastards, to give the mothers a chance to make a fresh start.’
They talked it over endlessly, and the icicles started to melt, dripping on to the rock of objection and wearing it away.
While Angel slept, Sarah planned her future with heartbreaking realism.
She didn't need Maggie to remind her of the odds against a baby's survival in the alleys, and she loved this one enough to make the ultimate sacrifice.
‘Mrs Bradford said she'd take you back,’ Maggie reminded her.
‘I reckon, that being so, the Governors'll smile on you.’
Sarah studied Angel, committing each tiny feature to memory.
‘I'll try it,’ she said.
‘But if they take 'er I swear I'll not lose sight of 'er.
I'll devote me life to getting her back somehow.
See if I don't.’
She smoothed the soft baby hair lovingly, and she didn't  notice that a few fine golden strands rubbed off on her finger.
Chapter Three
Two days after leaving Angel at the Foundling Hospital Sarah returned to work at the house in Newcastle Place.
‘I'm surprised Mrs Bradford took you back,’ said Cook.
‘I hope you appreciate it.’
‘I do, Mrs Martin.’
‘And I hope that stepmother of yours appreciates it, too.
I don't know what you've been doing to yourself, girl.
That dress would hang better on a broomstick.’
She picked hold of the loose material round the waist and yanked it with disapproval.
‘We must see you get some decent food or it'll be a waste of time paying you a wage.’
‘Thank you, Mrs Martin.’
The first days back were hard for Sarah.
She hadn't completely regained her strength, and as no one knew the truth about her absence, no allowances were made.
‘I reckon if you 'adn't left you'd 'ave bin a parlourmaid by now,’ Ella Tomkin said.
The two girls were sharing the attic room again.
‘Reckon I'll be one anyway before much longer,’ said Sarah, with a swish of her skirt.
Her cheeks began to fill out and the hollows by her collar bone were less noticeable, but the dullness in her blue eyes persisted.
She tried to go about her tasks with the same thoroughness as before, but too often her mind strayed from what she was doing, and promotion became less and less likely.
A dozen times a day she pictured the woman with prematurely white hair who was now holding Angel to her breast, and she ached with longing to change places with her.
But the bright enthusiasm with which she had vowed to improve herself was already being tarnished by the increasing breath of reprimand.
‘The salt cellar has a finger mark on it, Sarah,’ said the housekeeper one morning, after she had spent an hour on  the silver.
‘You've become a dreamer since you came back here and you're not so careful about things.
I found coal dust on the hearthrug in the main parlour yesterday.’
‘I'm very sorry, ma' am,’ Sarah apologized.
‘It won't happen again.’
‘You'd better make sure it doesn't.’
But the harder she tried not to make mistakes the more they seemed to occur.
It seemed as if she couldn't do anything right and everyone grumbled at her.
Yet once she had been a favourite with the below-stairs staff.
‘I don't know what's the matter with you,’ Ella Tomkin said.
‘I reckon that stepmother of yours must've wore you out skivvying.
You ain't no fun any more.’
She wished she could confide in Ella, but it was far too risky and she knew she would feel worse if anyone in the house knew about the baby.
She was lucky she'd been able to keep it a secret all along.
‘I'm just tired,’ she said.
‘There was never enough to eat.’
Sarah was allowed to dust and polish in Mr Bradford's rooms, a duty given only to trusted servants since it meant moving many of his important papers, but when she went in there after her return she dropped one of his boxes and everything was scattered over the carpet.
She picked the papers up hurriedly and put them back before anyone should see, but it seemed Mr Bradford, who was a powerful man at the Doctors' Commons, had complained that they were out of order.
There was a great fuss and bother and Mrs Bradford sent for her.
‘I'm surprised at you, Sarah,’ she said.
‘I'm afraid I can't allow such a mistake to go unpunished.
I believe you were due for the afternoon off tomorrow.
You will work instead.’
The punishment was hard because Maggie would miss her visit, but it was not so bad as losing some of her pay.
She was threatened with that a few days later when she was sweeping the back stairs and her rear view was too much of a temptation for the young footman.
He playfully pinched her, and Sarah rounded on him.
‘I ain't 'ere for your amusement,’ she cried.
She was severely scolded for the commotion she caused, but since it wasn't entirely her fault the matter wasn't taken further.
At the end of two weeks she was tired, frustrated, and close to despair.
She wished she had taken a chance and kept Angel, for there was no lessening of the pain that parting with her had caused, and no comfort to be found in Newcastle Place.
Her emotions were so erratic, changing from anger to jealousy in a moment, and then to resentment of James Halden who continued to torment her thoughts.
With Angel gone there was no need to humble herself and inquire if he had at last returned to work.
It no longer mattered.
But memories of him persisted.
Finally she shut herself in the attic room on Ella's day off and sobbed until she ached in body and soul.
After that she refused to shed another tear.
That Sunday she took the first positive step towards keeping a check on her child.
She'd thought that Foundling children stayed in the hospital from the time they were taken in.
It had been a shock to discover that for the first five years they went to homes in the country where women were paid to nurse them, and it seemed to put a stop to any hope of seeing Angel again.
Then she came to the conclusion that it might make things easier.
She had seen the two women leave the hospital with babies in their arms, so all she had to do was discover where the van had taken them.
After that it would be simpler to make a journey into the country than to find an excuse to walk through the hospital doors.
At the first opportunity Sarah went again to the Foundling Hospital, but she didn't approach by Guilford Street in case the porter came out of his lodge and recognized her.
Instead she went round by Mecklenburgh Square and waited by a gate at the rear where there were two smaller buildings.
Judging by the warm air and steam issuing from it, the building on the left could be a laundry, and girls with wagging tongues worked in laundries.
After about half an hour a girl came out of the gate, her tartan shawl held round her with rough, reddened hands.
Sarah kept out of sight, then followed at a careful distance, swinging a basket.
She didn't know how she was going to do it, but somehow she had to get into conversation with her.
The chance came so unexpectedly it took her breath away.
The girl lingered at a secondhand clothes shop and was looking at grubby petticoats displayed on iron rods by the doorway, when a young man dressed in a shabby tail coat and check trousers came along and paused beside her.
Sarah drew closer, one of a crowd in the busy street.
The man smiled at the girl and must have passed some friendly remark, for she looked at him agreeably before returning to her inspection of the petticoats.
It was then his hand brushed against her skirt, and two fingers would have slid into the pocket unnoticed if Sarah hadn't been watching.
She was near enough now to swing the basket viciously against the pickpocket's hand, making him yell as he extracted the girl's purse, which he dropped as he fled.
The girl spun round in alarm, and gave a cry.
‘Thief!
Stop him.’
She was pale and shaking.
It's all right,’ Sarah said, picking up the purse and giving it to her.
‘I'm sorry if I hurt you but it was the only way I could do 'im some damage.’
‘That was real good of you.’
The girl was almost in tears with gratitude.
‘Me wages are in there and I was taking them to me ma.
She'd 'ave killed me if I'd gone home without 'em.
How can I thank you?’
‘I don't want thanks.’
A lemonade seller had a place at the kerbside further along, his polished urn reflecting the warm glow from the fire of a trader in hot chestnuts next to him.
Sarah took the girl's arm.
‘We need a drink.’
She found a coin in her pocket and paid for two glasses of lemonade, then drew the girl into a doorway away from the people.
‘You're real kind,’ the girl said.
‘I know how bad I'd 'ave felt if someone'd tried to pick my pocket.
Not that they'd 'ave got much.
I don't earn enough.’
‘What do you do?’
‘I'm a kitchen maid.
What do you do?’
‘I work over at the Foundling Hospital, in the laundry.’
Sarah's heart was beating fast.
She was so afraid of losing this heaven-sent opportunity, yet she didn't know how to ask the question she so desperately needed to ask.
If she aroused the girl's suspicion all would be lost.
She swallowed a mouthful of the lime-coloured liquid and the sharpness stung her throat.
‘The tiny babies must make a lot of washing,’ she said artfully.
The girl's eyes widened in surprise at her ignorance.
‘Oh, we don't have the babies.
They're farmed out to East Peckham or Chertsey for five years.’
How easy it had been!
Sarah could have hugged her companion right there in the street.
After all her worrying she had got the answer she wanted within minutes.
By the time she drained her glass she also knew that the last van to leave for the country about three weeks ago had been Chertsey bound.
In parting, the girl squeezed Sarah's hand.
She had plump cheeks with dimples and pretty brown hair.
‘Me name's Dimsey Turner.
I'll not forget what you did.
You never know, someday I might be able to pay you back.
Me stepfather keeps the pawnshop in Middle Alley off Cowcross Street if yer need me.’
She dodged away among the throng, her red hands now clutching her pockets and the tartan shawl tied over her chest to keep it on.
Sarah smiled.
She had been handsomely repaid already.
It look a little longer to plan how she was to make the journey to Chertsey, which she had discovered was about twenty miles away.
The days were getting shorter and colder, and with Christmas approaching there was so much to do in the kitchen Sarah rarely had a spare minute.
But her meeting with Dimsey Turner had revived her flagging ambitions, and she had begun to find favour in higher places once more.
‘Mrs Bradford wants someone extra to wait at tables,’ said Mrs Martin, one morning in late November.
‘Mr Priddy  reckons you're the most likely, Sarah Byrne.
Would you like to do it?’
Sarah's eyes lit up and her pale skin coloured to a pleasing pink.
‘I'd like to very much, ma'am,’ she said.
‘It was kind of Mr Priddy to suggest it.’
‘Yes, well…’
Mrs Martin sniffed with disapproval.
‘It appears he thinks you're a presentable young woman.
Mind you don't get carried away by the honour.
Meself, I'd rather judge a girl on her capabilities.’
Sarah had become aware of her looks, which were improving daily, and she began using them to her advantage.
She took trouble with her hair, and bathed her face regularly in cold water before rubbing it well with the towel.
Her skin seemed to glow, and she discovered she only had to smile at the male members of the staff and they were immediately more friendly.
It was a trick worth using.
‘Pity to shut you away down here,’ Mr Priddy said gruffly when she thanked him for his recommendation.
He was the butler, a gentleman full of his own importance and not usually given to conversing with the lower servants.
Her training took long hours.
The Bradfords entertained important people, and to correctly serve them food every detail had to be perfected.
At the end of a week Sarah's back and legs ached intolerably, but the reward, when it came, was recompense indeed.
She was given a whole day off.
‘A whole day, Ella!
Just think of it.
I shall be able to go to Chertsey.’
‘Chertsey?
What do you want to go there for?’
‘There's someone I must see,’ said Sarah.
‘A fella?’
Ella's plain face creased into a mischievous smile.
‘He must be special to take you all that way.’
Sarah didn't enlighten her.
She discovered that Ella had a sister at Staines, and on the rare occasions she visited her she went on the railway.
Staines, it appeared, was not far from Chertsey, but it was a long and tedious journey, and meant travelling by omnibus first of all to get to the big station across the river in York Road.
‘I 'as to save up for the fare, and when I get there it's  nearly time to come back,’ Ella said.
‘It ain't hardly worth it.
Once again Sarah's spirits dropped.
It seemed there wouldn't be time to do any prying even if she had the money to go to Chertsey, which she didn't.
So the precious day came and went, and the only person she visited was Maggie, who didn't have a lot of sympathy.
‘You gave the child up, so what's the sense tormenting yerself trying to see it?’
Maggie brushed aside her stepdaughter's problem.
She had news she couldn't wait to impart.
‘What do you think, Sarah.
I'll be moving out of here by Christmas.
I've got meself a position, living in like you do.’
The noise in the alleys was deafening that morning, and the smell of the dungheap outside had never been so bad.
She sat down, stunned and curious.
‘What about Patrick?’
‘I can take 'im with me.
Mr Wood don't mind.
He's a jeweller and he'll be working all day upstairs.
‘E lives in one of them tenements in Corporation Lane, on the corner of St James's Passage.
I'm to keep house.’
Sarah was far from happy for her.
‘You mean you'll be living in sin with 'im,’ she said.
‘And you'll be right opposite the prison.’
The House of Detention held dangerous men behind bars, some of them Irish, and she remembered how her father had been threatened with it when he'd been caught causing trouble.
Turnmill Street was bad enough.
At one time so many people from the area were hanged at Newgate it had been nicknamed Jack Ketch's Warren, and according to Paddy it had been known for as many as forty constables to march down with cutlasses to control disturbances.
But it wasn't up against dreary prison walls.
‘There'll be nowt wrong with the arrangement,’ said Maggie.
‘Mr Wood's a respectable gentleman, and the house is a right palace compared to this.
Be happy for me, ducks.
Reckon I deserve a new start as much as you do.’
It would have been churlish to deny it.
‘You deserve it more,’ Sarah told her.
‘And I'm glad for Patrick.
It'll be healthier for 'im than here.’
When Sarah was leaving, Maggie thrust a parcel in her arms.
It was bulky and badly tied up with paper and string but Sarah didn't need to feel it to know what it was.
‘It's Paddy's fiddle,’ her stepmother said.
‘It was mean of me keeping it, and you could sell it to pay yer fare to Chertsey.’
Sarah's eyes flooded with tears, and she was ashamed of herself for not being more charitable over this generous woman's good fortune.
‘No, it's yours,’ she said, thrusting it back again.
‘Pa would've been livid with me for getting pregnant, and he wouldn't want his precious fiddle going to pay for anything to do with it.’
She went to the top of the stairs, then spun round and rushed back to hug Maggie Byrne with spontaneous affection.
‘But thanks anyway.’
The Bradfords entertained lavishly at Christmas.
Dr John Bradford was a judge at the Doctors' Commons, a very highly respected man at the top of his profession, and Elizabeth, his wile, was well known for her hospitality.
Their dining room that Christmas of 1850 was the scene of a sumptuous dinner attended by family and friends, and it was the first important one at which Sarah Byrne was allowed to serve.
It was an occasion she would never forget.
The day began like any other, except that the bells of St James's Church seemed to peal with more exhilaration than they ever did on a Sunday, and Sarah pictured the ringers jumping up and down for joy at the ends of their stout ropes.
Two carriages took the Bradford family to early morning service, though it would have been no distance for them to walk.
She caught a glimpse of them filing down the front steps in their best clothes, prayer books clasped in hands which no doubt itched to be unwrapping parcels.
Two children arranged themselves in the first carriage, Bradford grandchildren with their parents up from Bristol.
An older man joined Dr and Mrs Bradford in the second.
He was Mrs Bradford's brother, so Ella said, a reverend gentleman by the name of Nahum Morey.
The air of excitement was as great below stairs as it was  above.
Once the early morning jobs were done there was a relaxing of discipline, and when the family returned from church everyone on the staff, from Mr Priddy down to the newest domestic, was invited to the second-best parlour to receive a small present.
Sarah was given a new apron to wear for work and an embroidered handkerchief for herself, a very pretty one with lace round the edge which was much too good to use.
Christmas dinner for the Bradfords and their guests was not until six o'clock.
The servants had theirs at two, gathered round the scrubbed table in the big kitchen.
Firelight shone on festoons of holly, making the berries glow like rubies, and nothing could taste better than the chicken and the plum pudding Mrs Martin had cooked.
‘I give a toast to you all this joyous, happy Christmas,’ said Mr Priddy, raising a glass of homemade raisin wine.
It was warm and smooth on Sarah's tongue, nothing like the terrible gin Maggie had given her which she never wanted to taste again.
Later she helped Mr Priddy to set the dining table upstairs.
She preferred it to preparing food, and took the greatest care to see that each piece of cutlery was exactly an inch from the edge of the snow-white damask cloth.
She folded napkins to look like coronets and gave the crystal glasses a final polish before positioning them in groups to the right of each place.
In the centre of the table was a bower of holly entwined with Christmas roses, and the candlesticks were garlanded with festive trinkets which sparkled in the firelight.
Sarah had never seen anything look so lovely, and she danced from one end of the table to the other to admire it.
Cook had said she must be more smartly attired to work in the house, so she had a new black dress for the occasion.
She pulled the strings of her apron until the bow at the back was just right, and perched her white cap at the correct angle on her head to make it sit pertly on her dark curls.
Her new position made her nervous but she kept breathing deeply to conquer it, and looked forward to proving herself worthy of the promotion.
At six o'clock everyone assembled for dinner and Mr Priddy signalled that the first course could be taken in, a heavy tureen of mock turtle soup which was to be served from a side table.
Sarah carried it carefully, but when she entered the dining room and glanced across at the guests she almost dropped it.
There immediately behind the silver platter of Salmon à la Régence, was James Halden.
Luckily he had his back towards her.
A pain gripped her heart, and its beat became so erratic the soup slopped on her apron.
Sarah hurriedly put it down, her hands trembling, and Mr Priddy looked askance at her, no doubt thinking she was intimidated by the company.
She was afraid to look round again, but the other housemaid was ready to carry soup bowls to the table and she had to do the same.
Sarah's confident manner temporarily deserted her and she tried to keep behind James as much as possible, hoping not to be noticed.
Like as not he wouldn't even recognize her, and he'd made it clear she was merely one of a number of girls who accommodated him.
It was a year now since she had seen him, and he was more handsome than ever.
His burnished gold hair curled over the high collar of a royal blue coat, and he wore a black velvet waistcoat sprigged with silver leaves, an expensive-looking garment for a young physician unless he had private means.
Seeing him made Sarah think with anguish of their child.
My goodness, what a commotion it would cause if she announced to all these posh people that James Halden had once seduced her.
Not that they would condemn him.
It was an everyday occurrence for the gentry to bed maidservants.
She pushed the thought away, praying instead for Angel on her very first Christmas.
James was talking to the person on his right, a vivacious lady who Sarah recognized as Mrs Bradford's daughter.
On his left was a small, plump girl with round brown eyes which she blinked rapidly, as if smoke from the fire made them smart.
Her fair hair was worn in a tight knob at the crown of her head, while ringlets covered her ears in the style made fashionable by Queen Victoria.
Her shoulders were covered by a lace-trimmed mantelet, and pink ribbons  decorated her lavender wool day dress.
Sarah guessed she must be James's wife, and thought she looked like the pink jelly which wobbled on a dish near the salmon.
When she had to set a plate before him she could smell pomade on his hair, and her gaze was drawn to the long, clever hands which had once touched her body so intimately and unprofessionally.
The sight of them sent a warmth stealing through her veins, and she was afraid her new dress might soon smell of sweat like the old one.
After the soup came courses of fish, meat, game and poultry, followed by a ragout with truffles.
Then the eagerly awaited plum pudding arrived to the accompaniment of clapping and cheering, and a plume of blue smoke from the brandy flames was like the tail of Halley's Comet.
Before the pudding was cut the Reverend Morey stood up and rapped the table to attract attention.
He was a man of about forty, and he wore a black jacket buttoned to the throat with only a glimpse of white stock appearing above it.
His dark hair was thinning on top, but he had bushy side whiskers as if it had all slipped downwards, and his chin was a dimpled mound seeming to support an ever-smiling mouth.
‘Dear friends and relations, I think this is the moment when we should be aware of how lucky we are to be partaking of such excellent food and spare a thought for those less fortunate.’
There were murmurs of assent, though Sara noticed the children eyeing the plum pudding impatiently.
‘I hope you agree that we should show our gratitude for God's gifts in a concrete way, by supporting a charity.
What could be more appropriate at Christmas than to remember children who have been deserted by their mothers and know only a hospital as home.
I refer, of course, to the Foundling Hospital.’
‘A worthy cause indeed,’ said James Halden.
Sarah felt as if the room was spinning round, fearing that everyone would glance in her direction.
In fact she almost expected them to accuse her of causing the conscience-prodding dip into their pockets.
But there was only  good-natured laughter and the jingling of coins as the men tried to outdo each other in their generosity.
James Halden, of course, had no idea that he was helping to support his own daughter.
What consternation it would cause him if he were to find out.
‘Nahum, dear,’ said Elizabeth Bradford, ‘we're all used to your fondness for parting us from our wealth, but may we ask what prompted you to choose the Foundling Hospital this year?’
‘Ah, you may well ask,’ said the Reverend Morey.
He tucked his fingers in the neck of his coat and puffed out his chest like a pouter pigeon, his smile widening.
‘Standing before you is a new Governor of the Hospital.
As you know, for many years I have devoted time to families in my parish who foster babies for the charity, but now I feel I can do more.
A vacancy arose on the committee and I am proud to have been asked to fill it.’
There was a murmur of congratulations, and Mrs Bradford came round the table to kiss her brother's cheek.
Then the pudding was served, and dinner resumed, much to the relief of the children.
Sarah was trembling.
The totally unexpected mention of the Foundling Hospital, coming on top of the shock of seeing James, had shaken her so much she scarcely knew how to complete the rest of her tasks.
But she thanked the Lord that Reverend Morey hadn't become a Governor sooner, for then everyone would have known about Angel, and James's plump and prissy wife might have discovered her husband had fathered a bastard.
When a signal was given for the ladies to retire, leaving the men to their port and cigars, Sarah hurried to the kitchen, scurrying like a rabbit for shelter.
‘Whatever's the matter with you, girl?’
Mrs Martin asked.
‘I knew it was a mistake giving you responsibilities.’
Soon there was the dining room to clear.
Family and guests could be heard playing charades and blindman's buff in the drawing room, and Mr Priddy snuffed out the candles, replacing them with new ones ready for tea at about ten in the evening when the table would again be  laden with sweetmeats and delicacies.
But the joy of the occasion had dimmed for Sarah.
She got down on hands and knees to sweep away crumbs, and in the gaslight she looked paler than ever.
She was so busy she didn't hear anyone approaching.
Someone had dropped jelly on an expensive rug and she was attacking it forcefully with a brush to relieve her feelings when the bristles came in contact with a pair of smart leather shoes.
Her hand stilled, and she raised her eyes to see grey trousers close to her shoulder.
Up and up she looked, to a black waistcoat sprigged with silver, and the intense gaze of James Halden.
James was aware of Sarah Byrne from the moment she came into the dining room carrying the soup tureen.
He saw her through a gilt-framed mirror on the opposite wall, and that first glimpse of her brought him more joy than a dozen Christmases put together.
He'd thought of her constantly, hoping she still worked for the Bradford family, and the invitation to Christmas dinner with them had caused him more elation than Maud, his wife, though he hadn't dared show it.
And Sarah was here.
Wonderfully, miraculously she was here, and lovely as ever though she looked tired.
At all costs he had to avoid catching her eye.
When he had left Sarah at Maggie Byrne's hovel that fateful day last December he had told himself she was no different from a hundred other girls.
For weeks he had pushed thoughts of her out of his mind, and it hadn't been too difficult at first.
In early spring Maud, his wife, suffered her second miscarriage, and with the accompanying trauma it was a wonder James managed to finish the last of his studies at the hospital.
He became angry and frustrated, having struggled so hard to rise above his humble background to become a physician, and the marriage he had seen as his link to success was more like a chain binding him to the spoilt daughter of the man whose position he envied.
After the miscarriage Dr Rollerson, Maud's father, had insisted on paying for them to make an extended tour of Europe, so that Maud could regain her health, and James's dream of a permanent post at St Bartholomew's Hospital was indefinitely postponed.
While Maud rested on balconies overlooking Lake Garda, the Matterhorn, the Bay of Naples and the Tuileries Gardens, James took himself for long walks.
The truth was, Maud bored him.
He found it trying having to listen to endless complaints about her weight, her tiredness and her inability to carry a child.
Maud had become petulant.
Each night she retired to bed a few minutes earlier, and he saw it as an excuse to avoid the means of starting another pregnancy, though she was in the best of health.
It was not his way to admit that he had made a mistake.
In the beginning he had found Maud appealing, and on their wedding day he had really believed that he loved her, but ambition had clouded his vision.
Her father, Richard Rollerson, was the physician to whom James was attached at St Bartholomew's, and he had cultivated Maud Rollerson's friendship early for the purpose of improving his status with his tutor.
A word from Maud and he had been given one of the four coveted places as a dresser, which meant he had more chance to learn the great man's skills.
James intended one day to be equally celebrated, and as a dresser he was privileged to be at the bedside while the physician examined a patient.
He took every opportunity to learn while arranging pillows and giving comfort.
From boyhood James had wanted to become a physician, but even if he had been taken seriously there would have been no money to cater for such an extravagant ambition.
His father was a land agent who ran an estate in East Anglia belonging to John Bradford's brother.
The job provided the Halden family with a home and enough money to live fairly comfortably, but with four sons and five daughters to bring up there had never been any to spare.
James had gone round the village with his father as soon as he was old enough, visiting tenants in cottages with no sanitation.
Sickness caused by overcrowding, and the damp, fetid conditions had appalled him.
He spent hours with the local clergyman who had his own private store of medicines such as Epsom  salts, gentian, laudanum, and quantities of port which he believed built up the strength, and he had seen for himself how garlic had done wonders for children with whooping cough.
But it had taken Duncan Bradford's vision to persuade his agent that James was gifted enough to be worthy of the expense involved in letting him study medicine.
‘He has the ability to become a physician,’ Duncan Bradford had said.
‘I've seen the way he gives confidence to the sick, in spite of his youth.
What is more, he has a social conscience, and as a result of his persuasion I intend to see that our labourers' cottages have better sanitation.’
James's father was angry.
‘But I've been recommending such improvements for years.’
‘But you have only used the cottagers' convenience as an argument,’ said Duncan.
‘James has seen that their health would be improved, and consequently their work.
I find that a worthwhile observation.’
In fact he was so impressed he agreed to make an allowance towards James's student fees at St Bartholomew's, but it had not stretched to comfortable accommodation.
The only lodgings James had been able to afford were so squalid he had scarcely been able to concentrate on his studies for the cold each winter, and the thought of a house and a wife to warm his bed had been added incentive to pursue marriage plans with Maud Rollerson.
Then Sarah Byrne disrupted his cosy life.
When he first saw her on the day of her father's accident, something happened to him.
His system reacted to contact with her in ways he had never experienced with Maud, or with any other woman.
He wanted to give comfort, and protect her from the cruel blow life had dealt her.
More than that, he wanted to act on the impulse to touch her and experience the thrill of holding a girl whose very presence caused him exceptional physical excitement.
He had carried her in his arms as naturally as if he had been doing so for years, and she had felt right there.
He watched her go down Newcastle Place with the bird  cage in her arms, and pity rose up like yeasty dough in his chest, restricting his breath.
She was so lovely, so young, so innocent, and she had such courage.
The next day he went back to the factory and found out the time of the funeral.
When he stood beside her at the grave he longed to hold her hand, and the sight of smudges on her cheeks from weeping made his heart ache.
She was so dreadfully alone.
He hadn't meant to make love to her.
It happened with the same naturalness that had first drawn them together, and in taking her he felt the greatest fulfilment of his life.
Then like a fool he had spoken of Maud, and Sarah had seen him as nothing more than a philanderer.
What a powerful thing his pride had become.
He'd looked around that shabby dwelling and smelled the poverty which he had vowed to help alleviate in his dedicated youth, and to his shame he had thought only of escaping from the fleas he might have picked up from that terrible straw mattress.
On his long, solitary walks in Italy, Switzerland and Paris, he began to long for Sarah.
He pictured her mane of dark hair which was so beautiful to touch, and her unblemished skin, like silk beneath his fingers.
And more than once he lost his way because he was remembering the bluest eyes he had ever seen.
Yet she was not a conventionally beautiful girl.
Compared with Maud she was too tall and thin, and her mouth was too wide, but she had a simple grace which remained in his memory long after her features were blurred by time.
Immediately he was back in England he longed to seek her out, but his acquaintance with the Bradfords prohibited it.
The last thing he wanted was word to be passed to Maud.
Once he went to the house in Stone Alley and was met at the door by Maggie Byrne, but she only wanted to talk about the undersized child in her arms whose life he had saved.
When asked about Sarah she turned up her nose and sniffed.
‘I can't tell you where she is.’
Maggie looked at him suspiciously.
‘What would you be wanting with her anyway?’
He couldn't tell a woman like Maggie Byrne that thoughts of Sarah were blighting his relationship with his wife, and turning him to celibacy.
She would have roared with laughter.
But this Christmas an invitation had come to celebrate with the Bradfords, and he had found her.
His spirits soared.
He glanced over at the mirror every time she came near, longing to speak, and he drank in her loveliness like a man who has crossed a barren desert.
She was more mature than when he had last seen her.
Her waist was still slender enough to span with his hands, her eyes were full of mystery, and her control of the situation was admirable.
He alone could tell she was nervous.
He sensed the bond between them, and knew she was aware of it too, though she gave not the slightest outward sign.
He bided his time until there was an opportunity to seek her out.
Under cover of a game of blindman's buff he slipped into the darkened dining room, and to his relief she was there, on hands and knees by the table.
When she looked up at him the year just passed faded away like an unpleasant dream.
‘Sarah, I must speak to you.’
‘We've nothing to say.’
He clasped her arm and made her get to her feet, but she shook herself free immediately.
‘Where can we talk?’ he asked.
‘I told you, I've nothing to say to you.’
He followed her when she went towards the door, and detained her.
‘Sarah, please!
Do you think I wasn't aware of you every moment of that interminable dinner?
Every time you came near me I wanted to put my arm round your waist.’
He tried to do it now, but she dodged back into a corner.
‘Say we can meet somewhere and start again.’
‘Does this mean you no longer have a wife?’
‘Of course I still have a wife, but there's no need for you to worry your pretty little head about it.
Since meeting you I've thought of no one else, I swear.’
He put one hand against the wall, close enough to touch a strand of her hair which had pulled free from the cap, and  he imprisoned her in that dark corner.
Her rapid breathing was proof that her emotions were stirred as much as his, but she shrank away, flattening her body against the cold wood rather than succumb to his persuasion.
‘Your swearing doesn't impress me one bit,’ she said, turning her head aside to avoid a kiss.
‘If you've thought of me at all since we last met I'd be very surprised.’
‘My dear Sarah…’
‘I'm not your dear Sarah.’
She tried to slip free, but he moved round so that he could see her face more clearly.
In the gaslight her blue eyes flashed, and her anger only increased his need of her.
‘I have me pride, James Halden, and I'm ashamed I ever let you come near me.’
‘I'm sure there have been plenty of men since,’ he said, considerably piqued.
But the thought of anyone else knowing her intimately produced a wave of incredible jealousy.
‘There's been no one.
Mrs Bradford don't allow followers.
And she'd be none too happy if I told her I was being bothered by one of her guests.’
She clutched the brush against her, unaware how provocatively her hands were thrusting up her breasts.
‘Now, if you don't mind, I've work to do.’
‘I'll not let you go until you promise to let me see you.’
‘Then we'll be here all night.’
‘What a delicious thought.
I'd like nothing better than to spend the night with you.’
His teasing upset her.
‘I wish you'd never come here.
Oh, I wish it so much.’
She stamped her foot.
‘I thought you'd left the country for good.’
So she had been asking after him.
He drew in his breath with elation, but he could see by the way she bit her lip that she hadn't intended to let the confession slip.
‘How did you know I'd gone abroad?’
He bent his head and cupped her face between his hands so that she couldn't look away.
‘My little sparrow, I do believe you regretted our quarrel as much as I did.
And you must believe me when I tell you I'd rather have been with you than in any of those exotic places.’
He attempted to take her in his arms, thinking the matter was happily resolved, but she was adept at dodging, losing none of the dignity which was so exceptional in a common maidservant.
‘I don't hold with philandering,’ she said.
‘I intend to make something of meself, so I'd be obliged if you'd treat me with more respect.’
‘Hoity-toity!’
James scoffed.
Such airs she gave herself!
‘The only way a girl like you gets on in this world is if she has something worth selling.
I'd not expect your favours for nothing.’
He was immediately ashamed of the outburst.
For a moment she looked stricken, then she lifted her head proudly.
‘If ever I'm that desperate for money I'll come and ask you for it,’ she said.
‘But it won't be for the reason you think.’
She walked away with a poise unmatched by any woman of his acquaintance, and he stared after her with angry fascination.
Chapter Four
The meeting with James upset Sarah very much.
He was an arrogant man who thought he had only to crook his finger and she would come running.
Well, she had shown him she couldn't be swayed by his good looks or his fancy words; not any more.
But the fire in her body when she lay in bed thinking of him that night warned her that she had to be strong or she wouldn't be able to reject him if he tried again.
Strangely, she wasn't so upset by the revival of a strong physical attraction.
She could control that by reminding herself of the terrible consequences it had led to the first time.
What troubled her more was the memory of James's kindness when they first met.
It had meant so much to her and she longed for his compassion again, but it was too late now for him to be told about Angel.
He would never forgive her for abandoning his child.
Last night there had been Christmas bells ringing all over London.
Tonight when she tried to sleep there was a dog howling, and the dismal sound expressed everything Sarah was feeling.
But just as she was burying her head beneath the blanket in utter dejection Ella came to bed, and she passed on the most extraordinary piece of news.
‘You know you was talking about Chertsey,’ Ella said.
‘Well Reverend Morey comes from there.
Ain't that a coincidence?’
Sarah's eyes flew open.
‘Did he say so?’
‘I 'eard Mr Priddy telling Cook.’
Ella never missed anything that was said in the kitchen.
It was the only thing that could have made Sarah temporarily forget about James, and she was still awake with her thoughts when Ella's snoring rattled to the rafters of the narrow attic room.
God works in mysterious ways.
She had learnt that from her ma, but she had never understood until recently.
First there had been Dimsey  Turner, and now there was the Reverend Morey.
Somehow she was going to get to Chertsey to see Angel before too long.
All she had to do was work out a plan.
The next morning breakfast was laid ready in the dining room for the Bradfords' guests to help themselves at whatever hour they chose to rise.
Sarah was kept busy replenishing dishes, and every time she had to go down to the kitchen she was afraid of missing the Reverend Morey, but he appeared last of all.
Luck was with her again, for he breakfasted alone.
‘Excuse me, sir,’ Sarah said.
She bobbed a curtsey to give a good impression.
‘I was here when you was collecting for the Foundling Hospital yesterday, and I wondered if a shilling would help.
It's all I have, you see, but I don't need it with Mrs Bradford providing everything for me.
I'd be glad if you'd take it.’
Nahum Morey wiped his mouth on a napkin, and gave her his full attention.
‘My dear, kind girl.’
He positively beamed as he took the coin and held it up between his thumb and index finger.
‘This is indeed the widow's mite.’
‘It's a whole shilling I'm giving you, sir.
And I ain't a widow.
I ain't been married.’
He laughed, and stood up.
‘What's your name, child?’
‘Sarah Byrne, sir.’
‘Well, Sarah Byrne, you've strengthened my faith in human nature, even though I can tell you don't go to church.’
‘I don't have time, sir.’
‘Hmm.’
He stroked his round, dumpling chin.
‘You should go and hear the Foundling children sing in their wonderful chapel.
I'll make it right with Mrs Bradford for you to have time off next Sunday, then you must go and listen to them.’
‘Me, sir?’
Sarah's face lit up.
‘I rent my own pew, of course.
But the public are admitted to the galleries, providing they make a small donation.’
The light was extinguished as quickly as it had come, and her shoulders curled with disappointment.
He  held the shilling out to her.
‘How would it be if I returned your gift so that you can give it at the door?’
‘That's very kind of you, sir.
I'd be more than pleased.’
‘Consider it settled then.’
Nahum Morey was a man of middle height, and Sarah could look into his dark brown eyes.
She did so with such innocent flirtation he should have been discomforted, but he met the look with his usual amusement.
And something more.
She was learning to recognize the effect she had on men, and to her surprise she saw the hint of desire creep into his gaze.
His smiling lips almost curved into an invitation which his calling would not permit him to express.
She thought over this new development carefully and decided to encourage it.
With a little guile her visit to Chertsey might even be achieved quite soon.
That was Thursday.
She had to wait three more days until Sunday, and it was difficult to hide her excitement.
It was also important to think what she should wear, for if any of the Governors who had interviewed her only three months ago saw her at the service they would know why she was there.
Ella, whose curiosity had to be appeased with little white lies, was persuaded to lend her best bonnet.
It had a deep brim which widened towards the chin so that in profile the face would be hidden, and before she put it on Sarah brushed her unruly hair until it looked smooth, then she parted it in the middle and drew it tightly back.
It altered her appearance considerably, making her look older and quite severe, and in her new black working dress she could have been taken for a widow.
‘I don't know what you're up to, Sarah Byrne, but I know you ain't religious,’ said Ella.
‘So there must be some other reason you changed yer time off.
Don't you tell me again you ain't got a fella 'cause I shan't believe you.’
Sarah neither confirmed nor denied it, but went off with a smile.
She needn't have worried that she would be recognized.
A constable was at the door to regulate the stream of people going into the chapel, and she was directed to the eastern  gallery.
Her face was pleasingly flushed from hurrying, but now she walked with her head held high, taking slow, dignified steps so that no one would have thought she was a domestic servant.
Once in her seat she was able to look round, and she quietly absorbed the lovely surroundings.
When every seat was taken the Foundling children filed to their places, filling the gallery where the organ stood like a turreted castle, girls on the left in snowy white, and darkly dressed boys on the right.
One day Angel would be among them.
Sarah blinked back tears.
It was harder still to restrain them when the singing started, for she had never heard anything so glorious.
There was a professional choir as well as the children, and the sound of hymns being so brilliantly performed made the Foundling Hospital chapel the most popular place of worship in London.
Her meagre shilling donation was an embarrassment in this wealthy company, but she refused to think of it.
During the sermon Sarah's attention wandered.
She spotted Nahum Morey in his rented pew, his legs outstretched and his head tipped back against the wood as if he were concentrating on the sermon's message, but she was suddenly aware that their eyes were meeting.
She looked away hurriedly, confused in spite of her resolution to encourage him.
He was old enough to be her father, and she convinced herself that she was suffering from too much imagination.
Surely a man of the cloth wouldn't look at her with the same sort of craving as James Halden.
The thought was odious.
She pictured James with his intense hazel eyes and nose that was too big.
Since Christmas day her feelings for him had been in such a chaotic state she didn't know whether she loved or hated him.
Whichever it was the emotion was so strong it made her attempted flirtation with Nahum Morey seem cheap.
James would have plenty to say about it if he knew.
She could almost hear his language.
But she was doing it for their child, and in order to make sure that Angel was happy she needed the Reverend Morey.
The children began to sing Handel's anthem.
‘Blessed  are they that consider the poor’, and Sarah dared to glance once more in his direction.
This time there was no mistaking his scrutiny.
As soon as their eyes met he inclined his head in acknowledgement.
After the service it took time for the galleries to empty.
Sarah was worried because it was getting late, and when at last she was out of the hospital she started walking quickly towards Clerkenwell, but she hadn't gone far before a hackney cab drew up.
‘Allow me to give you a lift, Sarah,’ said Nahum Morey, leaning out.
The night was dark and a fog was coming in from the river, but she hesitated.
Things were happening too easily and it made her nervous, even though he was Mrs Bradford's brother.
‘I don't know that you should, sir.’
‘Nonsense.
We're going to the same destination.’
He alighted and offered his hand to help her in.
When she was still unsure he patted her shoulder.
‘Your reluctance does you credit, but you've no need to be afraid.
My respect for you is increasing by the hour.’
She'd never been in a hackney cab.
Once inside she wriggled into the corner of the seat to make room for him, and prepared to enjoy the novelty.
But she was soon aware of his fat thigh pressing against hers, and each time they passed a gas lamp he turned to look at her.
She had to distract him.
‘Reverend Morey, do you really visit babies from the Foundling Hospital in your parish?’
‘Regularly,’ he said.
‘There must be forty or more.’
‘As many as that?’
Her surprise was genuine.
He chatted on about them for the rest of the journey, as she had hoped he would, and she learnt that they couldn't be better looked after.
‘They're treated like part of the families caring for them.
In fact I often hear the children calling their foster parents ‘mother’ and ‘father’.
The sad thing is that the tie is broken when they are five, and the little ones can get very distressed.’
Sarah was quiet.
The thought of Angel calling another woman mother made her heart ache anew.
‘I wish I could do something for them,’ she said, and the concern in her voice was now innocent of duplicity.
Nahum Morey, too, fell silent.
Along the cobbled road the steady clop-clopping of the cab horse echoed through the fog-laden evening, and they were enclosed in a very private world.
He was a good man.
She was ashamed of causing his inner disturbance which she sensed by the restlessness of his hands, and she wondered if he was praying.
He breathed deeply before speaking again.
‘Miss Byrne, I've been a widower these last three years, and the rectory where I live is big and lonely.’
Under the next gas lamp it was Sarah who looked at him, but he stared straight ahead.
Then he cleared his throat and made a quite extraordinary proposal.
‘For some time now I have been thinking I should marry again.
I know we haven't long been acquainted, but will you do me the honour of becoming my wife?’
‘Oh!’ she gasped.
He turned to her quickly and took one of her hands in both of his.
‘I know it must come as a shock to you.
Indeed it has to me, too, but I'm certain you've been sent into my life.
I feel the compassion in you.
From the first moment we spoke I knew you were a girl with great sensibility, and I admire you very much.
I need someone to share my duties in the parish, someone with understanding of family problems and poverty, and a love of children.
Please say you'll marry me.’
Like someone drowning, Sarah saw her past life in detail; the filthy room in which she'd grown up with no privacy and no sanitation, the painful joints on Ma's fingers from too much sewing, Paddy's brawls, and the incessant noise and smell of Turnmill Street.
She shut out memories of James, and thought hard about Angel.
Had she been asked the same question in different surroundings her amazement might have been tempered with doubt that Nahum Morey was in his right mind, but in this confined space she began to share his conviction that they had been drawn together by their various needs.
‘You don't know anything about me,’ she said doubtfully.
‘All I need to know is in your demeanour.
We shall soon grow to know each other better.’
She daren't think of the future.
The last thing in the world she had thought of becoming was a parson's wife, and if she were to consider it for any length of time she would refuse through lack of courage.
But he was expecting a decision now, and with Angel firmly in mind there could only be one answer.
She said, ‘Thank you, Reverend Morey.
I think I should like to be your wife.’
He sighed with satisfaction and carried her hand to his lips.
The touch was not unpleasant.
One day in February, just six weeks after Sarah accepted Nahum Morey's proposal, Edward Wooldridge ran home from the Chertsey Infants' School on the corner of St Anne's Road as fast as his six-year-old legs would carry him.
Usually he lingered by the stream to throw in stones, but today he didn't stop.
He rushed along London Street and Bridge Road so fast that he puffed and staggered the last few yards to the cottage where he lived with his parents and two younger brothers.
‘How is she, Ma?
Has the inspector been?’
‘He's been,’ said Peg.
‘Not long since, and he's sending the apothecary.
I wish he'd hurry.’
His mother was bending over the baby in the basketwork cradle his father had made for the first Wooldridge child, and she was mopping the fevered little body with a damp cloth.
‘Do you want me to go and find him?’
Edward asked.
‘You're a good boy.’
Peg paused and ruffled his hair affectionately, then handed him the cloth.
‘I must get yer father's tea.
It'd help me more if you keep Anna cool.
But don't make her wet or she'll get worse.’
Anna didn't belong to them.
When Ma had come home from London with her there'd been great excitement, and Edward and his brother Billy had looked at the mite as if she  were a fairy found among the budding snowdrops.
She was different from George.
Different from all of them.
Edward had watched over her for hours, even refusing to go down to the lock with his friends for days, though he loved to play there.
He fetched and carried things for Ma when she was nursing her, and never grumbled the way he'd done when George was sucking.
‘It's no good getting too fond of her,’ Ma had said.
‘We've only got her for five years, then she has to go back to the Foundling Hospital.’
But five years was a lifetime, and every day Edward loved Anna more.
If she cried he rocked the cradle and sang to her tunelessly.
If he had the chance he picked her up in his sturdy little arms and kissed her downy head the way he saw his father do when he thought no one was looking.
Anna had found a place in all their hearts, but nowhere so strongly as in the heart of this young boy.
She'd had a fever since last night, and all day at school he'd been thinking about her.
He didn't want her to die like so many babies did.
For weeks now she'd been recognizing him, her eyes following him round the room, and she tried to pull herself up in the cradle to see him better.
He made funny faces to amuse her, and when she smiled at his antics he would go on to tickle her toes until she gurgled happily.
‘She's going to have dark hair, Ma,’ he said one morning, when Anna was nearly five months old.
‘It's coming on dark after all,’ Peg agreed.
The baby fluff had disappeared and the new hair that was growing was quite a different colour.
Today her eyes were as dull as a puddle.
When he bent over her she cried, like she'd done all night, and he wanted to cry with her.
The apothecary came in his pony and trap just before Pa got home.
He was a small man with a shock of white hair, and a ruddy complexion from his liking for port.
He brought with him a bottle of his own herbal remedy for fevers and scarcely looked at the baby before worrying about his fee.
‘I take it the hospital inspector will be paying me,’ he said.
He placed his flabby hand on the hot little forehead, and Edward expected the fever to disappear like magic.
Instead, Anna's limbs suddenly began to jerk alarmingly and for several seconds she thrashed her head from side to side until tiny bubbles of foam appeared on her lips.
Then she was still.
Edward began to cry.
‘She's dead, Ma.
She's dead.’
‘The child has had a mild fit,’ said the apothecary, turning Anna on to her stomach.
He didn't seem too concerned.
‘Quite a common occurrence in babies with a fever.
Dose her with the medicine I've brought and she'll be better by tomorrow.’
‘But what if it happens again?’
Peg had gone very pale and her hands fluttered over Anna anxiously.
‘It won't.
She's a strong child.’
The man picked up his bag and went to the door.
‘The hospital will have to be informed, of course.
I'll tell the inspector to mention it in his report.’
The fit had frightened Edward, and he wouldn't leave Anna's side even when Ma told him it was time for bed.
His pa had been worried, too.
He'd picked up the baby and held her while Ma gave her the medicine, and his face had the same look as when Billy had fallen in the river.
But the apothecary had been right, and by morning Anna was almost like her old self, crying at last to be fed instead of turning her head away.
‘Thank God for that,’ his father said.
He'd always gone to the fields long before Edward was up for school, but today he was still wrapping his lunchtime bread and cheese in a cloth.
‘Don't like to see little 'uns ill.’
‘You was worried about her, Isaac, same as all of us,’ said Peg, and she gave Pa one of those nice smiles that made you feel warm inside.
‘I'm glad you was.
It shows you're a good Christian.’
Pa shrugged himself into his coat and tied a muffler about his neck to keep out the cold February wind.
‘Better tell that to Reverend Morey next time you see him.’
He  collected the stout stick he always took with him, and pulled on his cap.
‘Forgot to tell you, Peg, I hear the rector's taken hisself a wife.’
‘He never has!’ said Peg with disbelief.
Then: ‘So that's why he's been away more than usual.
Is she someone posh?’
‘Dunno.
But from what I 'eard she's a bit of a thing little more than half his age.
Some blokes have all the luck!’
‘Get away with you, Isaac Wooldridge.’
Edward creased up laughing as Ma chased Pa with a broom outside into the bright, crisp morning.
When he went to look at Anna before going to school her eyes were once more as blue as the sky, and she curled her fingers round his as if she didn't want to let him go.
He was so happy he wouldn't have changed places with anybody.
Nahum Morey rarely drove in his carriage up to London now that the railway had come to Chertsey.
The city streets were so congested with vehicles it was a slow process getting up the Strand, and in winter horse manure was apt to splash up unpleasantly.
He found the train far more to his liking.
On the day he married Sarah Byrne at St James's Church in Clerkenwell he was impatient to travel home, there being no reception to mark the occasion.
His sister Elizabeth had preferred not to attend the ceremony for fear of appearing to condone his alliance with one of her housemaids, and the Bradfords' staff had been equally disapproving of one of their number presuming to move up into such illustrious circles.
The only witnesses had been Sarah's stepmother, and an ecclesiastic colleague who envied him his good fortune.
After Christmas he had wanted to arrange for the marriage to take place straight away, before he could change his mind, but it was difficult to fit it in with his new duties as a Governor of the Foundling Hospital which required him to spend one day a week in town.
In fairness to Sarah he had wanted to devote a whole day to her, but the pressure of his work had made it impossible, and he had been forced to settle for an afternoon wedding, following a  Governors' meeting, so that he and his bride could depart for Chertsey on the last train.
He tried not to think of the shock his sister had expressed so strongly when he had told her of his intentions.
‘You should be ashamed of yourself, Nahum,’ Elizabeth had said.
‘Poor Adelaide must be turning in her grave if she knows you mean to put a domestic servant in her place.
It's too disgraceful for words.
Why, you don't even know the girl!’
‘I'm sure she will be quite suitable.’
‘Whatever will the family say?
Really, Nahum!
If you're so desperate to marry again please wait until a lady of the proper class comes along.
I can introduce you to several of my acquaintance.’
‘Thank you, Elizabeth, but I have already proposed to Sarah, and I'm quite happy about it.’
Happy indeed.
Sarah was now his wife, and he had only to look at her to know he had done the right thing.
She had never been on a train before and the speed, which must have been twenty miles an hour, made her as excited as a child.
‘I ain't never travelled so fast.
It's bloomin' marvellous,’ she cried.
‘Haven't,’ he corrected.
‘You must stop saying ‘ain't'’ my dear.’
‘Yes, Nahum.
I'll try to remember.’
She was already dutiful and anxious to please him, and she looked so pretty in a dress of sprigged cotton he'd given her the money to buy for the wedding.
Her lovely hair had been coaxed into ringlets which bounced out beneath her bonnet, and he longed to feel the spirals curling round his fingers.
When he recalled how he had felt on first seeing her he had to push the sinful thoughts out of his mind.
When they arrived at Chertsey her excitement increased.
She looked around with a bright smile, which turned to surprise and a hint of dismay.
‘I didn't know it was such a big place,’ she said as they drove through the gaslit streets from the station in a hired carriage.
‘How will I get to know people?’
He laughed.
‘Anyone would think you had come from the country.’
But he was pleased because it showed she intended taking seriously the duties of a rector's wife.
‘I shall introduce you to my parishioners on Sunday morning.’
‘I want to be a credit to you, Nahum.’
‘You will be, I know.’
He took the liberty of holding her hand briefly.
She twisted in the seat to peer at every building, her eyes seeking the upper windows above shops rather than the goods on display, as if she were looking for someone.
‘Where do the Foundling babies live?’ she asked.
His smile broadened with growing satisfaction.
‘My word, what interest I kindled when I spoke of the hospital at Christmas.
I find it very heartening, my dear.’
His hand now rested lightly on her knee.
‘I'm especially pleased you have such a fondness for babies.
Adelaide and I were never blessed with children, but it has always been my dearest wish to have a family.’
For a girl born and bred in the slums of Clerkenwell she showed surprising embarrassment at the discreet mention of his hopes.
She lost the colour which had tinted her pale cheeks to the velvety beauty of pink rose petals, and her lower lip was drawn in slightly.
For the rest of the short journey she sat beside him uneasily, no longer so taken with her surroundings.
The rectory was a dour red brick house with ivy-clad walls where birds would soon be nesting.
It had an iron gate almost indistinguishable from the railings, and he preceded her through it to the front door which was centrally placed between tall windows, with a bow window above it belonging to the bedroom they would be sharing.
In answer to his ring the door was opened by a short, stout woman dressed severely in black.
‘Ah, Mrs Deacon,’ said Nahum, striding in and drawing Sarah after him.
‘Allow me to introduce you to the new Mrs Morey.’
There were deep lines at the side of the woman's mouth which pulled her lips downwards ungraciously.
She had  been his housekeeper since he had first moved into the rectory with Adelaide, and she looked after him with a devotion bordering on obsession.
He'd informed her of his intention to remarry, and she had commented favourably, so he was quite unprepared for her look of horror when Sarah stepped into the house.
‘Pleased to meet you, I'm sure,’ she said, keeping her hands firmly clasped over her bombazine-covered girth.
And there was no welcoming smile.
‘Your dinner's close to spoiling, sir.
I expected you back sooner.’
The house was cold.
He took Sarah through to the parlour where the glow from a fire lent a more cheerful appearance to the book-lined retreat which had been exclusively his own since Adelaide's death.
For the first time he felt awkward with this tall girl who was young enough to be his daughter, and he wished he had warned Mrs Deacon what to expect.
With a single look she had made him feel faintly ridiculous.
Such withering disapproval had curled those drooping lips after her initial consternation, and Nahum was so inwardly uncomfortable he forgot to consider Sarah's feelings.
‘From tomorrow, Sarah, I should like you to wear your hair in the style in which it was dressed when you attended the service at the Foundling Hospital,’ he said, forcing the smile which gave him a jovial reputation.
‘The severity will be more in keeping with your new responsibilities.’
He meant it would make her look older and plainer.
Sarah came through the first week of marriage with few hopes of real happiness, though she was pleased enough with her elevated circumstances.
It was gratifying to have people shake her hand who once wouldn't have given her the time of day, and when she walked through the dreary rooms where evidence of the late Adelaide Morey still abounded she had trouble convincing herself that she was now the mistress here.
She detested Mrs Deacon, who was like a sterner, more forthright edition of Mrs Martin.
But she remained amiable no matter how much she was provoked, and each day she  gained a little more confidence.
In time she would put the disagreeable widow in her place.
Nahum was the one she aimed to please.
She didn't love her husband, or even have any great affection for him, but she was mindful of the predicament in which he had placed himself by marrying so far beneath him, and she was going to make certain he never had cause to be ashamed of her.
She listened to the way he spoke and began imitating his careful diction, and her natural grace was an asset when she walked at his side.
He bought her two new gowns of a sombre colour at a shop in Guildford Street, a pair of good shoes, and a bonnet which shaded her lovely blue eyes.
Her hair no longer showed signs of its natural curl.
He was fascinated by her hair.
When it was loose at night he gathered it in his hands and buried his face against it before kissing her, and it seemed to give him more satisfaction than the hurried, clumsy act of love which followed.
Sarah closed her eyes when he lifted her nightdress and entered her with no show of sentiment.
It was just the mating of two bodies, essential for procreation, but certainly not meant to be enjoyed.
She endured these attentions patiently, and hoped that she would not become pregnant.
Above all she had to suppress thoughts of James Halden.
She was still haunted by the look in his eyes at Christmas, and memories of his strong, lean body made her ache with a longing which Nahum's undignified fumbling would never be able to satisfy.
If she allowed herself to think of James at all tears came close to the surface, and she knew she would never feel the same with anyone else.
On Sunday she heard Nahum preach for the first time, and she met the assistant curate, a young, delicate-looking man by the name of Daniel Marsh.
Neither impressed her.
Her husband's sermon was too long and hard to understand, and the curate was so self-effacing she had difficulty getting a word out of him.
It could have been that he was overcome with shyness, for he gazed at her almost with awe and stumbled over his words.
‘You are…you have…
I mean, the Reverend Morey  is a very lucky man, Mrs Morey.
If there is anything I can do for you…’
According to Nahum he was indispensable.
He practically ran the church, especially now that Nahum was away so much on Foundling Hospital business, and Sarah felt sorry for him.
His eagerness to please ensured that he was put upon, and judging by the worn state of his clothes she guessed he was paid a pittance for it.
Pity made her more friendly towards him than she might otherwise have been.
‘It's kind of you to make me so welcome,’ she said, dazzling him with a very personal smile.
‘I'll remember your offer.’
The young man went on his way with a lighter step, and he made an effort to project his almost non-existent chin.
But more than anything else Sarah craved for even a glimpse of Angel.
During that first week she went out with Nahum in the trap he used for visiting in the parish, and she was continually looking for a young woman with white hair and a baby.
She'd thought it would be easy to find her.
It was going to be nothing of the sort.
To her disappointment Nahum only seemed to visit the old and sick, and after the first few days he no longer took her with him, having suffered embarrassment each time he introduced his new wife whose youth couldn't be disguised.
She was amused and saddened by his dilemma.
She was also frustrated.
It was on Tuesday, the day before Nahum paid his weekly visit to London that Sarah met Peg Wooldridge.
She supported a baby of about six months on one hip and carried a bundle of laundry.
‘Good morning, Mrs Wooldridge,’ said Mrs Deacon, letting her in by the back door.
‘Parson's washing, Mrs Deacon,’ said Peg.
‘I'm real sorry it's a day late, but the baby's been ill.’
Sarah was in the kitchen when she arrived, and her heart gave a sudden leap as she recognized the plump, rosy-faced woman as one of the two who had driven away from the Foundling Hospital that fateful day.
Full of new hope, she waited by the table.
The housekeeper took the bundle of laundry and money  changed hands.
She said: ‘There's more this week, with an extra one in the house.’
‘I'm Mrs Morey, the rector's new wife,’ said Sarah, going towards Peg with an outstretched hand as the housekeeper didn't have the manners to introduce her.
‘I'm sorry your baby's not been well.’
‘She's had a fever and now she won't let me out of her sight, so I 'ad to bring her.’
The baby's head was buried against Peg's arm.
Sarah touched the dark hair springing up in a quiff.
‘What's her name?’
‘Anna Beckett.
She ain't mine, ma'am.
I foster 'er.’
Anna looked up, and her blue eyes fixed on Sarah for several seconds.
Her skin was sallow since the fever, and her little face was pinched with the cold so that there was nothing attractive about her.
All at once she began to scream, turning her tiny head away, and Peg bounced her against her shoulder with soothing murmurs until the outburst ceased.
Then she picked up the dirty washing and went to the door.
‘I hope the baby's soon better,’ said Sarah, with all the diplomacy of a clergyman's wife.
Not that she really minded.
She couldn't take to the child.
‘Thank you, ma'am.’
Peg left.
After a moment Sarah followed her.
There was a knot of excitement in her stomach and her breathing was erratic.
‘Mrs Wooldridge, did you know my husband's a Governor of the Foundling Hospital now?’ she asked, catching the woman up.
‘I'd heard, ma'am.’
Peg's expression was wary.
‘There's nothing the matter with Anna that need trouble him.
She's well looked after.’
‘I can see she is.
I only wanted to tell you I'm really interested in the Foundling babies and I hope to visit some of them for my husband.
There's another about Anna's age, I believe.’
‘Betty Gilling took one the same time as me, but Reverend Morey knows there'll be no troubles there.
Betty's fostered before.’
Anna was crying again and Peg cuddled her into the folds of her own shawl where it was warm.
‘Now if you'll excuse me, I must get home to me boys.’
Sarah stayed outside a few minutes longer, her spirits lifting wondrously, and she felt as happy as a robin singing among the branches of the oak tree.
The sky was blue, the air crisp and clear, and the sun was shining on a patch of yellow crocuses.
It was the loveliest day imaginable now that she knew the name of Angel's foster parents.
The following morning Nahum set out on his visit to London, just seven days after their marriage, and Sarah watched his departure.
‘I shall miss you, Nahum,’ she said.
Nahum kissed her fingertips.
He rarely kissed her lips.
‘You make it difficult for me to leave.
I've never had a better incentive to hurry home.
Goodbye, my dear.’
She waved until he was out of sight.
An hour later she went to the church and looked for Daniel Marsh.
‘Mr Marsh, I wonder if I might accept your offer of help,’ she said when she found him in the vestry.
‘I thought I'd visit some of the mothers with Foundling babies today.’
‘That's very commendable of you, Mrs Morey,’ said Daniel.
His large adam's apple moved up and down as he swallowed his nerves.
‘So I'd like you to drive me in the pony and trap, just till I know where people live.’
‘But, Mrs Morey…’
‘I'm sure my husband won't mind.
The first person on my list is a Mrs Gilling.’
Daniel took more persuading than she had expected, but finally agreed to spare an hour later in the morning.
She watched him get the pony ready, learning all the time so that she would be able to harness it herself in future when she wanted to drive out in Nahum's absence.
When she was seated beside him Daniel's discomfort was noticeable.
It embarrassed him to be sitting so close to the rector's wife and he kept as far to the side as he could so that no one would think he was enjoying her company.
Sarah was too excited to worry what anybody thought.
And too preoccupied to hold a conversation.
She was picturing her daughter, her beloved Angel, and as the pony stepped daintily over the cobbles she was counting the minutes until she was with her for the first time in nearly six months.
They drove the length of London Street and Bridge Road in silence until the first glimpse of the sun glinting on the river by Chertsey Bridge prompted Sarah to comment.
‘It seems to be a long way.’
‘Harry Gilling is the lock-keeper,’ said Daniel.
‘It's a small cottage for a large family.’
When they reached it Sarah counted four children playing near the turf-sided lock, and fears for Angel's safety immediately sprang to mind.
Not far off she could hear rushing water where the Thames tumbled over a weir, and two more children were running along the narrow bank separating the lock from the river.
The whole area seemed fraught with danger.
Betty Gilling was at the cottage door, her white hair knotted prettily on top of her head and her arms folded over the mound of her stomach where her eighth child was curled, almost ready to be born.
‘What brings you, Mr Marsh?’ she asked.
‘Has that old skinflint parson sent you to check up on me?’
Daniel's face turned crimson.
‘Madam, allow me to introduce you to Mrs Morey, the Reverend Morey's wife.
She has kindly offered to visit the Foundling children.’
‘Should you need anything, Mrs Gilling…’
‘If I need anything, ma'am, I call the inspector.
But I don't need nothing.’
‘If I can just see the baby.’
Sarah's legs were trembling.
There was a patch of ground at the side of the cottage where washing was strewn to dry on the bushes, and she saw Angel's patchwork blanket.
‘There's nowt wrong with Corrie.
I earn me three and a tanner.’
‘I'm sure you do.
I only want to see her a moment.’
Betty stood aside grudgingly.
‘Yuh'd best come in.’
The cottage was warm and surprisingly tidy, considering the size of the family, but Sarah saw little of her surroundings.
Her eyes went straight to the wicker chair by the window where a baby was just waking from its morning sleep.
She went over to it, her mouth dry, her pulses racing, and when she looked down at the cherubic child with bright golden hair she had to grip the arms for support.
Without asking permission she lifted the baby and held it against her heart, crying silently.
Chapter Five
There was no doubt that Paddy Byrne's greatest gift to his daughter Sarah was the passing on of his irresistible Irish charm which enabled him to get his own way.
Sarah knew well how to use her gift.
She had been married to Nahum Morey for two years when the staid Mrs Deacon died of influenza.
There had never been any warmth between the women, but they had learnt to respect each other, and Sarah had become accomplished at running the house.
With subtle flattery she had gradually been accepted by the housekeeper.
With humility she managed to convince her husband that she was obedient to his every wish.
Had either realized her knack of manipulating it might have been a different story, but Sarah never allowed her determination to show.
After Mrs Deacon's death there was no change in the pattern of life at the rectory, and Nahum's comforts remained the same.
His meals were always ready, his clothes clean and pressed, and his vestments for the Sunday service were immaculate.
After his visits to London his wife was waiting to welcome him as if he had been away for weeks, and she was always dutiful in bed.
She visited the sick, made gifts for the poor, and ran bazaars to raise money for the church.
She also made a point of keeping in touch with every woman who fostered a baby from the Foundling Hospital as the charity was so dear to her husband's heart.
In all she was a model wife, and earned the esteem of everyone in the town.
Sarah herself was reasonably happy.
She had achieved her purpose in being able to watch Angel grow, but often she was homesick for Clerkenwell and the friends she'd known since childhood.
Life was so different in the country and she couldn't get used to the fresh air, the slower pace, the cleanliness of everything.
Sometimes she longed for the  sound of traffic and street cries.
There was no soot in the mists and fog which came from the river, and no garbage in the gutters like there was in London.
She was awakened in the mornings by cocks crowing, and it was so quiet in the evenings it seemed everyone must go to bed before dark.
If she hadn't kept busy all the time she would have thought too much about James, and about Maggie.
She missed Maggie, though once she would never have believed it possible.
The bond which had drawn them so close before Angel's birth was strong and sometimes Sarah longed to be back for a brief time in that dilapidated house in Stone Alley, free of the sanctimonious atmosphere of the rectory, until she remembered Maggie wasn't there any more either.
Once she started writing her a letter and had filled a sheet of paper before she realized that Maggie couldn't read so there was no sense in sending it.
Perhaps the jeweller she kept house for could read, but the things Sarah wanted to say were not for a stranger's eyes.
For several weeks after her wedding she had entertained the silly idea that James might look for her, but she was thankful that he never came even though he soon heard about her marriage to Nahum.
‘How very kind,’ Nahum said one day as he was going through his morning correspondence.
‘My sister's friends, Dr Halden and his wife, have written to send good wishes on our marriage.
They hope we'll be very happy.
Pity Elizabeth wasn't as kindly disposed.’
Good wishes!
Sarah's heartbeats quickened.
James's message had been meant for herself, an oblique way of saying that he was no longer interested.
She knew it was best, but she couldn't help wondering what would have happened if she hadn't been so proud on Christmas Day.
Gradually she got used to thinking of Angel as Corrie, but it soon became clear that she would never be able to claim her as her own.
Such dreams were defeated by the means she'd first thought would make it possible for her baby to be returned to her.
Nahum would be horrified if he discovered she had a child.
His disappointment at having a second wife barren was, to him, the only flaw in  their marriage, and her deception would never be forgiven.
But there were ways of increasing her contact with Corrie.
Sarah schemed for several weeks before daring to put forward a proposal.
‘Nahum, am I doing everything I should now that Mrs Deacon is no longer with us?’ she asked.
It was a warm spring evening and she was sewing by the window while he checked the weekly accounts.
His careful way with money was well known.
He looked up and smiled.
‘My dear, you are coping perfectly.
I'm very proud of you.’
‘If only I didn't feel so tired,’ she said.
She let the sewing drop on to her lap and her shoulders drooped a little.
Her complexion was always pale, but she had dusted her cheeks lightly with flour after the evening meal to accentuate it.
‘I don't want to neglect anything.’
Nahum got up at once and went to her side, his concern tinged with ever-present hope.
Do you think, Sarah, this might mean you are expecting a child?’
‘I don't think so,’ she said, but she expressed the truth so artfully it sounded almost as if there was a possibility.
‘What I need, just in case, is some help with the heavy work.’
‘We already have a housemaid.’
‘Who should be free to help me with the food.
And she would be if I could have a woman come in to scrub the floors.’
He returned to pick up his account book and totted up some figures.
‘That would mean paying out almost as much money as when Mrs Deacon was here.’
‘I'm sorry, Nahum,’ said Sarah.
‘I shouldn't have suggested it.
Of course I can manage.’
Her subservience never failed.
Nahum was immediately contrite, apologizing for his hesitation and assuring her that her health was more important than anything else, especially if there was the longed-for reason for her tiredness.
She could have a woman come in twice a week.
‘I'll find someone suitable tomorrow,’ he promised.
‘I already have someone in mind,’ Sarah said.
‘I sometimes visit the lock-keeper's wife who has a Foundling child, and she's a good worker.
She could do with the extra money.’
She had learnt long ago that Nahum's chief interest in the Foundling Hospital was the boost it gave to his own ego being on the Board of Governors, a position acquired mainly through the generosity of his brother-in-law, John Bradford, who always supported the charity financially.
Nahum was content to let his wife do the local visiting, and reports on the children's welfare came regularly from the inspector, so there was little required of him in Chertsey.
In this respect Sarah had made herself as indispensable as Daniel Marsh.
However, Nahum was not out of touch.
‘But the Gillings have a horde of children,’ he protested.
‘And you know how I love them, Nahum, dear.
The oldest are working, and their father is always on hand to keep an eye on the others.
Mrs Gilling can bring the two youngest with her.’
She knew Nahum wouldn't refuse.
Betty Gilling started work the following week.
It was a long walk from the lock, but Harry had made her a box on wheels in which to push the two little girls, Corrie Palmer and her last child, Lily, who was seven months younger.
She thanked the Lord there had been none since Lily.
Already there were six in one bed, three at the top and three at the bottom, and they would soon have to make room for Matt, the boy born before she took in Corrie.
She had more than enough to cope with, but the chance of a job to bring in a few extra shillings was not to be scorned.
The rector's wife was a bit of a mystery, and Betty couldn't really make her out.
She seemed to have taken to the Foundling child the moment she set eyes on her, and there was no doubt in Betty's mind that Corrie was the sole reason for her being offered the work.
The girl seemed to love kids, but like the first Mrs Morey she didn't produce any.
It weren't fair that one woman should fall every time  her husband used her, while another never fell at all.
She sighed as she thought of the constant drudgery.
No wonder her hair had turned white at twenty-five.
Then Lily touched her hand to show her something, and love welled up in her like treacle.
Not for the first time she found herself pitying Sarah Morey.
‘The children can play in the garden,’ Mrs Morey said when they arrived.
A short time later Betty stopped her scrubbing and looked out of the kitchen window.
Mrs Morey was outside, seated on a wooden bench with Corrie on her lap and Lily beside her, both children  enthralled with a story she was telling.
There was no doubt she was a beautiful woman.
Since marrying the rector she had filled out, and she had such clear blue eyes which reminded Betty of others she had seen, though she couldn't place where it was.
Usually her hair was drawn back tightly until the skin pulled at her temples, but today it was loose, and so pretty Betty was quite envious.
Some said she was a girl from the slums of London that Reverend Morey had taken pity on, but Betty didn't believe that.
It wouldn't be pity that any man felt for Sarah Morey.
As she watched she saw Sarah put both arms round Corrie and hug her with a joyful laugh.
Corrie was a loving child who inspired affection.
She was also a delight to behold with her golden curls, and the two formed a real picture out there in the garden.
It made Betty Gilling strangely uneasy.
A routine was established which went on for more than a year.
Betty came to the rectory on Wednesdays, when the Reverend Morey was in London, and on Saturdays to see the place was clean for the sabbath.
While the scrubbing was done Mrs Morey found an occupation which would involve the children, and going there was the highlight of their lives.
But as they grew older it no longer seemed necessary to take them with her, and one Wednesday morning Betty arrived on her own.
‘Where are they?’
Sarah Morey demanded.
Her disappointment was so  acute she was wringing her hands.
‘Why haven't you brought Corrie?’
‘There's no need now, ma'am.
They're big enough to stay with the others and do jobs at home.’
‘I want you to bring them with you,’ said Sarah.
‘They're just becoming useful when there's the silver to clean, and they gather fir cones for the fire.
They can do a dozen small jobs.’
Betty didn't come without them any more for fear of losing her job, but she wasn't blind or daft.
She could see that Mrs Morey was besotted with the Foundling child, and she began to feel sorry for her.
She was a woman in need of a child to love, and having none of her own she was lavishing it all on Corrie Palmer, which was sad because in another year she would have to be returned to the hospital.
On rare occasions Peg Wooldridge came with the laundry as late as Wednesday, and now that Mrs Deacon was no longer there it didn't seem to matter.
On Wednesdays the mistress was in such a good mood you could get away with anything.
‘I'm sorry, ma'am,’ Peg would say, and find one excuse or another.
And Sarah Morey would tell her that it didn't matter, though on any other day she would have been irritable at the delay.
As long as the rector's wife could hold Corrie Palmer's hand she was happy, as Betty soon told Peg.
‘It's a shame really,’ she said.
‘For Corrie as well as her.
The kid dotes on her, and it's making her difficult.
Spoilt like.
You're lucky it wasn't Anna she took to.’
‘There ain't much about Anna that would appeal to her,’ said Peg.
They stood a moment by the kitchen window and compared the two Foundling girls who were playing with Lily in the garden.
Anna was growing tall, and her black hair was so unruly Peg had plaited it to keep it away from her pale face.
She was as fearless as the Wooldridge boys who involved her in all their mischief, but sometimes Anna would stand and stare, as if she was seeing things that others couldn't see.
She was a strange child.
Betty frowned.
Now she knew who it was with eyes like Sarah Morey's.
Anna and Sarah both had surprisingly light  blue eyes considering the darkness of their hair.
The stamp of the Irish, Harry had said, when they were talking about Mrs Morey.
Perhaps both had Irish blood in them.
Sarah refused to think about the inevitable separation from Corrie when it was time for her to be returned to the Foundling Hospital.
She lived in the present, loving her more each day and experiencing the secret joy of sharing in her child's upbringing.
But as the months became years she could no longer hide her feelings.
She made little dresses and pinafores for Lily and Corrie, but Corrie's were decorated with ribbons and lace.
She always brushed Corrie's beautiful hair when she came to the rectory, and though she began teaching both children the alphabet it was Corrie who received the most attention.
She would cuddle the child and sing to her, always trying to keep her near, but sadly Corrie wanted none of it.
She would wriggle away from Sarah's attention as soon as she could and hide in the garden.
‘My beautiful, precious child,’ Sarah crooned one day.
‘I don't know what I'd do if you didn't come and see me.’
I'm not yours,’ said Corrie, darting off.
‘I'm not anybody's.’
When the sun played on her golden hair it was as bright as the copper warming pan which Sarah put between the sheets on winter nights.
The lovely reddish gold curls were so similar to the colour of James's hair it took her breath away, yet she could see no other likeness.
Corrie had a short, snub nose and rosebud mouth, and her eyes were a smoky grey.
Nor was she growing tall like her father or Sarah.
She was nowhere near the height of Anna Beckett either, who was shooting up like a sapling.
Anna made Sarah feel uncomfortable.
Whenever she came to the house with Peg she would look about with solemn curiosity, and her blue eyes dominated her wan little face.
Sometimes she would stand in front of Sarah and stare at her in the most curious way, saying nothing.
The child gave her goose pimples and she never encouraged her to stay, though Anna clearly wanted to.
‘You're a pretty lady,’ she said one Wednesday.
She reached out to Sarah longingly, trying to hold her hand, but Sarah thrust her away, unmoved by the quivering lips and tear-filled eyes her rejection caused.
She just couldn't take to Anna Beckett at all.
Perhaps it was because she compared so unfavourably with Corrie.
Being so preoccupied with her child helped Sarah to ignore the change in her husband.
Nahum was no longer so kind or considerate, and he was prone to strange moods.
He stopped her from going visiting in the town, and whenever Daniel Marsh was near Nahum became angry, taking it out on the poor, innocent man whose only role in life was to serve.
‘My wife doesn't want you hanging around her like a pet dog,’ Nahum said to him after the service one Sunday morning.
Daniel had been offering to lend her his favourite book of poetry as she had developed a liking for it.
His head sank so low that his collar dented his bottom lip, and Sarah had touched his arm in sympathy, earning an even stronger rebuke herself.
Nahum was becoming a feverishly energetic lover.
Perhaps he thought powerful attacks on her might produce the result he longed for.
He would pump away until he was exhausted, as though by sheer force he could inject her with fertile seed.
It left Sarah sore and bruised.
His weight had increased since their marriage, and she began to dread his nightly activity, but she accepted it without complaint as the price she had to pay for Corrie.
Sarah's downfall came through being over-confident.
As it drew nearer to Corrie's fifth birthday she began desperately seeking a way in which to keep her in Chertsey.
To lose her now was going to be ten times worse than when she had left her at the Foundling Hospital, and she was making herself ill with worry.
The solution came to her one evening when Nahum commented on her excessive pallor.
‘My dear, you're not looking well,’ he said.
‘I do hope you're not sickening for anything.’
After all this time his hopes could still be rekindled, so the comment was made cheerfully.
Sarah sighed.
‘I'm such a disappointment to you, Nahum.’
The summer evenings were getting shorter and she was lighting the wick of the lamp on her husband's desk so that he could see to write his sermon.
‘I will admit we don't have the fulfilled marriage I had hoped for,’ he said.
‘A house is not a proper home without children, and I quite thought there might have been three at least by now.’
‘It's all my fault.’
Sarah always took the blame, though she knew it wasn't the truth.
Then, as the flame of the lamp flickered and grew, she saw the most wonderful answer to her problems.
She drew in her breath at the simplicity of it, wondering why she hadn't thought of it before, and it excited her so much she put forward the suggestion without stopping to think if it was wise.
Clutching his sleeve, she said: ‘Nahum, we could adopt a child and bring it up as if it were our own.’
Her husband's smile, which she had long since discovered to be a deceitful thing, wavered on his lips like a breeze over a cornfield, and he was slow to answer.
‘I don't know that I care for the idea.
I've no wish for someone of unknown parentage to inherit after my death.’
‘Oh, Nahum, shame on you,’ she chided.
‘I'm not thinking of money.
I'm talking about giving a home and love to a child.
Wouldn't it he a very Christian thing to do?’
Her heart was beating like a drum while he considered.
Then: ‘For your sake, Sarah, I shall give the matter thought.
My sister Elizabeth does a lot of charitable work in orphanages.
She may know of a suitable baby.’
‘But I want one of the Foundling children,’ Sarah cried, much too eagerly.
She went down on her knees beside him.
‘I want the little girl who comes here with Betty.
Her name's Corrie Palmer.
Please, Nahum.
I really love her.’
‘Impossible,’ he said, his small eyes hardening.
‘You know all Foundling children have to be returned to the hospital.
Not even foster parents are allowed to keep them.’
It was the first time she had ever begged him for anything, but she knew it was likely he could be persuaded  with flattery.
‘You're a Governor, Nahum.
You can do anything.
Say you'll try to get Corrie for me.’
Her blue eyes beseeched him.
Her hands cajoled, touching his face with tenderness and trust.
He frowned: ‘I've seen the unhealthy affection you have for the child.
I should have put a stop to it.’
He removed her hands from his person and deposited them in her lap.
‘There's nothing I can do to prolong the girl's stay here, even if I wanted to.’
Sarah's eyes filled with tears, which she allowed him to see before burying her face against his ample knees.
His trousers were rough against her skin and smelt fusty like the church where he spent so many hours praying, presumably, for guidance.
‘But you can try.
Please say you'll try.’
Her longing for her daughter outweighed all else and she began to sob.
‘There, there,’ he said, as if she were a child herself.
‘We'll think of something.’
In the days which followed Sarah never let him forget, but Nahum was adamant.
‘Corrie Palmer has become an obsession with you,’ he said.
His patience was dwindling and for the first time in four years of marriage she could see he was on the point of losing his temper.
Yet still he smiled.
‘I think we'll consider the subject closed.’
Sarah was heartbroken.
She couldn't eat and began to lose weight.
Her hair lost its lustre.
By the end of September she had lost interest in everything, and waited with dread for the news that Corrie was to be taken back to London.
It was like the fear of death.
Anna could hear Edward calling but she kept in her hiding place, covering her mouth so that he wouldn't hear her laugh.
‘Anna, where are you?
Anna!’
She loved Edward more than anybody in the world.
He worked now with his father at the farm, going every morning as the sun came up and not getting back until it was due to set again, so she hardly saw him unless she hid  from Ma when it was bedtime.
He always came looking for her.
Sometimes on Sundays he would take her to the fields where he had been helping with the harvest, to see the rabbits, or a nest of mice.
He taught her to make easy corn dollies.
Once he had made a crown of poppies for her hair and a daisy chain for her neck, and she had danced all the way home, feeling like a princess.
Edward was eleven now, and nearly as tall as Isaac.
Anna, too, was tall for her age.
She had quickly outgrown any tendency to baby fat, and her legs were like beansticks.
Her little heart-shaped face was lost amidst the abundance of black hair, her nose was too big, and her mouth with the upper lip thinner than the lower showed her determination to have her own way.
She was a very strong-willed child, and not a particularly attractive one.
Peg tried to keep her hair tightly braided, but the moment it was done Anna would shake it free.
Freedom was everything.
She would make George take her down to the river, or get Billy to run away with her for hours, never fearing the punishment.
Edward was the only one she obeyed without question.
This evening she was hiding behind a pile of rush mats and baskets in the shed at the back of the cottage.
She liked the reedy smell of them.
It reminded her of the river bank where Pa and the boys went to cut rushes at weekends so that Ma and Billy could work all week.
Sometimes she had to help with the weaving, and her fingers were sore from bending stems round the spokes.
‘Come out of there, Anna,’ Edward said, pushing aside the baskets.
She squealed at the fun, but he wasn't laughing.
‘Boo!’ she cried, jumping up to frighten him.
Then her mouth drew in with disappointment.
‘You always know where I am.’
Edward looked serious.
‘You've got to come indoors.
The inspector's here.’
Her little fists clenched in defiance, and her mouth set stubbornly.
‘I don't want to see him.
I don't like him.’
She dreaded the inspector coming because he always  asked a lot of questions, and told her how lucky she was that she would soon be able to go to a big place in London where there were lots of other girls and boys.
She didn't want to go to London.
She didn't ever want to leave Ma and Pa, and she would die if she wasn't near Edward.
Edward was pale and she wondered if he'd been eating pork crackling again which didn't agree with him, but he didn't seem sick.
‘Ma'll get into trouble if you don't come.
Besides, you should be in bed.’
The sun was so low it looked through the dirty window at her, touching the reeds with golden fingers so that they were bright yellow.
She pulled a basket over her head and crouched down again.
‘Say you can't find me,’ she commanded, her voice muffled.
He clambered over and pulled off the covering so quickly her hair bushed out like a halo.
‘I'll come with you,’ he said.
He put his arms round her thin little body and squeezed it.
‘Come on.’
The inspector was a big man with a thatch of grey hair which brushed the beams.
Anna would look no further than his leather-gaitered legs as she was hauled in front of him, and she wore her most sullen expression.
He had come to say something nasty, she could tell.
Ma was twisting a handkerchief in her hands, and her nose was as red as the apples Anna had been forbidden to pick in the garden because they were to be kept till Christmas.
‘Well, Anna, the time has come,’ said the inspector.
He had a loud, jolly voice which rumbled round the room.
‘In two weeks I shall be taking you and Corrie Palmer on the train to London.
Isn't that exciting news?’
‘When will we come back?’
Anna asked.
Ma came and picked her up, holding her so tight she could hardly breathe.
There was the smell of flour and dripping on her apron front, lovely cosy smells which gave a safe feeling, but there were tears on her cheeks.
‘You can't be our little girl any more, Anna, love,’ Ma said.
‘We've got to let you go.’
‘No!
I don't want to go anywhere.’
‘I know you don't, and we'd like to keep you for ever.
But you belong at the Foundling Hospital and we were only able to borrow you for a little while.
We've always taught you to give borrowed things back, haven't we?
Well, now that's what we've got to do.’
‘You will have a lot of children your own age to play with,’ said the inspector, leaning too close.
Anna began to kick and scream.
Her face was stricken and the walls of the warm kitchen seemed to start spinning round her.
‘Edward!’ she screamed.
Ma could no longer hold her and she ran to the boy she thought of as her oldest brother, clinging to him.
‘Don't let this horrid man take me anywhere.
Please don't let him.’
There was a nasty loud noise in her head, and a strange feeling started moving up through her body from her feet until she couldn't stop shaking.
And then she fell down, not knowing anything more until she woke up in Ma's big bed.
The apothecary was bending over her, mumbling words she didn't understand.
‘It was a slight convulsion, Mrs Wooldridge.
Nothing to worry about.’
He placed a cold hand on Anna's forehead.
‘I don't think there's any need for blood letting, but if she's still not well tomorrow you could give her an infusion of mistletoe.
It sometimes works.’
Anna opened her eyes and wondered why they were fussing round her.
The last thing she remembered was the sun perched on the shed window ledge like a big golden ball, and Edward telling her it was bedtime.
Nahum Morey was not at all happy about his wife's attachment to the Foundling child.
He hadn't realized she was allowing her feelings to run away with her to such an extent and he was worried about the situation.
It put him in a predicament.
Being a man of faith he believed in the truth, so he had no delusions about his feelings for Sarah.
He loved her passionately.
Not the way he had loved his gentle Adelaide, to whom he had been devoted, but with a lust which made  him ashamed.
Sarah was a beautiful, sensual woman and she aroused in him the kind of emotions he had always condemned as sinful in others.
He enjoyed her body, though he wouldn't allow himself to dwell on the pleasure it gave him, and being away from her, even for one day, was a kind of purgatory.
To his dismay his weight problem was causing him to become increasingly short of breath and he would soon have to restrict his carnal pleasures.
It made him frustrated and angry when he didn't intend to be, and he deeply regretted the outburst which had made Sarah so unhappy.
His love also made him jealous.
He couldn't bear to see Daniel Marsh fawning round his wife like a besotted mongrel, and any other man who looked at her was to be immediately discouraged.
Now, to his intense shame, he found he was even jealous of the child, Corrie Palmer, who had wormed her way into Sarah's heart so thoroughly there seemed no dislodging her.
And Sarah believed he could bend the rules of the Foundling Hospital so that she could have the child with her always.
For many nights Nahum lay on his back in the big double bed, knowing Sarah was weeping into the pillow beside him.
He listened, and his heart ached because he knew if he failed her she would hold it against him for ever.
So on the day that the inspector called on Peg Wooldridge, Nahum Morey was in London, asking to see papers at the Foundling Hospital which were strictly confidential.
He had been thinking the matter over very seriously as he travelled from Chertsey on the train.
Apart from his emotional objection to bringing up a child which was not their own, there was another consideration, one which he hoped to keep from his wife.
His financial state was very worrying indeed.
As a Governor he was expected to be continually generous, and it seemed he was always having to spend more money than he could afford.
He knew Sarah thought he was mean, but the truth was his capital had dwindled away, and his stipend was insufficient for his needs.
Two years ago Mr Gladstone had promised that by 1855 taxation would drop to sixpence in the pound, but the  war in the Crimea had put a stop to such plans.
In another few months Nahum could see he would have to resign his Governorship, if only to save the expense of his weekly journeys by train.
Being a Governor gave him the right to know details of any child's parentage, but in his case the necessity to study the books had never arisen.
Today, however, he used his privilege to check on the background of the child his wife idolized, more out of curiosity than any inclination to relax his stand against trying to procure the child for her.
Private information was immediately made available.
The consequential shock he suffered all but paralysed him.
The papers were kept in the office of the treasurer's clerk, and fortunately he had the room to himself while he pursued his investigations.
He found Corrie Palmer's name listed under the twenty-fifth of October 1850.
The mother was an unmarried girl by the name of Mercy Barnett, a whatever'sstreet trader's daughter, ill used by a seaman who had made off to the other side of the world rather than face up to his responsibilities.
Nahum was about to close the ledger when his attention was caught by the entry above the one he had been reading.
Under the same date, neatly inscribed in copperplate writing with sepia ink, was the name Sarah Byrne.
His stomach churned.
There was no mistake.
Suddenly he was reading the most terrible things about his own wife.
‘Sarah Byrne, unmarried, of Stone Alley, Turnmill Street, Clerkenwell, left a female infant, subsequently baptized Anna Beckett.
Father married and untraceable.
Unencumbered, the mother able to return to work in Newcastle Place.’
He pressed his hands to his eyes to shut out the dreadful picture.
His heart hammered painfully, and he was so angry he couldn't move, even when he heard the treasurer's clerk returning, though he managed to close the book before eyes other than his own fell on the damning evidence of Sarah's treachery.
He felt so ill he almost vomited over the leather-bound cover.
All their married life she had been living a lie.
So many confusing facts battered his brain he didn't know how to start sorting them out.
He didn't know if he wanted to.
For one thing he would have to acknowledge that Sarah was not barren, so it must be his own fault she hadn't given him children.
It was a wicked blow to his pride.
The possibility that she might have been raped should have made him pause and perhaps pity, but his savage jealousy allowed no room for it.
Sarah had produced a child by another man, and that made her a loose woman.
‘She's a common whore,’ he breathed against his clenched knuckles.
‘And to think she's fooled me all these years.’
No wonder she'd been desperate to have contact with the Foundling Hospital.
Having left her bastard to be brought up on charity she had then schemed to stay near it.
No wonder she was now inconsolable at the prospect of the child being returned to London.
How easily she'd tricked him!
How gullible he had been.
But she wouldn't get away with it.
It didn't occur to him until he was travelling home that in learning the truth he had also acquired the means of getting his revenge.
Pleading illness, he excused himself from the Governors, meeting that day and took an earlier train home.
He was staring out of the carriage window, seeing nothing of the countryside because the image of Sarah with Corrie Palmer in her arms was superimposed on everything he looked at, and it was then he remembered something important.
The child born to Sarah Byrne had been baptized Anna Beckett.
The significance dawned on him like a sword piercing his anger.
He didn't know how it had happened, but Sarah was giving all her maternal love to the wrong child.
By prodding his memory he placed Anna Beckett as the strange, dark little girl who was fostered with Mrs Wooldridge, his laundry woman, and with his new knowledge he thought he could see a slight resemblance to Sarah, though it would never be remarked upon.
He was breathing quickly, his nostrils pinching in as he  thought of the coming confrontation with his wife.
Daniel Marsh usually met him at the station, but today Nahum was early.
The only transport available was a dog cart, which he hired of necessity, but the slowness made his temper worse, and by the time he reached the rectory he felt as if he would burst with fury.
He had never been so overwrought in his life.
When he stormed in the door it was as if a gale of wind was behind him, and he shouted his wife's name at the top of his voice.
‘Sarah!
You whore, where are you?’
He had never used such language, and shouting the word aloud added fuel to his temper.
‘Liar!
Bitch!
You've deceived me all these years, but you'll never do it again.’
Sarah came running from the parlour, her face colourless.
‘Nahum, the matter?
Are you ill?’
She was lifting her skirt as she hurried to him, and he could see her ankles.
‘You shameless creature.
You made use of me, didn't you?’
He took hold of her by the shoulders and began to shake her with all his strength, forcing her back through the hall towards the staircase.
‘All that pretence about wanting to help Foundling babies!
The only one you wanted to help was your own.’
‘No, Nahum!’ she protested.
She tripped on the rug and his grip tightened.
‘What a fool you made of me, Sarah Byrne.
I saw your name in the ledger, so don't deny it.’
‘Nahum, let me explain…’
He was sweating profusely, and an iron band seemed to be clamped round his chest.
His perpetual smile became an ugly grimace.
‘But you haven't made such a fool of me as you've made of yourself.
You don't even have the sense to know …’
The truth he had been about to disclose never passed his lips.
Instead he suffered an excruciating pain which made him clasp his heart, and he let go of Sarah so violently she crashed against the newel post.
Blood gushed from a wound on her temple, running down into her eyes, but she saw Nahum Morey's fatal collapse just before she crumpled into unconsciousness at the foot of the stairs.
Chapter Six
In the October of 1855 Sarah returned to London, just five years after she had left her baby to be cared for in the Foundling Hospital.
When she got off the train from Chertsey she didn't have enough money to take an omnibus.
She had to walk all the way to Clerkenwell with a canvas bag containing all her belongings, and her feet dragged as she grew more reluctant every minute to face the destitution she thought she had left behind for ever.
It was a month since Nahum's death, and she didn't know what to make of this new turn her life had taken.
After five years as the wife of a country rector with no financial worries she had suddenly become a homeless, penniless widow.
All she had left was the clothes she wore, the second gown Nahum had bought her, and her wedding ring.
Nothing else, for the rectory belonged to the church, and she had discovered that her late husband's public generosity had run him into considerable debt.
She pushed her way through the narrow, crowded streets of Southwark and crossed the river by Blackfriars Bridge so that she wouldn't have to pay a toll.
Her legs ached already from the walk which once would have meant nothing to her.
But as she kept to the inside edge of the footpath to avoid being splashed by the congestion of horse-drawn vehicles her gaze turned to the heart of the city, and all at once her spirits lifted.
She loved London.
She belonged here.
The sky was heavy with rain-filled clouds which pressed down on the dome of St Paul's as if to deflate it, and the wharves and warehouses bordering the river cowered like black giants in the smoky gloom.
Bales of goods thumped from even blacker openings in the walls into barges at landing stages, and tiers of narrow windows rose upwards with all the hopefulness of blinded eyes seeking light.
She  had been homesick for this city, and the years of marriage to Nahum slipped away.
Living with him had made her feel middle-aged, yet she was still only twenty-two, and it was wonderful to be free again.
What was more, her darling Corrie had also returned to London.
It would have been unbearable in Chertsey without her, but Fate had once more intervened to bring them close together.
She wished she knew what Nahum had been going to say just before he died.
She could remember very little about his fatal collapse, no matter how many times she went over it in her mind.
For several days after his death she had lain in the sagging double bed with a bolster by her side to stop her rolling into the hollow created by Nahum's bulk, unaware that he would never again make the springs protest at his weight.
In the moments when she had drifted nearer to consciousness she'd thought she saw Corrie sitting on the bed, but when she had tried to lift her arms to gather her close the vision faded away.
Someone bathed her head.
A woman.
When she called Nahum to know who it was he didn't answer, and it was almost a week before she recognized Elizabeth Bradford.
Incredibly, Nahum's sister was sitting by the window with some needlework.
‘What's the matter with me?’
Sarah asked.
‘And where's Nahum?’
She knew something dreadful must have happened for Mrs Bradford to be visiting.
Since her marriage there had been no communication with her former employer, not even at Christmas, and she could never think of her as a sister-in-law.
‘My brother had a heart attack,’ Elizabeth Bradford said, putting down her sewing.
When she bent over Sarah there was no sign of sympathy, yet she was known for her kindness.
She was older than her brother and she wore a black lace cap over her grey hair.
Her gown, too, was black, and the high-necked bodice was closed with a mourning brooch.
‘In trying to break his fall you were  knocked against the newel post.
He collapsed on top of you.
‘But why are youhere?’
Poor Nahum is dead.
Someone had to see to everything as you were incapable.’
The news caused such pain Sarah had to shut her eyes again.
Then she remembered why Nahum had come home in a terrible temper and called her unrepeatable names.
He'd found out about Corrie.
She turned her head away, scalding tears coursing down her cheeks and on to the pillow which had absorbed her earlier grief.
The hours passed, daylight faded, and the sounds of a warm September evening came in through the open window.
When she partially woke again she could smell honeysuckle and new-mown grass in the churchyard.
She remembered being told that Nahum was dead.
Over the years she had grown to love him in a familiar, comfortable sort of way, though of late a change in temperament had made him difficult.
She was not grief-stricken the way she had been when her father died, but sorrow was a weight which kept her from opening her eyes on a world where she would sorely miss his company.
He had loved her, of that she had no doubt.
But she didn't find out he had made no provision for her in the event of his death until Elizabeth could no longer withhold her sentiments.
‘I knew no good would come of such a marriage,’ she said.
‘You tricked my poor brother into it, Sarah, and I fear you must also have squandered his money.’
Sarah could only protest feebly.
‘How can you say such a
thing?’
‘My husband has looked into Nahum's affairs, as there was no one else to do it, and has been shocked to find that debts were mounting weekly.’
‘I knew nothing of them.’
‘A good husband would naturally not discuss such things with his wife, but you must have had some idea.
For Nahum's sake, so that no stain will be on his character, Mr Bradford has cleared those debts, but you, Sarah, will have  nothing.
I blame you for his death.
It was worry that caused his heart to fail.’
Sarah had been too ill to defend herself, and besides, in a way Elizabeth Bradford had been telling the truth.
She was to blame.
The shock of finding out about her child had been responsible for her husband's fatal apoplexy, and she would feel guilty for the rest of her life.
A week later Elizabeth had departed, taking with her everything of Nahum's which belonged in the family.
Sarah was still too weak from her head injury to make any protest at the way they were treating her, but as soon as she was able she had sold the rest of Nahum's possessions to repay the debts which John Bradford had settled, preferring to lose everything rather than owe the Bradfords a penny.
They would never be able to say that she had accepted their charity.
Without the help of Daniel Marsh she would never have survived those dreadful days.
He helped her to make the house ready for the next occupant, and though she protested he gave her the money for her railway journey back to London.
Had she encouraged him he would have given more.
He was almost in tears when he took her to the station, and when he said his farewells his reedy voice was quite unsteady.
‘You've been treated very badly, my dear Mrs Morey, but I hope you will remember that you have a true friend here in Chertsey, should you ever need one.
If at any time you would like to return…’
‘I'll never return, Mr Marsh,’ Sarah had said.
‘This terrible thing should never have happened to you.’
‘But it has, and now I must leave.’
‘Mrs Morey…’
‘Goodbye, Daniel.’
His face had coloured at the use of his Christian name, and he'd grabbed her hand with renewed courage.
‘Don't go…
Sarah.’
But Sarah had stepped into the railway carriage with relief, unable to feel anything but pity for the curate whose heart she had unwittingly stolen.
Now, as she crossed into Farringdon Street and saw familiar landmarks, she stopped and put down her bag, gazing about her with the pleasure of someone who has come home after a long absence.
Yet there were changes, and not all for the better.
Work was about to start on a new street through to Clerkenwell Green and excavations were under way to raise the level of the road by several feet.
There had recently been a very bad storm, leaving mud everywhere, and it seemed the sewers had overflowed in Saffron Hill, for the filth was worse than she had ever seen it.
A bridge had been carried away in Castle Street, so likely there had been a flood tide at the time.
The bag was bumping against her legs as she turned into Corporation Lane.
She hoped that Maggie was still looking after the jeweller whose name Sarah had a struggle to remember.
Mr Wood.
Yes, that was it.
An urchin showed her which tenement house was his.
The boy who answered her knock was scrawny still, with dark hair and roguish eyes like Paddy's, but his expression became cunning when he saw her neat dress and bulging bag.
‘You must be Patrick,’ Sarah said.
This was her half-brother, and for two pins she would have hugged him.
‘Is your mother at home?’
‘Ma!’ he called.
‘Ma, there's a woman to see you.’
Maggie's voice came from upstairs.
‘Who is it?’
‘I'm your sister, Patrick.’
Sarah went to touch him, but he backed away.
‘I ain't got no sisters.
Only brothers.’
Brothers!
Sarah marched into the house belonging to Abel Wood.
‘Maggie, where are you?
It's Sarah.’
Maggie came hurrying down the stairs, followed by two little boys of about four and three.
‘Lawks, girl, where've you sprung from?’
She rushed to Sarah and threw her arms round her.
‘I don't know what brings you, ducks, but it's good to see yer.’
She had filled out a little since Sarah had last seen her and she was no longer drab.
She wore a taffeta dress the colour  of port wine and a white lace cap, and there was a happier air about her, though the lines of care had deepened with the extra years.
Maggie had become motherly.
‘What've you been doing to yourself, Maggie Byrne?
I can't believe it's you.
And with two more boys!’
‘I'm a respectably married woman again, I'll have yer know.
Maggie Wood I've bin these last four years.’
Maggie let go of her and called up the stairs.
Patrick disappeared down the street before she could shut the door.
‘Abel!
Sarah's here.
Come and meet 'er.’
She led the way to a room at the back which served as living room and kitchen, chattering non stop.
It was all reasonably clean, and a smell of cooking reminded Sarah that she hadn't eaten since early morning when Daniel's landlady had given her breakfast.
‘You can take yer bonnet off and sit yerself down.
We can talk while I get dinner.’
The two younger boys, Dick and John, clung to her skirt as she told Sarah how good Abel was to her.
Maggie had done well for herself.
Abel had his workshop on the first and second floors of the tall house and made intricate jewellery which he sold to a shop in Hatton Garden.
He had made the ring which adorned her finger, and the brooch at the neck of her dress.
‘Seems to me you have everything you want,’ said Sarah, trying not to sound envious.
Maggie had been stewing meat, and now she rolled out pastry with a heavy glass roller like the one Mrs Martin had used in the Bradfords' kitchen.
‘I'm pleased for you, that I am.’
The backs of her eyes and nose were burning, and a single tear found its way on to her cheek.
Maggie put down the rolling pin.
‘Here's me goin' on about my life, and you haven't told me about yours.
How long are you visiting for?
Is the Reverend Morey calling here to take you back home?’
‘Nahum died a month since.’
Sarah lifted her chin, determined to talk about it unemotionally.
‘All he left was debts, and I've nothing but what you can see.’
‘Oh, Sarah.
Oh, ducks, I'm so sorry.’
After a few stunned seconds plump arms enfolded her.
‘Have you no home  either?
Yer can stay here for a bit.
Abel won't mind, I'm sure.’
‘What can I do with my life now?
There's nothing left…except Angel.’
Sarah slipped back into using the name she had called her child at birth.
Maggie said: ‘Yer've seen 'er then.’
‘Twice a week.
Sometimes more.
She's beautiful, and she's got golden hair just like James Halden's.’
She told Maggie about Betty Gilling and Peg Wooldridge, and how she had almost persuaded Nahum to adopt Corrie.
‘That's her name, Corrie Palmer.
It's what they baptized her at the Foundling Hospital.’
Sarah buried her face in her hands to hide her misery.
‘I nearly had her back, Maggie, but now she's right out of reach.
What am I going to do?’
‘Well, to my mind you're a fool,’ said Maggie, her sympathy evaporating.
‘A fool I said, and a fool I meant.
If you'd left well alone and not tried to see the child you'd 'ave saved yerself a lot of heartache.
By now you'd 'ave forgotten you ever had' er.’
‘Never,’ said Sarah.
She sat forward in the worn chair.
‘The most foolish thing I ever did was take her to the Foundling.
I ought never to have listened to you .
I could have brought her up myself, the same as you've done Patrick.’
‘And what would you have done for money?
Answer me that.
You'd have been on the streets, girl, that's where you'd 'ave been.’
Their voices rose in heated argument, and at that moment Abel Wood appeared.
He was a thin man with a hooked nose and dark stubble on his chin which made it seem too weighty for his cadaverous face.
His head was bald, and his shoulders curved from continuous bending over intricate work.
His short-sighted eyes blinked at the stranger in his kitchen.
Maggie hurried to his side.
‘Abel, this is Sarah, me stepdaughter.
She needs somewhere to stay and I said she could stop here.’
‘So you're Paddy Byrne's daughter,’ he said.
He assessed her as if he was looking for flaws in a jewel.
Then: ‘I 'spose  you can stay a short while.
But if you cause trouble like Patrick, out you go.’
‘Abel!’ cried Maggie.
‘Sarah was married to a parson.’
‘I don't care if she was married to a bloody prince.
If she upsets you, Mags, I'll kick 'er out meself.’
He spoke as if she wasn't there, and Sarah's temper increased tenfold.
‘That's a dreadful thing to say.
Perhaps I'd better leave now.’
‘Take no notice, ducks,’ Maggie shouted.
‘You should be ashamed, Abel Wood.
Sarah's just lost 'er husband, and she can stay as long as she likes.
Yer've no right judging 'er by Patrick.
He's a boy with high spirits.’
‘He's the devil 'imself.’
‘You've got to forgive 'im, Sarah.
He looks after me right well, but Paddy's son is just too much for 'im.’
The boy in question burst in noisily from the street, chanting obscene words.
Maggie clipped his ear, making him yell, but undeterred he began to torment the two younger boys who had crouched quietly in a corner, watching.
‘Patrick, take Sarah upstairs,’ said Abel.
‘She can have your bed.
You can sleep in the workshop.’
Patrick scowled, but did as he was told.
Sarah followed him up the narrow stairs with her bag, her eyes on his thin, dirty bare legs and ragged trousers.
The other children were clean and decently fed, but this one had a smell of the gutters about him and looked like he could do with some good food to fatten him up.
Her heart went out to him.
It seemed there was no love for the boy in this house, and though Sarah could hardly believe it, Maggie had let her own well-being be bought at Patrick's expense.
The room had one dirty window overlooking a wall of the House of Detention yard.
Patrick went and gazed out.
‘That's the prison,’ he said.
‘I wish I could see over them walls.
I can hear men shouting sometimes.’
‘Is that where you heard the bad words you used just now?’
He grinned.
‘Reckon I did.’
‘They're bad men in there,’ Sarah said.
‘You don't want anything to do with them, do you?’
‘I 'ate to think of them shut away.’
‘But they've done wicked things.’
Patrick flung himself on the mattress which Sarah was to use, and jumped up and down on his knees, full of boyish energy.
Then he stopped, and stared at her.
‘Are you really my sister?’ he asked.
‘My father was your father, too.
You're like him, Patrick.’
He was thoughtful a moment.
Then he said: ‘He was Irish.
Ma said so.
Are you Irish?’
‘I suppose I am.’
‘Then I think I'll like you,’ Patrick said.
Anna hated the Foundling Hospital, but she didn't cry all the time like Corrie Palmer.
She sat in a corner of the playroom, dressed in the brown serge dress and white apron she had been given, and tried to think how she could run away.
She had to get back to Ma and Pa, and Edward.
She didn't understand why she had been taken from them when they loved her and wanted to keep her.
It wasn't fair.
That hateful inspector had dragged her away, even though Ma had been weeping enough to fill a kettle.
‘She's such a wee thing,’ Ma had said through her tears.
‘She needs a proper home like she's got here, not a great institution.
It's cruel.’
‘Not cruel, Mrs Wooldridge.
Anna was brought to us when her life was not worth anything.
The hospital took her in, and you knew she had to go back there time she was five.
Rules is rules.’
‘But we love her.’
Ma had held her so tight the buttons of her dress had pressed into Anna's chest until they hurt.
She had clung equally hard, her little arms binding like rope round the warm, soft neck.
Saying goodbye to Edward had been worse.
‘I made this for you, Anna,’ he had said, presenting her  with a small wooden doll.
‘It ain't very good but it's the best I could do.’
She'd cried then, because she had loved the doll so much and the inspector had tried to take it from her.
‘She won't be allowed to keep it, I'm afraid.
Everything is shared at the hospital.’
She had clung to the doll tenaciously, until the awful feeling she'd had once before stole up through her little body from her feet to her head, and the next thing she knew she was lying on the floor with her head in Ma's lap.
The inspector stood over them.
‘Another of her fits,’ he'd exclaimed.
‘It's time she was back at the hospital.’
’‘Tis only the third one,’ Pa had said.
‘And they're mild.
She'll soon grow out of them.’
Pa knew all about it.
He'd brought home some hairs from the cross on the back of a donkey when she was cutting her teeth, and Ma had made a little black silk bag to put them in so they could hang round her neck to keep the funny turns away.
She'd never had any more until the inspector had come to say she must go back to London.
Edward's doll was in Anna's apron pocket.
She had refused to be parted from it, and leniency had been shown during her first few days in new surroundings.
She and Corrie were allowed to play while the other children attended lessons in alphabets and multiplication tables, but they sat at one end of the long playroom like wilting flowers, still too unhappy at their uprooting to do anything.
And Corrie continued to cry.
‘I want Mrs Morey,’ she sobbed, her pretty lips perpetually curving downwards.
‘She said she wouldn't let me come here.’
‘Mrs Morey, Mrs Morey!’ scoffed Anna.
‘She's all you think about.’
‘I want Ma, too,’ wailed Corrie.
When Matron came in that afternoon everyone stood up and shouted ‘Hooray’.
It seemed a silly thing to cheer about and Anna remained sitting on the floor until a group of older boys appeared with musical instruments which they took to  a bank of seats at the far end.
Someone else brought in toys, and when the music started Anna was given a horn which didn't make any sound.
She threw it down in disgust and took a drum which Corrie showed no inclination to use, thumping it furiously to express her feelings.
Then she discarded that, too, and left Corrie's side for the first time to join in with the other children.
A small boy gave her his wooden sword and she brandished it the way he had shown her.
Presently Anna turned round to see a girl of about six shaking Corrie by the shoulders.
‘Why don't you stop crying?’ the child asked.
She was making Corrie worse.
‘We don't like cry-babies.’
‘I want my ma,’ sobbed Corrie.
‘You haven't got one.
None of us has, so stop howling.’
The wooden sword in Anna's hand landed across the aggressor's legs.
‘Leave Corrie alone,’ she shouted.
’ She can cry if she wants.’
In the ensuing pandemonium the young musicians played on, but Matron came and took Anna away, scolding her gently for bad behaviour which would not be tolerated once she was settled in.
She was told unruly children were placed in solitary confinement and given only bread and water for a week.
The next day Corrie's misery was worsened by the barber.
She shrieked when he went near her with the scissors, and had to be held down by the nurse so that he could take off about twelve inches of her golden curls.
‘I don't want my hair cut,’ Corrie screamed.
‘Mrs Morey says I've got beautiful hair and she brushes it for me.’
‘You'll have it cut, child, whether you like it or not,’ said the nurse.
‘A penny a head the barber charges and we're going to see we get our penn'orth.’
When it was done the reddish gold hair licked round the edge of her mob cap like a straight silken fringe, and there was no consoling her.
Anna's turn followed, and the opposite happened.
Once the heaviness dropped away her black hair formed into tight curls, and for the first time she looked almost pretty.
An older girl helped Anna and Corrie to dress each morning as soon as it was light.
She tied the strings of their aprons and did up their buttons, and she sat between them at their bread and milk breakfast which was at half past seven.
Dinner was at one o'clock.
Anna quite liked dinner, and soon she would know each day by what there was to eat.
Monday and Wednesday meant mutton.
On Tuesday and Thursday they had beef boiled into soup with rice, while on Saturday there was either rice or suet pudding.
Sunday was best of all with cold roast beef and potatoes or bread.
At six o'clock there was always bread and milk for supper, and at eight o'clock it was bedtime, but no warm arms cuddled her.
There was only a nurse to help untie and unbutton the morning's fastenings before she undressed and climbed into a bed in the long, crowded dormitory.
Once the first week was over the two small girls joined others in the schoolroom.
A mistress in a plum-coloured dress began to teach them sewing so that later on they would be able to help with needlework that was taken in.
Anna found she could do it quite well, but Corrie had no aptitude at all, though when it came to learning Foundling hymns she excelled.
Most important of all was to know the Catechism, and they had to repeat it over and over until it could be said without faltering.
They were in their second week when a nurse came one morning to take Anna Beckett over to the infirmary to see a physician.
‘I don't want to see him,’ Anna said, remembering her inoculation on the first day back, and how it had hurt.
‘'Fraid you've got to, ducks,’ said the nurse, whose name was Teresa Thorpe.
She was a nice enough young woman, well-rounded like Peg, and until now Anna had liked her.
‘Something to do with you having fits.’
‘I don't, I don't, I don't,’ cried Anna.
‘Well, we'll see.’
Teresa held her hand as they left the main building by a back door and crunched over the path to the infirmary, Anna dragging her feet.
She had to be scolded.
‘Yer'd better behave.
The physician runs a madhouse, I've heard, and he'll take you there if you're not good.’
Anna hung back even more, frightened by the threat, though she wasn't sure what it meant.
The infirmary was quiet like the chapel and had a strange smell.
She shuddered when she looked in an open door and saw grey-faced children in beds with blue curtains round, propped up on pillows.
The doctor was very tall and had hair nearly the same colour as Corrie's.
He wore a smart black tail coat and silk waistcoat, and a gold chain was draped from a buttonhole to the pocket where he kept his watch.
He stood over her for a moment, smiling gently, then he sat on a chair so that she didn't have to look up at him.
So you are Anna Beckett,’ he said.
‘And you sometimes have ‘funny turns’.’
‘Yes, sir.’
He took off her mob cap and touched her dark hair which sprang up in unruly profusion.
There must have been some magic in his fingers because they made her head tingle.
She opened her blue eyes wide and smiled back at him, the curve of her mouth imitating his.
‘Tell me how you feel when you have these funny turns,’ he said, his exploring fingers moving to her temple.
‘I go round and round till I fall down.
Shall I show you?’
She wanted to please him.
She darted away and began spinning on one foot in the middle of the room, but he quickly took hold of her and drew her back.
‘No, Anna.
If you go round and round any more I might have to prescribe some medicine for you.’
He looked intently into her eyes, and she thought he was sad, even though he smiled.
His eyelids were like shells beneath his sandy-coloured brows, and he seemed to hide behind them.
‘What do you think made you feel funny the last time?’
Remembering made her answer tearfully.
‘I didn't want to leave Ma and Pa.
And Edward.
And the inspector took away my doll.’
The physician sighed deeply.
His arms closed round her momentarily, and the feel of rough, male clothing against her was like being back with Isaac.
It was comforting.
‘You were frightened, then,’ he said, and she nodded.
‘Well, there's nothing to frighten you here.’
He stood up, and he towered above her like a golden figure in one of the hospital's many paintings.
Trustingly she slipped a small hand into one of his, and she would have gone with him anywhere, but he detached her fingers after giving them a reassuring squeeze.
‘Nurse, I shall leave instructions for Anna's treatment, should it be necessary.
The child obviously has mild epilepsy, and should it recur she must be exposed fortnightly to intense cold in a bath for an hour, then put in a warm bed until a fever is induced.
But she seems healthy enough now.
I hope she stays that way.’
‘I hope so too, Dr Halden,’ said the nurse.
James Halden returned to a tall, red-brick house in Clerkenwell, a private asylum where he was employed as permanent physician.
Professionally the years had been good to him, though it was a great disappointment to Maud that he had specialized in diseases of the mind.
She considered the insane unmentionable, and the care of them the least attractive area of the medical profession, but in accepting the position in Claybury's Private Asylum the financial rewards had enabled him to buy a house in Calvert Terrace, just off Myddelton Square, an address which certainly won Maud's approval.
Maud liked to be associated with the right people and be seen in the right places.
‘I'm to be on the committee of the Society for the Relief of Distressed Widows,’ she told him one day.
‘Such an honour, don't you think, dearest?’
The endearment was affectation.
She had borne James three children in the last five years, but none had survived infancy, and she accused him regularly of not trying enough to save them.
The fact that all three babies had been born with an incurable heart condition was characteristic of the Rollerson side of the family, but Maud preferred to blame her husband, and the marriage suffered as a consequence.
James took refuge in his work.
He was already a respected physician in his field, and his opinion was often called for in public hospitals and institutions, which was  why he had been to the Foundling Hospital today.
Principally the visit had been to see a senior boy with lifelong problems who had suddenly become unmanageable and would have to be admitted to an asylum, but while there he had been asked to assess Anna Beckett, a child who had moved him strangely.
He was finding it difficult to change old methods of treatment at Claybury's.
The elderly lay proprietor, Miss Cordelia Claybury, had inherited the madhouse from her father who had made a good living out of the rich and insane.
The man had not been deliberately cruel or corrupt, like so many non-medical people who licensed their houses for this purpose, but he had stuck to the principle that the violent needed continual restraint, and his daughter still feared more progressive methods.
‘Miss Claybury, the most successful way to treat insanity is with kindness,’ James told her when she insisted that a particularly deranged woman of middle age should remain chained by the ankle to her bed.
But Miss Claybury was adamant.
‘Mrs Duncan's family pay well to keep her here but we can't have her attacking the other patients.
For her own good and everyone elses she must be restrained.’
She would not allow the manacle to be removed, and her word had to be obeyed.
James had done training under Dr John Conolly at Hanwell, the Middlesex County pauper lunatic asylum, and to him the insane were the most pitiable of all human flotsam.
He wanted to improve their lot, as John Conolly was doing, but with Maud always wanting every luxury he couldn't afford to leave this lucrative private madhouse.
Today he heard screams coming from Mary Duncan's room on the first floor as soon as he entered the house.
A man wearing a hat he'd painted and twisted into an unrecognizable shape shuffled along the corridor, pointing upwards with a contorted grimace.
‘It's 'er again.’
‘It's her again,’ repeated a woman with red eyes and dribbling mouth.
James hurried upstairs, calling for an attendant, and  found Mary Duncan trying to reach the iron-barred window, her shackled ankle attached to the bed which she was dragging along inch by inch behind her.
The noise she made was like a cry from hell, and James knew her suffering had turned this place into hell itself.
‘It's all right, Mrs Duncan,’ he said gently, appalled at the poor woman's distress.
Her hair was like a bird's nest, her skin grey, her leg bleeding.
One of his rules, which Miss Claybury could not contest, was that all patients must be spoken to kindly, but it was hard to make himself heard above the noise.
When he was near enough she went for him with clawed hands.
‘I won't hurt you.
I want to help.’
His soothing voice reduced her screams to a quieter moaning, and she huddled on the floor against the bed in a pathetic foetal position.
‘Get the key to this devilish contraption,’ James ordered the attendant, a blowsy woman with the strength of a man.
‘Hurry.’
When the manacle was unlocked a weeping ulcer was exposed, and he was sickened, not by the sight of it, but because he had failed her in not acting sooner.
‘Be careful,’ the attendant warned.
‘She's violent.’
‘She's in need of different treatment.’
The room was unsanitary.
Mary's clothes were wet and dirty, and the smell was appalling.
‘I want this room cleaned, and I want a warm bath got ready for Mrs Duncan.’
‘I can't bath her, sir.
It ain't safe.’
‘Then we'll do it together.’
James never expected anyone to do things he was not prepared to do himself.
Three hours later Mary Duncan was back in her bed.
Her wound was dressed, her body and clothes were clean, and her hair was neat.
The chain had not been replaced, nor would it ever be, and warm, fresh blankets covered her.
She muttered incoherently but the sound was happy, and her eyes had lost the terrible haunted stare of madness.
‘P'raps she should be in a strait-waistcoat tomorrow,’ said the attendant.
There were four scratches across James's cheek from Mary's fingernails.
‘Tomorrow Mrs Duncan will be treated with kindness,’ said James.
‘She will have well-ordered meals nicely presented, and for a short time she will mix with the other patients.
From now on we must keep her mind free of stress and I guarantee she will improve daily.’
‘But tonight…’
‘She'll have no restraint.
I've given her a mild sedative and I'll sit here with her myself until she sleeps.’
It was soon dark, but a watery moon penetrated the iron grille and made silver stripes across the floor.
Long after Mary Duncan was asleep James continued to sit beside her, his thoughts disturbed by the day's events, and little Anna Beckett, whom he had seen that afternoon, kept tugging at his conscience.
She was a strange little girl, advanced for her age and surprisingly sensible for one afflicted with the symptoms of epilepsy.
Perhaps she'd intrigued him because she had such lovely eyes, unusually blue against the dark hair, and clear and direct like those of Sarah Morey.
His memories of Sarah were as strong as ever, but he thought of her with mixed emotions.
He would never understand why she had married a pompous clergyman.
He had wanted her himself so badly, and when he'd heard of her wedding he had been insanely jealous.
For days he'd been in the blackest of moods, furious with her for wasting herself on a man old enough to be her father, and even more furious with himself for not having taken her forcefully after that Christmas evening when he'd known her feelings were as inflamed as his own.
He hadn't dared to dwell on her in those aging arms lest his rage should drive him to deeds he might regret for the rest of his life.
Mary Duncan stirred in her sleep.
James touched her hand, and she smiled.
Several hours passed while he sat there, knowing that Maud would be inconsolable at having missed a charity dinner.
He made up his mind to tell Miss Claybury in the morning that things must change, otherwise he could no longer stay in her employ.
The case of Mrs Duncan influenced him strongly, but for some reason it was Anna Beckett more than anyone who made up his mind.
He kept  thinking of her pirouetting, her small face impish, then her eyes filling at the memory of her lost doll.
The Foundling Hospital was generous towards its inmates.
He had heard that forty pounds a year had been paid for a girl to be looked after in the asylum of Dr Perfect in West Malling.
At some future date it might become necessary for Anna Beckett to be admitted to a private asylum.
The knowledge worried James.
He couldn't bear the thought of a child like Anna ever being subjected to the indecencies and ugliness of a house such as Claybury's, and he vowed that from now on he would work only to make life for lunatics stress-free and tolerable, even if it meant less money for himself.
Maud must understand.
There were still scratches on his face on Sunday.
If the weather was fine Maud liked to walk in Hyde Park, not so much to see as to be seen, her small hand slotted lightly into he bend of his arm.
That day in early November when a warm sun was turning the autumn trees to gold, they entered the park by Grosvenor Gate and passed a group of young chimneysweeps in the Ring playing pitch-and-toss.
It was then that James saw Sarah.
Sarah was watching the chimneysweeps with a rapt expression, and holding the hands of two small boys, while one a bit older had to be reprimanded for trying to climb a tree.
James stopped at the sight of her, making his wife almost lose her balance.
His heart began to beat like a native drum and his palms ran with sweat.
So Nahum Morey had given her children.
The discovery was painful, and his heavy-lidded eyes narrowed to shut out the picture she made with them.
She was pale but more beautiful than ever, and her dignity was pronounced in spite of having to cope with three boys.
‘What's the matter, James?’
Maud asked irritably.
‘Surely that's the wife of Nahum Morey over there,’ he said.
At that moment he felt as if the chain he had taken from Mary Duncan now fettered him to his wife.
‘Perhaps we should speak to her.’
‘Definitely not.
Elizabeth Bradford would never forgive us.’
Maud's hand tightened on his sleeve as she urged him  to walk on towards the Serpentine.
‘I spoke to her the other day at a charity meeting and she was telling me that her poor brother died recently.
Apparently the servant girl he married squandered every penny of his and Elizabeth says she has no pity for her now she's destitute.’
James hid his feelings well.
No one could have known that he no longer heard the park sounds for the pounding in his temples, or that his feet felt iron-clad as he walked away from the woman he longed to hold in his arms.
It wouldn't do for them to meet now.
With great effort he averted his gaze from the sight of Sarah Morey with her family, but he promised himself that one day soon he would look upon her intimately, now that she was free once more.