

On Saturday evening and early Sunday morning I packed two bags, the new suitcase from England and a softer holdall bought in Toronto.
Into the first I put the rich young owner's suit, cashmere pullover and showy shirts and into the second the new younger-looking clothes for off-duty Tommy, jeans, sweatshirts, woolly hat and trainers.
I packed the Scandinavian jersey I'd worn at Woodbine into the suitcase just in case it jogged anyone's memory, and got dressed in dark trousers, open-necked shirt and a short zipped navy jacket with lighter blue bands round waist and wrists.
The rich young owner's expensive brown shoes went away.
Tommy, following instructions from the uniform department, had shiny new black ones, with black socks.
Into Tommy's holdall went the binoculars-camera and the hair curler (one never knew), and I had the cigarette lighter-camera as always in my pocket.
Tommy also had the rich young owner's razor and toothbrush, along with his underclothes, pyjamas and stock of fresh films.
The suitcase, which held my passport, had a Merry & Co label on it addressed to the Vancouver Four Seasons Hotel; the holdall had no identification at all.
With everything ready, I telephoned Brigadier Catto in England and told him about Daffodil Quentin and the touching little scene in the winners' circle.
‘Damn!’ he said.
‘Why does that sort of thing always happen?
Absolutely the wrong person winning.’
‘The general public didn't seem to mind.
The horse was third favourite, quite well backed.
Daffodil Quentin seems to be acceptable to the other owners, who of course probably don't know about her three dead horses.
They're bound to take to Filmer too, you know how civilized he can seem, and I don't suppose news of the trial got much  attention here since it collapsed almost before it began.
Anyway, Filmer and Daffodil left the races together in what looked like her own car, with a chauffeur.’
‘Pity you couldn't follow them.’
‘Well, I did actually, in a hired car.
They went to the hotel, where Filmer and the other owners from the train are staying, and they went into the bar for a drink.
After that, Daffodil left in her Rolls and Filmer went upstairs.
Nothing of note.
He looked relaxed.’
The Brigadier said, ‘You're sure they didn't spot you at the hotel?’
‘Quite sure.
The entrance hall of the hotel was as big as a railway station itself.
There were dozens of people sitting around waiting for other people.
It was easy.’
It had even been easy following them from the racecourse, as when I went out to where my driver had parked his car I had a clear view from a distance of Daffodil at the exit gate being spooned into a royal blue Rolls-Royce by Filmer and her chauffeur.
My driver, with raised eyebrows but without spoken question, agreed to keep the Rolls in sight for as long as possible, which he did without trouble all the way back to the city.
At the hotel I paid him in cash with a bonus and sent him on his way, and was in time to see Filmer's backview receding into a dark-looking bar as I walked into the big central hall lobby.
It had been an exercise without much in the way of results, but then many of my days were like that, and it was only by knowing the normal that the abnormal, when it happened, could be spotted.
‘Would you mind telling me,’ I said diffidently to the Brigadier, ‘whether Filmer has made a positive threat to disrupt this train?’
There was a silence, then, ‘Why do you ask?’
‘Something Bill Baudelaire said.’
After a pause he answered, ‘Filmer was seething with anger.
He said the world's racing authorities could persecute him all they liked but he would find a spanner to throw in their works, and they'd regret it.’
‘When did he say that?’
I asked.
‘And why…and who to?’
‘Well…er…’
He hesitated and sighed.
‘Things go wrong, you know.
After the acquittal, the Disciplinary Committee of the jockey Club called Filmer to Portman Square to warn him as to his future behaviour, and Filmer said they couldn't touch him, and was generally unbearably arrogant.
As a result, one of the committee lost his temper and told Filmer he was the scum of the earth and no one in racing would sleep well until he was warned off which was the number one priority of the world's racing authorities.’
‘That's a bit of an exaggeration,’ I commented, sighing in my turn.
‘I suppose you were there?’
‘Yes.
You could have cut the fury on both sides with a knife.
Very vicious, all of it.’
‘So,’ I said-regretfully, ‘Filmer might indeed see the train as a target.’
‘He might.’
The trouble and expense he had gone to to get himself on board looked increasingly ominous, I thought.
‘There's one other thing you might care to know,’ the Brigadier said.
‘John saw Ivor Horfitz's son Jason hanging around outside the weighing-room at Newmarket yesterday and had a word with him.’
When Millington had a word with people they could take days to recover.
In his own way, he could be as frightening as Derry Welfram or Filmer himself.
‘What happened?’
I asked.
‘John spoke to him about the inadvisability of running errands on racecourses for his warned-off father, and said that if Jason had any information, he should pass it on to him, John Millington.
And apparently Jason Horfitz then said he wouldn't be passing on the information he had to anybody else as he didn't want to end up in a ditch.’
‘What ?’
I said.
‘John Millington pounced on that but he couldn't get another word out of the wretched Jason.
He turned to jelly and literally ran away, John says.’
‘Does Jason really know,’ I said slowly, ‘what Paul Shacklebury knew?
Did he tell Paul Shacklebury whatever it was he knew?
Or was it just a figure of speech?’
‘God knows.
John's working on it.’
‘Did he ask Jason what was in the briefcase?’
‘Yes, he did, but Jason either didn't know or was too frightened to speak.
John says he was terrified that we even knew about the briefcase.
He couldn't believe we knew.’
‘I wonder if he'll tell his father.’
‘Not if he has any sense.’
He hadn't any sense, I thought, but he did have fear, which was almost as good a life preserver.
‘If I hear anything more,’ the Brigadier said, ‘I'll leave a message with…’his voice still disapproved ‘…with Mrs Baudelaire senior.
Apart from that…good luck.’
I thanked him and hung up, and with considerable contentment took my two bags in a taxi to Union Station.
The train crew were already collecting in the locker room when I made my way there and introduced myself as Tommy, the actor.
They smiled and were generous.
They always enjoyed the mysteries, they said, and had worked with an actor among them before.
It would all go well, I would see.
The head waiter, head steward, chief service attendant, whatever one called him, was a neat small Frenchman named Emil.
Late thirties, perhaps, I thought, with dark bright eyes.
‘Do you speak French?’ he asked first, shaking my hand.
‘All VIA employees have to be able to speak French.
It is a rule.’
‘I do a bit,’ I said.
‘That is good.
The last actor, he couldn't.
This time the chef is from Montreal, and in the kitchen we may speak French.’
I nodded and didn't tell him that, apart from my school days, my working French had been learned in stables, not kitchens, and was likely to be rusty in any case.
But I'd half-learned several languages on my travels, and somehow  they each floated familiarly back at the first step on to the matching soil.
Everything in bilingual Canada was written in both English and French and I realized that since my arrival I'd been reading the French quite easily.
‘Have you ever worked in a restaurant?’
Emil asked.
‘No, I haven't.’
He shrugged good-humouredly.
‘I will show you how to set the places, and to begin with, this morning, perhaps you will serve only water.
When you pour anything, when the train is moving, you pour in small amounts at a time, and you keep the cup or glass close to you.
Do you understand?
It is always necessary to control, to use small movements.’
‘I understand,’ I said, and indeed I did.
He put a copy of the timetable into my hands and said, ‘You will need to know where we stop.
The passengers always ask.’
‘OK.
Thanks.’
He nodded with good humour.
I changed into Tommy's uniform and met some others of the crew: Oliver, who was a waiter in the special dining car, like myself, and several of the sleeping-car attendants, one to each car the whole length of the train.
There was a smiling Chinese gentleman who cooked in the small forward dining car where the grooms, among others, would be eating, and an unsmiling Canadian who would be cooking in the main central dining car for the bulk of the racegoers and the crew themselves.
The French chef from Montreal was not there, I soon discovered, because he was a she, and could only be found in the women's changing room.
Everyone put on the whole uniform including the grey raincoat on top, and I put on my raincoat also, I packed Tommy's spare garments and my own clothes into the holdall, and was ready.
Nell had said she would meet me this Sunday morning in the coffee shop in the Great Hall, and had told me that the crews often went there to wait for train time.
Accordingly, accompanied by Emil and a few of the others, I carried my bags to the coffee shop where everyone immediately  ordered huge carrot cakes, the speciality of the house, as if they were in fear of famine.
Nell wasn't there, but Zak and some of the other actors were, sitting four to a table, drinking pale-looking orange juice and not eating carrot cake because of the calories.
Zak said Nell was along with the passengers in the reception area, and that he wanted to go and see how things were shaping.
‘She said something about you checking a suitcase through to Vancouver in the baggage car,’ he added, standing up.
‘Yes, this one.’
‘Right.
She said to tell you to bring it along to where the passengers are.
I'll show you.’
I nodded, told Emil I'd be back, and followed Zak down the Great Hall and round a comer or two and came to a buzzing gathering of people in an area like an airport departure lounge.
An enormous banner across a latticed screen left no one in any doubt.
Stretching for a good twelve feet it read in red on white THE GREAT TRANSCONTINENTAL MYSTERY RACE TRAIN, and in blue letters a good deal smaller underneath, THE ONTARIO JOCKEY CLUB, MERRY & CO AND VIA RAIL PRESENT A CELEBRATION OF CANADIAN RACING.
The forty or so passengers already gathered in happy anticipation wore name badges and carnations and held glasses of orange juice convivially.
‘There was supposed to be champagne in the orange juice,’ Zak said dryly.
‘There isn't.
Something to do with the Sunday drink law.’
He searched the throng with his eyes from where we stood a good twenty paces away out in the station.
‘There's Ben doing his stuff, see?
Asking Raoul to lend him money.’
I could indeed see.
It looked incredibly real.
People standing around them were looking shocked and embarrassed.
Zak was nodding his mop of curls beside me and had begun snapping his fingers rather fast.
I could sense the  energy starting to flow in him now that this fiction was coming alive, and I could see that he had used make-up on himself; not greasepaint or anything heavy, more a matter of darkening and thickening his eyebrows and darkening his mouth, emphasizing rather than disguising.
An actor in the wings, I thought, gathering up his power.
I spotted Mavis and Walter Bricknell being fussy and anxious as intended, and saw and heard Angelica asking if anyone had seen Steve.
‘Who's Steve?’
I asked Zak.
‘I forget.’
‘Her lover.
He misses the train.’
Pierre and Donna began to have their row which made a different bunch of passengers uncomfortable.
Zak laughed.
‘Good,’ he said, ‘that's great.’
Giles-the-murderer, who had been in the coffee shop, strolled along into the mêlée and started being frightfully nice to old ladies.
Zak snapped his fingers even faster and started humming.
The crowd parted and shifted a little and through the gap I saw Julius Apollo Filmer, another murderer, beginning frightfully nice to a not-so-old lady, Daffodil Quentin.
I took a deep breath, almost of awe, almost on a tremble.
Now that it was really beginning, now that I was going to be near him, I felt as strung up and as energized as Zak, and no doubt suffered the same compelling anxiety that things shouldn't go wrong.
Daffodil was playfully patting Filmer's hand.
Yuk, I thought.
Ben the actor appeared beside them and started his piece, and I saw Filmer turn a bland face towards him and watched his mouth shape the unmistakable words, ‘Go away.’
Ben backed off.
Very wise, I thought.
The crowd came together again and hid Filmer and his flower and I felt the tension in my muscles subside, and realized I hadn't known I had tensed them.
Have to watch that, I thought.
The Lorrimores had arrived, each wearing yesterday's expression: pleasant, aloof, supercilious, sulky.
Mercer was entering into the spirit of things, Bambi also but more coolly.
Sheridan looked as if he thought he was slumming.
The young daughter, Xanthe, could have been quite pretty if she'd smiled.
James Winterbourne, actor, had discarded his red felt trilby and had shaved off the stubble and was drifting around being welcoming in his role as a member of the Jockey Club.
And the real Jockey Club was there, I saw, in the person of Bill Baudelaire, who was known to one or two of the owners with whom he was chatting.
I wondered how much he would fret if he didn't see me among the passengers, and I hoped not much.
Nell emerged from the noise of the crowd and came across towards us, a clipboard clasped to her chest, her eyes shining.
She wore another severe suit, grey this time over a white blouse, but perhaps in honour of the occasion had added a long twisted rope of coral, pearls and crystal.
‘It's all happening,’ she said.
‘I can hardly believe it, after all these months.
I won't kiss you both, I'm not supposed to know you yet, but consider yourselves kissed.
It's all going very well.
Pierre and Donna are having a humdinger of a row.
How does she manage to cry whenever she wants to?
Is that the suitcase for Vancouver?
Put it over there with those others which are being checked right through.
Mercer Lorrimore is sweet, I'm so relieved.
We haven't had any disasters yet, but there must be one on the way.
I'm as high as a kite and there's no champagne in the orange juice.’
She stopped for breath and a laugh and I said, ‘Nell, if Bill Baudelaire asks you if I'm here, just say yes, don't say where.’
She was puzzled but too short of time to argue.
‘Well…
OK.’
‘Thanks.’
She nodded and turned to go and take care of the passengers, and the James Winterbourne character came out to meet her and also to talk to Zak.
‘It's too much,’ he complained, ‘the real goddam Chairman of the Ontario Jockey Club has turned up to do the ‘bon voyage ’bit himself.
I'm out of a job.’
‘We did ask him first,’ Nell said.
‘We suggested it right at the beginning, before it all grew so big.
He's obviously decided he should be here after all.’
‘Yes, but…what about my fee?’
‘You'll get it,’ Zak said resignedly.
‘Just go back and jolly things along and tell everyone what a great trip they're going to have.’
I've been doing that,’ he grumbled, but returned obediently to his task.
‘As a matter of fact,’ Nell said, her brow wrinkling, ‘I suppose I did get a message days ago to say the Chairman was coming, but I didn't know it meant him.
I didn't know who it meant.
It was a message left for me while I was out.
‘The Colonel is coming.’
I didn't know any colonels.
Is the Chairman a colonel?’
‘Yes,’ I said.
‘Oh well, no harm done.
I'd better go and see if he needs anything.’
She hurried off, unperturbed.
Zak sighed.
‘I could have saved myself that fee.’
‘How do you mean?’
‘Oh, Merry & Co pay me a lump sum to stage the mystery.
I engage the actors and pay them, and whatever is left at the end is mine.
Not much, sometimes.’
Voices were suddenly raised over in the crowd and people began scattering to the edges of the area, clearing the centre and falling silent.
Zak and I instinctively went nearer, he in front, I in his shadow.
On the floor, sprawling, lay the actor Raoul, with Donna and Pierre bending down to help him up.
Raoul dabbed at his nose with the back of his hand, and everyone could see the resulting scarlet streak.
Mavis Bricknell began saying loudly and indignantly, ‘He hit him.
He hit him.
That young man hit our trainer in the face.
He had no right to knock him down.’
She was pointing at Sheridan Lorrimore, who had turned his back on the scene.
I glanced at Zak for enlightenment.
‘That,’ he said blankly, ‘wasn't in the script.’
Nell smoothed it over.
Sheridan Lorrimore could be heard saying furiously and fortissimo to his father, ‘How the hell could I know they were acting?
The fellow was being a bore.
I just bopped him one.
He deserved it.
The girl was crying.
And he was crowding me, pushing against me.
I didn't like it.’
His father murmured something.
‘Apologize?’
Sheridan said in a high voice.
‘Apol — oh, all right.
I apologize.
Will that do?’
Mercer drew him away to a comer, and slowly, haltingly, the general good humour resurfaced.
Ironic compliments were paid to Pierre, Donna and Raoul for the potency and effect of their acting and Raoul played for sympathy and looked nobly forgiving, holding a handkerchief to his nose and peering at it for blood, of which there seemed to be not much.
Zak cursed and said that Pierre had in fact been going to knock Raoul to the ground at a slightly later rime, and now that would have to be changed.
I left him to his problems because it was coming up to the time when Emil had said the crew should board the train, and I was due back in the coffee shop.
The carrot cakes had been reduced to crumbs and the coffee cups were empty.
The bussed consignment of grooms had arrived and were sitting in a group wearing Race Train T-shirts above their jeans.
Emil looked at his watch and another crew member arrived and said the computer in the crew's room downstairs was showing that the special train had just pulled into the station, Gate 6, Track 7, as expected.
‘Bon ,’ Emil said, smiling.
‘Then, Tommy, your duties begin.’
Everyone picked up their travelling bags and in a straggle more than a group walked back towards the passengers' assembly area.
As we approached we could hear the real Chairman of the Ontario Jockey Club welcoming everyone to the adventure and we could see Zak and the other actors waiting for him to finish so that they could get on with the mystery.
Jimmy the actor was dressed in a maroon VIA Rail station uniform, Zak was intent, and Ricky, due on in gory glory at any moment, was checking in a small handmirror that ‘blood’ was cascading satisfactorily from a gash on his head.
Zak flashed a glance at the crew, saw me and gave me a thumbs-up sign.
The Chairman wound up to applause.
Zak tapped Ricky, who had put the mirror in his pocket, and Ricky went into the ‘I've been attacked’ routine most convincingly.
Emil, the crew and I wasted no time watching.
We went on past and came to Gate 6, which was basically a staircase leading to ground level, where the rails were.
Even though it was high morning, the light was dim and artificial outside as acres of arched roof far above kept out the Canadian weather.
The great train was standing there, faintly hissing, silver, immensely heavy, stretching away in both directions for as far as one could see in the gloom.
In the Merry & Co office, I'd learned that each carriage (built of strong unpainted corrugated aluminium with the corrugated lying horizontally) was eighty-five feet long; and there were fifteen carriages in all, counting the horses, the baggage and the Lorrimores.
With the engines as well, this train covered more than a quarter of a mile standing still.
Two furlongs, I thought frivolously, to put it suitably.
Three times round the train more than equalled the Derby.
There was another long banner, duplication of the one in the station, fastened to the side of the train, telling all the passengers what they were going on, if they were still in any doubt.
The crew divided to right and left according to where their jobs were and, following Emil, I found myself climbing up not into the dining car but into one of the sleeping cars.
Emil briefly consulted a notebook, stowed his travel bag on a rack in a small bedroom and directed me to put my big in the one next door.
He said I should remove my raincoat and my jacket and hang them on the hangers provided.
That done, he closed both doors and we descended again to the ground.
‘It's easier to walk along outside while we are in the station,’ he explained.
He was ever precise.
We walked along beside the wheels until the end of the train was in sight and finally walked past the dining car and at the end of it swung upwards through its rear door into the scene of operations.
The special dining car lived up to its name with a blue and red carpet, big blue padded leather chairs, polished wood gleaming in the lights and glass panels engraved with birds.
There were windows all down both sides with blue patterned curtains at intervals and green plants lodged above, behind pelmets.
Ten feet wide, the car was long enough to accommodate six oblong tables down each side of a wide aisle with four chairs at each: forty-eight seats, as promised.
All quiet, all empty.
All waiting.
‘Come,’ Emil said, leading the way forward through the splendour, ‘I show you the kitchen.’
The long, silvery, all-metal kitchen was already occupied by two figures dressed in white trousers and jackets topped by high white paper hats: the diminutive lady chef from Montreal and a tall willowy young man who introduced himself as Angus, the special chef employed by the outside firm of top-class caterers who were providing for this journey the sort of food not usually served on trains.
It seemed to my amused eyes that the two chefs were in chilly unfriendliness, marking out their territories, each, in the normal course of events, being accustomed to being the boss.
Emil, who must have picked up the same signals, spoke with a true leader's decisiveness.
‘In this kitchen this week,’ he said to me, ‘Angus is to command.
Simone will assist.’
Angus looked relieved, Simone resentful.
‘This is because’, Emil said, as if it clinched matters, which it did, ‘Angus and his company have designed le menu and provided the food.’
The matter, everyone could see, was closed.
Emil explained to me that on this trip the linen, cutlery and glasses had been provided by the caterers, and without  more ado he showed me first, where to find everything and second, how to set a table.
He watched me do the second table in imitation of his manner.
‘You learn fast,’ he said approvingly.
‘If you practise, they will not tell you are not a waiter.’
I practised on about half of the remaining tables while the two other dining-room stewards, the real regular service attendants; Oliver and Cathy, set the rest.
They put things right with a smile when I got them wrong, and I fell into their ways and rhythm of working as well as I could.
Emil surveyed the finished dining room with a critical eye and said that after a week I would Probably be able to fold a napkin tidily.
They all smiled: it seemed that my napkins were already OK, and I felt quite ridiculously pleased, and also reassured.
Outside the windows, the red hit of a porter trundling luggage went by, with, in its wake, the Lorrimores.
‘They're boarding,’ Emil said.
‘When the train departs, our passengers will all come here for the champagne.’
He bustled about with champagne flutes and ice and showed me how to fold a napkin round the neck of a bottle and how to pour without drips.
He seemed to have forgotten about only letting me loose on water.
There were voices outside as the train came alive.
I put my head out of the rear door of the dining car and, looking forward, saw all the passengers climbing upwards into the sleeping cars, with porters following after with their bags.
Several people were embarking also into the car behind dining car, into the car which comprised three bedrooms, a bar, a large lounge area and an upstairs glass-domed observation deck, the whole lot known, I'd discovered, a the dome car.
Forward by the gate through which the passengers were crowding, Nell was doing her stuff with bandages on the convincing bloodiness of Ricky.
The little scene concluded, she walked aft, looking inward through the windows, searching for someone, who in fact turned out to be me.
‘I wanted to tell you,’ she said, ‘the Conductor — he's like the captain of a ship — knows that you're our security  you want, and to let you go everywhere in the train without question, including the engines, as long as the two engineers — they're the train-drivers — permit it, which he says they will once he's talked to them.
Say you are Tommy, when you see him.
I gazed at her with admiration.
‘You're marvellous,’ I
said.
‘Yes, aren't I?’
She smiled.
‘Bill Baudelaire did ask about you.
I said you were here and you'd boarded early.
He seemed satisfied.
Now I've got to sort out all the people who persist in putting themselves into the wrong bedrooms…’
She had gone before she'd finished the sentence, climbing into the sleeping car forward of the kitchen and vanishing from view.
Filmer's bedroom was in that car.
It had been easy to get myself moved away from sleeping next door to him: It had happened naturally with my demotion to crew.
However much I might want to keep tabs on him, bumping into him several times a day in the corridor hardly seemed the best route to anonymity.
People started coming into the dining room and sitting at the tables regardless of the fact that we were still in the station.
‘Where do we sit?’ a pleasant-faced woman asked Emil, and he said, ‘Anywhere, madam.’
The man with her demanded a double Scotch on the rocks and Emil told him that alcohol was available only after departure.
Emil was courteous and helpful.
I listened, and I learned.
Mercer Lorrimore came through into the dining car followed by his wife, who looked displeased.
‘Where do we sit?’
Lorrimore said to me, and I answered ‘Anywhere, sir,’ in best Emil fashion, which drew a fast appreciative grin from Emil himself.
Mercer and Bambi chose a centrally located table and were soon joined by their less than happy offspring, Sheridan audibly saying, ‘I don't see why we have to sit in here when we have our own private car.’
Both mother and daughter looked as if they agreed with him but Mercer, smiling round clenched molars, said with surprising bitterness, ‘You will do what I ask or accept the consequences.’
And Sheridan looked furious but also afraid.
They had spoken as if I weren't there, which in a way I wasn't, as other passengers were moving round me, all asking the same questions.
‘Anywhere, madam.
Anywhere, sir, I said, and ‘I'm afraid we can't serve alcohol before departure.’
Departure came from one instant to the next, without any whistles blowing, horns sounding or general ballyhoo.
One moment we were stationary, the next sliding forward smoothly, the transition from rest to motion of a quarter of a mile of metal achieved as if on silk.
We emerged from the shadow of the station into the bright light of noon, and Daffodil Quentin under her sunburst of curls made an entrance from the dome car end, looking about her as if accustomed to people leaping up to help.
‘Where do we sit?’ she asked, not quite looking at me, and I said, ‘Anywhere, madam.
Wherever you like.’
She found two seats free not far from the Lorrimores and, putting herself on one chair and her handbag on the other, said with bonhomie to the elderly couple already occupying the table, ‘I'm Daffodil Quentin.
Isn't this fun?’
They agreed with her warmly.
They knew who she was: she was yesterday's winner.
They started talking with animation, like almost everyone else in the car.
There was no cool period here of waiting for the ice to break.
Any ice left after the previous day's racing had been broken conclusively in the scenes out in the station, and the party had already gelled and was in full swing.
Emil beckoned me towards the kitchen end, and I went up there into the small lobby with a serving counter, a space that made a needed gap between the hot glittering galley and the actual dining area.
The lobby led on the left to the kitchen and on the right to the corridor to the rest of the train, along which desultory passengers  were appearing, swaying gently now to the movement of gathering speed.
Behind the counter, Emil was opening bottles of Pol Roger.
Oliver and Cathy were still taking glasses from a cardboard container and arranging them on small trays.
‘Would you mind polishing some of these smeary glasses?’
Emil said to me, pointing at a trayful.
‘It would be of great help.’
‘Just tell me,’ I said.
‘Polish them,’ he sad.
‘That's better.’
They all laughed.
I picked up a cloth and began polishing the tall flutes, and Filmer emerged from the corridor and crossed into the dining room without glancing our way.
I watched him walk towards Daffodil, who was waving to him vigorously, and take the place saved by her handbag.
He had his back to me, for which I was grateful.
Prepared for the closeness of him, I was still unprepared, still missing a breath.
It wouldn't do, I thought.
It was time for a bit of bottle, not for knocking knees.
Every seat in the dining car filled up and still people were coming.
Nell, arriving, took it in her stride.
‘Bound to happen.
All the actors are here.
Give everyone champagne.’
She went on down the car, clipboard hugged to her chest, answering questions, nodding and smiling, keeping the
Emil gave me a tray of glasses.
‘Put four on each table.
Oliver will follow you to fill them.
Start at the far end and work back.’
‘OK.’
Carrying a tray of glasses would have been easier if the floor had been stable but I made it to the far end with only a lurch or two and delivered the goods as required.
Three or four people without seats were standing at the far dome car end, including the actress Angelica.
I offered them all glasses as well, and Angelica took one and went on bellyaching to all around her about how Steve had let her down and she should never have trusted the louse, and it was a tribute to her acting that there was a distinct drawing  aside of skirts in the pursed mouths of those around her who were fed up with hearing about it.
Oliver, on my heels, was delivering them solace in pol Roger's golden bubbles.
I came with acute awareness to the table where Filmer was sitting with Daffodil and, careful not to look directly at either of them, put my last four glasses in a row on the tablecloth.
At once Filmer said, ‘Where have I seen you before?’
About fifty conclusions dashed through my head, all of them disastrous.
I had been so sure he wouldn't know me.
Stupid, arrogant mistake.
‘I expect it was when we were over in Europe and went to the Derby Eve dinner in London,’ the elderly woman said.
‘We sat at the head table….
We were guests of dear Ezra Gideon, poor man.’
I moved away, sending wordless prayers of thankfulness to anyone out there listening.
Filmer hadn't even glanced at me, still less had known me.
His head, when I'd finally looked at him, was turned away from me towards his companions, as was Daffodil's also.
Filmer's own thoughts must anyway have been thrown in a tangle.
He was himself directly responsible for Gideon's suicide, and now he found himself sitting with Gideon's friends.
Whether or not he felt an ounce of embarrassment (probably not), it had to be enough to make him aware of waiters.
I fetched more glasses and dealt some of them to the Lorrimores who were an oasis of silence in the chattering mob and paid me absolutely no attention: and from then on I felt I had indeed chosen the right role and could sustain it indefinitely.
When everyone was served, Zak the investigator  along through Scene Two, disclosing the details of the attempted kidnap of one of the horses and leaving a tantalizing question mark in the shape of which one ?
To the amusement of the audience, he quizzed several of the real passenger owners.
‘Which is your horse, sir?
Did you say Upper Gumtree?’
He consulted a list.
‘Ah yes.
You must be Harvey Unwin from Australia?
Do you have any reason to believe that your horse might be the target of international intrigue?’
It was skilfully and entertainingly acted.
Mercer Lorrimore in his turn and with a smile said his horse was called Voting Right, and no, he'd had no advance notice of any attack.
Bambi smiled thinly, and Sheridan said in a loud voice that he thought the whole thing was stupid; everyone knew there hadn't been any goddam kidnap attempt and why didn't Zak stop messing around and piss off.
Into a gasping horrified silence while Mercer struggled for words, Zak smiled brilliantly and said, ‘Is it indigestion?
We'll get you some tablets,’ and he patted Sheridan compassionately on the shoulder.
It brought the house, or rather the train, down.
People laughed and applauded and Sheridan looked truly murderous.
‘Now, Sparrowgrass,’ Zak said, consulting his list and very smoothly carrying on, ‘who owns Sparrowgrass?’
The elderly gentleman sitting with Filmer said, ‘I do.
My wife and I.’
‘So you are Mr and Mrs Young?
Any relation to Brigham?
No?
Never mind.
Isn't it true that someone tried to burn down the barn your Sparrowgrass was stabled in a month ago?
Could the two attacks be linked, would you say?’
The Youngs looked astounded.
‘How ever did you know that?’
‘We have our sources,’ Zak said loftily, and told me afterwards his source was the Daily Racing Form , busily read recently for background help with his story.
It impressed the passengers most satisfactorily.
‘I'm sure no one 's trying to kidnap my horse,’ Young said, but with a note of doubt in his voice that was a triumph for Zak.
‘Let's hope not,’ he said.
‘And finally, who owns Calculator?’
The actors Walter and Mavis Bricknell put up their hands in agitation.
‘We do.
What's wrong with him?
We must go at once to make sure.
The whole thing's most upsetting.
Have you proper guards now looking after the horses?’
‘Calm down, sir, calm down, madam,’ Zak said as to children.
‘Merry & Co have a special horsemaster looking after them.
They will all be safe from now on.’
He concluded the scene by saying that we would soon be stopping at Newmarket, but that British owners shouldn't get off the train as they would find no races there.
(Laughter.)
Lunch was now on its way, he added, and he hoped everyone would return for drinks at five-thirty when there would be Interesting Developments as per their printed programmes.
The passengers clapped very loudly, to encourage him.
Zak waved, retreated and set off down the corridor, flat-footed almost at once after his bounce in the dining car, and already with drooping shoulders consulting his notebook about what he needed to do next.
How often, I wondered, had he had to deal with the likes of Sheridan?
From his demeanour, often enough.
Emil told me to collect the champagne glasses, pour the water and put a pot of breadsticks on each table.
He himself was opening wine.
Oliver and Cathy began bringing plates of smoked salmon and bowls of vichyssoise soup on trays from the kitchen and offering a choice.
The seating problem more or less sorted itself out.
Mavis and Walter, pretending ‘their horse's welfare meant more to them than eating’, set off up the train to eat in the racegoers' dining car, and so did Angelica, ‘too upset to sit down’.
A few others like Raoul, Pierre and Donna, left discreetly, until Nell, counting heads, could match all paying passengers with a place, Giles-the-murderer, I was interested to see, was still in the dining room, still being  overpoweringly nice: it £as apparently essential to the drama that he should be liked.
We stopped at Newmarket briefly.
No British owners got off.
(A pity.)
The soup gave place to a fricassée of chicken with lemon and parsley.
I was promoted from Aquarius to Ganymede, forsaking water for wine.
Emil quite rightly didn't trust me to clear dirty plates, which involved fancy juggling with knives and forks.
I was allowed with the others to change ashtrays, to deliver maple hazelnut praline mousse and to take tea and coffee to the cups, already laid.
Filmer ignored my presence throughout and I was extremely careful not to draw his attention by spilling things.
By the end I had a great admiration for Emil, Oliver and Cathy, who had neatly served and cleared three full courses with the floor swaying beneath their feet and who normally would have taken my few jobs also in their stride.
When nearly all the passengers (including Filmer) had left, heading for their own rooms or the observation car, we cleared the tables, spread fresh cloths and began thinking of food for ourselves.
At least, I did.
The others made for the kitchen with me following, but once there Oliver took off his waistcoat, donned an apron and long yellow gloves, and began washing dishes.
A deep endless sinkful of three courses for forty-eight people.
I watched him in horror.
‘Do you always do this?’
I asked.
‘Who else?
Cathy took a cloth to do some drying.
‘No machines?’
I protested.
‘We're the machines,’ she said.
Catch me, I thought ruefully, washing dishes.
I picked up one of the cloths and helped her.
‘You don't have to,’ she said.
‘But thanks.’
Angus the chef was cleaning up his realm at the far end of the long hot kitchen and Simone was unpacking fat beef sandwiches which we all ate standing up while working.
There was an odd sort of camaraderie about it all, as if we were the front-line troops in battle.
They were  entitled to eat after the last sitting in the central dining car, Emil said, rinsing glasses, but usually they went only for dinner, if then; I could see why, as after the sandwiches on that first day we ate the all-too-few left-over portions of the Lucullan lunch we had served.
‘There's never anything thrown away,’ Cathy said, ‘when we do trips like this.’
The dishes finally finished and stowed in their racks, it appeared that we were free for a blessed couple of hours: reassembly on the dot of five-thirty.
I don't know what the others did but I made straight towards the front of the packed train, threading an unsteady way through seemingly endless sleeping cars (passing my own berth), through the still busy central dining car, the full and raucous open-seat dayniter, three more sleeping cars, the crowded dome car (dining room, kitchen, lounge, observation deck), another sleeping car, and finally reaching the horses.
In all, a little less than a quarter of a mile's walk, though it felt like a marathon.
I was stopped at the horse-car entrance by a locked door and, in response to my repeated knocking, by a determined female who told me I wasn't welcome.
‘You can't come in,’ she said bluntly, physically barring my way.
‘The train crew aren't allowed in here.’
‘I'm working for Merry & Co,’ I said.
She looked me up and down.
‘You're an attendant,’ she said flatly.
‘You're not coming in.’
She was quivering with authority, the resolute governess guarding the pass.
Maybe forty, I judged, with regular features, no make-up and a slim wiry figure in shirt, sweater and jeans.
I knew an immovable object when I saw it, and I retreated through the first sleeping car, where grooms in T-shirts lolled in open day compartments (shut off by heavy felt curtains for sleeping), on my way to consult with the Chinese chef in the forward dome car's kitchen.
‘The Conductor?’ he said in answer to my question.
‘He is here.’
He pointed along the corridor towards the dining section.
‘You're lucky.’
The Conductor, in his grey suit with gold bars of long service on his left sleeve, was sitting at the first table past  the kitchen, finishing his lunch.
There were other diners at other tables, but he was alone, using his lunch break to fill in papers laid out on the cloth.
I slid into one of the seats opposite him and he raised his eyes enquiringly.
‘I'm from Merry & Co,’ I said.
‘I believe you know about me.’
‘Tommy?’ he said, after thought.
He put a hand across the table, which I shook.
‘George Burley,’ he said.
‘Call me George.’
He was middle-aged, bulky, close cropped as to hair and moustache and with, I discovered, a nice line in irony.
I explained about the impasse at the door of the horse car.
His eyes twinkled, ‘You've met the dragon-lady, eh?
Ms Leslie Brown.
They sent her to keep the grooms in order.
Now she tries to rule the train, eh?’
He had the widespread Canadian habit of turning the most ordinary statement into a question.
It's a nice day, eh?
‘I hope,’ I said politely, ‘that your authority outranks hers.’
‘You bet your life,’ he said.
‘Let me finish these papers and my lunch and we'll go along there, eh?’
I sat for a while watching the scenery slide by, wild uninhabited stretches of green and autumn-blazing trees, grey rocks and blue lakes punctuated by tiny hamlets and lonely houses, all vivid in the afternoon sunshine, a panoramic impression of the vastness of Canada and the smallness of her population.
‘Right,’ George said, shuffling his papers together.
‘I'll just finish my coffee, eh?’
‘Is there,’ I asked, ‘a telephone on the train?’
He chuckled.
‘You bet your life.
But it's a radio phone, eh?
It only works near cities where they have receiver/ transmitters.
At small stations, we have to get off and use the regular phones on the ground, like the passengers do at longer stops.’
‘But can anyone use the train telephone?’
I asked.
He nodded.
‘It's a pay phone by credit card, eh?
Much more expensive.
Most people stretch their legs and go into  the stations.
It's in my office.’
He anticipated my question.
‘My office is in the first sleeping car aft of the central dining car.’
‘My roomette is there,’ I said, working it out.
‘There you are, then.
Look for my name on the door.’
He finished his coffee, slid his papers into a folder and took me forward again to the horse car.
The dragon answered belligerently to his knock and stared at me disapprovingly.
‘He is Tommy,’ George said.
‘He is a security guard for Merry & Co, eh?
He has the run of the whole train under my authority.’
She bowed in her turn to an irresistible force and let us in with raised eyebrows and an air of power suspended, not abdicated.
She produced a clipboard with a sheet of ruled paper attached.
‘Sign here,’ she said.
‘Everyone who comes in here has to sign.
Put the date and time.’
I signed Tommy Titmouse in a scrawl and put the time.
Filmer, I was interested to see, had been to see his horse before departure.
We walked forward into the horse car with George pointing things out.
‘There are eleven stalls, see?
In the old days they carried twenty-four horses in a car, but there was no centre aisle, eh?
No passage for anyone between stops.
They don't carry horses by train much now.
This car was built in 1958, eh?
One of the last, one of the best.’
There was a single stall lengthwise against the wall on each side of the entrance door, then a space, then two more box-stalls, one on each side, then a space where big sliding doors gave access to the outer world for loading and unloading.
Next came a wider central space with a single box on one side only.
Then two more boxes and another space for loading, then two more boxes and a space, and finally another box on each side of the far forward door.
Eleven boxes, as promised, with a central aisle.
The boxes were made of heavy green-painted panels of metal slotted and bolted together; dismantleable.
In the wide centre space, where one box alone stood along  one wall, there was a comfortable chair for the redoubtable Ms Brown, along with a table, equipment lockers, a refrigerator and a heavy plastic water tank with a tap low down for the filling of buckets.
George opened the top lid of the tank and showed me a small plank floating on the surface.
‘It stops the water sloshing about so much, eh?’
Eh indeed, I thought.
There were dozens of bales of hay everywhere possible, and a filled hay-net swinging gently above each horse's head.
A couple of grooms sat around on bales while their charges nibbled their plain fare and thought mysterious equine thoughts.
Each box had the name of its occupant thoughtfully provided on a typewritten card slotted into a holder on the door.
I peered at a few of them, identifying Filmer and Daffodil's Laurentide Ice as a light grey colt with brittle-looking bones, the Lorrimores' Voting Right as an unremarkable bay, and the Youngs' Sparrowgrass as a bright chestnut with a white star and sock.
‘Come on,’ George said.
‘Meet the engineers, eh?’
He wasn't a horse man, himself.
‘Yes.
Thank you.’
He opened the forward door of the horse van with a key, and with a key also let us through into the baggage car.
‘The doors are kept locked, eh?’
I nodded.
We swayed down the long baggage car, which was half empty of freight and very noisy, and George, having told me to remove and lay aside my waistcoat in case I got oil on it, unlocked the door at the far end.
If I'd thought it noisy where we were, where we went made talking impossible.
George beckoned and I followed through a door into the heat of the rear section of the engines, the section containing among other things the boiler which provided steam to heat the whole train.
George pointed wordlessly to an immense tank of water and with amusement showed me the system for telling the quantity of the contents.
At intervals up the huge cylinder there were normal taps, the sort found over sinks.
George pointed to the figures beside each, which were in hundreds of gallons, and made tap-turning motions with his hands.
One turned on the taps, I understood with incredulity, to discover the level of the contents.
Supremely logical, I supposed, if one had never heard of gauges.
We went on forward into a narrow passage beside yards of hot hammering engine of more than head height, throbbingly painful to the senses, and then passed over a coupling into another engine, even longer, even noisier, even hotter, the very stuff of hell.
At the forward end of that we came to a glass-panelled door, which needed no key, and suddenly we were in the comparative quietness of the drivers' cab, right at the front of the train.
There was fresh cool air there, as the right-hand window, next to the bank of controls in front of the engineer's seat, was wide open.
When I commented on it, George said that that window was open always except in blizzards, eh?
Through the wide forward unopening windows there was a riveting view of the rails stretching ahead, signals shining green in the distance, trees flashing back at a useful seventy miles an hour.
I'd never been in the cab of a moving train before, and I felt I could have stayed there all day.
At the controls sat a youngish man in no sort of uniform, and beside him sat an older man in cleanish overalls with grease on his fingers.
George made introductions.
‘Robert’, that was the younger, and ‘Mike’, the elder.
They nodded and shook hands when George explained my position.
‘Give him help, if he asks for it.’
They said they would.
George patted Robert on the shoulder and pointed out to me a small white flag blowing stiffly outside to the right of the front windows.
‘That flag shows this is a special train.
Not in the timetable.
It's so all railwaymen along the way don't think the Canadian is running thirty minutes early.’
They all thought it a great joke.
Trains never ran early the world over.
Late was routine.
Still chuckling, George led the way back through the glass door into the inferno.
We inched again past the thundering monster and its second string to the rear, and emerged at last into the clattering reverberating peace of the baggage car where I was reunited with my waistcoat.
My suitcase, I was interested to see, stood in a quiet row of others, accessible enough if I wanted it.
George locked the baggage car door behind us and we stood again in the quiet horse car which looked homely and friendly with the horses' heads poking forward over the doors.
It was interesting, I thought, that as far as they were able in their maybe four-foot-wide stalls, most of them were standing diagonally across the space, the better to deal with the motion; and they all looked alert and interested, sure signs of contentment.
I rubbed the noses of one or two under the frowning suspicious gaze of Ms Brown who was not pleased to be told that she should let me in whenever I asked, eh?
George chuckled his way out of the horse car and we meandered back down the train together, George stopping to check for news with each sleeping-car attendant and to solve any problems.
There was a sing-song in progress in the dome car and the racegoers in the dayniter had formed about four separate card schools with cash passing briskly.
The overworked and gloomy chef in the main dining car had not lost his temper altogether and only a few passengers had grumbled that the roomettes were too cramped; the most usual disgruntlement, George said.
No one was ill, no one was drunk, no one was fighting.
Things, George said eventually, were going so smoothly that one should expect disaster any time now, eh?
We came at last to his office which was basically a roomette like my own: that is to say, it was a seven-by-four-foot space on one side of a central corridor, containing a washbasin, a folding table and two seats, one of which concealed what the timetable coyly called ‘facilities’.
One could either leave the sliding door open and see the world go by down the corridor, or close oneself into a private cocoon; and at night, one's bed descended from the ceiling  and on to the seat of the facilities which effectively put them out of use.
George invited me in and left the door open.
‘This train,’ he said, settling himself into the armchair and indicating the facilities for me, ‘is a triumph of diplomacy, eh?’
He had a permanent smile in his eyes, I thought, much as if he found the whole of life a joke.
I learned later that he thought stupidity the norm for human behaviour, and that no one was as stupid as passengers, politicians, pressmen and the people who employed him.
‘Why,’ I asked, ‘is it a triumph?’
‘Common sense has broken out.’
I waited.
He beamed and in a while went on, ‘Except for the engineers, the same crew will stay with the train to Vancouver!’
I didn't to his eyes appear sufficiently impressed.
‘It's unheard of, eh?’ he said.
‘The unions won't allow it.’
‘Oh.’
‘Also the horse car belongs to Canadian pacific.’
I looked even blanker.
He chuckled.
‘The Canadian Pacific and VIA Rail, who work so closely together, get along like sandpaper, good at friction.
Canadian pacific trains are freight trains, eh?, and VIA trains carry passengers, and never the two shall mix.
This train is a mix.
A miracle, eh?’
‘Absolutely,’ I said encouragingly.
He looked at me with twinkling pity for my lack of understanding of the really serious things in life.
I asked if his telephone would work at the next big stop which came under the heading of serious to me.
‘Sudbury?’ he said.
‘Certainly.
But we will be there for an hour.
It's much cheaper from the station.
A fraction of the price.’
‘But more private here.’
He nodded philosophically.
‘Come here as soon as we slow down coming to Sudbury, eh?
I'll leave you here.
I have to be busy in the station.’
I thanked him for everything and left the orbit of his beaming smile knowing that I was included in the universality of stupid behaviour.
I could see a lot more of George, I thought, before I tired of him.
My own door, I found, was only two doors along from his, on the right-hand side of the train when facing forward.
I went past without stopping, noting that there were six roomettes altogether it the forward end of the car: three each side.
Then the corridor bent to the side to accommodate four enclosed double bedrooms and bent back again through the centre of open seating with sleeping curtains, called sections.
The six sections of that car were allocated to twelve assorted actors and crew, most of them at that point reading, talking or fast asleep.
‘How's it going?’
Zak said, yawning.
‘All quiet on the western front.’
‘Pass, friend.’
I smiled and went on down the train, getting the feel of it now, understanding the way it was put together, beginning to wonder about things like electricity, water supply and sewage.
A small modern city on the move, I thought, with all the necessary infrastructure.
All the doors were closed in the owners' sleeping cars (there were almost no open sections in those), the inhabitants there having the habit of privacy.
The rooms could have been empty, it was impossible to tell, and in fact when I came to the special dining car I found a good number of the passengers sitting at the unlaid tables, just chatting.
I went on through into the dome car where there were three more bedrooms before one came to the bar, which was furnished with tables, seating and barman.
A few people sat there also, talking, and some again were sitting around in the long lower lounge to the rear.
From there a short staircase went up to the observation lounge, and I went up there briefly.
The many seats there were almost full, the passengers enjoying their uninterrupted view of a million brilliant trees under blue skies and baking in the hot sunshine streaming through the glass roof.
Mr Young was up there, asleep.
Julius Apollo wasn't, nor anywhere else in public view.
I hadn't seen Nell at all either.
I didn't know where she'd put herself finally on her often-revised allocation of sleeping space, but wherever she was, it was behind a closed door.
To the rear of the dome car there was only the Lorrimores' private car, which I could hardly enter, so I retraced my steps, intending to retreat to my own roomette and watch the scenery do its stuff.
In the dining car I was stopped by Xanthe Lorrimore who was sitting alone at a table looking morose.
‘Bring me some Coke,’ she said.
‘Yes, certainly,’ I said, and went to fetch some from the cold locker in the kitchen, thanking my stars that I'd happened to see where the soft-drink cans were kept.
I put the can and a glass on one of the small trays (Emil's voice in my ear saying, ‘Never ever carry the object.
Carry the tray’) and returned to Xanthe.
‘I'm afraid this is on a cash bar basis,’ I said, putting the glass on the table and preparing to open the can.
‘What does that mean?’
‘Things from the bar are extra.
Not included in the fare.’
‘How ridiculous.
And I haven't any money.’
‘You could pay later, I'm sure.’
‘I think it's stupid.’
I opened the can and poured the Coke, and Mrs Young, who happened to be sitting alone at the next table, turned round and said to Xanthe sweetly that she, Mrs Young, would pay for the Coke, and wouldn't Xanthe come and join her?
Xanthe's first instinct was clearly to refuse but, sulky or not, she was also lonely, and there was an undemanding grandmotherliness about Mrs Young that promised an uncritical listening ear.
Xanthe moved herself and her Coke and unburdened herself of her immediate thought.
‘That brother of mine,’ she said, ‘is an asshole.
‘Perhaps he has his problems,’ Mrs Young said equably, digging around in her capacious and disorganized handbag for some money.
‘If he was anyone else's kid, he'd be in jail.’
The words came out as if propelled irresistibly from a well of compressed emotion.
Even Xanthe herself looked shocked at what she'd let out, and feebly tried to weaken the impact.
‘I didn't mean literally, of course,’ she said.
But she had.
Mrs Young, who had paused in her search, finally found her purse and gave me a dollar.
‘If there's any change, keep it,’ she said.
‘Thank you, madam.’
I had no choice but to leave and I made for the kitchen carrying the dollar on the tray like a trophy anchored by a thumb.
From there I looked back to see Xanthe begin to talk to Mrs Young, at first slowly, with brakes on, and then faster and faster, until all the unhappiness was pouring out like a flood.
I could see Xanthe's face and the back of Mrs Young's head.
Xanthe, it seemed to me, was perhaps sixteen, but probably younger: certainly not older.
She still had the facial contours of childhood, with a round chin and big-pupilled eyes: also chestnut hair in abundance and a growing figure hidden within a bulky white top with a pink glittering pop-slogan on the front, the badge of youth.
They were still talking when I continued on my way back to my roomette where I sat in comfortable privacy for a while reading the timetable and also reflecting that although I still had no answers to the old questions, I now had a whole crop of new ones, the most urgent being whether or not Filmer had already known the Youngs were friends of Ezra Gideon.
Whether the Youngs were, in fact, a target of some kind.
Yet Filmer hadn't chosen to sit at their table; it had been the random fortuitous decision of Daffodil.
Perhaps if it hadn't happened so handily by chance, he would have engineered a meeting.
Or was the fact of their friendship with Gideon just an unwelcome coincidence, as I had at first supposed.
Time, perhaps, would tell.
Time told me more immediately that it was five-thirty, the hour of return to the dining room, and I returned to find every single seat already taken, the passengers  having learned fast.
Latecomers stood in the entrances, looking forlorn.
Filmer, I saw at once, was placed opposite Mercer Lorrimore.
Daffodil, beside him, was opposite Bambi who was being coolly gracious.
Xanthe was still sitting across from Mrs Young, now rejoined by her husband.
Sheridan, as far as I could see, was absent.
Giles-the-murderer was present, sitting with the Youngs and Xanthe, being nice.
Emil, Oliver, Cathy and I went round the tables pouring wine, tea or coffee into glasses or cups on small trays with small movements, and when that was done Zak bounded into the midst of things, vibrating with fresh energy, to get on with the mystery.
I didn't listen in detail to it all, but it revolved round Pierre and Donna, and Raoul the racehorse trainer who wanted to marry her money.
Zak had got round the pre-empted Pierre-hitting-Raoul-to-the-ground routine by having Donna slap Raoul's face instead, which she did with a gusto that brought gasps from the audience.
Donna was clearly established as the wittering Bricknells' besotted daughter, with Raoul obviously Mavis's favourite, and Pierre despised as a no-good compulsive gambler.
Mother and daughter went into a sharp slanging match, with Walter fussing and trying to stop them.
Mavis, in the end, started crying.
I looked at the passengers' faces.
Even though they knew this lot were all actors, they were transfixed.
Soap opera had come to life within touching distance.
Racing people, I'd always thought, were among the Most cynical in the world, yet here some of the most experienced of them were moved and involved despite themselves.
Zak, keeping up the tension, said that at the last of our brief stops at minor stations he had been handed a telex about Angelica's missing friend Steve.
Was Angelica present?
Everyone looked around, and no, she wasn't.
Never mind, Zak said, would someone please tell her that she must telephone Steve from Sudbury, as he had serious news for her.
A lot of people nodded.
It was amazing.
Dressed in silk and ablaze with jewellery, apparently to prove that Donna's inheritance was no myth, Mavis Bricknell stumbled off towards the toilet room at the dome car's entrance saying she must repair the ravages to her face, and presently she came back, screaming loudly.
Angelica, it appeared, was lying on the lavatory floor, extremely dead.
Zak naturally bustled to investigate, followed by a sizeable section of the audience.
Some of them soon came back smiling wealthy and looking unsettled.
‘She can't really be dead,’ someone said solemnly.
‘But she certainly looks it.’
There was a lot of ‘blood’ all over the small compartment, it appeared, with Angelica's battered head in shadow beyond the essential facility.
Angelica's eyes were just visible staring at the wall, unblinking.
‘How can she do that?’ several said.
Zak came back, looked around him, and beckoned to me.
‘Stand in front of that door, will you, and don't let anyone go in?’
I nodded and went through the crowd towards the dome car.
Zak himself was calling everyone back into the dining room, saying they should all stay together until we reached Sudbury, which would be soon.
I could hear Nell's voice announcing calmly that everyone had time for another drink.
There would be an hour's stop in Sudbury for everyone to stretch their legs if they wanted to, and dinner would be served as soon as the train started again.
I went across the clattering, windy linkage space between the dining and dome cars and stood outside the toilet room.
I wasn't actually pleased with Zak as I didn't want to risk being identified as an actor, but that, I supposed, would be a great deal better than the truth.
It was boring in the passage but also, it proved, necessary, as one or two passengers came back for a look at the corpse.
They were good-humoured enough when turned away.
Meanwhile the corpse, who must have had to blink in the end, could be heard flushing water within.
When we began to slow down I knocked on the door.
‘Message from Zak,’ I said.
The door opened a fraction.
Angelica's greasepaint make-up was a pale bluish grey, her hair a mass of tomato ketchup.
‘Lock the door,’ I said.
‘Zak will be along.
When you hear his voice outside, unlock it.’
Right,’ she said, sounding cheeringly alive.
‘Have a nice trip.’
Angelica left the train on a stretcher in the dusk under bright station lights, her tomato head half covered by a blanket, and one lifeless hand, with red fingernails and sparkling rings, artistically drooping out of concealment on the side where the train's passengers were able to look on with fascination.
I watched the scene through the window of George Burley's office while I talked to Bill Baudelaire's mother on the telephone.
The conversation had been a surprise from the beginning, when a light young female voice had answered my call.
‘Could I speak to Mrs Baudelaire, please?’
I said.
‘Speaking.’
‘I mean…
Mrs Baudelaire senior.’
‘Any Mrs Baudelaire who is senior to me is in her grave,’ she announced.
‘Who are you?’
‘Tor Kelsey.’
‘Oh yes,’ she replied instantly.
‘The invisible man.’
I half laughed.
‘How do you do it?’ she asked.
‘I'm dying to know.
‘Seriously?’
‘Of course, seriously.’
‘Well…say if someone serves you fairly often in a shop, you recognize them when you're in the shop, but if  you meet them somewhere quite different, like at the races, you can't remember who they are.’
‘Quite right.
It's happened to me often.’
‘To be easily recognized,’ I said, ‘you have to be in your usual environment.
So the trick about invisibility is not to have a usual environment.’
There was a pause, then she said, ‘Thank you.
It must be lonely.’
I couldn't think of an answer to that, but was astounded by her perception.
‘The interesting thing is,’ I said, ‘that it's quite different for the people who work in the shop.
When they get to know their customers, they recognize them easily anywhere in the world.
So the racing people I know, I recognize everywhere.
They don't know that I exist…and that's invisibility.’
‘You are,’ she said, ‘an extraordinary young man.’
She stumped me again.
‘But Bill knew you existed,’ she said, ‘and he told me he didn't recognize you face to face.’
‘He was looking for the environment he knew…straight hair, no sunglasses, a good grey suit, collar and tie.’
‘Yes,’ she said.
‘If I meet you, will I know you?’
‘I'll tell you.’
‘Pact.’
This, I thought with relief and enjoyment, was some carrier pigeon..
‘Would you give Bill some messages?’
I asked.
‘Fire away.
I'll write them down.’
‘The train reaches Winnipeg tomorrow evening at about seven-thirty, and everyone disembarks to go to hotels.
please would you tell Bill I will not be staying at the same hotel as the owners, and that I will again not be going to the president's lunch, but that I will be at the races, even if he doesn't see me.’
I paused.
She repeated what I'd said.
‘Great,’ I said.
‘And would you ask him some questions?’
‘Fire away.’
‘Ask him for general information on a Mr and Mrs Young who own a horse called Sparrowgrass.’
‘It's on the train,’ she said.
‘Yes, that's right.’
I was surprised, but she said Bill had given her a list to be a help with messages.
‘Ask him,’ I said, ‘if Sheridan Lorrimore has ever been in any trouble that he knows of, apart from assaulting an actor at Toronto, that should have resulted in Sheridan going to jail.’
‘Gracious me.
The Lorrimores don't go to jail.’
‘So I gathered,’ I said dryly, ‘and would you also ask which horses are running at Winnipeg and which at Vancouver, and which in Bill's opinion is the really best horse on the train, not necessarily on form, and which has the best chance of winning either race.’
‘I don't need to ask Bill the first question, I can answer that for you right away, it's on this list.
Nearly all the eleven horses, nine to be exact, are running at Vancouver.
Only Upper Gumtree and Flokati run at Winnipeg.
As for the second, in my own opinion neither Upper Gumtree nor Flokati will win at Winnipeg because Mercer Lorrimore is shipping his great horse premiere by horse-van.’
‘Um…’
I said.
‘You follow racing quite a bit?’
‘My dear young man, didn't Bill tell you?
His father and I owned and ran the Ontario Raceworld magazine for years before we sold it to a conglomerate.’
‘I see,’ I said faintly.
‘And as for the Vancouver race,’ she went on blithely, ‘Laurentide Ice might as well melt right now, but Sparrowgrass and Voting Right are both in with a good chance.
Sparrowgrass will probably start favourite as his form is consistently good, but as you ask, very likely the best horse, the one with most potential for the future, is Mercer Lorrimore's Voting Right, and I would give that one the edge.’
‘Mrs Baudelaire,’ I said, ‘you are a gem.’
‘Beyond the price of rubies,’ she agreed.
‘Anything else?’
‘Nothing, except…
I hope you are well.’
‘No, not very.
You're kind to ask.
Goodbye, young man.
I'm always here.’
She put the receiver down quickly as if to stop me from asking anything else about her illness, and it reminded me sharply of my Aunt Viv, bright, spirited and horse mad to the end.
I went back to the dining car to find Oliver and Cathy laying the tables for dinner, and I helped them automatically, although they said I needn't.
The job done, we repaired to the kitchen door to see literally what was cooking and to take the printed menus from Angus to put on the tables.
Blinis with caviare, we read, followed by rack of lamb or cold poached salmon, then chocolate mousse with cream.
‘There won't be any over,’ Cathy sighed, and she was right as far as the blinis went, though we all ate lamb in the end.
With ovens and gas burners roaring away, it was wiltingly hot even at the dining-room end of the kitchen.
Down where the chef worked, a temperature gauge on the wall stood at 102° Fahrenheit, but tall willowy Angus, whose high hat nearly brushed the ceiling, looked cool and unperturbed.
‘Don't you have air-conditioning?’
I asked.
Angus said, ‘In summer, I dare say.
October is however officially winter, even though it's been warm this year.
The air-conditioning needs freon gas, which has all leaked away, and it won't be topped up again until spring.
So Simone tells me.’
Simone, a good foot shorter and with sweat trickling down her temples, mutely nodded.
The passengers came straggling back shedding overcoats and saying it was cold outside, and again the dining car filled up.
The Lorrimores this time were all sitting together.
The Youngs were with the Unwins from Australia and Filmer and Daffodil shared a table with a pair Nell later identified to me as the American owners of the horse called Flokati.
Filmer, extremely smooth in a dark suit and grey tie, solicitously removed Daffodil's chinchillas and hung them over the back of her chair.
She shimmered in a figure-hugging black dress, diamonds sparkling whenever she moved, easily outstripping the rest of the company (even Mavis Bricknell) in conspicuous expenditure.
The train made its smooth inconspicuous departure and I did my stuff with water and breadsticks.
Bambi Lorrimore put her hand arrestingly on my arm as I passed.
She was wearing a mink jacket and struggling to get out of it.
‘Take this back into our private car, will you?’ she said.
‘It's too hot in here.
Put it in the saloon, not the bedroom.’
‘Certainly, madam,’ I agreed, helping her with alacrity.
‘I'd be glad to.’
Mercer produced a key and gave it to me, explaining that I would come to a locked door.
‘Lock it again when you come back.’
‘Yes, sir.’
He nodded and, carrying the coat away over my arm, I went back through the dome car and with a great deal of interest into the private quarters of the Lorrimores.
There were lights on everywhere.
I came first to a small unoccupied sleeping space, then a galley, cold and lifeless.
provision for private food and private crew, but no food, no crew.
Beyond that was the locked door, and beyond that a small handsome dining room to seat eight.
Through there, down a corridor, there were three bedrooms, two with the doors open.
I took a quick peek inside: bed, drawers, small bathroom with shower.
One was clearly Xanthe's, the other by inference Sheridan's.
I didn't go into the parents' room but went on beyond it to find myself in the rear part of the carriage, at the very end of the train.
It was a comfortable drawing room with a television set and abundant upholstered armchairs in pastel blues and greens.
I went over to the rear door and looked out, seeing a little open boarding platform with a polished brass-topped balustrade and, beyond, the Canadian Pacific's single pair of rails streaming away into darkness.
The railroad across  Canada, I'd learned, was single track for most of the way.
Only in towns and at a few other places could trains going in opposite directions pass.
I put the mink coat on a chair and retraced my journey, locking the door again and eventually returning the key to Mercer who nodded without speech and put it in his pocket.
Emil was pouring wine.
The passengers were scoffing the blinis.
I eased into the general picture again and became as unidentifiable as possible.
Few people, I discovered, looked directly at a waiter's eyes, even when they were talking to him.
About an hour after we'd left Sudbury we stopped briefly for under five minutes at a place called Cartier and then went on again.
The passengers, replete with the lamb and chocolate mousse, lingered over coffee, and began to drift away to the dome car's bar lounge.
Xanthe Lorrimore got up from the table after a while and went that way, and presently came back screaming.
This time, the real thing.
She came stumbling back into the dining car followed by a commotion of people yelling behind her.
She reached her parents who were bewildered as well as worried.
‘I was nearly killed,’ she said frantically.
‘I nearly stepped off into space.
I mean, I was nearly killed .’
‘Darling,’ Mercer said calmingly, ‘what has exactly happened?’
‘You don't understand.’
she was screaming, trembling, hysterical.
‘I nearly stepped into space because our private car isn't there .’
It brought both of the Lorrimores to their feet in an incredulous rush, but they had only to look at the faces crowding behind her to know it was true.
‘And they say, all those people say…’ she was gasping, half unable to get the words out, terribly frightened, ‘…they say the other train, the regular Canadian, is only half an hour behind us, and will smash into…will smash into…don't you see ?’
The Lorrimores, followed by everyone still in the dining room, went dashing off into the dome car, but Emil and I looked at each other, and I said, ‘How do we warn that train?’
‘Tell the Conductor.
He has a radio.’
‘I'll go,’ I said.
‘I know where his office is.
I'll find him.’
‘Hurry then.’
‘Yes.’
I hurried.
Ran.
Reached George's office.
No one there.
I went on, running where I could, and found him walking back towards me through the dayniter.
He instantly took in that I brought bad news and steered me at once into the noisy outside coupling space between the dayniter and the central dining car.
‘What is it?’ he shouted.
‘The Lorrimores’ private car is unhitched…it's somewhere back on the track, and the Canadian is coming.’
He moved faster than I would have thought anyone could on a train and was already talking into a radio headset when I reached his office.
‘The private car was there at Cartier,’ he said.
‘I was off the train there and saw it.
Are you sure it's not in sight?’
He listened.
‘Right, then radio to the Canadian and warn the Conductor he'll not be leaving Cartier, eh?
I'll get this train stopped and we'll go back for the lost car.
See what's what.
You'd better inform Toronto and Montreal.
They won't think this is very funny on a Sunday evening, eh?’
He chuckled and looked at me assessingly as I stood in his doorway.
‘I'll leave someone here manning the radio,’ he continued.
‘Tell him when you've got the Canadian understanding the situation, eh?’
He nodded at the reply he heard, took off the headset and gave it to me.
‘You are talking to the despatcher in Schreiber,’ he said, ‘— that's ahead of us, this side of Thunder Bay — and he can radio straight to the Canadian following us.
You can hear the despatcher without doing anything.
To transmit, press the button.’
He pointed, and was gone.
I put on the headset and sat in his chair and presently into my ears a disembodied voice said, ‘Are you there?’
I pressed the button.
‘Yes.’
‘Tell George I got the Canadian and it will stop in Cartier.
There's a CP freight train due behind it but I got Sudbury in time and it isn't leaving there.
No one is happy.
Tell George to pick up that car and get the hell out.’
I pressed the button.
‘Right,’ I said.
‘Who are you?’ asked the voice.
‘One of the attendants.’
He said, ‘Huh,’ and was quiet.
The Great Transcontinental Mystery Race Train began to slow down and soon came to a smooth stop.
Almost in the same instant, George was back in his doorway.
‘Tell the despatcher we've stopped and are going back,’ he said, when I'd relayed the messages.
‘We're eleven point two miles out of Cartier, between Benny and Stralak, which means in an uninhabited wilderness.
You stay here, eh?’
And he was gone again, this time towards the excitement in the tail.
I gave his message to the despatcher and added, ‘We're reversing now, going slowly.’
Let me know when you find the car.’
‘Yes.’
It was pitch dark through the windows; no light in the wilderness.
I heard afterwards from a lot of excited chattering in the dining room that George had stood alone outside the rear door of the dome car on the brink of space, directing a bright hand-held torch beam down the track.
Heard that he had a walkie-talkie radio on which he could give the engineer instructions to slow down further, and to stop.
He found the Lorrimores' car about a mile and a half out of Cartier.
The whole train stopped while he jumped down from the dome car and went to look at the laggard.
There was a long pause from my point of view, while the lights began flickering in the office and the train exceedingly slowly reversed, before stopping again and going into a sudden jerk.
Then we started forward slowly, and then  faster, and the lights stopped flickering, and soon after that George appeared in his office looking grim, all chuckles extinguished.
‘What's the matter?’
I said.
‘Nothing ,’ he said violently, ‘that's what's the matter.’
He stretched out a hand for the headset which I gave him.
He spoke into it.
‘This is George.
We picked up the Lorrimores’ car at one point three miles west of Cartier.
There was no failure in the linkage.’
He listened.
‘That's what I said.
Who the hell do they have working in Cartier, eh?
Someone uncoupled that car at Cartier and rigged some way of pulling it out of the station into the darkness before releasing it.
The brakes weren't on.
You tell Cartier to send someone right away down the track looking for a rope or some such, eh?
The steam heat pipe wasn't broken, it had been unlocked.
That's what I said.
The valve was closed.
It was no goddam accident, no goddam mechanical failure, someone deliberately unhitched that car.
If the Lorrimore girl hadn't found out, the Canadian would have crashed into it.
No, maybe not at high speed, but at twenty-five, thirty miles an hour the Canadian can do a lot of damage.
Would have made matchsticks of the private car.
Might have killed the Canadian engineers, or even derailed the train.
You tell them to start looking, eh?’
He took off the headset and stared at me with rage.
‘Would you,’ he said, ‘know how to uncouple one car from another?’
‘No, of course not.’
‘It takes a railwayman.’
He glared.
‘A railwayman!
It's like a mechanic letting someone drive off in a car with loose wheel nuts.
It's criminal, eh?’
‘A hundred years ago,’ he said furiously, ‘they designed a system to prevent cars that had broken loose from running backwards and crashing into things.
The brakes go on automatically in a runaway.’
He glared.
‘That system had been bypassed.
The Lorrimores’ brakes weren't on.
That car was deliberately released on level ground, eh?
I don't understand it.
What was the point?’
‘Maybe someone doesn't like the Lorrimores,’ I suggested.
‘We'll find the bastard,’ he said, not listening.
‘There can't be many in Cartier who know trams.
‘Do you get much sabotage?’
I asked.
‘Not like this.
Not often.
Once or twice in the past.
But it's mostly vandals.
A kid or two throwing rocks off a bridge.
Some stealing, eh?’
He was affronted, I saw, by the treachery of one of his own kind.
He took it personally.
He was in a way ashamed, as one is if one's countrymen behave badly abroad.
I asked him about his communication system with the engineer.
Why had he gone up the train himself to get it stopped if he had a walkie-talkie?
‘It crackles if we're going at any speed.
It's better to talk face to face.’
A light flashed on the ship-to-shore radio and he replaced his headset.
‘George here,’ he said, and listened.
He looked at his watch and frowned.
‘Yes.
Right.
Understood.’
He took off the headset, shaking his head.
‘They're not going to go along the track looking for a rope until both the Canadian and the freight train have been through.
If our saboteur's got an ounce of sense, by that time there won't be anything incriminating to find.’
‘Probably not already,’ I said.
‘It's getting on for an hour since we left Cartier.’
‘Yeah,’ he said.
His good humour was trickling back despite his anger, the gleam of irony again in his eye.
‘Better than that fellow's fake mystery, eh?’
‘Yes…’
I said, thinking.
‘Is the steam pipe the only thing connecting one car to the next?
Except the links, of course.’
‘That's right.’
‘What about electricity…and water?’
He shook his head.
‘Each car makes its own electricity.
Self-contained.
They have generators under the floors…like dynamos on bicycles…that make electricity from the wheels going round.
The problem is that when we're  going slowly, the lights flicker.
Then there are batteries for when we're stopped, but they'd only last for forty-five minutes, eh?, if we weren't plugged into the ground supply at a station.
After that we're down to emergency lighting, just the aisle lights and not much else for about four hours, then we're in the dark.’
‘And water?’
I asked.
It's in the roof.’
‘Really?’
I said, surprised.
He patiently explained.
‘At city stations, we have water hydrants every eighty-five feet, the length of the cars.
One to each car.
Also the main electricity, same thing, eh?
Anyway, the water goes up under pressure into the tanks in the roof and feeds down again to the washrooms by gravity.’
Fascinating, I thought.
And it had made unhitching the Lorrimores' car a comparatively quick and easy job.
‘The new cars,’ George said, ‘will be heated by electricity, not steam, so we'll be doing away with the steam pipe, eh?
And they'll have tanks for the sewage, which now drops straight down on to the tracks, of course.’
‘Canada's railways,’ I said politely, ‘will be the envy of the world.’
He chuckled.
‘The trains between Montreal and Toronto are late three-quarters of the time and the new engines break down regularly.
The old rolling stock, like this train, is great.’
He picked up the headset again.
I raised a hand in farewell and went back to the dining room where the real mystery had easily usurped Zak's, though some were sure it was part of the plot.
Xanthe had cheered up remarkably through being the centre of sympathetic attention, and Filmer was telling Mercer Lorrimore he should sue the railway company for millions of dollars for negligence.
The near-disaster had galvanized the general consciousness to a higher adrenaline level, probably because Xanthe had not, in fact, been carried off like Angelica.
Nell was sitting at a table with a fortyish couple who she later told me owned one of the horses in the box-car, a dark bay called Redi-Hot.
The man beckoned to me as I stood around vaguely, and asked me to fetch cognac for him, vodka with ice for his wife and…what for Nell?
‘Just Coke, please,’ she said.
I went to the kitchen where I knew the Coke was, but made frantic question mark signals to Nell about the rest.
Emil, the chefs, Oliver and Cathy had finished cleaning up and had all gone off duty.
I had no alcohol-divining rod to bend a twig in the direction of brandy or Smirnoff.
Nell said something to the owners and came to join me, stifling laughter.
‘Yes, very funny,’ I said, ‘but what the hell do I do?’
‘Take one of the small trays and get the drinks from the bar.
I'll explain they have to pay for them.’
‘I haven't seen you for five minutes alone today,’ I complained.
‘You're downstairs, I'm up.’
‘I could easily hate you.’
‘But do you?’
‘Not yet,’ I said.
‘If you're a good little waiter, I'll leave you a tip.’
She went back to her place with a complacent bounce to her step, and with a curse, but not meaning it, I took the Coke and a glass to her table and went on into the dome car for the rest.
After I'd returned and delivered the order someone else asked for the same service, which I willingly performed again, and yet again.
On each trip I overheard snatches of the bar-room conversations and could hear the louder buzz of continuing upheaval along in the lounge, and I thought that after I'd satisfied everyone in the dining room I might drift along to the far end with my disarming little tray.
The only person not wholly in sympathy with this plan was the bartender who complained that I was supposed to be off duty and that the passengers should come to the bar to buy the drinks themselves; I was syphoning off his tips.
I saw the justice of that and offered to split fifty fifty.
He knew very well that, without my running to and fro, the passengers mostly wouldn't be bothered to move to drink, so he accepted fast, no doubt considering me a mug as well as an actor.
Sheridan Lorrimore, who was sitting at a table apart from his parents, demanded I bring him a double Scotch at once.
He had a carrying voice, and his sister from two tables away turned round in disapproval.
‘No, no, you're not supposed to,’ she said.
‘Mind your own business.’
He turned his head slightly towards me and spoke in the direction of my tie.
‘Double Scotch, at the double.’
‘Don't get it,’ Xanthe said.
I stood irresolute.
Sheridan stood up, his ready anger rising.
He put out a hand and pushed my shoulder fiercely.
‘Go on,’ he said.
‘Damn well do as I say.
Go and get my drink.’
He pushed again quite hard and as I turned away I heard him snigger and say, ‘You have to kick 'em, you know.’
I went into the dome car and stood behind the bar with the bartender, and felt furious with Sheridan, not for his outrageous behaviour but because he was getting me noticed.
Filmer had been sitting with his back to me, it was true, but near enough to overhear.
Mercer Lorrimore appeared tentatively in the bar doorway and came in when he saw me.
‘I apologize for my son,’ he said wearily, and I had a convincing impression that he'd apologized countless times before.
He pulled out his wallet, removed a twenty-dollar note from it and offered me the money.
‘Please don't,’ I said.
‘There's no need.’
‘Yes, yes.
Take it.’
I saw he would feel better if I did, as if paying money would somehow excuse the act.
I thought he should stop trying to buy pardons for his son and pay for mental treatment instead.
But then, perhaps he had.
There was more wrong with Sheridan than ill-temper, and it had been obvious to his father for a long time.
I didn't approve of what he was doing, but if I refused his money I would be more and more visible, so I took it, and when he had gone off in relief back towards the dining car I gave it to the barman.
‘What was that all about?’ he asked curiously, pocketing the note without hesitation.
When I explained, he said, ‘You should have kept the money.
You should have charged him triple.’
‘He would have felt three times as virtuous,’ I said, and the barman looked at me blankly.
I didn't go back to the dining car but forward into the lounge, where again the sight of my yellow waistcoat stirred a few thirsts, which I did my best to accommodate.
The barman was by now mellow and helpful and said we were rapidly running out of the ice that had come aboard in bags in Sudbury.
Up in the dome, the uncoupling of the private car had given way to speculation about whether the northern lights would oblige: the weather was right, apparently.
I took a few drinks up there (including some for Zak and Donna, which amused them), and on my way down the stairs saw the backs of Mercer, and Bambi, Filmer and Daffodil, as they walked through the lounge towards the door to the private car.
Mercer stood aside to let Bambi lead the other two through the short noisy joining section, and then, before going himself, he looked back, saw me and beckoned.
‘Bring a bowl of ice, will you?’ he said when I reached him.
‘To the saloon.’
‘Yes, sir,’ I said.
He nodded and departed, and I relayed the request to the barman who shook his head and said he was down to six cubes.
I knew there were other bags of cubes in the kitchen refrigerator, so, feeling that I had been walking the train for a lifetime, I went along through the dining room to fetch some.
There weren't many people still in there, though Xanthe was still being comforted and listened to by Mrs Young.
Nell sat opposite Sheridan Lorrimore who seemed to be telling her that he had wrapped his  Lamborgini round a tree recently and had ordered a new one.
‘Tree?’
Nell said smiling.
He looked at her uncomprehendingly.
Sheridan wasn't a great one for jokes.
I fetched a bag of ice and a bowl from the kitchen, swayed back to the bar and in due course took the bowl of ice (on a tray) to the saloon.
The four of them were sitting in armchairs, Bambi talking to Daffodil, Mercer to Filmer.
Mercer said to me, ‘You'll find glasses and cognac in the cupboard in the dining room.
And Benedictine.
Bring them along here, will you?’
‘Yes, sir.’
Filmer paid me no attention.
In the neat dining room, the cupboards had glass fronts with pale green curtains inside them.
In one I found the bottles and glasses as described, and took them aft.
Filmer was saying, ‘Will Voting Right go on to the Breeders’ Cup if he wins at Winnipeg?’
‘He's not running at Winnipeg,’ Mercer said.
‘He runs at Vancouver.’
‘Yes, I meant Vancouver.’
Daffodil with enthusiasm was telling a cool Bambi that she should try some face cream or other that helped with wrinkles.
‘Just leave everything,’ Mercer said to me.
‘We'll pour.’
‘Yes, sir,’ I said, and retreated as he began the ultimate heresy of sloshing Remy Martin's finest on to rocks.
Mercer would know me everywhere on the tram, I thought, but none of the other three would.
I hadn't met Filmer's eyes all day; had been careful not to; and it seemed to me that his attention had been exclusively focused upon what he had now achieved, a visiting-terms acquaintanceship with Mercer Lorrimore.
There was now loud music in the lounge, with two couples trying to dance and falling over with giggles from the perpetual motion of the dance-floor.
Up in the dome, aurora borealis was doing its flickering fiery best on the horizon, and in the bar there was a group playing poker in serious silent concentration.
Playing for thousands, the barman said.
Between the bar and the dining room there were three bedrooms, and in one of those, with the door open, was a sleeping-car attendant, dressed exactly like myself.
‘Hello,’ he said, as I paused in the doorway.
‘Come to help?’
‘Sure,’ I said.
‘What do I do?’
‘You're the actor, aren't you?’ he asked.
‘It's hush hush.’
He nodded.
‘I won't say a word.’
He was of about my own age, perhaps a bit older, pleasant looking and cheerful.
He showed me how to fold up the ingenious mechanism of the daytime armchairs and slide them under a bed which pulled out from the wall.
A top bunk was then pulled down from the ceiling, complete with ladder.
He straightened the bedclothes and laid a wrapped chocolate truffle on each pillow, a goodnight blessing.
‘Neat,’ I said.
He had only one more room to do, he said, and he should have finished long before this but he'd been badly delayed in the car on the other side of the dining car, which he had in his care also.
I nodded — and several thoughts arrived simultaneously in a rush on my mental doorstep.
They were that Filmer's bedroom was in that car.
Filmer was at that moment with the Lorrimores.
The only locks on the bedroom doors were inside, in the form of bolts to ensure privacy.
There was no way of preventing anyone from walking in if a room were empty.
I went along to the sleeping car on the far side of the kitchen and opened the door of the abode of Julius Apollo.
By virtue of having paid double and possibly treble, Filmer had a double bedroom all to himself.
Only the lower bunk had been prepared for the night: the upper was still in the ceiling.
For all that he could be expected to stay in the Lorrimores, car for at least fifteen more minutes I felt decidedly jittery, and I left the door open so that if he did come back unexpectedly I could say I was merely checking that everything was in order.
My uniform had multiple advantages.
The bedrooms were small, as one would expect, though in the daytime, with the beds folded away, there was comfortable space.
There was a washbasin in full view, with the rest of the plumbing in a discreet little closet.
For hanging clothes there was a slot behind the bedheads of about eight inches wide, enough in Filmer's case for two suits.
Another two jackets hung on hangers on pegs on the wall.
I searched quickly through all the pockets, but they were mostly empty.
There was only, in one inner pocket, a receipt for a watch repair which I replaced where I found it.
There were no drawers: more or less everything else had to be in his suitcase which stood against the wall.
With an eye on the corridor outside, I tried one of the latches and wasn't surprised to find it locked.
That left only a tiny cupboard above the hanging space, in which Julius Apollo had stored a black leather toilet bag and his brushes.
On the floor below his suits, pushed to the back of the hanging space, I found his briefcase.
I put my head out of the door which was directly beside the hanging space, and looked up and down the corridor.
No one in sight.
I went down on hands and knees, half in and half out of the doorway, with an excuse ready of looking for a coin  I'd dropped.
I put a hand into the language space and drew the briefcase to the front; and it was of black crocodile skin with gold clasps, as I'd seen at Nottingham races.
The fact of its presence was all I was going to learn, however, as it had revolving combination locks which were easy enough to undo, but only if one had two hours to spend on each lock, which I hadn't.
Whether or not the briefcase still contained whatever Horfitz had given Filmer at Nottingham was anyone's guess, and dearly though I would have liked to look at the contents, I didn't want to risk any more at that point.
I pushed the black case deep into the hanging space again, stood up outside the door, closed it and went back to the scenes of jollity to the rear.
It was, by this time, nearly midnight.
The Youngs were standing up in the dining room, ready to go to bed.
Xanthe, however, alarmed by the departure of her new-found friend, was practically clinging to Mrs Young and with an echo of the earlier hysteria was saying that she couldn't possibly sleep in the private car, she would have nightmares, she would be too scared to stay, she was sure whoever had uncoupled the car before would do it again in the middle of the night, and they would all be killed when the Canadian crashed into them, because the Canadian was still there behind us, wasn't it, wasn't it?
Yes, it was.
Mrs Young did her best to soothe her, but it was impossible not to respect her fears.
She had undoubtedly nearly been killed.
Mrs Young told her that the madman who had mischievously unhitched the car was hours behind us in Cartier, but Xanthe was beyond reassurance.
Mrs Young appealed to Nell, asking if there was anywhere else that Xanthe could sleep, and Nell, consulting the ever-present clipboard, shook her head doubtfully.
‘There's an upper berth in a section,’ she said slowly, ‘but it only has a curtain, and no facilities except at the end of the car, and it's hardly what Xanthe's used to.’
‘I don't care,’ Xanthe said passionately.
‘I'll sleep on the floor or on the seats in the lounge, or anywhere .
I'll sleep in that upper berth…
Please let me.’
‘I don't see why not, then,’ Nell said.
‘What about night things?’
‘I'm not going into our car to fetch them.
I'm not .’
‘All right,’ Nell said.
‘I'll go and ask your mother.’
Mrs Young stayed with Xanthe, who was again faintly trembling, until at length Nell returned with both a small grip and Bambi.
Bambi tried to get her daughter to change her mind, but predictably without success.
I thought it unlikely that Xanthe would ever sleep in that car again, so strong was her present reaction.
She, Bambi, Nell and the Youngs made their way past me without looking at me and continued on along the corridor beside the kitchen, going to inspect the revised quarters which I knew were in the sleeping car forward of Filmer's.
After a while Bambi and Nell returned alone, and Bambi with an unexcited word of gratitude to Nell walked a few paces forward and stopped beside her son, who had done nothing to comfort or help his sister and was now sitting alone.
‘Come along, Sheridan,’ she said, her tone without peremptoriness but also without affection.
‘Your father asks you to come.’
Sheridan gave her a look of hatred which seemed not in the least to bother her.
She stood patiently waiting until, with exceedingly bad grace, he got to his feet and followed her homewards.
Bambi, it seemed to me, had taught herself not to care for Sheridan so as not to be hurt by him.
She too, like Mercer, must have suffered for years from his boorish behaviour in public, and she had distanced herself from it.
She didn't try to buy the toleration of the victims of his rudeness, as Mercer did: she ignored the rudeness instead.
I wondered which had come first, the chill and disenchantment of her worldly sophistication, or the lack of warmth in her son: and perhaps there was ice in both of them, and the one had reinforced the other.
Bambi, I thought, was a highly inappropriate name for her; she was no innocent wide-eyed smooth-skinned fawn but an  experienced, aloof, good-looking woman in the skin of minks.
Nell, watching them go, sighed and said, ‘She didn't kiss Xanthe goodnight, you know, or give her even a hug to comfort her.
Nothing.
And Mercer's so nice.’
‘Forget them.’
‘Yes….
You do realize the press will be down on this train like a pack of hunting lions at the next stop?’
‘Lionesses,’ I said.
‘What?’
‘It's the females who hunt in a pack.
One male sits by, watching, and takes the lion's share of the kill.’
‘I don't want to know that.’
‘Our next stop,’ I said, ‘will be fifteen minutes at White River in the middle of the night.
After the delay, we'll aim to arrive at four-oh-five, depart four-twenty.’
‘And after that?’
‘Except for a three-minute pause in a back-of-beyond, we stop at Thunder Bay for twenty-five minutes at ten-fifty tomorrow morning.’
‘Do you know the whole timetable by heart?’
‘Emil told me to learn it.
He was right when he said the question I would have to answer most was ‘When do we reach so and so?’…and if I were a regular waiter he said I would know the answers, even though we're thirty-five minutes earlier everywhere than the regular Canadian.’
‘Emil is cute,’ she said.
I looked at her in surprise.
I wouldn't have thought of Emil as cute.
Small, neat, bright and generous, yes.
‘Cute?’
I asked.
‘I would hope,’ she said, ‘that you don't think so.’
‘No.’
‘Good.’
She was relieved, I saw.
‘Weren't you sure?’
I asked curiously.
‘Am I so…ambivalent?’
‘Well…’
There was a touch of embarrassment.
‘I didn't mean to get into this sort of conversation, really I didn't.
But if you want to know, there's something.
about you that's secret…ultra-private…as if you  didn't want to be known too well.
So I just wondered.
I'm sorry…’
‘I shall shower you with ravening kisses.’
She laughed.
‘Not your style.’
‘Wait and see.’
And two people didn't, I thought, drift into talking like that after knowing each other for such a short while unless there was immediate trust and liking.
We were standing in the tiny lobby between the kitchen and the dining room, and she still had the clipboard clasped to her chest.
She would have to put it down, I thought fleetingly, before any serious ravening could take place.
‘You always have jokes in your eyes,’ she said.
‘And you never tell them.’
‘I was thinking about how you use your clipboard as chain-mail.’
Her own eyes widened.
‘A lousy man in the magazine office squeezed my breast…
Why am I telling you?
It was years ago.
Why should I care?
Anyway, where else would you carry a clipboard?’
She put it down, all the same, on the counter, but we didn't talk much longer as the revellers from the rear began coming through to go to the bedrooms.
I retreated into the kitchen and I could hear people asking Nell what time they could have breakfast.
‘Between seven and nine-thirty,’ she said.
‘Sleep well, everybody.’
She put her head into the kitchen.
‘Same to you, sleep well.
I'm off to bed.’
‘Goodnight,’ I said, smiling.
‘Aren't you going?’
‘Yes, in a while.’
‘When everything's…safe?’
‘You might say so.’
‘What exactly does the Jockey Club expect you to do?’
‘See trouble before it comes.’
‘But that's practically impossible.’
‘Mm,’ I said.
‘I didn't foresee anyone uncoupling the Lorrimores.’
‘You'll be fired for that,’ she said dryly, ‘so if you sleep, sleep well.’
‘Tor would kiss you,’ I said.
‘Tommy can't.’
‘I'll count it done.’
She went away blithely, the clipboard again in place: a habit, I supposed, as much as a defence.
I walked back to the bar and wasted time with the barman.
The intent poker school looked set for an all-night session, the dancing was still causing laughter in the lounge and the northern lights were entrancing the devotees in the dome.
The barman yawned and said he'd be closing the bar soon.
Alcohol stopped at midnight.
I heard Daffodil's voice before I saw her, so that when Filmer came past the door of the bar I was bending down with my head below the counter as if to be tidying things there.
I had the impression they did no more than glance in as they passed, as Filmer was saying ‘…when we get to Winnipeg.’
‘You mean Vancouver,’ Daffodil said.
‘Yes, Vancouver.’
‘You always get them mixed…’
Her voice, which had been raised, as his had been, so as to be heard while one of them walked ahead of the other, died away as they passed down the corridor, presumably en route to bed.
Giving them time to say goodnight, as Daffodil's room was one of the three just past the bar, I slowly followed.
They were nowhere in sight as I went through to the dining car, and Filmer seemed to have gone straight to his room, as there was a thread of light shining along the bottom of his door; but Daffodil, I discovered, had after all not.
Instead of being cosily tucked up in her bunk near the bar, she surprisingly came walking towards me from the sleeping car forward of Filmer's, her diamonds lighting small bright fires with every step.
I stood back to let her pass, but she shimmered to a stop before me and said, ‘Do you know where Miss Lorrimore is sleeping?’
‘In the car you've just come from, madam,’ I answered helpfully.
‘Yes, but where?
I told her parents that I would make sure she was all right.’
‘The sleeping-car attendant will know,’ I said.
‘If you would like to follow me?’
She nodded assent and as I turned to lead the way I thought that at close quarters she was probably younger than I'd assumed, or else that she was older but immature: an odd impression, fleeting and gone.
The middle-aged sleeping-car attendant was dozing but dressed.
He obligingly showed Daffodil the upper berth where Xanthe was sleeping, but the thick felt curtains were closely fastened, and when Daffodil called the girl's name quietly, there was no response.
The slightly fatherly attendant said he was sure she was safely asleep, as he'd seen her returning from the washroom at the end of the car and climbing up to her bunk.
‘I less that will do,’ Daffodil said, shrugging off someone else's problem.
‘Goodnight, then, and thank you for your help.’
We watched her sway away holding on to the rails, her high curls shining, her figure neat, her intense musky scent lingering like a memory in the air after she herself had gone.
The sleeping-car attendant sighed deeply at so much opulent femininity and philosophically returned to his roomette, and I went on up the train into the next car, where my own bed lay.
George Burley's door, two along from mine, was wide open, and I found he was in residence, dressed but asleep, quietly snoring in his armchair.
He jerked awake as if with a sixth sense as I paused in his doorway and said, ‘What's wrong, eh?’
‘Nothing that I know of,’ I said.
‘Oh, it's you.
‘I'm sorry I woke you.’
‘I wasn't asleep…well, napping, then.
I'm used to that.
I've been on the railways all my life, eh?’
‘A love affair?’
I said.
‘You can bet your life.’
He rubbed his eyes, yawning.
‘In the old days there were many big railway families.
Father to son…cousins, uncles…it got handed down.
My father, my grandfather, they were railwaymen.
But my sons, eh?
They're behind desks in big cities tapping at computers.’
He chuckled.
‘They run the railways too now  from behind desks, eh?
They sit in Montreal making decisions and they've never heard a train's call at night across the prairie.
They've missed all that.
These days the top brass fly everywhere, eh?’
His eyes twinkled.
Anyone who wasn't a wheels-on railwayman was demonstrably stupid.
‘I'll tell you,’ he said, ‘I hope to die on the railways.’
‘Not too soon, though.’
‘Not before White River, at any rate.’
I said goodnight and went to my own room where I found the sleeping-car attendant had duly lowered my bed and laid a chocolate truffle on the pillow.
I ate the chocolate.
Very good.
I took off the yellow waistcoat with its white lining and hung it on a hanger, and I took off my shoes, but rather like George I still felt myself to be on duty, so I switched off the light and lay on top of the bedclothes watching the black Canadian land slide by, while the free northern show went on above for hours in the sky.
There seemed to be wide horizontal bands of light which slowly changed in intensity, with brighter spots growing and fading in places mysteriously against the deeps of eternity.
It was peaceful more than frenetic, a mirage of slow dawns and sunsets going back to the fluted point people: humbling.
In the I context of ten thousand years, I thought, what did Filmer and his sins matter?
Yet all we had was here and now, and here and now…always through time…was where the struggle towards goodness had to be fought.
Towards virtue, morality, uprightness, order: call it what one liked.
A long, ever-recurring battle.
In the here and now we stopped without incident at White River.
I saw George outside under the station lights and watched him set off towards the rear of the train.
Apparently the Lorrimores were still safely with us as he came back presently without haste or alarm, and after a while the train made its usual unobtrusive departure westwards.
I slept for a couple of hours and was awakened while it was still dark by a gentle rapping on my door: it proved to be Emil, fully dressed and apologetic.
‘I didn't know if I should wake you.
If you are serious about this, it is time to set the tables for breakfast.’
‘I'm serious,’ I said.
He smiled with seeming satisfaction.
‘It is much easier with four of us.’
I said I would come at once and made it, washed, shaved and tidy, in roughly ten minutes.
Oliver and Cathy were already there, wide awake.
The kitchen was filled with glorious smells of baking and Angus, with languid largesse, said he wouldn't notice if we ate a slice or two of his raisin bread, or of his apple and walnut.
Simone said dourly that we were not to eat the croissants as there wouldn't be enough.
It was all rather like school.
We set the places, put fresh water and carnations in bud vases, one flower to each table, and folded pink napkins with precision.
By seven-fifteen, the first breakfasters were addressing themselves to eggs Benedict and I was pouring tea and coffee as to the service born.
At seven-thirty, in struggling daylight, we stopped briefly in a place identified in suitably small letters on the small station as Schreiber.
It was from here, I reflected, looking through the windows at a small scattered town, that the despatcher had spoken to George and me the previous evening: and while I watched, George appeared outside and was met by a man who came from the station.
They conferred for a while, then George returned to the train, and the train went quietly on its way.
A spectacular way: all through breakfast, the track ran along the north shore of Lake Superior, so close that at times the train seemed to be overhanging the water.
The passengers oohed and aahed, the Unwins (Upper Gumtree) sitting with the owners of Flokati, the Redi-Hots with a couple talking incessantly of the prowess of their horse, Wordmaster, also on the train.
Filmer came alone to sit at an untenanted table, ordering eggs and coffee from Oliver without looking at him.
Presently the Youngs appeared and with smiling acquaintanceship joined Filmer.
I wondered if he thought immediately  of Ezra Gideon, the Youngs' dear friend, but his face showed nothing but politeness.
Xanthe ambled in in a tousled yawning state and yesterday's clothes and flopped into the empty chair beside Filmer.
Interestingly he made no attempt to save the seat for Daffodil, but seemed to echo Mrs Young's enquiries about how Xanthe had slept.
Like a log, it appeared, although she seemed to regret not reporting constant nightmares.
Mr Young looked bored, as if he had tired of the subject a long time ago, but his wife retained her sweet comforting expression without any visible effort.
I waited with hovering impatience for Nell to arrive, which she did at length in a straight black skid (worse and worse) with a prim coffee blouse and unobtrusive gold earrings.
She had drawn her fair hair high into an elaborate plait down the back of her head and fastened it at the bottom with a wide tortoiseshell clasp: it looked distinguished and competent, but nowhere near cuddly.
People I hadn't yet identified beckoned her eagerly to join them, which she did with the ravishing smile she had loosed once or twice in my direction.
She told Cathy she would pass on the eggs but would like croissants and coffee, and presently I was bringing them to her as she sat with eyes demurely downwards, studiously ignoring my existence.
I set butter, jam and breads before her.
I poured into her cup.
She told her table companions it was nice having hand-picked attendants all the way to Vancouver.
I knew it was a game but I could cheerfully have strangled her.
I didn't want them noticing me even a little.
I went away and looked back, and met her eyes, which were laughing.
It was the sort of look between us which would have started alert interest in me if I'd spotted it between others, and I thought I was hear to losing my grip on what I was supposed to be doing, and that I'd better be more careful.
I hadn't needed to serve her: I'd taken the tray from Cathy.
Temptation will be your downfall, Tor, I thought.
Except for Xanthe, Mercer was the only Lorrimore to surface for breakfast, and he came not to eat but to ask Emil  to send trays through to his own private dining room.
Emil himself and Oliver delivered the necessary, although Emil on his return said he hoped this wasn't going to happen at lunch and dinner also, because it took too much time.
Room service was strictly not available, yet one didn't disoblige the Lorrimores if one could help it.
Daffodil arrived after everyone else with each bright curl in place and pleasantly sat across the aisle from the Filmer/Young table, asking for news of Xanthe's night.
The only people not bothering to ask, it seemed, were the near-victim's own family.
Xanthe chattered and could be heard telling Daffodil she felt snug and safe behind her curtain.
The next time I went slowly past their table, refill coffee pot at the ready, the conversation was back to the journey, with Xanthe this time saying she basically thought horseracing boring and she wouldn't have come on this trip if her father hadn't made her.
‘How did he make you?’
Filmer said interestedly.
‘Oh!’
She sounded suddenly flustered and evaded an answer.
‘He made Sheridan come, too.’
‘But why, if you both didn't want to?’
That was Daffodil's voice, behind my back.
‘He likes us where he can see us, he says.’
There was a note of grudge and bitterness but also, it seemed to me, a realistic acknowledgement that father knew best: and judging from Sheridan's behaviour to date, under his father's long-suffering eye was certainly the son's safest place.
The conversation faded into the distance and I paused to refill the Unwins' cups, where the talk was about Upper Gumtree having the edge over Mercer's premiere that was coming to Winnipeg by road.
George Burley presently came into the dining car and spoke for a while to Nell, who subsequently went from table to table, clipboard in place, repeating what he'd said.
‘We're stopping at Thunder Bay for longer than scheduled, as there'll be an investigation there about the Lorrimores’ car being uncoupled.
We'll be there about an hour and a half, as we're not going on until after the regular  Canadian has gone through.
The Canadian will be ahead of us then all the way to Winnipeg.’
‘What about lunch?’
Mr Young asked.
Mr Young, though thinnish, had a habit of eating half his wife's food as well as his own.
‘We'll leave Thunder Bay at about a quarter to one,’ Nell said, ‘so we'll have lunch soon after.
And a more leisurely dinner before we get to Winnipeg, instead of having to crowd it in early.
It will all fit in quite well.’
She was smiling, reassuring, keeping the party from unravelling.
‘You'll be glad to stretch your legs for a bit longer in Thunder Bay, and some of you might visit your horses.’
The owner of Redi-Hot, who seemed to spend most of his time reading a guide book, told Mr and Mrs Wordmaster, who looked suitably impressed, that Thunder Bay, one of Canada's largest ports, was at the far west end of the St Lawrence-Great Lakes seaway and should really be called what the locals called it, The Lakehead.
Grain from the prairies was shipped from there to throughout the world, he said.
‘Fancy that,’ said Mrs Wordmaster, who was English.
I retreated from this scintillating conversation and helped Oliver and Cathy clear up in the kitchen, and shortly before eleven we slid to a halt in the port that was halfway across Canada on some rails parallel with but a little removed from the station buildings.
Immediately a waiting double posse of determined-looking men advanced from the station across two intervening tracks, one lot sprouting press cameras, the other notebooks.
George stepped down from the train to meet the notebook people, and the others fanned out and began clicking.
One of the notebook crowd climbed aboard and came into the dining car, inviting anyone who had seen anyone or anything suspicious the previous evening to please unbutton, but of course no one had, or no one was saying, because otherwise the whole train would have known about it by now.
The investigator said he would try his luck with the scenery-watchers in the dome-car, with apparently the  same result, and from there he presumably went in to see the Lorrimores, who apart from Xanthe were still in seclusion.
He then reappeared in the dining car with an interested crowd of people following him and asked to speak to Xanthe, who up until then had kept palely quiet.
He identified her easily because everyone looked her way.
Filmer was still beside her: the passengers tended all the time to linger at the tables, talking, after the meals had been cleared, rather than return to the solitude of their bedrooms.
Nearly everyone, I would have guessed, had been either in the dining room or the dome car all morning.
Mrs Young squeezed Xanthe's hand encouragingly from across the table while the half-child half-young-woman shivered her way through the dangerous memory.
‘No,’ she said, with everyone quiet and attentively listening, ‘no one suggested I went to our car…
I just wanted to go to the bathroom.
And I could…
I…could have been killed.’
‘Yes…’
The investigator, middle-aged and sharp-eyed, was sympathetic but calming, speaking in a distinct voice that carried easily through the dining car, now that we weren't moving.
‘Was there anyone in the dome car lounge when you went through?’
‘Lots of people.’
Xanthe's voice was much quieter than his.
‘Did you know them?’
‘No.
I mean, they were on this trip.
Everyone there was.’
She was beginning to speak more loudly, so that all could hear.
A few heads nodded.
‘No one you now know was a stranger?’
‘No.’
Mrs Young, intelligent besides comforting, asked, ‘Do you mean it's possible to uncouple a car while you're actually on the train?
You don't have to be on the ground to do it?’
The investigator gave her his attention and everyone leaned forward slightly to hear the answer.
‘It's possible.
It can be done also while the train is moving, which is why we want to know if there was anyone in the dome car who was unknown to you all.
Unknown to any of you, I should say.’
There was a long, respectful, understanding silence.
Nell said, ‘I suppose I know most of our passengers by sight by now.
I identified them all at Toronto station when I was allocating their sleeping quarters.
I didn't see anyone yesterday evening who puzzled me.’
‘You don't think,’ Mrs Young said, putting her finger unerringly on the implication, ‘that the car was unhitched by someone in our party?’
‘We're investigating all possibilities,’ the investigator said without pompousness.
He looked around at the ranks of worried faces and his slightly severe expression softened.
‘The private car was deliberately uncoupled,’ he said, ‘but we're of the preliminary opinion that it was an act of mischief committed by someone in Cartier, the last place you stopped before Miss Lorrimore found the car was missing.
But we do have to ask if the saboteur could have been on the train, just in case any of you noticed anything wrong.’
A man at the back of the crowd said, ‘I was sitting in the dome car lounge when Xanthe came through, and I can tell you that no one had come the other way.
I mean, we all knew that only the Lorrimores’ car was behind the dome car.
If anyone except the Lorrimores had gone that way and come back again…well…we would have noticed.’
Another nodding of heads.
People noticed everything to do with the Lorrimores.
I was watching the scene from the kitchen end of the dining car, standing just behind Emil, Cathy and Oliver.
I could see Xanthe's troubled face clearly, and also Filmer's beside her.
He seemed to me to be showing diminishing interest in the enquiry, turning his tidily brushed head away to look out of the window instead.
There was no tension in him: when he was tense there was a rigidity in his neck muscles, a rigidity I'd watched from the depths of the crowd during the brief day of his trial and seen a  few times since, as at Nottingham.
When Filmer felt tense, it showed.
Even as I watched him, his neck went rigid.
I looked out of a window to see what he was looking at, but there seemed to be nothing of great note, only the racegoing passengers streaming off their forward carriages en route to write postcards home from the station.
Filmer looked back towards Xanthe and the investigator and made a small gesture of impatience, and it seemed to trigger a response from the investigator because he said that if anyone remembered any helpful detail, however small, would they please tell him or one of his colleagues, but meanwhile everyone was free to go.
There was a communal sigh as the real-life investigation broke up.
Zak, I thought, would be finding the competition too stiff, the fiction an anti-climax after the fact.
He hadn't appeared for this scene: none of the actors had.
Most of the passengers went off to don coats against what appeared to be a cold wind outside, but Filmer climbed down from the door of the dome-car end of the dining car without more protection than his carefully casual shirt and aristocratic tweed jacket.
He paused irresolutely, not scrunching, as the others were beginning to, across the two sets of rails between our train and the station but meandering at an angle forward in the direction of the engine.
Inside, I followed him, easily keeping pace with his slow step.
I thought at first that he was merely taking an open-air path to his own bedroom, but he went straight past the open door at the end of his sleeping car, and straight on past the next car also.
Going to see his horse, no doubt.
I went on following: it had become a habit.
At the end of the third car, just past George Burley's office, he stopped, because someone was coming out from the station to meet him: a gaunt man in a padded short coat with a fur collar, with grey hair blowing in disarray in the wind.
They met between George's window and the open door at the end of the car and although at first they looked moderately at peace with each other, the encounter deteriorated rapidly.
I risked them seeing me so as to try to hear, but in fact by the time I could hear them they were shouting, which meant I could listen through the doorway without seeing them or being seen.
Filmer was yelling furiously, ‘I said before Vancouver!
The gaunt man with a snarl in his Canadian voice said, ‘You said before Winnipeg, and I've done it and I want my money.’
‘Coo-ee’ trilled Daffodil, teetering towards them in chinchillas and high-heeled boots.
‘Are we going to see Laurentide Ice?’
Blast her, I thought intensely.
Triple bloody shit, and several other words to that effect.
I watched through George's window as Filmer made great effort to go towards her with a smile, drawing attention away from the gaunt-faced man, who returned to the station.
Before Winnipeg, before Vancouver.
Julius Apollo had mixed them up yet again.
‘You said before Winnipeg, and I've done it and I want my money.’
Heavy words, full of threat.
What before Winnipeg?
What had he done!
What indeed.
It couldn't have been the Lorrimores' car, I thought.
Filmer had shown no interest and no tension; had been obviously uninvolved.
But then he would have been calm, I supposed, if he hadn't been expecting anything to happen except before Vancouver.
He hadn't been expecting the  I was certain.
he had instead been cultivating his acquaintanceship with Mercer, a game plan that would have come to an abrupt end if the Lorrimores had deserted the trip, which they would have done at once if the Canadian had ploughed into their home-from-home.
If not the Lorrimores's car, what else had happened?
What had happened before Winnipeg that Filmer had intended to happen before Vancouver?
In what way had the gaunt man already earned his money?
Anyone's guess, I thought.
He could have robbed someone, bribed a stable lad, nobbled a horse…
Nobbled a horse that was going to run at Winnipeg, instead of one running at Vancouver?
From the fury in their voices, the mistake had been devastating.
Only Flokati and Upper Gumtree were due to run at Winnipeg…
Laurentide Ice was running at Vancouver against Voting Right and Sparrowgrass…
Could Filmer have been so stupid as to get the horses' names wrong in addition to the cities?
No, he couldn't.
Impasse.
Yet…gaunt-face had done something .
Sighing, I watched the Youngs walk past the window en route , I supposed, to the horse car.
Soon after, the Unwins followed.
I would have liked to have checked at once on the state of the horses, but I supposed if there were something wrong with any of them I would hear soon enough.
I wished I'd been able to take a photograph of gaunt-face, but I'd been more keen to listen.
If he'd done something to or around the horses, I thought, then he had to have travelled with us on the train.
He hadn't just met us in Thunder Bay.
If he'd been on the train and had walked with the other racegoers towards the station, Filmer could have seen him through the window…and just the sight of him had caused the tensing of the neck muscles…and if Filmer hadn't yet paid him for whatever…then he would come back to the train…
I left George's office and went two doors along to my roomette to dig my telescopic-lens binoculars-camera  out of Tommy's holdall, and I sat and waited by the window for gaunt-face's return.
What happened instead was that after a while Filmer and Daffodil appeared in my view, making a diagonal course towards the station buildings, and pretty soon afterwards, accompanied by a lot of bell-ringing and warning hooters, a huge bright yellow diesel engine came grinding and groaning past my window followed by long corrugated silver coaches as the whole of the regular Canadian rolled up the track next to the race train and stopped precisely alongside.
Instead of a nice clear photographic view of the station, I now faced the black uninformative window of someone else's roomette.
Frustration and damnation, I thought.
I tucked the binoculars into the holdall again and without any sensible plans wandered back towards the dining car.
If I went on like this, I would fulfil the gloomiest fears of Bill Baudelaire, the Brigadier and, above all, John Millington.
‘I told you we should have sent an ex-policeman…’
I could hear his voice in my ear.
It occurred to me, when I reached Julius Apollo's door, that the Canadian would be standing where it was for the whole of the twenty-five minutes of its daily scheduled stop.
For twenty-five minutes…say twenty-two by now…
Filmer would stay over in the station.
He would not walk round either end of the lengthy Canadian to return to his room.
Would he?
No, he would not.
Why should he?
He had only just gone over there.
I had twenty minutes to see what I could do about his combination locks.
If I'd paused for more thought I perhaps wouldn't have had the nerve, but I simply opened his door, checked up and down the corridor for observers (none) and went inside, shutting myself in.
The black briefcase was still on the floor at the back of the hanging space, under the suits.
I pulled it out, sat on one of the armchairs, and with a feeling of unreality  started on the right-hand lock.
If anyone should come in, I thought confusedly…if the sleeping-car attendant for instance came in…whatever excuse could I possibly find?
None at all.
The right-hand combination wheels were set at one-three-seven.
I methodically went on from there, one-three-eight, one-three-nine, one-four-zero, trying the latch after each number change.
My heart hammered and I felt breathless.
I was used to long-distance safety in my work, and in the past to many physical dangers, but never to this sort of risk.
One-four-one, one-four-two, one-four-three….
I tried the latch over and over and looked at my watch.
Only two minutes had gone.
It felt like a lifetime.
One-four-four, one-four-five….
There were a thousand possible combinations…one-four-six, one-four-seven…in twenty minutes I could perhaps try a hundred and fifty numbers.
…I had done this process before, once, but not under pressure, when Aunt Viv had set a combination on a new suitcase and then forgotten it…one-four-eight, one-four-nine…my face sweating, my fingers slipping on the tiny wheels from haste…one-five-zero, one-five-one…
With a snap the latch flew open.
It was incredible.
I could hardly believe it.
I had barely started.
All I needed now was double the luck.
The left-hand combination numbers stood at seven-three-eight.
I tried the latch.
Nothing.
With just a hope that both locks opened to the same sesame, I turned the wheels to one-five-one and tried it.
Nothing.
Not so easy.
I tried reversing it to five-one-five.
Nothing.
I tried comparable numbers, one-two-one, two-one-two, one-three-one, three-one-three, one-four-one, four-one-four…six…seven…eight…nine…three zeros.
Zilch.
My nerve deserted me.
I rolled the left-hand wheels back to seven-three-eight and with the latch closed again  set the right-hand lock to one-three-seven.
I polished the latches a bit with my shirtsleeve, then I put the briefcase back exactly as I'd found it and took my leaf-trembling self along to the dining car, already regretting, before I got there, that I hadn't stayed until the Canadian left, knowing that I'd wasted some of the best and perhaps the only chance I would get of seeing what Filmer had brought with him on the train.
Perhaps if I'd tried one-one-five, or five-five-one…or five-one-one, or five-five-five…
Nell was sitting alone at a table in the dining car working on her interminable lists (those usually clipped to the clipboard) and I sat down opposite her feeling ashamed of myself.
She glanced up.
‘Hello,’ she said.
‘Hi.’
She considered me.
‘You look hot.
Been running?’
I'd been indulging in good heart exercise while sitting still.
I didn't think I would confess.
‘Sort of,’ I said.
‘How's things?’
She glanced sideways with disguise at the Canadian.
‘I was just about to go over to the station when that arrived.’
That, as if taking the hint, began quietly to roll, and within twenty seconds, we again had a clear view of the station.
Most of the train's passengers, including Filmer and Daffodil, immediately started across the tracks to reboard.
Among them, aiming for the racegoers' carriages, was gaunt-face.
God in heaven, I thought.
I forgot about him.
I forgot about photographing him.
My wits were scattered.
‘What's the matter?’
Nell said, watching my face.
‘I've earned a D minus.
A double D minus.’
‘You probably expect too much of yourself,’ she said dispassionately.
‘No one 's perfect.’
‘There are degrees of imperfection.’
‘How big is the catastrophe?’
I thought it over more coolly.
Gaunt-face was on the train, and I might have another opportunity.
I could undo  one of the latches of Filmer's briefcase and, given time, I might do the other.
Correction: given nerve, I might do the other.
‘OK,’ I said, ‘let's say C minus, could do better.
Still not good.’
Millington would have done better.
Zak and Emil arrived together at that point, Emil ready to set the tables for lunch, Zak in theatrical exasperation demanding to know if the actors were to put on the next scene before the meal as originally planned, and if not, when?
Nell looked at her watch and briefly thought.
‘Couldn't you postpone it until cocktail time this evening?’
‘We're supposed to do the following scene then,’ he objected.
‘Well…couldn't you run them both together?’
He rather grumpily agreed and went away saying they would have to rehearse.
Nell smiled sweetly at his departing back and asked if I'd ever noticed how important everything was to actors?
Everything except the real world, of course.
‘Pussycat,’ I said.
‘But I have such tiny, indulgent claws.’
Oliver and Cathy arrived and with Emil began spreading tablecloths and setting places.
I got to my feet and helped them, and Nell with teasing amusement watched me fold pink napkins into water lilies and said, ‘Well, well, hidden depths,’ and I answered, ‘You should see my dishwashing,’which were the sort of infantile surface remarks of something we both guessed might suddenly become serious.
The surface meanwhile was safe and shimmering and funny, and would stay that way until we were ready for change.
As usual, the passengers came early into the dining car, and I faded into the scenery in my uniform and avoided Nell's eyes.
The passengers hadn't over-enjoyed their sojourn in the station, it appeared, as they had been fallen upon by the flock of pressmen who had taken Xanthe back again to the brink of hysteria, and had asked Mercer whether it wasn't  unwise to flaunt the privilege of wealth in his private car, and hadn't he invited trouble by adding it to the train?
Indignation on his behalf was thick in the air.
Everyone knew he was public-spiritedly on the trip For the Sake of Canadian Racing.
The Lorrimores, all four of them, arrived together to murmurs of sympathy, but the two young ones split off immediately from their parents and from each other, all of them gravitating to their various havens: the parents went to join Filmer and Daffodil of their own free will, Xanthe made a straight piteous line to Mrs Young, and Sheridan grabbed hold of Nell, who was by this time standing, saying that he needed her to sit with him, she was the only decent human being on the whole damn train.
Nell, unsure of the worth of his compliment, nevertheless sat down opposite him, even if temporarily.
Keeping Sheridan on a straight or even a wavy line definitely came into the category of crisis control.
Sheridan had the looks which went with Julius's name, Apollo: he was tall, handsome, nearly blond, a child of the sun.
The ice, the arrogance, the lack of common sense and of control, these were the darkside tragedy.
A mini psychopath, I thought, and maybe not so mini, at that, if Xanthe thought he should be in jail.
The Australian Unwins, sitting with the rival owners of Flokati, were concerned about a lifelessness they had detected in Upper Gumtree due to the fact that on the train their horse had been fed a restricted diet of compressed food nuts and high-grade hay and the Flokati people were cheerfully saying that on so long a stretch without exercise, good hay was best.
Hay was calming.
‘We don't want them climbing the walls,’ Mr Flokati said.
Upper Gumtree had looked asleep, Mrs Unwin remarked with disapproval.
the Flokati people beamed wide, trying to look sympathetic.
If Upper Gumtree proved listless, so much the better for Flokati's chances.
It seemed that all of the owners had taken the opportunity of visiting the horses while the train was standing still, and  listen though I might I could hear no one else reporting trouble.
Upper Gumtree, it seemed to me, might revive spectacularly on the morrow, given oats, fresh air and exercise.
His race was still more than forty-eight hours away.
If gaunt-face had in fact given Upper Gumtree something tranquillizing, the effects would wear off long before then.
On reflection, I thought it less and less probable that he had done any such thing: he would have to have bypassed the dragon-lady, Leslie Brown, for a start.
Yet presumably at times she left her post…to eat and sleep.
‘I said,’ Daffodil said to me distinctly, ‘would you bring me a clean knife?
I've dropped mine on the floor.’
‘Certainly, madam,’ I said, coming back abruptly to the matter in hand and, realizing with a shock that she had already asked me once, I fetched her a knife fast.
She nodded merely, her attention again on Filmer, and he, I was mightily relieved to see, had taken no notice of the small matter.
But how could I, I thought ruefully, how could I have possibly stopped concentrating when I was so close to him?
Only one day ago the proximity had had my pulse racing.
the train had made its imperceptible departure and was rolling along again past the uninhabited infinity of rocks and lakes and conifers that seemed to march on to the end of the world.
We finished serving lunch and coffee and cleared up, and as soon as I decently could I left the kitchen and set off forward up the train.
George, whom I looked for first, was in his office eating a fat ragged beef sandwich and drinking diet Coke.
How did it go,’ I asked, ‘in Thunder Bay?’
He scowled, but halfheartedly.
‘They found out nothing I hadn't told them.
There was nothing to see.
They're thinking now that whoever uncoupled the private car was on it when the train left Cartier.’
‘On the private car?’
I said in surprise.
‘That's right.
The steam tube could have been disconnected in the station, eh?
Then the train leaves Cartier with the saboteur in the Lorrimores' car.
Then less than a  mile out of Cartier, eh?, our saboteur pulls up the rod that undoes the coupling.
Then the private car rolls to a stop, and he gets off and walks back to Cartier.’
‘But why should anyone do that?’
‘Grow up, sonny.
There are people in this world who cause trouble because it makes them feel important.
They're ineffective, eh?, in their lives.
So they burn things…and smash things…
Paint slogans on walls…leave their mark on something, eh?
And wreck trains.
Put slabs of concrete on the rails.
I've seen it done.
Power over others, that's what it's about.
A grudge against the Lorrimores, most like.
Power over them, over their possessions.
That's what those investigators think.’
‘Hm,’ I said.
‘If that's the case, the saboteur wouldn't have walked back to Cartier but up to some vantage point from where he could watch the smash.’
George looked startled.
‘Well…
I suppose he might.’
‘Arsonists often help to put out the fires they've started.’
‘You mean he would have waited around…to help with the wreck?
Even to help with casualties?’
‘Sure,’ I said.
‘Pure, heady power, to know you'd caused such a scene.’
‘I didn't see anyone around,’ he said thoughtfully, ‘when we went back to the car.
I shone the lamp…there wasn't anyone moving, eh?, or anything like that.’
‘So, what are the investigators going to do?’
I asked.
His eyes crinkled and the familiar chuckle escaped.
‘Write long reports, eh?
Tell us never to take private can.
Blame me for not preventing it, I dare say.’
He didn't seem worried at the idea.
His shoulders and his mind were broad.
I left him with appreciation and went forward into the central dining car where all the actors were sitting in front of coffee cups and poring over typed sheets of stage directions, muttering under their breaths and sometimes exclaiming aloud.
Zak raised his eyes vaguely in my direction but it would have been tactless to disrupt the thoughts behind them, so I pressed on forward, traversing the dayniter and the  sleeping cars and arriving at the forward dome car.
There were a lot of people about everywhere, but no one looked my way twice.
I knocked eventually on the door of the horse-car and, after inspection and formalities that would have done an Iron Curtain country proud, was admitted again by Ms Brown to the holy of holies.
Rescrawling Tommy Titmouse on her list I was interested to see how long it had grown, and I noticed that even Mercer hadn't been let in without signing.
I asked the dragon-lady if anyone had come in who wasn't an owner or a groom, and she bridled like a thin turkey and told me that she had conscientiously checked every visitor against her list of bona fide owners, and only they had been admitted.
‘But you wouldn't know them all by sight,’ I said.
‘What do you mean?’ she demanded.
‘Supposing for instance someone came and said they were Mr Unwin, you would check that his name was on the list and let him in?’
‘Yes, of course.’
‘And suppose he wasn't Mr Unwin, although he said he was?’
‘You're just being difficult,’ she said crossly.
‘I cannot refuse entry to the owners.
They were given the right to visit, but they don't have to produce passports.
Nor do their wives or husbands.’
I looked down her visitors' list.
Filmer appeared on it twice, Daffodil once.
Filmer's signature was large and flamboyant, demanding attention.
No one had written Filmer in any other way: it seemed that gaunt-face hadn't gained entry by giving Filmer's name, at least.
It didn't mean he hadn't given someone else's.
I gave Leslie Brown her list back and wandered around under her eagle eye looking at the horses.
They swayed peacefully to the motion, standing diagonally across the stalls, watching me incuriously, seemingly content.
I couldn't perceive that Upper Gumtree looked any more sleepy than any of the others: his eyes were  as bright, and he pricked his ears when I came near him.
All of the grooms, except one who was asleep on some hay bales, had chosen not to sit in the car with their charges, and I imagined it was because of Leslie Brown's daunting presence: racing lads on the whole felt a companionable devotion to their horses, and I would have expected more of them to be sitting on the hay bales during the day.
‘What happens at night on the train?’
I asked Leslie Brown.
‘Who guards the horses then?’
‘I do,’ she said tartly.
‘They've given me a roomette or some such, but I take this thing seriously.
I slept in here last night, and will do so again after Winnipeg, and after Lake Louise.
I don't see why you're so worried about anyone slipping past me.’
She frowned at me, not liking my suspicions.
‘When I go to the bathroom, I leave one groom in here and lock the horses’ car door behind me.
I'm never away more than a few minutes.
I insist on one of the grooms being in here at all times.
I am very well aware of the need for security, and I assure you that the horses are well guarded.’
I regarded her thin obstinate face and knew she believed to her determined soul in what she said.
‘As for the barns at Winnipeg and the stabling at Calgary,’ she added righteously, ‘they are someone else's responsibility.
I can't answer for what happens to the horses there.’
She was implying, plain enough, that no one else could be trusted to be as thorough as herself.
‘Do you ever have any fun, Ms Brown?’
I asked.
‘What do you mean?’ she said, raising surprised eyebrows.
‘All this is fun.’
She waved a hand in general round the horse car.
‘I'm having the time of my life.’
And she wasn't being ironic: she truly meant it.
Well, I said a little feebly, then that's fine.
She gave two sharp little nods, as if that finished the matter, which no doubt it did, except that I still looked for gaps in her defences.
I wandered one more time round the whole place, seeing the sunlight slant in through the barred unopenable windows (which would keep people out as well as horses in), smelling the sweet hay and the faint musty odour of the horses themselves, feeling the swirls of fresh air coming from the rows of small ventilators along the roof, hearing the creaking and rushing noises in the car's fabric and the grind of the electricity-generating wheels under the floor.
In that long, warm, friendly space there were animals worth at present a total of many millions of Canadian dollars: worth more if any of them won at Winnipeg or Vancouver.
I stood for a long while looking at Voting Right.
If Bill Baudelaire's mother knew her onions, in this undistinguished-looking bay lay the dormant seed of greatness.
Maybe she was right.
Vancouver would tell.
I turned away, cast a last assessing glance at Laurentide Ice, who looked coolly back, thanked the enthusiastic dragon for her co-operation (prim acknowledgement) and began a slow walk back through the train, looking for gaunt-face.
I didn't see him.
He could have been behind any of the closed doors.
He wasn't in the forward dome car, upstairs or down, nor in the open dayniter.
I sought out and consulted separately with three of the sleeping-car attendants in the racegoers' sleeping cars who frowned in turn and said that first, the sort of jacket I was describing was worn by thousands, and second, everyone tended to look gaunt outside in the cold air.
All the same, I said, if they came across anyone fitting that description in their care, please would they tell George Burley his name and room number.
Sure, they each said, but wasn't this an odd thing for an actor to be asking?
Zak, I improvised instantly at the first enquiry, had thought the gaunt man had an interesting face and he wanted to ask if he could use him in a scene.
Ah, yes, that made sense.
If they found him, they would tell George.
When I got back to George, I told him what I'd asked.
He wrinkled his brow.
‘I saw a man like that at Thunder Bay,’ he said.
‘But I probably saw several men like that in all this trainload.
What do you want him for?’
I explained that I'd told the sleeping-car attendants that Zak wanted to use him in a scene.
‘But you?’
George said.
‘What do you want him for
I looked at him and he looked back.
I was wondering how far I should trust him and had an uncomfortable impression that he knew what I was thinking.
‘Well,’ I said finally, ‘he was talking to someone I'm interested in.’
I got a long bright beam from the shiny eyes.
‘Interested in…in the line of duty?’
‘Yes.’
He didn't ask who it was and I didn't tell him.
I asked him instead if he himself had talked to any of the owners' party.
‘Of course I have,’ he said.
‘I always greet passengers eh?, when they board.
I tell them I'm the Conductor, tell them where my office is, tell them if they've any problems to bring them to me.’
‘And do they?
Have they?’
He chuckled.
‘Most of the complaints go to your Miss Richmond, and she brings them to me.’
‘Miss Richmond…’
I repeated.
‘She's your boss, isn't she?
Tall pretty girl with her hair in a plait today, eh?’
‘Nell,’ I said.
‘That's right.
Isn't she your boss?’
Colleague.’
‘Right, then.
The sort of problems the owners’ party have had on this trip so far are a tap that won't stop dripping, a blind that won't stay down in one of the bedrooms, eh?, and a lady who thought one of her suitcases had been stolen, only it turned up in someone else's room.’
He beamed.
‘Most of the owners have been along to see the horses.
When they see me, they stop to talk.’
‘What do they say?’
I asked.
‘What sort of things?’
‘Only what you'd expect.
The weather, the journey, the scenery.
They ask what time we get to Sudbury, eh?
Or Thunder Bay, or Winnipeg, or whatever.’
‘Has anyone asked anything that was different, or surprised you?’
‘Nothing surprises me, sonny.’
He glowed with irony and bonhomie .
‘What would you expect them to ask?’
I shrugged in frustration.
What happened before Thunder Bay that shouldn't have?’
‘The Lorrimores’ car, eh?’
‘Apart from that.’
‘You think something happened?’
‘Something happened, and I don't know what, and it's what I'm here to prevent.’
He thought about it, then said, ‘When it turns up, you'll know, eh?’
‘Maybe.’
‘Like if someone put something in the food, eh?, sooner or later everyone will be ill.’
‘George!’
I was dumbstruck.
He chuckled.
‘We had a waiter once years ago who did that.
He had a grudge against the world.
He put handfuls of ground-up laxative pills into the chocolate topping over ice cream and watched the passengers eat it, and they all had diarrhoea.
Dreadful stomach pains.
One woman had to go to hospital.
She'd had two helpings.
What a to-do, eh?’
‘You've frightened me stiff,’ I said frankly.
‘Where do they keep the fodder for the horses?’
He stared, his perpetual smile fading.
‘Is that what you're afraid of?
Something happening to the horses?’
‘It's a possibility.’
‘All the fodder is in the horse car,’ he said, ‘except for some extra sacks of those cubes most of the horses are having, which are in the baggage car.
Some of the horses have their own special food brought along with them, sent by their trainers.
One of the grooms had a whole set of separate bags labelled, ‘Sunday evening’, ‘Monday morning’ and so on.
He was showing them to me.’
‘Which horse wag that for?’
‘Um…the one that belongs to that Mrs Daffodil Quentin, I think.
The groom said one of her horses died of  colic or some such recently, from eating the wrong things, and the trainer didn't want any more accidents, so he'd made up the feeds himself.’
‘You're brilliant, George.’
His ready laugh came back.
‘Don't forget the water tank, eh?
You can lift the lid…where the plank floats, remember?
You could dope all those horses at once with one quick cupful of mischief, couldn't you?’
Leslie Brown told us adamantly that no one could possibly have tampered with either the fodder or the water.
‘When did the grooms last fill the buckets?’
I asked.
During the morning, she said.
Each groom filled the bucket for his own horse, when he wanted to.
All of them had been in there, seeing to their charges.
The horses' drinking-water tank had been topped up, she said, by a hosepipe from the city's water supply during the first twenty minutes of our stop in Thunder Bay, in a procedure that she herself had supervised.
George nodded and said the whole train had been rewatered at that point.
‘Before Thunder Bay,’ I said, ‘could anyone have put anything in the water?’
‘Certainly not.
I've told you over and over again, I am here all the time.’
‘And how would you rate all the grooms for trustworthiness?’
I said.
She opened her mouth and closed it again and gave me a hard look.
‘I am here to supervise them,’ she said.
‘I didn't know any of them before yesterday.
I don't know if any of them could be bribed to poison the water.
Is that what you want?’
‘It's realistic,’ I said with a smile.
She was unsoftened, unsoftenable.
‘My chair, as you see,’ she said carefully, ‘is next to the water tank.
I sit there and watch.
I do not think…
I repeat, I do not believe, that anyone has tampered with the water.’
‘Mm,’ I said calmingly.
‘But you could ask the grooms, couldn't you, if they've seen anything wrong?’
She began to shake her head automatically, but then stopped and shrugged.
‘I'll ask them, but they won't have.’
‘And just in case,’ I said, ‘in case the worst happens and the horses prove to have been interfered with, I think I'll take a sample of what's in the tank and also what's in their buckets at this moment.
You wouldn't object to that, Ms Brown, would you?’
She grudgingly said she wouldn't.
George elected himself to go and see what could be done in the way of sample jars and presently returned with gifts from the Chinese cook in the dome car, in the shape of four rinsed-out plastic tomato-sauce bottles rescued from the rubbish bin.
George and Leslie Brown took a sample from the tank, draining it, at the dragon's good suggestion, from the tap lower down, where the buckets were filled.
I visited Voting Right, Laurentide Ice and Upper Gumtree, who all graciously allowed me to dip into their drink.
With Leslie Brown's pen, we wrote the provenance of each sample on the sauce label and put all four containers into a plastic carrier bag which Leslie Brown happened to have handy.
Carrying the booty, I thanked her for her kindness in answering our questions, and helping, and George and I retreated.
‘What do you think?’ he said, as we started back through the train.
‘I think she now isn't as sure as she says she is.’
He chuckled.
‘She'll be doubly careful from now on.’
‘As long as it's not already too late.’
He looked as if it were a huge joke.
‘We could get the tank emptied, scrubbed and refilled at Winnipeg,’ he said.
‘Too late.
If there's anything in it, it was there before Thunder Bay, and the horses will have drunk some of it.
some horses drink a lot of water…but they're a bit fussy.
They won't touch it if they don't like the smell.
If there're traces of soap in it, for instance, or oil.
They'd only drink doped water if it smelled all right to them.’
‘You know a lot about it,’ George commented.
‘I've spent most of my life near horses, one way and another.’
We reached his office where he said he had some paperwork to complete before we stopped fairly soon for ten minutes at Kenora.
We would be there at five-twenty, he said.
We were running thirty minutes behind the Canadian.
There were places the race train didn't really need to stop, he said, except to keep pace with the Canadian.
We needed always to stop where the trains were serviced for water, trash and fuel.
I had nowhere on our journey to and from the horse car seen the man with the gaunt face.
George had pointed someone out to me in the dayniter, but he was not the right person: grey haired, but too ill-looking, too old.
The man I was looking for, I thought, was fifty-something, maybe less, still powerful; not in decline.
In a vague way, I thought, he had reminded me of Derry Welfram.
Less bulky than the dead frightener, and not as smooth, but the same stamp of man.
The sort Filmer seemed to seek out naturally.
I sat for an hour in my roomette looking out at the unvarying scenery and trying to imagine anything else that Filmer might have paid to have done.
It was all the wrong way round, I thought: it was more usual to know the crime and seek the criminal, than to know the criminal and seek his crime.
The four sample bottles of water stood in their plastic carrier on my roomette floor.
To have introduced something noxious into that tank, gaunt-face would certainly have to have bribed a groom.
He wasn't one of the grooms himself, though perhaps he had been one, somewhere, sometime.
The grooms on the train were all younger, thinner and from what I'd seen of them in their uniform T-shirts less positive.
I couldn't imagine any of  them having the nerve to stand up to Filmer and demand their money.
I spent the brief stop at the small town of Kenora hanging out of the open doorway past George's office, watching him, on the station side of the train, walk a good way up and down outside while he checked that all looked well.
The Lorrimores’ car, it appeared, was still firmly tacked on.
Up behind the engine, two baggage handlers were loading a small pile of boxes.
I hung out of the door on the other side of the train for a while, but no one was moving out there at all.
George climbed back on board and closed the doors, and presently we set off again to our last stop before Winnipeg.
I wished intensely that I had the power to see into Filmer's mind.
I ached to foresee what he was planning.
I felt blind, and longed for second sight.
Failing such superhuman qualities, however, there was only as usual ordinary observation and patience, and they both seemed inadequate and tame.
I went along to the dining car where I found that Zak had already positioned some of the actors at the tables for the cocktail-hour double-length scene.
He and Nell were agreeing that after the scene the actors would leave again (all except Giles-the-murderer), even though they didn't like being banished all the time and were complaining about it.
Emil, laying tablecloths, said that wine alone was included in the fare, all other cocktails having to be paid for, and perhaps I'd better just serve the wine; he and Oliver and Cathy would do the rest.
Fine by me, I said, distributing ashtrays and bud vases.
I could set the wine glasses also, Emil said.
Glasses for red wine and for white at each place.
The passengers drifted in from their rooms and the dome car and fell into by now predictable patterns of seating.
Even though to my mind Bambi Lorrimore and Daffodil Quentin were as compatible as salt and strawberries, the two women were again positioned opposite each other, bound there by the attraction between their men.
When I put the wine glasses on their table, Mercer and Filmer were discussing world-wide breeding in terms of exchange rates.
Daffodil told Bambi there was a darling little jewellery store in Winnipeg.
Xanthe was still clinging to Mrs Young.
Mr Young looked exceedingly bored.
Sheridan had struck up an acquaintanceship with the actor-murderer Giles, a slightly bizarre eventuality which might have odd consequences.
The Upper Gumtree Unwins and the Flokati couple seemed locked in common interest: whether the instant friendship would wither after their mutual race would be Wednesday evening's news.
Most of the other passengers I knew only vaguely, by face more than by name.
I'd learned their names only to the extent that they owned horses in the horse car or had touched bases with Filmer, which came to only about half.
They were all in general pleasant enough, although one of the men sent nearly everything back to the kitchen to be reheated, and one of the women pushed the exceptional food backwards and forwards across her plate with flicking movements of her fork, sternly remarking that plain fare was all anyone needed for godliness.
What she was doing among the racing fraternity, I never found out.
Zak's long scene began with impressive fireworks as soon as everyone in the dining car had been served with a drink.
A tall man dressed in the full scarlet traditional uniform of the Royal Canadian Mounted police strode into the dining car and in a conversation-stopping voice said he had some serious information for us.
He had come aboard at Kenora, he said, because the body of a groom from this train called Ricky had been found lying beside the railway lines near Thunder Bay.
He had been wearing his Race Train T-shirt, and he had identification in his pocket.
The passengers looked horrified.
The Mountie's impressive presence dominated the whole place and he sounded undoubtedly authentic.
He understood, he said, that the groom had been attacked earlier, in Toronto, when he foiled the kidnapping of a horse, but he had insisted on  making the journey nevertheless, having been bandaged by a Miss Richmond.
Was that correct?
Nell demurely said that it was.
Among the actual owners of the horses, disbelief had set in the quickest.
Mercer Lorrimore enjoyed the joke.
Mounties, when investigating, didn't nowadays go around dressed for parades.
‘But we are in Manitoba,’ Mercer could be heard saying in a lull, ‘they've got that right.
We passed the boundary with Ontario a moment ago.
The Mounted Police's territory starts right there.’
‘You seem to know all about it,’ our Mountie said.
‘What do you know about this dead groom?’
‘Nothing,’ Mercer said cheerfully.
I glanced briefly at Filmer.
His face was hard, his neck rigid, his eyes narrow; and I thought in a flash of Paul Shacklebury, the lad dead in his ditch.
Stable lads in England…grooms in Canada: same job.
What had Paul Shacklebury known about Filmer…same old unanswerable question.
‘And why was he killed?’ the Mountie asked.
‘What did he know?’
I risked a glance, looked away, Filmer's mouth was a tight line.
The answer to the question had to be in his tautly-held head at that moment and it was as inaccessible to me as Alpha Centauri.
Zak suggested that Ricky had identified one of the hijackers.
Perhaps, he said, the hijackers had come on the train.
Perhaps they were among the racegoers, waiting another chance to kidnap their quarry.
Filmer's neck muscles slowly relaxed, and I realized that for a moment he must have suspected that the scene had been specifically aimed at him.
Perhaps he spent a lot of his time reacting in that way to the most innocent of remarks.
Mavis and Walter Bricknell demanded that the Mountie should keep their own precious horse safe.
The Mountie brushed them aside.
He was taking over the enquiry into the death of Angelica Standish, he said.
Two deaths connected to the same train could be no  coincidence.
What was the connection between Angelica and Ricky?
Zak said that he was in charge of the Angelica investigation.
No longer, said the Mountie.
We were now in the province of Manitoba, not Ontario.
His territory, exclusively.
Zak's intended scene of investigation into Angelica's murder had been upstaged by the reality of the Lorrimores' car and then aborted by the long stop at Thunder Bay.
passing the questioning to the Mountie bridged the void neatly, and the Mountie told us that the reason that Steve, Angelica's business manager, also her lover, had not turned up at Toronto station was because he too was dead, struck down in his apartment by blows to the head with a mallet.
The audience received the news of still more carnage with round eyes.
The said Steve, the Mountie went on, seemed to have been in bed asleep at the time of his murder, and the Ontario police were wanting to interview Angelica Standish as a suspect.
‘But she's dead!’
Mavis Bricknell said.
After a pause, Donna said she and Angelica had talked for maybe two hours between Toronto and Sudbury, and Donna was sure Angelica couldn't have murdered Steve, she was lost without him.
Maybe, the Mountie said, but if she was as upset as all that, why had she come on the train at all?
Couldn't it have been to escape from having to realize that she'd killed her lover?
Giles-the-murderer calmly enquired whether any murder weapon had been found after Angelica had been killed.
Also, Pierre asked, wouldn't Angelica's murderer have been covered with blood?
The whole toilet compartment had been splashed.
Zak and the Mountie exchanged glances.
The Mountie said grudgingly that a blood-covered rolled-up sheet of plastic had been found on the track near the area where Angelica must have been battered, and it could have been  used as a poncho, and it was being investigated for blood type and fingerprints.
Donna said couldn't Steve and Angelica both have been killed by a mallet?
That would make her innocent, wouldn't it?
She couldn't believe that anyone as nice as Angelica could have been mixed up in an insurance swindle.
What?
What insurance swindle?
I glanced involuntarily at Daffodil, but if there had been a flicker of her eyelids, I had missed it.
Donna in confusion said she didn't know what insurance swindle.
Angelica had just mentioned that Steve was mixed up in an insurance swindle, and she was afraid that was why he had missed the train.
Donna hadn't liked to probe any further.
Sheridan Lorrimore, saying loudly that Angelica had been a bitch, made a lunging grab at the pistol sitting prominently in a holster on the Mountie's hip.
The Mountie, feeling the tug, turned fast and put his hand down on Sheridan's wrist.
It was a movement in a way as dextrous as John Millington on a good day, speaking of razor-sharp reactions, more like an athlete than an actor.
‘That gun's mine, sir,’ he said, lifting Sheridan's wrist six inches sideways and releasing it.
‘And, everybody, it's not loaded.’
There was a general laugh.
Sheridan, universally unpopular and having made a boorish fool of himself yet again, looked predictably furious.
His mother, I noticed, had turned her head away.
Mercer was shaking his.
The Mountie, unperturbed, said he would be proceeding vigorously with the enquiries into both Angelica's and Ricky's deaths and perhaps he would have news for everyone in Winnipeg.
He and Zak went away together, and Donna drifted around from table to table for a while telling everyone that poor Angelica had really been very sweet, not a murderess, and she, Donna, was dreadfully upset at the suggestion.
She wrung out a real tear or two.
She was undoubtedly an effective actress.
‘What do you care?’
Sheridan asked her rudely.
‘You only met her yesterday morning and she was dead before dinner.’
Donna looked at him uncertainly.
He'd sounded as if he really believed in Angelica's death.
‘Er…’ she said, ‘some people you know at once.’
She moved on gently and presently disappeared with disconsolate-looking shoulders down the corridor beside the kitchen.
Sheridan muttered under his breath several times, making the people he was sitting with uncomfortable.
Emil and his crew, including me, immediately began setting the tables round the passengers for dinner, and were soon serving warm goat's cheese and radicchio salads followed by circles of rare Chateaubriand with snow peas and matchstick carrots and finally rich orange sorbets smothered in fluffy whipped cream and nuts.
Most of the passengers persevered to the end and looked as though it were no torture.
My suggestion to Angus, while we were dishwashing after the battle, that maybe his food could have been injected somehow with a substance that even now could be working away to the detriment of everyone's health was received by him with frosty amusement.
Absolutely impossible, he assured me.
I had surely noticed that nearly all the ingredients had come on to the train fresh?
He was cooking this food, not bringing it in pre-frozen packs.
I assured him truthfully that I had been impressed by his skill and speed, and I thought his results marvellous.
‘You actors,’ he said more indulgently, ‘will think of any impossible thing for a plot.’
Everyone got off the train at Winnipeg, one thousand, four hundred and thirteen miles along the rails from Toronto.
Two large motor horse-boxes were waiting for the horses, which were unloaded down and loaded up ramps.
The grooms and Leslie Brown led the horses across from train to van and saw them installed and then, carrying  holdalls, themselves trooped on to a bus which followed the horse-boxes away towards the racetrack.
A row of buses waited outside the station to take the racegoers away to a variety of outlying motels, and a long new coach with darkly tinted windows was set aside for the owners.
A few of the owners, like the Lorrimores and Daffodil and Filmer, had arranged their own transport separately in the shape of chauffeur-driven limousines, their chauffeurs coming over to the train to carry their bags.
The crew, after everyone else had left, tidied away into secure lockers every movable piece of equipment and goods, and then joined the actors in the last waiting bus.
The Mountie, I was interested to see, was among us, tall and imposing even with his scarlet and brass buttons tucked away in his bag.
George came last, carrying an attaché case of papers and looking over his shoulder at the train as if wondering if he'd forgotten anything.
He sat in the seat across the aisle from me and said the cars would be backed into a siding for two days, the engine would be removed and used elsewhere, and there would be a security guard on duty.
In the siding, the carriages would be unheated and unlit and would come to life again only about an hour before we left on the day after tomorrow.
We'd been able to keep the same crew from coast to coast, he said, only because of the two rest breaks along the way.
The owners and some of the actors were staying in the Westin Hotel which had, Nell had told everyone during dinner, a ballroom and comfort and an indoor pool on the roof.
There was a breakfast room set aside for the train party where a piece of the mystery would unravel each morning.
Apart from that, everyone was on their own: there were good shops, good restaurants and good racing.
Transport had been arranged to and from the racecourse.
We would all come back to reboard the train after the Jockey Club Race Train Stakes on Wednesday, and cocktails and dinner would be served as soon as we'd rolled out of the station.
The party, in good humour, applauded.
I had decided not to stay in the same hotel as any of the groups of owners, actors, racegoers or crew, and asked Nell if she knew of anywhere else.
A tall order, it seemed.
‘We've put people almost everywhere,’ she said doubtfully, ‘but only a few actors will be at the Holiday Inn…why don't you try there?
Although actually…there isone place we haven't booked anyone into, and that's the Sheraton.
But it's like the Westin — expensive.’
‘Never mind, I'll find somewhere,’ I said, and when the crew bus, after a short drive, stopped and disgorged its passengers, I took my grip and vanished on foot and, after asking directions, made a homing line to where no one else was staying.
In my buttoned-up grey VIA raincoat, I was unexceptional to the receptionists of the Sheraton: the only problem, they said, was that they were full.
It was late in the evening.
The whole city was full.
‘An annexe?’
I suggested.
Two of them shook their heads and consulted with each other in low voices.
Although they had no single rooms left, they said finally, they had had a late cancellation of a suite.
They looked doubtful.
I wouldn't be interested in that, they supposed.
Yes, I would,’ I said and gave them my American Express card with alacrity.
So Tommy the waiter carefully hung up his yellow waistcoat with its white lining and ordered some wine from room service and in a while after a long easing shower slept for eight solid hours and didn't dream about Filmer.
In the morning, I telephoned Mrs Baudelaire and listened again to the almost girlish voice on the wire.
‘Messages for the invisible man,’ she said cheerfully.
‘Er…are you still invisible?’
‘Mostly, yes, I think.’
‘Bill says Val Catto would like to know if you are still invisible to the quarry.
Does that make sense to you?’
‘It makes sense, and the answer is yes.’
‘They're both anxious.’
‘And not alone,’ I said.
‘Will you tell them the quarry has an ally on the train, travelling I think with the racegoers.
I've seen him once and will try to photograph him.’
‘Goodness!’
‘Also will you ask them whether certain numbers, which I'll tell you, have any significance in the quarry's life.’
‘Intriguing,’ she said.
‘Fire away.’
‘Well…three numbers I don't know.
Three question marks, say.
Then one-five-one.’
‘Three question marks, then one-five-one.
Right?’
‘Right.
I know it's not his car's number plate, or not the car he usually travels in, but ask if it fits his birthday in any way, or his phone number, or anything at all they can think of.
I want to know what the first three digits are.’
‘I'll ask Bill right away, when I've finished talking to you.
He gave me some answers to give you about your questions yesterday evening.’
‘Great.’
‘The answers are that Mr and Mrs Young who own Sparrowgrass are frequent and welcome visitors to England and are entertained by the jockey Club at many race meetings.
They were friends of Ezra Gideon.
Val Catto doesn't know if they know that Ezra Gideon sold two horses to Mr J. A. Filmer.
Does that make sense?’
‘Yes,’ I said.
‘I'm glad you understand what I'm talking about.
How about this one, then?’
She paused for breath.
‘Sheridan Lorrimore was sent down — expelled — from Cambridge University last May, amid some sort of hushed-up scandal.
Mercer Lorrimore was over in England at that time, and stayed and went racing at Newmarket in July, but the Jockey Club found him grimmer than his usual self and understood it was something to do with his son, although he didn't say what.
Val Catto is seeing what he can find out from Cambridge.’
‘That's fine,’ I said.
‘Sheridan Lorrimore!’ she said, sounding shocked.
‘I hope it's not true.’
‘Brace yourself,’ I said dryly.
‘Oh dear.’
‘How well do you know him?’
I asked.
‘Hardly at all.
But it does no good, does it, for one of our golden families to hit the tabloids.’
I loved the expression, and remembered she'd owned a magazine.
‘It demeans the whole country,’ she went on.
‘I just hope whatever it was will stay hushed up.’
‘Whatever it was?’
‘Yes,’ she said firmly.
‘For his family's sake.
For his mother's sake.
I know Bambi Lorrimore.
She's a proud woman.
She doesn't deserve to be disgraced by her son.’
I wasn't so sure about that: didn't know to what extent she was responsible for his behaviour.
But perhaps not much.
Perhaps no one deserved a son like Sheridan.
Perhaps people like Sheridan were born that way, as if without arms.
‘Are you still there?’
Mrs Baudelaire asked.
‘I sure am.’
‘Bill says the Lorrimores’ private car got detached from the train on Sunday evening.
Is that really true?
There's a great fuss going on, isn't there?
It's been on the television news and it's all over the papers this morning.
Bill says it was apparently done by some lunatic for reasons unknown, but he wants to know if you have any information about it that he doesn't have.’
I told her what had happened: how Xanthe had casually nearly walked off into space.
‘Tell Bill the quarry sat relaxed and unconcerned throughout both the incident and the enquiry held at Thunder Bay yesterday morning, and I'm certain he didn't plan the uncoupling.
I think he did plan somethingthough, with his ally on the train, and I think Bill should see that they guard the train's horses very carefully out at the track.’
‘I'll tell him.’
‘Tell him there's a slight possibility that the horses’ drinking water was tampered with on the train, before it got to Thunder Bay.
But I think that if it had been, the horses should have been showing distress by last night, which they weren't.
I can't check them this morning.
I suppose if there's anything wrong with them, Bill will know pretty soon.
Anyway, I took four samples of the drinking water which I will take to the races this evening.’
‘Good heavens.’
‘Tell Bill I'll get them to him somehow.
They'll be in a package with his name on it.’
‘Let me write some of this down.
Don't go away.’
There was a quiet period while she put down the receiver and wrote her notes.
Then she came back on the line and faithfully repeated everything I'd told her, and everything I'd asked.
‘Is that right?’ she demanded, at the end.
‘Perfect,’ I said fervently.
‘When in general is it a good time for me to phone you?
I don't like to disturb you at bad moments.’
‘Phone any time.
I'll be here.
Have a good day.
Stay invisible.’
I laughed, and she'd gone off the line before I could ask her about her health.
A complimentary copy of a Winnipeg newspaper had been slipped under my sitting-room door.
I picked it up and checked on what news it gave of the train.
The story wasn't exactly all over the front page, but it started there with photographs of Mercer and Bambi and continued inside, with a glamorous back-lit formal shot of Xanthe, which made her look a lot older than her published age, fifteen.
I suspected ironically that the extra publicity given to the Great Transcontinental Mystery Race Train hadn't hurt the enterprise in the least.
Blame hadn't been fastened on anyone except some unknown nutter back in the wilds of Ontario.
Winnipeg was full of racegoing visitors who were contributing handsomely to the local economy.
Winnipeg was pleased to welcome them.
Don't forget, the paper prominently said, that the first of the two Celebration of Canadian Racing meetings would be held the evening with the regular post time of 7 p.m., while the second meeting, including the running of the Jockey Club Race Train Stakes  would be tomorrow afternoon, post time 1.30.
The afternoon had been declared a local holiday, as everyone knew, and it would be a fitting finale to the year's thoroughbred racing programme at Assiniboia Downs.
(Harness racing, it said in brackets, would hold the first meeting of its winter season the following Sunday.)
I spent most of the day mooching around Winnipeg, seeing a couple of owners once in a shop selling Eskimo sculptures, but never coming face to face with anyone who might know me.
I didn't waste much time trying to see what Filmer did or where he went, because I'd quickly discovered that the Westin Hotel was sitting over an entrance to a subterranean shopping mall that stretched like a rabbit warren in all directions.
Shopping, in Canada, had largely gone underground to defeat the climate.
Filmer could go in and out of the Westin without a sniff of fresh air, and probably had.
There were racetrack express buses, I found, going from the city to the Downs, so I went on one at about six o'clock and strolled around at ground level looking for some way of conveying to Bill Baudelaire the water samples which were now individually wrapped inside the nondescript plastic carrier.
It was made easy for me.
A girl of about Xanthe's age bounced up to my side as I walked slowly along in front of the grandstand, and said, ‘Hi!
I'm Nancy.
If that's for Clarrie Baudelaire, I'll take it up if you like.’
‘Where is she?’
I asked.
‘Dining with her dad up there by a window in the Clubhouse.’
She pointed to a part of the grandstand.
‘He said you were bringing her some thirst quenchers, and he asked me to run down and collect them.
Is that right?’
‘Spot on,’ I said appreciatively.
She was pretty, with freckles, wearing a bright blue tracksuit with a white and gold studded belt.
I gave her the carrier and watched her jaunty backview disappear with it into the crowds, and I was more and more sure that what she was carrying was harmless.
Bill Baudelaire wouldn't be calmly eating dinner with his daughter if  there were a multi-horse crisis going on over in the racecourse stables.
the Clubhouse, from where diners could watch the sport, took up one whole floor of the grandstand, glassed in along its whole length to preserve summer indoors.
I decided not to go in there on the grounds that Tommy would not, and Tommy off duty in Tommy's off-duty clothes was what I most definitely wanted to be at that moment.
I made some Tommy-sized bets and ate very well in the (literally) below-stairs bar, and in general walked around, race-card in hand, binoculars around neck, exactly as usual.
The daylight faded almost imperceptibly into night, electricity taking over the sun's job smoothly.
By seven, when the first race was run, it was under floodlighting, the jockeys' colours brilliant against the backdrop of night.
There were a lot of half-familiar faces in the crowds; the enthusiastic racegoers from the train.
The only one of them that I was interested in, though, was either extremely elusive, or not there.
All the techniques I knew of finding people were to no avail: the man with his gaunt face, grey hair and fur-collared parka was more invisible than myself.
I did see Nell.
In her plain blue suit she came down from the Clubhouse with two of the owners who seemed to want to be near the horses at ground level.
I drifted after the three of them to watch the runners come out for the third race and wasn't far behind them when they walked right down to the rails to see the contest from the closest possible quarters.
When it was over, the owners turned towards the stands, talking animatedly about the result, and I contrived to be where Nell would see me, with any luck, making a small waving motion with my race-card.
She noticed the card, noticed me with widening eyes, and in a short while detached herself from the owners and stood and waited.
When without haste I reached her side, she gave me a sideways glance.
‘Aren't you one of the waiters from the train?’ she said.
‘I sure am.’
‘Did you find somewhere to sleep?’
‘Yes, thank you.
How's the Westin?’
She was staying with the owners; their shepherd, their smoother-of-the-way, their information booth.
‘The hotel's all right— but someone should strangle that rich…that arrogant…that insufferableSheridan.’
Disgust vibrated in her voice as she suddenly let go of some clearly banked-up and held-back emotion.
‘He's unbearable.
He's spoiling it for others.
They all paid a fortune to come on this trip and they're entitled not to be upset.’
‘Did something happen?’
I asked.
‘Yes, at breakfast.’
The memory displeased her.
‘Zak put on the next scene of the mystery and Sheridan shouted him down three times.
I went over to Sheridan to ask him to be quiet and he grabbed my wrist and tried to pull me on to his lap, and I overbalanced and fell and hit the table hard where he was sitting, and I caught the cloth somehow and pulled it with me and everything on it landed on the floor.
So you can imagine the fuss.
I was on my knees, there was orange juice and broken plates and food and coffee everywhere and Sheridan was saying loudly it was my fault for being clumsy.’
‘And I can imagine,’ I said, seeing resignation more than indignation now in her face, ‘that Bambi Lorrimore took no notice, that Mercer hurried to help you up and apologize, and Mrs Young enquired if you were hurt.’
She looked at me in amazement.
‘You were there!’
‘No.
It just figures.’
‘Well…that's exactly what happened.
A waiter came to deal with the mess, and while he was kneeling there Sheridan said loudly that the waiter was sneering at him and he would get him fired.’
She paused.
‘And I suppose you can tell me again what happened next?’
She was teasing, but I answered, ‘I'd guess Mercer assured the waiter he wouldn't be fired and took him aside and gave him twenty dollars.’
Her mouth opened.
‘You werethere.’
I shook my head.
‘He gave me twenty dollars when Sheridan shoved me the other evening.’
‘But that's awful.’
‘Mercer's a nice man caught in an endless dilemma.
Bambi's closed her mind to it.
Xanthe seeks comfort somewhere else.’
Nell thought it over and delivered her judgement, which was much like my own.
‘One day, beastly Sheridan will do something his father can't pay for.’
‘He's a very rich man,’ I said.
‘It's nothing to do with his birthday, nor with his telephone numbers, nor addresses, past or present, nor his bank accounts, nor his national insurance.’
Mrs Baudelaire's light voice in my ear, passing on the bad news on Wednesday morning.
‘Val Catto is working on your quarry's credit card numbers now,’ she said.
‘And he wants to know why he's doing all this research.
He says he's looked up your quarry's divorced wife's personal numbers also and he cannot see one-five-one anywhere, with or without three unknown digits in front.’
I sighed audibly, disappointed.
‘How important is it?’ she asked.
‘It's impossible to tell.
It could be pointless, it could solve all our problems.
Empty box or jackpot, or anywhere in between.
Please would you tell the Brigadier that one-five-one is the combination that unlocks the right-hand latch of a black crocodile briefcase.
We have three unknowns on the left.’
‘Good gracious,’ she said.
‘Could you say I would appreciate his instructions?’
‘I could, young man.
Why don't you just steal the briefcase and take your time?’
I laughed.
‘I've thought of that, but I'd better not.
Or  not yet anyway.
If the numbers have any logic, this way is safest.’
‘Val would presumably prefer you didn't get arrested.’
Or murdered, perhaps, I thought.
‘I would say,’ I agreed, ‘that getting myself arrested would lose me my job.’
‘You'd no longer be invisible?’
‘Quite right.’
‘And I'm afraid,’ she said, ‘that I have some more negative news for you.’
‘What is it?’
I asked.
‘Bill says the samples of water you sent him were just that, water.’
‘That's good news, actually.’
‘Oh?
Well, good, then.’
I reflected.
‘I think I'll phone you again this evening before we leave Winnipeg.’
‘Yes, do,’ she agreed.
‘The further west you go the bigger the time change and the longer it takes to get replies from Val Catto.’
‘Mm.’
Mrs Baudelaire couldn't ring the Brigadier in the middle of his night, nor in the middle of hers.
Toronto, where she lived, was five hours behind London, Winnipeg six, Vancouver eight.
At breakfast time in Vancouver, London's office workers began travelling home.
Confusing for carrier pigeons.
‘Good luck,’ she said.
‘I'll talk to you later.’
I was used by now to her abrupt disappearances.
I put my receiver down, hearing only silence on the line, and wondered what she looked like, and how deeply she was ill.
I would go back to Toronto, I thought, and see her.
I sped again on the bus to the races and found that overnight Assiniboia Downs had sprouted all the ballyhoo of Woodbine, T-shirt stalls, banners and besashed bosoms Support Canadian Racing included.
I again spent most of the afternoon looking for gaunt-face, coming in the end to the conclusion that whatever he was doing on the train he wasn't travelling because of an  overpowering interest in racing.
The racegoers from the train were on the whole easily identifiable as they all seemed to have been issued with large red and white rosettes with Race Train passenger emblazoned on them in gold: and the rosettes proved not to be confined to those in the front half of the train because I came across Zak wearing one too, and he told me that everyone had been given one, the owners included, and where was mine?
I didn't know about them, I said.
Too bad, he said, because they entitled everyone to free entry, free race-cards and free food.
They were gifts from the racecourse, he said.
Nell should have one for me, he thought.
I asked him how the scene from the mystery had fared that morning, as Nell had described what had happened the day before.
‘A lot better without that bastard Sheridan.’
‘Wasn't he there?’
‘I got Nell to tell his father that if Sheridan came to breakfast we wouldn't be putting on our scene, and it did the trick.
No Sheridan.’
He grinned.
‘No Lorrimores at all, in fact.’
He looked around.
‘But they're all here, Sheridan included.
They were getting out of a stretch limo when we rolled up in our private bus.
That's where we were given these rosettes; on the bus.
How did you get here, then?’
‘On a public bus.’
‘Too bad.’
His batteries were running at half-speed, neither highly charged up nor flat.
Under the mop of curls his face, without the emphasizing make-up he wore perpetually on the train, looked younger and more ordinary: it was David Flynn who was at the races, not Zak.
‘Are all the actors here?’
I asked.
‘Oh, sure.
We have to know what happens here today.
Have to be able to talk about it to the owners tonight.
Don't forget, it's a racing mystery, after all.’
I thought that I had forgotten, in a way.
The real mystery that I was engaged in tended to crowd the fiction out.
‘What are you betting on in our race?’ he asked.
‘I suppose premiere will win.
What do you think?’
‘Upper Gumtree.’
I said.
‘It's supposed to be half asleep,’ he objected.
‘It's got a nice face,’ I said.
He looked at me sideways.
‘You're crazy, you know that?
‘I am but mad north-north-west.
‘When the wind is southerly,’ he said promptly, ‘I know a hawk from a handsaw.’
He laughed.
‘There isn't an actor born who doesn't hope to play Hamlet.’
‘Have you ever?’
‘Only in school.
But once learned, never forgotten.
Shall I give you my ‘To be or not to be’?’
‘No.’
‘You slay me.
See you tonight.’
He went off with a medium spring to his step and I saw him later with his arms round Donna's shoulders, which wasn't (as far as I knew) in his script.
Most of the owners came down from the Clubhouse to watch the saddling of the runners in the Jockey Club Race Train Stakes, and all the sportier of them wore the rosettes.
Filmer didn't: there was no lightheartedness in him.
Daffodil, however, had fastened hers to her cleavage, the red, white and gold popping out now and again past the long-haired chinchillas.
Mrs Young wore hers boldly on her lapel.
Mr Young's wasn't in sight.
The Unwins, rosetted, were showing uninhibited pleasure in Upper Gumtree, who did in fact have a nice face, and wasn't unacceptably sleepy.
Upper Gumtree's trainer hadn't made the journey from Australia, and nor had his usual jockey: Canadian substitutes had been found.
The Unwins beamed and patted everyone within reach including the horse, and Mr Unwin in his great antipodean accent could be heard calling his jockey ‘son’, even though the rider looked older by far than the owner.
In the next stall along things were a great deal quieter.
Mercer Lorrimore, unattended by the rest of his family, talked pleasantly with his trainer, who had come from Toronto, and shook hands with his jockey, the same  one who had ridden for him at Woodbine.
Premiere, the favourite, behaved like a horse that had had a fuss made of him all his life; almost, I thought fancifully, as arrogantly as Sheridan.
The owners of Flokati were showing Mavis and Walter Bricknell-type behaviour, fluttering about in a nervous anxiety that would be bound to affect the horse if it went on too long.
Their ineffective-looking trainer was trying to stop the owners from straightening the number cloth, tidying the forelock over the headband, tweaking at the saddle and shoving their big rosettes with every ill-judged movement near the horse's affronted nostrils.
A riot, really.
poor Mr and Mrs Flokati; owning the horse looked an agony, not a joy.
Mr and Mrs Young, like Mercer Lorrimore, had shipped their Winnipeg runners, two of them, by road.
They, old hands at the owning game, stood by with calm interest while their pair, Soluble and Slipperclub, were readied, Mrs Young speaking with her sweet expression to one of the jockeys, Mr Young more impassively to the other.
Daffodil Quentin's runner, Pampering, had been flown in with five others owned by people on the train, all of whom were strolling around with rosettes and almost permanently smiling faces.
This was, after all, one of the highlights of their journey, the purpose behind the pizzazz.
I learned that the Manitoba Racing Commission had moreover by midafternoon given each of them not only a champagne reception and a splendid lunch but also, as a memento, a framed group photograph of all the owners on the trip.
They were living their memories, I thought, here and now.
Television cameras all over the place recorded everything both for news items that evening and for the two-hour Support Canadian Racing programme which posters everywhere announced was being made for a gala showing coast to coast after the triple had been completed in Vancouver.
The Winnipeg runners went out on to the track to bugle fanfares and cheers from the stands and were pony-escorted to the starting gate.
Mercer Lorrimore's colours, red and white like the rosette he had pinned on gamely For the Sake of Canadian Racing, could be seen entering the outermost stall.
Daffodil's pale blue and dark green were innermost.
Upper Gumtree, carrying orange and black, started dead centre of the eleven runners and came out of the stalls heading a formation like an arrow.
I was watching from high up, from the upper part of the grandstand, above the Clubhouse floor to which the owners had returned in a chattering flock to watch the race.
Through my binoculars-camera the colours down on the track in the chilly sunshine looked sharp and bright, the race easy on that account to read.
The arrow formation soon broke up into a ragged line, with Premiere on the outside, pampering on the inner and Upper Gumtree still just in front.
The Youngs' pair, split by the draw, nevertheless came together and raced the whole way side by side like twins.
Hokati, in pink, made for the rails as if needing them to steer by, and four of the other runners boxed him in.
Going past the stands for the first time, the Unwins' Upper Gumtree still showed in front but with Premiere almost alongside; pampering was on the inside tugging his jockey's arms out.
Doing their best for the glory of Canada, the whole field of eleven swept round the bend and went down the far side as if welded together, and it still seemed when they turned for home that that was how they might finish, in a knot.
They split apart in the straight, one group swinging wide, the red and white of premiere spurting forward with the Youngs' pair at his quarters and Upper Gumtree swerving dramatically through a gap to take the rails well ahead of pampering.
The crowd bounced up and down.
The money was on premiere.
The yelling could have been heard in Montreal.
The Canadian racing authorities were again getting a rip-roaring brilliant finish to a Race Train Stakes…and Mercer, putting his brave face on it, again came in second.
It was the Unwins, in the stratosphere of ecstasy, who led Upper Gumtree into the winners' circle.
The Unwins from Australia who were hugging and kissing everyone near enough (including the horse).
The Unwins who had their photographs taken each side of their panting winner, now covered across the shoulders by a long, triumphant blanket of flowers.
The Unwins who received the trophy, the cheque and the speeches from the president of the racecourse and the top brass of the Jockey Club; whose memories of the day would be the sweetest.
Feeling pleased for them, I lowered the binoculars through which I'd been able to see even the tears on Mrs Unwin's cheeks, and there below me and in front of the grandstand was the man with the gaunt face looking up towards the Clubhouse windows.
Almost trembling with haste, I put the binoculars up again, found him, activated the automatic focus, pressed the button, heard the quiet click of the shutter: had him in the bag.
It had been my only chance.
Even before the film had wound on, he'd looked down and away, so that I could see only his forehead and his grey hair; and within two seconds, he'd walked towards the grandstand and out of my line of vision.
I had no idea how long he'd been standing there.
I'd been too diverted by the Unwins' rejoicings.
I went down from the upper grandstand as fast as I could, which was far too slowly because everyone else was doing the same thing.
Down on ground level again, I couldn't see gaunt-face anywhere.
The whole crowd was on the move: one could get no length of view.
The Race Train event had been the climax of the programme and although there was one more race on the card, no one seemed to be much interested.
A great many red and white rosettes, baseball caps, T-shirts and balloons were on their way out of the gates.
The Unwins' entourage was disappearing into the Clubhouse entrance, no doubt for more champagne and press interviews, and probably all the other owners would be in there with them.
If gaunt-face had been looking up at  the Clubroom windows in the hope of seeing Filmer — or of Filmer seeing him — maybe Filmer would come down to talk to him and maybe I could photograph them both together, which might one day prove useful.
If I simply waited, it might happen.
I simply waited.
Filmer did eventually come down, but with Daffodil.
They weren't approached by gaunt-face.
They climbed into their chauffeured car and were whisked away to heaven knew where, and I thought frustratedly about time and the little of it there was left in Winnipeg.
It was already nearly six o'clock, and I wouldn't be able to find a one-hour photo lab open anywhere that evening; and I had to return to the Sheraton to collect my bag, and be back on the train by seven-thirty or soon after.
I retreated to the men's room and took the film out of the binoculars-camera, and wrote a short note to go with it.
Then I twisted the film and note together into a paper towel and went out to try to find Bill Baudelaire, reckoning it might be all right to speak to him casually down on ground level since Filmer wasn't there to see.
I'd caught sight of him in the distance from time to time all afternoon, but now when I wanted him his red hair wasn't anywhere around.
Zak came up to me with Donna and offered me a lift back to the city in their bus, and at that exact moment I saw not Bill Baudelaire himself but someone who might go among the owners, where Tommy couldn't.
‘When does the bus go?’
I asked Zak rapidly, preparing to leave him.
‘Twenty minutes…out front.
It's got a banner on.
‘I'll come…thanks.’
I covered a good deal of ground rapidly but not running and caught up with the shapely backview of a dark-haired girl.
I in a red coat with a wide gold and white studded belt.
‘Nancy?’
I said from behind her.
She turned, surprised, and looked at me enquiringly.
‘Er…’
I said, ‘yesterday you collected some thirst quenchers from me for Bill Baudelaire's daughter.’
‘Oh, yes.’
She recognized me belatedly.
‘Do you happen to know where I could find him now?’
‘He's up in the Clubhouse, drinking with the winners.’
‘Could you…could you possibly deliver something else to him?’
She wrinkled her freckled teenage nose.
‘I just came down, for some fresh air.’
She sighed.
‘Oh, all right.
I guess he'd want me to, if you asked.
You seem to be OK with him.
What do you want me to give him this time?’
I passed over the paper-towel bundle.
‘Instructions?’ she asked.
‘There's a note inside.’
‘Real cloak and dagger goings-on.’
‘Thanks, truly, and…er…give it to him quietly.
‘What's in it?’ she asked.
‘A film, with photos of today's events.’
She didn't know whether or not to be disappointed.
‘Don't lose it,’ I said.
She seemed to be more pleased with that, and flashing me a grin from over her shoulder went off towards the Clubhouse entrance.
I hoped she wouldn't make a big production out of the delivery upstairs, but just in case she did I thought I wouldn't go anywhere where she could see me and point me out to any of the owners, so I left through the front exit gates and found the actors' bus with its Mystery Race Train banner and faded inside into the reassembling troupe.
In general, the cast had backed premiere (what else?) but were contented to have been interviewed on television at some length.
A lot of Winnipeg's race crowd, Zak said, had asked how they could get on the train.
‘I must say,’ he said, yawning, ‘with all the publicity it's had, it's really caught on.’
In the publicity and the success, I thought, lay the danger.
The more the eyes of Canada and Australia and England were directed to the train, the more Filmer might want to discredit it.
Might…might.
I was guarding a moving shadow; trying to prevent something that might not happen, searching for the intention so as to stop it occurring.
The bus letting me off at a convenient corner in the city, I walked to the Sheraton and from a telephone there spoke to Mrs Baudelaire.
‘Bill called me ten minutes ago from the track,’ she said.
He said you sent him a film and you didn't say where you wanted the pictures sent.’
‘Is he calling you back?’
I asked.
‘Yes, I told him I'd be speaking to you soon.’
‘Right, well, there's only one picture on the film.
The rest is blank.
Please tell Bill the man in the photo is the ally of our quarry.
His ally on the train.
Would you ask if Bill knows him?
Ask if anyone knows him.
And if there's something about him that would be useful if I knew, please will he tell you, to tell me.’
‘Heavens,’ she said.
‘Let me get that straight.’
She paused, writing.
‘Basically, who is he, what does he do, and is what he does likely to be of help.’
‘Yes,’ I said.
‘And do you want a copy of the photo?’
‘Yes, please.
Ask if there's any chance of his getting it to Nell Richmond at Chateau Lake Louise by tomorrow night or the next morning.’
‘Difficult,’ she commented.
‘The mail is impossible.’
‘Well, someone might be flying to Calgary tomorrow morning,’ I suggested.
‘They might even meet our train there.
We get there at twelve-forty, leave at one-thirty.
I suppose the time's too tight, but if it's possible, get Bill to address the envelope to the Conductor of the train, George Burley.
I'll tell George it might come.’
‘Dear young man,’ she said, ‘let me write it all down.’
I waited while she did it.
‘Let me check,’ she said.
‘Either George Burley on the train or Nell Richmond at Chateau Lake Louise.’
‘Right.
I'll call you soon.’
‘Don't go,’ she said.
‘I have a message for you from Val Catto.’
‘Oh good.’
‘He said…now these are his exact words…
‘Stolen evidence cannot be used in court but facts learned can be  verified.’
The understanding amusement was light in her voice.
‘What he means is, have a looksee but hands off.’
‘Yes.’
‘And he said to tell you to remember his motto.’
‘OK,’ I said.
‘What is his motto?’ she asked curiously, obviously longing to know.
‘Thought before action, if you have time.’
‘Nice,’ she said, pleased.
‘He said to tell you he was working hard on the unknown numbers, and you are not to put yourself in danger of arrest.’
‘All right.’
‘Phone me from Calgary tomorrow,’ she said.
‘By then it will be evening in England.
Val will have had a whole day on the numbers.’
‘You're marvellous.’
‘And I'll be able to tell you when you'll get your photos.’
There was a click and she'd gone, and I could hardly believe that I'd ever doubted her as a relay post.
The train had come in from the sidings and stood in the station, warm and pulsing, its engines reattached, the horses and grooms on board and fresh foods and ice loaded.
It was like going back to an old friend, familiar and almost cosy.
I changed into Tommy's uniform in my roomette and went along to the dining car where Emil, Oliver and Cathy welcomed me casually as if I were an accepted part of the crew.
We began immediately laying the pink cloths and putting fresh flowers in the vases, and Angus in his tall white hat, whistling Speed Bonny Boat amid clouds of steam, addressed his talents to wild rice and scallops in Parmesan sauce while Simone rather grimly chopped lettuce.
The passengers returned well before eight o'clock in very good spirits, Mercer bringing with him a porter wheeling a case of highly superior bubbles for toasting the Unwins, success.
The Unwins themselves — and it was impossible for anyone to grudge them their moment — said over and over that it was great, just great that one of the horses  actually on the train had won one of the races, it made the whole thing worthwhile, and the whole party, drifting into the dining car in true party mood, agreed and applauded.
Filmer, I was interested to see as I distributed glasses, was smiling pleasantly in all directions, when the last thing he probably wanted was the enormous smash-hit the train enterprise was proving.
Daffodil had changed into a sparkling crimson dress and showed no pique over pampering finishing fifth.
She was being friendly as usual to Bambi, frostier in pale turquoise with pearls.
Mercer came to Emil and worried that the wine wasn't cold enough, but Emil assured him he had lodged all twelve bottles among the many plastic bags of ice cubes: by the time the train left the station, all would be well.
The Youngs, whose Slipperclub had finished third, were embraced by the hyperjoyous Unwins and were invited to their table, leaving the poor Flokatis to seek solace with others whose hopes had died on the last bend.
Sheridan Lorrimore was telling a long-suffering good-natured couple all about his prowess at ice hockey and Xanthe, pouting and put out at having been temporarily deserted by Mrs Young, had ended up next to Giles-the-murderer whose real-life preference, I'd gathered, was for boys.
The train slid out of Winnipeg on time at eight-twenty and I put all my energies and attention into being an unexceptional and adequate waiter, even though always conscious of the ominous presence in the aisle seat, facing forward, three tables back from the kitchen end.
I never met his eyes and I don't think he noticed me much, but we were all, Emil, Oliver, Cathy and I, becoming slowly and inevitably more recognizable to the passengers.
Several of them enquired if we'd been to the races (we all had) and had backed the winner (no, we hadn't).
Fortunately Mercer himself had had this conversation with Emil, which meant he felt no need to ask me also, so I escaped having to speak too much in my English accent at his table.
The party atmosphere went on all through dinner, prevailed through a short scene put on by Zak to explain  that the Mountie had been left behind in Winnipeg for investigations on the ground and heated up thoroughly afterwards with more unsteady dancing and laughter in the dome car.
Nell wandered about looking slightly less starchy in a fuller-cut black skirt with her tailored white silk blouse, telling me in passing that Cumber and Rose wanted to give a similar party at Chateau Lake Louise.
‘Who?’
I said.
‘Cumber and Rose.
Mr and Mrs Young.’
‘Oh.’
‘I've spent most of the day with them.’
She smiled briefly and went on her way.
No clip’ board, I noticed.
Cumber and Rose, I thought, collecting ashtrays.
Well, well.
Rose suited Mrs Young fine.
Cumber was appropriate also, I supposed, though Mr Young wasn't cumbersome; perhaps a shade heavy in personality, but not big, not awkward.
Mercer and Bambi again invited Filmer and Daffodil into their private car, although it was Oliver, this time, who obliged them with a bowl of ice.
Mercer came back after a while to collect the Unwins and the Youngs, and the general jollifications everywhere wore on without any alarms.
After midnight Nell said she was going to bed, and I walked up the train with her to her roomette, almost opposite mine.
She paused in the doorway.
‘It's all going well, don't you think?’ she said.
‘Terrific.’
I meant it.
‘You've worked very hard.’
We looked at each other, she in executive black and white, I in my yellow waistcoat.
‘What are you really?’ she said.
‘Twenty-nine.’
Her lips twitched.
‘One day I'll crack your defences.’
‘Yours are half down.’
‘What do you mean?’
I made a hugging movement across my own chest.
‘No clipboard,’ I said.
‘Oh…well…
I didn't need it this evening.’
She wasn't exactly confused.
Her eyes were laughing.
‘You can't,’ she said.
‘Can't what?’
‘Kiss me.’
I'd wanted to.
She'd seen it unerringly.
‘If you come into my parlour, I can,’ I said.
She shook her head, smiling.
‘I am not going to lose my credibility on this train by being caught coming out of the help's bedroom.’
‘Talking in the corridor is almost as bad.’
‘Yes, it is,’ she said, nodding.
‘So good night.’
I said with regret, ‘Good night,’ and she went abruptly into her own domain and closed the door.
With a sigh I went on a few steps further to George's office and found him as I'd expected, fully dressed, lightly napping, with worked-on forms pushed to one side beside an empty coffee cup.
‘Come in,’ he said, fully alert in an instant.
‘Sit down.
How's it going?’
‘So far, so good.’
I sat on the facilities, and told him that the water samples from the horse car had been pure and simple H&sub2; O.
‘That'll please the dragon-lady, eh?’ he said.
‘Did you go to the races?’
I asked.
‘No, I've got family in Winnipeg, I went visiting.
And I slept most of today, as I'll be up all night, with the stops.’
He knew, however, that Upper Gumtree had won.
‘You should see the party going on in the forward dome car.
All the grooms are drunk.
The dragon-lady's in a sober tizzy, eh?, because they tried to give a bucket of beer to the horse.
They're singing gold-rush songs at the tops of their voices in the dayniter and it's a wonder they haven't all rocked the train right off the rails, with the noise and the booze.’
‘I guess it wouldn't be easy to rock the train off the rails,’ I said thoughtfully.
‘Easy?’
George said.
‘Of course it is.
Go too fast round the curves.’
‘Well…suppose it was one of the passengers who wanted to stop the train getting happily to Vancouver, what could he do?’
He looked at me with bright eyes, unperplexed.
‘Besides doping the horses’ water?
Do what they're doing in the mystery, I'd say.
Throw a body off the train, eh?
That would stop the parties pretty quick.’
He chuckled.
‘You could throw someone off the Stoney Creek bridge — that's a high curved bridge over Roger's Pass.
It's a long way down into the gulch.
Three hundred feet and a bit more.
If the fall didn't kill them, the bears would.’
‘Bears!’
I exclaimed.
He beamed.
‘Grizzly bears, eh?
The Rocky Mountains aren't anyone's tame backyard.
They're raw nature.
So are the bears.
They kill people, no trouble.’
He put his head on one side.
‘Or you could throw someone out into the Connaught Tunnel.
That tunnel's five miles long with no lights.
There's a species of blind mice that live in there, eating the grain that falls from the grain trains.’
‘Jolly,’ I said.
‘There's a wine storage under the floor of your dining car,’ he said with growing relish.
‘They decided not to use it on this trip because opening it might disrupt the passengers.
It's big enough to hide a body in.’
His imagination, I saw, was of a scarier dimension than my own.
‘Hiding a body in the wine store,’ I said politely, ‘might indeed disrupt the passengers.’
He laughed.
‘Or how about someone alive and tied up in there, writhing in agony?’
‘Shouting his head off?’
‘Gagged.’
‘If we miss anyone,’ I promised, ‘that's where we'll look.’
I stood up and prepared to go.
‘Where exactly is the Stoney Creek bridge,’ I asked, pausing in the doorway, ‘over Roger's Pass?’
His eyes gleamed, the lower lids pouching with enjoyment.
‘About a hundred miles further on from Lake Louise.
High up in the mountains.
But don't you worry, eh?, you'll be going across it in the dark.’