

A dream come true for Katharine Mahoney recently when she won a lesson with Britain's most successful dressage rider, Jennie Loriston-Clarke, in a Today's Horse competition.
Riding one of Jennie's fabulous dressage schoolmasters, Katharine was able to experience a whole host of dressage movements from flying changes to pirouettes that she had never been able to try before.
He grin laster the entire three hour journey home!
‘Lessons’ are always popular so we have one lined up with Mary Thomson next month, which should please eventing fans!
I am happy to report that my own horse Turnip is feeling extremely well in herself, as the Irish say, following her minor tendon injury.
Having been off all winter, we are now on the long road back to full fitness, and my main worry, having recently started trotting, is finding somewhere where the going isn't too hard.
Understandable had I been writing this in August, but as it is still March it looks as if we are in for another drought this summer.
I, like many other riders, am eagerly awaiting the clocks going forward.
There's nothing nicer than an evening hack after a day in the office, and even if you prefer riding earlier, the extra hour of daylight somehow seems to lift the spirits.
Spring is also the ideal time to do all those jobs you have been putting off all winter.
Turn to Carolyn Henderson's excellent article on page 23 for some inspiration!
We get lost of letters from riders who are keen to have a go at competing but would like to arm themselves with some information first.
If you fall into this category you will find Jane Lucas' article on page 14 of interest, and for specific help with your jumping see the first of Jane Wallace's super new series on cross country jumping on page 36.
We have a very exciting development in the pipeline: a completely new look Today's Horse.
From next month we will continue to have all your favourites but add more colour, more pages and a snazzy new design.
Turn to page 45 for a sneak preview of the cover.
Well, I must rush off.
There's lots to be done on the new look mag which I am confident you will love!
See you next month.
Want a word…?
CHOOSING YOUR HOLIDAY
Dear Kate,
May I add to your letters on choosing a riding holiday?
We in Bridle Rides have been running bridle-riding holidays for ownerriders for five years now, and we'd agree strongly with Miriam Pender's emphasis on the important of choosing the right holiday for you.
We have a ‘put-off’ section in our brochure — a checklist of tough questions under the heading Is a Bridle Rides holiday the one for you ?
We'd rather lose some riders than have any dissatisfied because they chose the wrong holiday.
Maybe our ‘put-off’ check-list is too effective!
Many riders we hear about seem unjustifiably timid about taking themselves and their horses off across the countryside.
They often fear that their horses will find it all too much.
In practice, of course, most horses absolutely love the chance to explore the countryside, with all its exciting smells, sights and challenges.
That kind of riding is what horses have been doing for centuries.
But Miriam is right — that doesn't mean the riders will love it too.
Of course you can view it, as some bridle-riders do, as a holiday for your horse — you just go along for the ride.
HORSE AND PONY AUCTIONS
Dear Kate,
We have been covering random Horse & Pony Auctions during the latter part of 1991 in England, Scotland and Wales.
We would like to hear from people who regularly attend Auction Sales in different areas or who would be prepared to attend and be good enough to send us regular fair and balanced reports of their observations; conclusions and recommendations with regard to the numbers of and general condition of the animals; their handling and treatment; attendance by officials at the Sales; facilities for the animals, e.g. hay, water, etc., and more particularly what happens to the rubbish section?
As a matter of interest and as a direct result of our attendance at five of these Auctions — a total of 37 unweaned foals and ponies were rescued, and a small FOAL SANCTUARY has just been set up in Burnley for their rehabilitation.
A LESSON WITH JENNIE LORISTON-CLARKE reported by Kate Finlayson
Most riders dream of the opportunity of riding the perfect schoolmaster — one who will oblige when all the right buttons are pushed but won't worry when they're not.
Combine this with a lesson with Jennie Loriston-Clarke, Britain's top dressage rider, and it surely becomes any aspiring dressage rider's dream come true.
When Katharine Mahoney entered our ‘Win a lesson with a star’ competition, she mentioned that she was interested in journalism and offered to help with Today's Horse.
A year later, having done a super job as Editorial Assistant before going off to university last autumn, we finally got around to organising the lesson!
Katharine had asked for a lesson with Jennie because ‘Quite simply, she's the best’.
Katharine has her own horse, Liam, with whom she successfully competes at Novice level and last summer they did their first few Elementary tests together.
As Katharine is away at university, she has very little time to ride.
Liam is away at livery because Katharine is no longer at home to look after him and so riding is limited to the holidays.
When Katharine went for her lesson with Jennie, she hadn't ridden since Christmas and was concerned that she would be very stiff and rusty.
Ready to Go
Katharine and I made the journey to the Catherston Stud, just outside Brockenhurst in Hampshire, together.
We arrived to find Benjamin Bunny, the horse Katharine was to ride, already tacked up and ready to go.
Benji is an ex-champion Prix St Georges dressage horse with a wonderfully laidback temperament and is used as a schoolmaster to many of Catherston's pupils.
‘He's marvellous ’ said Jennie, ‘he doesn't get upset or nervous if the rider gets in a muddle.
He's taught a lot of people so much ’.
Luckily, Katharine had ridden in a double bridle before, so as they started working in she was able to concentrate on getting the feel of Benji.
Benji is quite an old boy and needs plenty of work to get him supple.
After a walk and trot on both reins, Jennie told Katharine to make some serpentine loops throughout the whole school to help supple him laterally.
Jennie reminded Katharine to use the inside led into the outside rein to make him round, and to concentrate on making him bend around her inside leg.
‘Remember to keep a contact and tickle him with your stick if he feels idle ,’ she said.
Then they had a canter on both reins as Katharine continued to get used to him.
‘I was surprised how hard I had to work ,’ Katharine remarked later.
‘If you don't ask him with 100 percent  commitment and effort he won't do it, yet the feeling I got when it suddenly clicked was just amazing!’
Jennie told Katharine not to be afraid to use the outside rein quite strongly when he was over bending.
‘He's quite used to being bossed !’ she laughed.
‘He needs a lot of leg and seat but try to keep your hand light.
You want a more active, not faster, trot .’
Jennie asked Katharine if she had ever done any lateral work.
Katharine replied that she had done shoulder-in and hand had a go at half-pass, but that it hadn't been very successful!
Shoulder-in
Jennie told Katharine to perform a 10m circle in the corner of the school, which helps bend the horse correctly, and then to shoulder-in up the long side.
Katharine was tempted to use too much inside rein to create the bend, and was therefore losing Benji's shoulder by not keeping hold of the outside rein.
They changed the reign and performed shoulder-in to the left.
Having established a good shoulder-in, Jennie asked for the movement without the help of the circle beforehand.
Jennie was very complimentary about Katharine's riding.
‘She's a nice rider.
She sits very well .’
Half-Pass
They then progressed to half-pass; coming up the centre line and then performing half-pass towards E. Jennie told Katharine to keep her inside leg on the girth, as the horse should bend in the direction of the movement, as opposed to leg-yielding where the horse keeps in a straight line.
The horse should bend throughout his whole body and not just through his head and neck.
Each horse is, of course, different, and whether the shoulders or the quarters are likely to need adjusting depends on the individual.
Jennie told Katharine to be aware of this and to correct any fault as necessary.
Katharine concentrates on getting the feel of Benji, as they work in.
The trot half-pass proved rather difficult.
By now Katharine's riding had become much more positive and effective and Benji was going much better as a result.
However, Katharine was finding the half-pass in trot quite difficult.
‘Keeping the bend and making Benji move sideways at the same time is not easy ,’ she said.
Jennie explained how crucial it is that a rider can use his aids independently of each other.
‘It's amazing how many people unconsciously use their right hand every time they use their right leg, for instance.
Then, after all the banging around, they wonder why their horses have hard mouths !’
Travers
After Katharine had experienced some problems with the half-pass, Jennie  suggested that Katharine try some travers, which would help to improve the half-pass.
Travers, or quarters-in, really consist of bending the horse exactly as he would be in half-pass, but going sideways.
The quarters should be in off the track as much as the shoulders would be in shoulderin, keeping plenty of bend behind the saddle.
Jennie told Katharine to ask and then give, which would help soften him — and it did.
Again Jennie stressed how important it was to be able to use the hand and leg independently.
Katharine and Benji had produced some nice work together and at this point Jennie told them to have a rest on a long rein for a few minutes.
‘I don't want to kill you off ’
Jennie explained that the travers, or quarters-in, would improve the half-pass.
Katharine's first flying change.
The smile says it all!.
Flying Changes
Katharine's face was a picture when Jennie suggested that she ‘have a bit of fund with some flying changes ’.
Jennie explained that rhythm and co-ordination were very important and that Katharine would have to keep Benji collected.
‘Give him a couple of nudges with your leg to say ‘listen to me ’!’ she advised.
They prepared for the exercise by doing some simple changes — canter, walk, canter — across the centre line.
Jennie then asked Katharine to come across the half diagonal in a nice, steady canter, and to imagine ‘picking him up and putting him down again on the other leg .’
The knack was asking at the moment of suspension by swinging one leg forward and the other back.
Interestingly, Jennie made no mention of weight or reign aids.
Katharine found that as she got into the rhythm, so the changes improved.
The aids had to be given positively and as Katharine became more adept, Benji performed the changes more smoothly.
Having achieved some very professional-looking flying changes, Jennie then suggested that Katharine try some tempi changes (where the lead changes every set number of strides).
Jennie instructed Katharine to come across the diagonal and on each third canter stride to ask for a flying change, which would result,(hopefully!) in a change of leg every fourth stride.
At this stage, Benji thought he knew best and was busy anticipating Katharine's aids, resulting in an impressive series of three-time changes!
Jennie told Katharine to move her leg back and then keep it there until she was ready to change.
Once Katharine had got the rhythm and coordination she found t much easier.
Jennie was delighted with Katharine's progress.
‘You've really got him going well The energy is between your leg, seat and rein and he is nicely balanced.
He is now much rounder and up to the bit.
Benji can look like a broken-down old cab horse with a real novice on his back or he can look really smart.
He goes as he's ridden ’.
The more positive and confident that Katharine became, the better Benji went.
Pirouettes
To finish with, Jennie suggested that Katharine have a go at some pirouettes.
They started with a demi-pirouette in walk (a turn on the haunches) on the outside track.
The hind legs have to mark time while the forelegs cross over, making the outer ring of a wheel.
Jennie told Katharine to keep pushing with her inside leg and holding him with the outside rein to stop him walking forward.
Katharine tickled Benji with the whip to keep the activity and the bend until he was back on the track.
From walk, they progressed to canter.
Katharine cantered Benji in a smaller and smaller circle, keeping a strong outside rein so that his hind legs were marking a smaller circle and working towards a canter pirouette.
It was important to keep the canter steady but bouncy, keeping the activity with the inside leg and encouraging Benji to use his back end more and lighten his forehand.
Jennie was delighted.
‘Well done!
That's very good for a first — you have a great feel for it !’
Demi-pirouette, or turn on the haunches, in walk.
They finished with an amazingly professional-looking canter demipirouette followed by a flying change as they hit the track.
It was hard to believe that Katharine hadn't done much more than a shoulder-in only an hour earlier!
Beaming
At the end of the lesson, Katharine was beaming from ear to ear.
‘Wow, that was great!
To be able to get the feel of canter half-pass, pirouettes and flying changes was absolutely amazing!
The hardest part was establishing the rhythm and co-ordination but luckily he's a tolerant chap who didn't appear to mind when I got it wrong.’
‘The movement I enjoyed most was canter half-pass across the short diagonal with a flying change on the centre line, half-pass back across the diagonal and finishing with another flying change as we reached the outer track.
There's a wonderful sense of ease and rhythm when it all goes right.’
‘I hadn't realised how hard you have to work, and how co-ordinated you have to be with the more difficult movements.
Although all my aids had to work in unison, I had to really concentrate on being able to work them independently of each other.
I can't wait to go and try them out on Liam!’
I understand that Today's Horse may not have made itself very popular.
Apparently Katharine is now bullying her parents to go back to Catherston for some more lessons!
Next month: A lesson with top eventer Mary Thomson .
Katharine's first canter pirouette, pretty impressive!
NEWS NEWS NEWS NEWS
FREE SUPPLEMENT
The body has an effective immune defence system at its disposal.
But the greater the demand placed upon this system, especially in the competitive environment, the greater the risk of cover-loading.
Very often, a horse's resistance to infection can be weakened by the constant pressure exerted during training, competition or hunting.
Recent scientific research has shown that Equi-Strath, a herbal food preparation will help maintain the body's immune defence system and thereby help maintain vitality and assist the performance of the working horse.
Equi-Strath is a combination of selected wild herbs and ‘live yeast’ transformed under a completely natural process.
When used on a daily basis, food digestion is greatly improved ensuring that essential dietary elements are assimilated by the horse in the most effective manner; thereby helping maintain balanced growth.
Cedar Health claim that Equi-Strath is a natural restorative for horses in training, competition and hunting and an ideal supplement in helping broodmares maintain their condition both prior to conception and throughout the foaling period.
It is also suitable for injured horses or those recovering from illness.
Equi-Strath can be bought by mail order from Cedar health Limited, through selected saddlers, or direct from the Equi-Strath exhibition unit on tour at many County Shows, Breed Society and Club Events.
For further information please phone Debi Wells on the Equi-Strath Helpline on 
Cedar health Limited are offering a 500ml bottle of Equi-Strath free to the first five readers who write to 
NEW LUCINDA GREEN VIDEO
With the eventing and hunter trial season approaching fast, Lucinda Green's new video ‘Cross Country Riding’ will prove invaluable.
The video is aimed at riders of all ages and levels who compete, or want to compete, cross country.
Lucinda believes that much of her success when riding cross country can be attributed to walking the course correctly, and throughout the video she leads the viewer from the start to the finish of a cross country course.
Lucinda looks at many types of fences and their alternatives and gives useful tips on how to ride the different obstacles and how to deal with the problems that may arise.
A variety of horses and riders demonstrate how to ride the fences but as Lucinda herself is such a joy to watch cross country, it was sad that she didn't demonstrate the jumping herself.
Her spontaneous and frank comments coupled with her personality make this an enjoyable and informative video.
The video is available now from .
Details are also available of their vast selection of other horsy videos.
ARAB RACING
Arab flat racing has entered its 15th year.
This is an amateur sport for registered Arab and Anglo Arab horses and is run under Jockey Club rules.
It is becoming increasingly popular — why not go along to a meeting near you?
ARAB RACE MEETING FIXTURES 1992 
Arab flat racing has entered its 15th year.
This is an amateur sport for registered Arab and Anglo Arab horses and is run under Jockey Club rules.
It is becoming increasingly popular — why not go along to a meeting near you?
First race 2pm for all afternoon meetings except Goodwood which is 1pm.
The runners and riders along with other details appear in Friday's Racing Post and a report with results appears in Monday's issue.
NEWS NEWS NEWS NEWS
ARTIST AT GOODWOOD
Art enthusiasts will be able to see the work of Jan Künster at this year's International Dressage Meeting at Goodwood, to be held 1–3 May.
The German-born artist is well-known for his elegant equestrian watercolours depicting dressage, show jumping, driving and polo.
He has painted many top-class combinations,, and was commissioned by Ronald Reagan to paint one of his favourite horses.
such as the one opposite of Nicole Uphoff and Rembrandt
A permanent exhibition of his work is on show at 
Künster's paintings are available by mail order from 
Art prints cost £20–25, hand coloured lithographs £150 and if you're feeling flush, original watercolours from £900 to £3,000.
£5 OFF EQUIBRAND
Today's Horse readers are being offered £5 off a set of branding irons, the latest security marking method, from Equibrand.
The irons depict your own postcode and are heated by a farrier who burns the code (painlessly) onto your horse's hooves.
The irons can be used to mark any number of horses — ideal for a large yard or riding school — and can also be used very effectively to mark show jumps and even trailers and carriages.
The brand will need to be reapplied every six months or so, depending on the rate of growth of your horse's feet.
The usual price for a pair of Equibrand hoof branding irons is £98.40 which includes VAT, carriage and a set of stable and gate warning signs.
The special offer price is £93.40 .
BHS SCOTTISH INSTRUCTORS' CONVENTION
An Instructors' Convention is to be held at the Gleneagles Mark Phillips Equestrian Centre on Monday 6 April 1992.
The BHS Training and Exams Committee have organised this to give those on the Instructors' Register a fair chance of attending a refresher course.
The presenter at the Scottish Instructors Convention is to be Miss Iris Kellett, the well-known Irish show-jumping trainer.
She will be demonstrating the training of horse and rider using several well-known guinea pigs.
Members of the Instructors' Register must ensure that their attendance is recorded on the day.
It will not be possible to register attendance at a later date.
The Horse Buyer's Survival Guide
Buying a horse is exciting — but mistakes can lead to misery all round.
Dealer and show producer Lynn Russell starts a new series which should help potential purchasers get it right.
If buying a horse was as simple as buying a car, life would be much easier.
Unfortunately it doesn't work like that — you know that two cars of the same make will drive in more or less the same way, but two horses of the same size, shape and age can be totally different.
That's where the fascination, and sometimes the frustration, of buying horses comes in.
It will always be something of a gamble, because we are ‘talking about a living animal with a mind of its own.
But doing your homework properly you will at least be able to make sure that the odds are in your favour.’
I get all sorts of horses through my yard, from nice riding club allrounders to top-class competition horses.
I also get all sorts of people, from average riders wanting a family horse to have fun with to those whose sights are fixed at the very top.
Out of every hundred customers, probably only 20 know exactly what they want.
70 have a rough idea — and 10 would settle for something totally wrong.
Be Honest
Choose a horse who will suit your height and weight.
Selling horses is my living, so it's my job to try and match up the right horse with the right owner.
But if you're looking to buy, whether privately, from a dealer or through an auction, you will only succeed if you are honest with yourself.
You need to be honest about your personality, your capabilities and the amount of money you have available.
For instance, you may well admire a well-bred horse that has a lot of competition potential — but even if you can afford it, buying it would be a big mistake if what you really want is something quiet and up to weight to hack and do riding club events.
You also need to accept that the perfect horse has not yet been born.
Horses, like people, all have their strengths and weaknesses; but just as we all get on with some people and are not keen on others, so one horse can be a success with one owner and a disaster with another.
If you haven't owned a horse before, or if you have bought on impulse and later  regretted it, it is worth taking a very logical approach.
Write down exactly what you hope to do with your new horse and what your priorities are; perhaps you want to hack and compete in Riding Club events, or maybe you want to concentrate on dressage or show jumping.
Be realistic about your capabilities and aspirations.
Don't Be A Size Snob
Then look at your own characteristics, starting with the basics of height and weight.
Some of the biggest mistakes are made by people who think that the only horse worth buying is one of at least 16.2hh; it's a kind of snobbery than can often misfire.
Talent doesn't always come in huge packages — remember Mark Todd's brilliant event horse Charisma, who was only 15.3hh?
Obviously a tall, long-legged person will need a big horse; I recently sold a 17.3hh gelding to a man of six foot eight who had been looking for a long time!
As a general guidelines, if you're an adult of five foot to five foot three you will probably be best suited to a horse 15hh–15.2hh.
Smaller horses can offer lots of bonuses, because they are cheaper to keep and often easier to keep sound.
If more than one person is to ride the horse (perhaps a husband and wide want to share him) the situation is a little more complicated.
Your best bet is to give the person who is going to do most of the riding top priority; if a five foot five woman and her six foot husband want a horse between them so that she can compete and he can hack, they should find that a 16hh middleweight that is deep through the girth will suit them both.
It is important, of course, that a horse is up to your weight.
A crude but effective method is to look at the rider's backside and pick a horse with one to match!
For instance, a lightweight lady will be fine with a lightweight horse, but if you are rather more substantial you will need a horse of similar build.
Opposites Don't Attract
Before you start horse shopping, you need to take a careful look at your own temperament and personality.
It is often said that opposites attract, but this doesn't usually work with horses; most people are happier with an animal whose temperament is similar to their own.
Remember that characteristics are not necessarily ‘good’ or ‘bad’.
Just because you like a quiet life, it doesn't mean that you are a wimp — and conversely, you can have a dominant personality without being a bully.
It can often be a mistake to team up an easy-going person with a dominant horse, because more often than not the horse will run rings round its rider.
A dominant rider and timid horse may not be quite so bad at first, because the rider will give the animal confidence; even so , the time will come when the rider does not have enough bottle for both of them and will be better off finding a horse with the drive and courage to match.
Age, Sex and Colour
Age, sex and colour are other considerations that you will want to take into account.
The most expensive horse is usually the well-schooled one between five and eight years of age, because he has a combination of youth and experience.
Younger and older horses both have plenty to offer the right person, though.
If you are a reasonably good rider and can get experienced help, you may enjoy bringing on a just broken four-year old — though youngsters with potential (whether obvious or in the current owner's imagination) can carry big price tags.
An older horse, even one into his teens, can still give a lot of fun.
He will probably show a few signs of wear and tear, but as long as your vet recommends purchase he could be a good buy.
Whether you choose a mare or a gelding is down to personal choice, but it can pay to keep an open mind.
A lot of people are prejudiced against mares because they assume they are all temperamental when they are in season; this isn't necessarily so.
A good mare will often have the edge over a good gelding, because she has had nothing ‘taken away’ and so retains that extra sparkle.
The same can be said of stallions, though most people don't have the facilities to keep them.
Colour is also down to the individual.
In many ways it should be the last consideration, though some people have such strong likes and dislikes that they can neither explain nor ignore!
Certainly strong, solid colours are usually the most popular — though I've got a definite weakness for greys, and there is a big demand for quality coloured horses.
As with most things, buying horses comes down to money.
If you have a set amount to spend and a glance through the adverts shows that the sort of horse you would like carries a rather bigger asking price, you'll be wasting your and someone else's time by going to look.
Wait until your savings have grown to something approaching the average asking price!
Most people are happier with an animal whose temperament is similar to their own.
Vices
Horses that have some kind of an ‘if’, such as a stable vice, will usually be cheaper.
But before you rush off and spend your savings on a weaver or crib biter, think ahead.
If you intend to keep the horse at livery, would the yard owner accept him?
And though you might not intend to sell him again at the moment, circumstances can change: a horse with a stable vice is always harder to sell than one without, unless he is so fantastically talented that his behaviour can be ignored.
Even so, there are some risks which the average horse owner should not be prepared to take.
Horses which rear, nap or are bad in traffic should only be dealt with by professionals, who knows what they are doing and are prepared to take the risks involved.
Everyone knows of someone who is said to have paid £500 for a horse advertised in the local paper and ended up with a star.
Bargains are, unfortunately, few and far between: the horse world doesn't believe in holding January sales!
But by the end of this series you should be in a position to find the right horse at a fair price — and that's what every horse buyer should be aiming for..
Lynn Russell produced show horses for Bailey's Horse Feeds and runs the Horses Galore agency from her yard in Dunsfold, Surrey
Choice of sex and colour is down to the individual.
Park II FIRST TIME COMPETITOR
Is lack of knowledge preventing you from having a go at hunter trials, eventing or showing?
Jane Lucas answers all the questions you were afraid to ask.
HUNTER TRIALS
‘Most hunter trials are held in the spring and autumn months and are organised by hunts, riding clubs, riding schools etc.
You and your horse need to be capable of jumping solid fences safely and under control.
It helps if you have had experience over different types of cross-country jumps — like ditches and water.
If your horse is a reluctant showjumper you may find he is more enthusiastic at hunter trials, due to the natural-looking fences and the galloping between fences, which can wake up the laziest or horses.
There will normally be three or four classes — for a first-timer the best choice will be either the Novice or the Pairs (usually 2′ 6 ″/2; ′ 9″).
You may even find a Minimum class which will be lower still.
The Pairs class can be useful if your horse is lacking in confidence or rather lazy, as you can go round the course with an experienced friend to lead the way.
Pairs classes are useful for gaining confidence or if your horse is lazy.
Even at Novice level the difficulty of cross-country courses can vary widely — not so much in height as in variety of fences.
While some may be mostly straightforward logs, hedges, rails etc., others may include ditches, water, steps, drops etc., which may be off-putting for the beginner.
Ask friends or ring the secretary to gain some idea of the standard before entering.
Unlike most other disciplines, there is no main body regulating hunter trials and cross-country events and, therefore, no standardised rules.
However, most schedules will indicate how the competition will be judged.
Usually faults are gained as for the cross-country phase of eventing:
First disobedience at obstacle 20 penalties
Second disobedience at same obstacle 40 penalties
Third disobedience at same obstacle Elimination
Fall of horse and/or rider 60 penalties
Third fall of horse and/or rider Elimination
All penalties are cumulative, but penalties for disobedience depend on whether they are incurred at one obstacle or not.
For example, one stop at the second fence and one at the  third results in a total of 40 penalties (20 + 20), whereas two stops at the second obstacle gives a total of 60 penalties (20 + 40).
Elimination only occurs after three stops at the same obstacle — in theory you could have two stops at every fence without being eliminated.
A combination, consisting of two or more elements (marked A. B.C, etc.) counts as one obstacle.
A disobedience means a refusal, run-out or circling immediately in front of the obstacle .
However, circling before the horse is presented at the obstacle is not penalised — unlike showjumping.
Common causes of elimination include:
Missing our an obstacle or boundary flag (red flags on your right, white on your left)
Taking the wrong course
Jumping an obstacle in the wrong order
Horse resisting rider for 60 consecutive seconds, anywhere on the course
Continuing the course without a hat
Exceeding the time limit
Forbidden assistance — most common being directions as to the right course
Missing out the finish flags — easily done!
To determine the winner, time is usually taken into account in one of the following ways:Bogey time:
A set time (usually a steady one) is determined for the course.
The nearest competitor to the time wine.
This is usually used in novice classes to deter people from going dangerously fast.
Fastest time:
Simply the fastest around the course — normally used for open competitions.
Optimum time with timed section:
An optimum time is set for the course, and penalties awarded if competitors exceed it.
In addition, one section of the course is timed, and the fastest time over this part determines the winner in the event of equality of penalties.
The timed section is usually twisty, with time-savings, but more difficult, alternative fences.
It is wise to use protective boots and an overgirth
Dress
Cross-country dress differs from normal show dress in that you may wear a coloured sweater instead of a shirt and jacket.
You will also need a crash skull, which can be covered with a silk to match your sweater.
It is now compulsory to wear a back protector at most events, and if not, it is still sensible to wear one.
Tack and Equipment
If run under BHS Horse Trials rules, then standing martingales and any form of running and check reins are not allowed.
It is wise for your horse to wear protective boots and an overgirth, just in case a girth strap breaks.
If your horse is strong, you might need a slightly stronger bit or noseband than usual.
Preparation
Most courses are at least a smile long, so your horse should be fit — he should be able to complete a five minute strong canter without showing signs of distress.
Usually you will be allowed to walk the course the day before.
A course plan will be displayed — check this so you know the rough direction of the course.
It should also indicate how the different sections (Novice, Open, etc.) are marked — make sure you walk the right one!
Ensure you note the boundary flags so that you don't get eliminated for an error of course.
Afterwards double check the plan — especially if you are not sure about something.
On the day, first collect your number — most events now ask for a deposit, so ensure you have the correct money.
Then declare to the steward before starting to warm up, which should be similar to that described for showjumping in last month's article.
Once you are on the course, be positive and give your horse the best chance at each obstacle, by giving him a good approach to each one and plenty of encouragement with the legs (and voice and whip if need be).
If another competitor catches you up, they may overtake at a safe and suitable place, and you should give way.
However, if you are committed to jumping a fence, they should not get in the way.
On completion of your round, slow down gently and then dismount.
Untack, check for injuries, and put a sweat rug (plus a top rug if it is cold) and walk him around to dry off.
If he is very sweaty you may need to wash him off (preferably with tepid water, not cold).
If he is very sweaty you will need to wash him off
EVENTING
If you and your horse are good all-rounders, this is probably the discipline for you.
You need to be able to complete a dressage test calmly and obediently, jump a course of show jumps, and safely negotiate a crosscountry course.
Your horse should also be fit, as eventing is more demanding than the other activities covered.
Most unaffiliated one-day events will include two or three sections — novice (jumps about 2′ 6″: to 3′), intermediate (2′ 9″ to 3′ 3″) and open (3′ to 3′ 6″).
The competition is judged be combining penalty marks for each of the three sections.
Dressage
The test is marked in the usual manner but the final score is deducted from the maximum possible marks, to give penalties .
Most of the rules are similar to those fore pure dressage, discussed earlier, but grakle nosebands are allowed and whips are not.
Tests should also be ridden from memory — callers are not allowed.
Showjumping
The course will usually be less technical and more flowing than for pure showjumping and different penalties are incurred:
Knockdown 5 penalties
First disobedience 10 penalties
Second disobedience 20 penalties
Fall of horse and/or rider 30 penalties
For every four seconds over the time allowed 1 penalty
Elimination is incurred as for normal showjumping
Saddlery is similar to that for pure showjumping, but standing martingales are not allowed.
Cross-country
The penalties for the cross-country phase of a one-day event are the same as those outlined in the section on ‘Hunter Trials’.
Usually, there is an optimum time in which to complete the course — every three seconds over the optimum time incurs one time penalty.
However, being inside the time does not incur either penalties or bonus points.
For safety's sake, some events may not use an optimum time — so check this with the organisers.
After the cross-country phase, the penalties are added up and the competitor with the fewest penalties wins.
You will need to be able to complete a dressage test calmly and obediently if you want to event.
SHOWING
The most common showing classes found at local shows include:Working hunter 
For horses of a type to be a suitable hunter.
Will be required to jump a course of rustic jumps (usually 2′ 9″ to 3′ 3″ for horses, 2′ 6″ to 3′ for ponies).
Normally judges 60% jumping, 40% ride and conformation.
Condition and turnout 
Judged on the condition, cleanliness and correctness of horse, tack and rider's clothing.
Usually divided into stable-kept and grass-kept.
Riding classes 
Judged on the rider, not the horse, but if you have schooled your horse properly, your riding will look better anyway.
Usually divided into novice and open, or by age.
Riding horse 
For horses over 15hh, who are well-mannered and pleasant to ride, with good conformation.
Riding club horse/pony 
May have less quality than the riding horse, but must be suitable for all riding club activities.
May be asked to jump.
Veteran 
For horses over a certain age — after about 15 years.
The judge is looking mainly at condition in relation to age, but manners, conformation and action may be taken into account.
Family horse/pony 
Suitable to be ridden and managed by all members of the family.
May be asked to jump a very small jump.
Tack and Turnout
Tack requirements vary for different classes and may be stated on the schedule.
Generally, a snaffle will be required for family horse, riding club horse and novice riding.
A double bridle, or perhaps a pelham, may be worn in the other classes, but if you are not used to riding in one, or your horse has a sensitive or difficult mouth, then stick to a snaffle.
Martingales and nosebands other than cavessons are only allowed in working hunter classes.
A showing saddle  isn't necessary at local level, although the less forward cut your saddle, the better it will show off your horse's shoulder.
You will need to plait your horse's mane and pull or plait his tail.
Dress is the correct riding clothes described in the first part of the series.
Preparation
Trim your horse's tail, beard (not whiskers) and fetlocks and pull his mane.
If it is warm enough, bath him a couple of days before the show, to allow his coat to get back its natural gloss.
Your schooling should include practising riding away from other horses (as he will have to do in the ring) and to stand still when asked.
In your class, keep a good distance between you and the horse in front.
You will be asked to walk, trot and canter around the ring with the other horses.
The judge will then start calling horses in — if you are called, enter the line of horses from behind.
If you are not called in, you will be asked to leave the ring — don't despair, another judge may like your horse or he may be more suitable for another type of class.
If you have been called in, you will be asked to do an individual show.
Keep this simple: walk, trot and canter on both reins, plus halt, will be sufficient.
The Next Stage
If you achieve success in local unaffiliated competitions, you may want to investigate affiliated competitions.
The British Horse Society is responsible for affiliated dressage and eventing, while the British Showjumping Association oversees affiliated showjumping.
The British Show Hack, Cob and Riding Horse Association and the National Light Horse Breeding Society (HIS) are the bodies for showing horses, while the British Show Pony Society and the various breed societies cater for ponies.
Keep your individual show simple
Tack requirements vary for different classes but a straight cut saddle will best show off your horse's shoulder.
OLDER BUT NOT BOLDER
Drawings by Caroline Finlayson 
Are you getting apprehensive about riding as the years tick by?
Angie Musgrave described how she minimises the risks.
I recall aged three, being hoisted aboard a huge hunter.
This magic creature enthralled me and I cajoled until kind hands lifted me into the saddle.
The thrill turned to fear as I looked down from my splendid but insecure perch and the animal began to move.
I cried to come down more insistently than I had pleaded for a ride.
As middle age threatens, my adoration for the horse is once more tinged with apprehension.
When I was young I longed to leap aboard every horse who pranced past.
Now I am more cautious.
The urge to scramble into the saddle and take my chance continues to triumph over an inclination to enjoy horses from a safer stance.
However, I am only too aware that falls damage more than the dignity.
The potential pain and inconvenience of an accident has influenced my attitude to riding.
When I was young I had on loan a pony who was atrocious in traffic.
We regularly left a trail of trembling motorists, their vehicles wedged in hedges or marooned on muddy verges after avoiding her antics.
I was unperturbed and continued to exercise her without aid of a saddle or protection of a hat.
On one occasion, we took fright at a cement mixer and ran backwards into a passing bus on a particularly busy road.
The noise her substantial rump and the side of the bus produced as they came into contact, increased her alarm.
She shot forward with such force that, lacking stirrups to support me, I slid off sideways.
Instinct attached my hands to the reins as she accelerated and headed for home with me in tow.
As I bumped along the road on my stomach, my clothing experienced serious stress.
A trail of boots and socks soon littered the tarmac.
The fastenings flew off my jodhpurs and there had wriggled their way round my knees by the time the pony pulled up.
But passengers pursued me along the road, gathering up my garments and vowing aloud never to succumb to the pleas of their offspring for riding lessons.
Exposing My Knickers!
My husband expressed horror at the prospect of a similar incident occurring today.
He knows that the knickers I wear when I sit in the saddle are not the smartest articles of underwear in my wardrobe.
He suspects that he would never survive the shame should they again be exposed to the eyes of other road users.
Country and Western is suitable for calming an agitated animal
My main misadventures on the roads came into my mind when it was time to choose a horse for happy hacking in my middle years.
In consequence, I acquired Beejay, an animal who is too laid back to concern himself with the eccentricities of any vehicle he encounters.
I have rarely regretted my choice.
As a teenager, I laughed off an incident when a nappy horse attempted to deposit me on the wrong side of the railings on a motorway bridge.
I had forgotten my fear until I came to cross one of these bridges on Beejay after rediscovering riding in my thirties.
As I took in the traffic thundering by beneath me and relived in my mind my alarming experience, my trepidation returned.
I closed my eyes and clutched a handful of mane.
My mount plodded on unmoved.
Today's traffic is fast and unforgiving of equine errors and terrors.
I quickly exhaust my quota of courage out on the roads when seated on something flighty.
However, if I have the company of my husband on Beejay to protect me, I find the confidence to take horses who are nt trustworthy in traffic.
On one of these outings, the nervous mare I was riding was already unsettled by strong winds.
We had scarcely survived a convoy of high articulated lorries to reach the safety of a country lane.
Sighs of relief stuck in my throat as the cacophony of rumbles and clangs which portends a tractor with a roller in tow, carried round the corner.
Panic would result in a rapid encounter with the main road traffic to our rear.
I pressed up against Beejay and leaning forward, covered the mare's eyes with my hands.
Beejay turned to give her a nudge.
I hoped he was reminding her that she had his bucket on her back and he didn't want it covering with dents.
I waited for her to erupt as the ear-splitting entourage drew level.
She made no move, but Beejay seized her mane and she subsided.
I was sure that his status as head of the herd helped me out in an unpleasant encounter.
We regularly left a trail of trembling motorists.
Beejay suffers from occasional high spirits himself.
The spring grass can transform a model of mature stability into a clowning colt.
Nowadays I am inclined to compromise where as once I would have felt confident of victory in a dogs' confrontation.
An Excellent Stomach Settler
In find a sing-song is an excellent stomach settler if the nervous flutters threaten.
Country and Western music with its rolling rhythm is especially suitable for calming an agitated animal.
The deep breaths required to reach the high notes relax the rider, too.
I turn to old favourites in time of stress.
We sail past piles of flapping silage wrap to y enthusiastic but off-key account of ‘Four Legged Friend’.
Passers-by sneak Beejay sympathetic smiles as he is forced to contend with this additional assault on his ears.
Beejay always seems to spot the object in the hedge that he cannot possibly pass without a protect, just as I hear the roar of a fast-moving car at our rear.
If I tense, my mount is encouraged to embark on the entertaining activity of backing into its path.
However, if I slacken the reins a fraction and state hard at an object in another direction, he is disconcerted.
When I turn in the saddle and point it out to him with vigorous gestures, his curiosity is aroused.
Beejay suspects that I have spotted an alternative to misbehave over and cannot resist a sideways look.
Once he is distracted, I push on hard and he gives up the game.
I recall the days when the unseen sounds of a muck spreader would seriously unsettle my solid cob.
In the moments when he was contemplating flight, I would produce a pocket of mints.
Leaning forward to slip the sweet between his lips, he would be reminded of his rider when all my other aids had failed to engage his attention.
A good munch would fortify us both and united again, we could tackle the trouble ahead as a team.
There is no shame in amending ambitions to take account of aging.
My brave days are over and I now ride for relaxation rather than a fall.
Beejay is kind and calm and he takes care of me.
There are days when he moves so slowly that we are not only outstripped by joggers, but overtaken by old ladies out exercising their dogs.
However, the stress involved in taking him out is purely physical.
Nowadays, although I am not prepared to take too many risks, riding brings me more pleasure than ever.
Stella Havard speaks to Trish Gardiner about her difficult but highly talented dressage horse WILY IMP
‘He's very difficult to settle.
I usually work him in for an hour, but when I'm riding him around in the arena before the bell goes, I'm still thinking, ‘How on earth am I going to get this thing up the centre line?’ because he's gawping at everything, but then I give him a jolly good boot and we get on with it…’
It is no green novice that top dressage rider Trish Gardiner is referring to, but Wily Imp, he class sixteen-year-old dark bay gelding who represented Britain in the last Olympics, and has every chance of doing so again in Barcelona.
‘Will’ came to Trish and part-owner Bill Noble as a six-year-old.
‘He'd been sent to a friend of mine to be sold, but he was a little bit difficult to place.
He needed hobdaying and was rather on the temperamental side, so she sent him to Bill and me to see if he had any ability in the dressage sphere .’
Though Will was distracted by crowds and other outside influences, he was very quick to learn and Trish felt that he had the makings of a dressage horse.
It is well known that Trish's expertise is accompanied by unwavering dedication and perseverance and undoubtedly it was these qualities that upgraded the nervous novice to a Grand Prix horse within three years.
Even at sixteen, Will refuses to stand still at the beginning of a season for a presentation, but clams down as the year progresses.
‘He's very sharp, and it took him a good while to accustom himself to the flowers, the boards, the judge's car, or the judge's box and all the rest of it.
It took him four years to get used to the doors at Stoneleigh!
We still have difficulty with the time changes towards a pot of geraniums!’
Trish had never been able to trace Will's breeder, though she is certain that he is mostly thoroughbred.
‘I think he has a bit of pony or something in him somewhere, though, as he grows very hairy heels !’
Wily Imp has been consistently successful throughout his dressage career at home and abroad, though the victory that possibly thrilled Trish most was winning the Prix St. Georges at Catherston in ‘86.
There are many other impressive triumphs, among the most prestigious being the Parkway Freestyle, the Supreme Championship at Ardingly and the National Championship Grand Prix in ‘87 and the Olympic Pre-Selection Freestyle in ‘88.
(‘And of course, competing at the Olympics was tremendously exciting ’) 1991 was a particularly good year for Will with placings at most of the top competitions, including Addington, Arena UK and the Horse of the Year Show.
Because of his tense disposition, Trish finds it necessary to work Will most days.
On a normal day at home, he is given his breakfast, which he may or may not eat depending on his mood and Trish then rides him, unless she is competing in the evening, when she delays it until later.
‘He doesn't usually get hacked out because he's dreadful; he runs away, and ‘passages’ for a mile or so.
After he's been ridden, he is turned out in the field, because he won't eat unless he's turned out and I do try desperately hard to get four feeds a day into him.
But he hates it if his friends aren't nearby, and he's difficult to catch…’
In fact, Will is definitely no paragon of virtue!
He detests travelling alone, he is impossible to clip unless doped, he loathes vets and injections (‘We can just about get a needle into a vein now he's sixteen…’ and he has to be sedated for his teeth to be rasped.
On top of this, he has allergies to oats and dust and is a finicky feeder.
‘He always wees like mad when he's upset, and he digs under stress.
He digs his bed up in the stable if he's too warm and digs great holes in his field.
I always worry about whether he's going to go lame on his off-fore, he gives it such a hammering when he's madly digging.’
A change of scene stops Will eating and drinking, though Trish has discovered many answers to his hang-ups by trial and error.
‘He wouldn't drink when he was travelling at all, but now I have found that he'll drink if you put the bucket on the floor, but he utterly refuses to if you hold the bucket up to him…’.
The dust allergy means that Will has to be bedded on paper, and his hay always has to be soaked.
He is generally fed microfeed with sugar beet, and he loves carrots and sugar, but he detests his feed being mixed.
Everything has to be left in separate heaps in his manger for him to inspect before he condescends to eat it.
‘He's terribly difficult to keep condition on.
I've just returned from South Africa, during which he went to stay with Sally Newcombe and refused to eat anything for a week and a half ’.
Trish obviously has a great rapport with the odd character, though she freely admits that he, despite his talent, is an unrewarding sort of horse.
‘It's been disappointing that sometimes his emotional tension has dropped him down the placings.
I'm sure no-one else would have persevered with him ’.
Having heard what a neurotic individual Will is, I had to ask why Trish had continued with him.
‘He was so very quick to grasp things and, at the time, I didn't have anything else…’.
Trish, who has been representing her country for the last twelve years with such good horses as Manifesto and Michelangelo, only allows her horses to compete on decent surfaces.
‘I'm not a great one for carting them all around the country, so Will only contests about a dozen competitions a year ’.
Will's best movements are considered to be the passage and canter pirouette, and his worst to be flying changes.
‘He waves about so that they're not quite straight, but he isn't the greatest moving horse in the world ’.
Trish's own career has not been plain sailing.
‘I was doing a bit of eventing and show jumping, but always wanted to specialise in dressage.
I had a real ambition to ride round Badminton, but had a terrible fall which left me with two broken legs before I could do that.
And then I was thirty, and I thought that I would have to start specialising or it would be too late…’.
This year, of course, everything will be geared to being selected for the Olympic Games.
‘Though if he's not selected, I shall downgrade him and Sally Newcombe will ride him because continuing to compete at that level is such an emotional strain on him ’.
This alternative plan was not negative thinking on Trish's part, but a sensible consideration of all options.
So who would Wily Imp be if he were a human being?
‘I really don't know anybody like him ,’ declared Trish.
‘He'd definitely be someone very nervy, very jumpy and basically insecure.
And if he was married he'd be hell to live with!
He'd have to be someone in need of a lot of psychiatric help !’
Hopefully, he will not have Trish reaching for the valium in the Olympic Selection Trials!
EQUINE Profile
DIRT BUSTERS!
Now is the time to make a clean sweep of all the jobs you put off during the bad weather.
Carolyn Henderson offers some springtime suggestions.
When everywhere and everything seems covered in mud — especially your horse — it's hard to keep up appearances.
But now that the worst of the weather is behind us and the days are drawing out, you should have a chance to catch up.
For most of us, winter is a survival course.
For safety's sake and your horse's health and comfort, there are some jobs that should still be done regularly.
Others have to be left until the weather improves and/or we have some more time; even so, spring is a good time to rethink your routine and perhaps make next winter easier to get through.
For instance, there is no more depressing sight than horses and ponies standing miserably in a muddy field.
If you don't have at least two acres for the first horse and at least one per subsequent animal sharing the land, you haven't got enough for satisfactory winter keep and should be looking for an alternative.
Pasture Management
Dividing large areas into smaller ones with electric fencing is a good way of spreading the strain.
It enables you to use and rest areas in turn and give you a smaller area to keep clean — picking up droppings is essential all the year round.
Horses soon get used to electric fencing if introduced to it sensibly; once they have touched it with their noses and realised the outcome they will stay well clear..
A hood will help to keep your horse warm and keep his head and neck much cleaner.
Your local farmer may be prepared to hire out equipment, such as this post rammer, to divide up your paddock
Obviously you will keep an eye on your fencing and gates all the year round.
Make a special check at this time of year, fencing is put under more pressure in winter, because horses push against it trying to reach grass on the other side and mill round gateways wanting to come in.
Check that posts are secure and there are no gaps in hedges — and if you have to use wire, make sure it is as taut as possible.
In the yard, make sure that drains and guttering are clear.
If you don't have a concrete area in front of your stables, move heaven and earth to get one down before next winter!
This could also be a good time to look at your yard layout.
You will probably be stuck with what's on site, but could you make better use of it?
If the muck heap is miles away it all adds up to precious minutes when you're doing your horse before going to work.
Unhealthy Environment
A stable environment can, unfortunately, be an unhealthy one.
Please don't think you're doing your horse a favour in cold weather by shutting his top door, because you're actually subjecting him to all sorts of health hazards.
Apart from possible dust and fungal spores from hay and straw, he also has to  cope with ammonia from urine, carbon dioxide from his lungs, water vapour and so on.
Good ventilation is vital, and so is stable hygiene.
The old grooms used to say that you should not remove cobwebs from stables.
The reason is that where you get cobwebs, you get spiders — and spiders catch flies!
It is a good idea to have a thorough scrub out, though, and if you can arrange to borrow or hire a power washer, the task will be easier.
Unless you keep your horse on a deep or semi-deep litter system, you will be taking the bed up every time you muck out.
If possible, let the floor dry before putting the bed down again.
A solution of Jeyes fluid diluted to the manufacturers' instructions can be sprinkled on the floor when needed, or you could try Stable Boy — crystals from a volcanic rock called zeolite that are said to absorb damp and help horses who normally cough when they come out of their boxes or start work.
Picking up droppings must be done regularly to keep the grazing sweet.
Rugs
Most people find that modern, lightweight rugs are much easier to handle than old fashioned jute rugs with blankets, and they must be more comfortable for the horse.
Try going back to sheets and blankets after sleeping under a duvet and you'll probably agree!
But while many rugs are advertised as machine washable, it isn't always that easy.
Getting a six foot six quilted rug in a domestic washing machine is often impossible; the only answer is to wash it by hand in the bath) and hope that you can clean it out before the rest of the family notice) or find a launderette that will accept horse rugs.
Many won't, but some have heavy duty machine.
If possible, let the floor dry before putting the bed down again.
You will need to check that the washing temperature is not too high.
If you can't find out, don't risk it.
Some enterprising yards install big washing machines and then offer a horse laundry service, usually charging about £5 per rug.
If you horse loves sleeping in the dirtiest part of his stable, you'll be fighting a losing battle trying to keep his rugs clean.
Dirty rugs can spark off skin infections, though — so compromise next winter by using a summer sheet under your quilted one.
You can then wash the summer sheet regularly and the top when the outside gets do disgusting you can't bear to see it.
New Zealands should be brushed off, hosed down and dried before you put them away for the summer.
Some materials may need re-proofing; check with the manufacturer if you aren't sure.
Oil legstraps, check that all the fittings are secure and get any minor repairs done now.
Make sure the rug if clean before you ask your saddler to do any work on it; if it isn't, he or she will probably and quite rightly refuse to accept it.
Tack
Only the truly virtuous strip their tack and clean it every time it's used — the rest of us simply don't have time.
Strike a compromise by washing the bit every time it's used and making sure that numnahs and girth are always clean; be wary of using biological washing powder for horse equipment and clothing, as some animals are allergic to it.
Cleaning your tack properly once a week gives you the vital opportunity of checking that stitching is in good order and that the parts where metal rests on leather (such as reins and stirrup leathers) are not too worn.
Most New Zealand rugs get quite a hammering’
Check that all stitching is in good order when you clean your tack.
Don't over-oil leather — once every month to six weeks is plenty — and don't use boot polish to try and get a shine.
You will get the desired effect, but you will also have slippery tack.
It's inevitable that you'll get caught out in the rain at some time.
Let your tack dry away from a direct source of heat; don't put it in front of a radiator or fire, or the leather will become brittle.
When it has dried, oil it if necessary.
If time is at a premium or you really hate tack cleaning, think about investing in a synthetic saddle and bridle for everyday use and keeping your leather tack for best.
Wintec and Thorowgood saddles have come a long way since early designs and Thorowgood also make wipe-clean bridles that look smart enough for most occasions.
Synthetic tack, such as this bridle from Thorowgood, will save you time and money.
Spring Clean Your Horse!
Once you've cleaned up your yard, you'll want your horse to look equally smart.
Most traditional horse care books tell you that the only way to achieve this is to give him as thorough grooming every day, but I've got more faith in the old stud groom who said that grooming put muscles on people's arms but didn't do an awful lot for horses' coats!
‘It's what you put on the inside that counts, not what you do to the outside ,’ he said.
In other words, your horse's coat is a reflection more of his health and diet than of the number of hours his owner spends with a body brush.
Some grooming is, of course, essential.
You need to remove dried mud from any area where the tack goes, and to remove sweat marks.
If you have a confirmed mudlark, or a horse that doesn't like parting with his winter coat, try a cactus cloth or a nifty little gadget called the Unigroom.
It's a small rubber brush with large prongs that really shifts the dirt other grooming tools can't reach, and at £3.50 is a good investment.
You should find it in your tack shop — if not, contact 
Apart from necessary grooming, feed your horse well (by which I mean quality rather than quantity) and give him a bath when he needs it!
Professional show producers bath their horses all the year round, without ill effect.
The secret is to be as quick as possible and to keep the animal warm afterwards.
Pick the mildest day you can and make sure you have everything to hand before you start so you don't leave a dripping horse standing there while you hunt for the shampoo.
Use water with the chill taken off if possible: if you make up two or three buckets of really hot water before you start you can mix these with the cold.
Once he's shampooed and rinsed off, scrape off the excess with a plastic sweat scraper and put a rug over him.
This is where modern designs like the Thermatex really comes into their own, because they wick the moisture through and keep the horse warm while he's drying.
Keep him on the move until he's dried off — if necessary, lunge him.
He's far more likely to catch a chill standing about at a show or in the hunting field than after a bath, as long as you take the right precautions.
If you are faced with a filthy horse on an equally filthy day, you can give him the equine equivalent of a bed bath.
Damp a piece of towel or old fashioned sacking in warm water and rub it into the horse's coat in a circular motion, rinsing it in another bucket before repeating the process.
This is quite effective on clipped horses or those with fairly short coats.
It won't work on unclipped ‘hairies’— but as they are probably living out, you shouldn't remove too much of the natural grease from their coats.
It's their waterproofing agent, so leave it where it is.
There are two opposite schools of thought on dealing with muddy legs and heels.
One says that you should never wash them and should leave the mud to dry before brushing it off.
The other says you should wash or hose off mud and then dry the area as thoroughly as possible.
I've always done this, and have never known a horse get chapped heels or skin infections — whereas I have known horses whose owners follow the first course get mud fever.
Life with Mary Top eventer Mary Thomson describes the work she has been giving her horses.
February always seems to be the busiest month for me.
All the horses are getting pretty fit, and need schooling and jumping in preparation for the rapidly approaching event season.
This is the one time of year when I wish I didn't live in the depths of Devon, as my nearest indoor school is 1¾ hours away, and Ferdi Eilberg my dressage trainer lives 3½ miles away!
To make the trips to Ferdi worthwhile, I usually take three horses up and have lessons one afternoon, stable the night, and have lessons the following morning before travelling home.
The horses always go much better on the second day, which makes the long journey seem worthwhile.
I return home with a feeling of achievement, but also a realisation of the vast amount of improvement that is needed!
The Advanced Horses
Mary and her promising five-year-old King Basil
Boris, William and Samuel are experienced advanced horses, and their dressage is quite established.
They do not forget what they have been taught in the past, and as long as their basic work is kept up to scratch (i.e. suppleness on each rein, general willingness to work, and obedience), the rest falls into place.
Conker (King Kong), and Apple (Star Appeal), are young advanced horses, and have still got plenty to learn.
They both need to learn to work in a more advanced outline, by increasing their hock engagement which will lead to lightness of their forehand and better selfcarriage.
Head girl Annie Collings leads a hack out.
Conker is a real bundle of fun, and was extremely naughty during his first visit to Ferdi.
He really couldn't help himself, and I ended up having to do lots of steady canter work on and on until he settled before I could start to work on more interesting things.
Apple is a calmer horse by nature, he finds his medium/extended trot rather difficult, but hopefully as his general self-carriage and balance  improves, the bigger trot will come through.
Still Looking
I have still not managed to find another young horse to come on with young Basil.
I have looked at quite a few, but there have not been any which have struck me as being ‘the one’.
Ideally I like a ⅞ths bred horse.
Some riders will only buy thoroughbred horses, but I do prefer ones with a little‘common’ blood, as I like a stronger build of horse.
Some riders will only buy thoroughbred horses, but I do prefer ones with a little‘common’ blood, as I like a stronger build of horse.
16.1hh-16.3hh is the size of horse I feel happy on, then they must have a good jump, temperament, and paces (in that order).
Most of the horses I have bought in the past have been five or six years old, and have been at the stage of jumping around Discovery and Newcomer classes.
By then, their jump is reasonably established, so you can see what you are buying!
After deciding to buy, I have the horse vetted by a very good vet, and ask for x-rays to be taken of the front feet and joints.
If during the examination the vet is concerned about the hocks, for example, I say to feel free to take more.
Buying a horse with clean x-ray plates a) avoids buying trouble, and b) if the horse does not make the grade, and you need to sell, there is less chance of running into problems during the next purchaser's vetting.!
King Cuthbert (left) and King Boris enjoy a spell in the field.
Cuthbert has retired from top level competition and is now owned and ridden by Mary's head girl
Mary and Basil pop a small fence at home
Next month I will explain my jumping training methods.
I have help from both Captain Mark Phillips and Stephen Hadley; being what I feel is my weakest phase, I am planning to work hard at it this spring!
Mary washes Basil off after his schooling session.
‘To the Rescue’ Gordon Weley BHS (SMT) DABRS answers more of your questions.
ALLERGIC SYNDROME
Dear Gordon,Q. 
I have a ‘white’ grey Highland pony gelding.
He had a little pink around his muzzle and eyes when I bought him two years ago, but this has been gradually increasing and is now quite extensive.
My vet has diagnosed that he suffers from an allergic syndrome, which could either be a contact allergy or photosensitivity.
I think I have narrowed down the possible causes to be either hogweed or nettles and I am in the process of removing these.
he lives out all year and has a total sunblock applied to protect the sensitive areas.
His skin now looks reasonably healthy, but I would like to know if there is any chance that the pink pigment will revert back to its former black colour.
He has done some showing and I hope to show him again next year, but feel that his extensively pink muzzle detracts from his appearance.
Could you please advise me on this matter as there is so little literature available on skin allergies and pigmentation.
A. 
I don't think your pony's pinkness will revert to the former black colour.
You can sometimes get a little darkness back by a well-balanced skin diet, which I am sure your vet would have recommended.
Manifesto the dressage horse had this problem.
It does sound like sunlight sensitivity but allergy or drugs (e.h.
phenothiazine) may predispose to photosensitisation.
This condition occurs in low pigmented areas, e.g. white heels, face markings etc.
Sometimes the skin gets inflamed and, often on the face, sores can develop which ooze serum.
Sounds as though your pony has been spared these problems, but I do doubt you will see the black colour again.
COUGH AND RUNNY NOSE
Dear Gordon,Q .
One of the ponies at my local stable always gets a cough and a runny nose when he is stabled in at nights.
He even coughs when people are riding him.
Now the stables don't use him as much.
Is this a good idea and how can they stop him coughing?
A. Horses should NEVER be ridden when a cough or runny nose gives any hint or suspicion of a ‘brewing’ infection.
Of course some horses have early morning coughs rather like humans and some have allergies to hay, straw and some hard feedstuffs.
As an owner you generally know these symptoms or will have taken veterinary advice.
Some other reasons for a cough could be:
a
Damage due to lung worm — a temperature rise does NOT occur:
b
COPD (Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disorder);
c
An out-of-condition horse ie a horse just brought up from grass and worked too hard, too soon;
d
A structural change in the lungs — such as EMPHYSEMA — very serious;
e
Working too hard after inoculations;
f
Inhalation of dust off an indoor or outdoor riding surface.
Changing the straw bedding for wood shavings will help, also dampened hay and hard feed.
With the runny nose there could be a problem with the sinuses or the pony may be a catarrh sufferer.
Antibiotics and/or surgery are possible treatments.
Surgery involves opening the sinus from the outside, flushing and allowing free drainage into the nasal passage.
The pony really needs a vet to sort him out.
Photosensitivity usually occurs in low pigmented areas such as face markings and white heels.
HATES WATER
Dear Gordon,
My horse hates water of any kind!
Can you advise me on how to cure ‘water shyness’ out hacking and when jumping ?
A. Many horses simply do not like getting their feet wet!
I had a horse who loved going on the beach and in the sea at Weston-Super-Mare but hated puddles and tiny streams.
I feel that it is essential for a horse to go through water.
Eventing horses are required to jump into water showjumpers MUST NOT!
Moreover, there is a safety aspect to water as a hazard — the last thing you want as a rider is for your horse to side-step a puddle into the path of an oncoming or passing vehicle.
It is also rather embarrassing to stop dead on a hack and be unable to proceed further.
Into Water
I believe that to conquer fear of water, gentle persuasion is the best tack.
Hack out with a couple of schoolmaster horses — one to lead the way and the other as a back-up’.
Get the schoolmaster to stand in the puddle or a stream, preferably on a hot day when splashing could be associated with cooling off.
Splashing can sometimes frighten a horse.
Start with a puddle and progress slowly to a small pool and shallow stream.
Don't forget to praise and produce a tit-bit as soon as the horse enters the water.
It is essential for a horse to go through water.
A horse or pony who will pop over a ditch without fuss is a great asset.
In the Army, where a horse would dominate the situation, a little force was sometimes necessary and a stiff-bristled broom under the tail produced results both when leading into horse-boxes AND into water.
No undue force was necessary, and we always rewarded with TLC and a tit-bit.
Over Water/Ditches
It is vital that your show-jumping horse does NOT become a habitual refuser at water jumps.
To cure the problem, try one of the following ideas.
In Queensland, Australia, I saw a water jump that was easy and cheap to build on top of the ground.
Because the water level was above the ground, horses tended to jump higher, treating  it more like a cross-country obstacle.
(See diagram)
An alternative is to dig a trench and put planks or poles over it.
Fill the trench with water and progressively jump over it, from time to time removing a pole.
I would always advise a small bit of brush on the takeoff side of the jump and in due course a white tape on the landing side.
(See diagram).
Sandpaper on the floor of a hole with transparent cellophane on top, substituting for water, is an alternative, with the cellophane held down by pegs or small stones.
Most young horses are already in flight (airborne) over the fence/hole before they realise there is water in the hole.
Hope some of the advice helps.
Put a rug on your mare at night.
FEEDING ADVICE
Dear Gordon,Q. I would like to ask your advice on which are the best concentrates for my horse and in what quantity they should be given.
I have a 15hh seven year old mare who is in foal to a TB.
(She is due in mid June 1992).
She is half Arab, half Hanoverian (the Arab characteristics showing most).
She will be stabled at night and out at grass during the day in the winter.
I will be working he most mornings before school and at the weekend.
This will involve gentle hacks around our fields (plenty of hills though) and a couple of non-strenuous schooling sessions a week.
I would be grateful if you could tell me what concentrates to use and how much.
I don't want to use ready-made foods.
I would like to use barley and sugar beet as part of her diet.
Please could you state which are proteins, carbohydrates etc.
One other thing — would it be advisable to use a stable rug at night?
She is not clipped by fine A. 
Amount and type of food required by the pregnant mare vary with age and size.
The pregnant mare needs about 14 percent of he diet in protein during the last third of her pregnancy and in the first three months of lactation.
Good quality hay is vital when grass is no longer present.
Salt is vital.
Vitamins are necessary for growth, health and the pre-foaling cycle.
When she is stabled she may be vitamin A, D and E deficient.
Get advice from your vet, but one of the Equivites will satisfy the need.
Plenty of water is needed, anything between five and ten gallons daily will be needed.
Particular requirements, to recap, are
PROTEIN
MINERALS
VITAMINS
ROUGHAGE
My suggestion would be two meals a day, keeping sugar beet to a minimum consisting of
BARLEY
MOLLICHAFF
FLAKED MAIZE
But why not a good STUDMIX which has everything she needs?
Succulents are needed such as chopped carrots and apples.
Consult your vet about use of limestone flour if using bran.
(The old calcium/phosphorous problem!)
Stop schooling sessions three months from foaling, resort only to gentle ambling.
Don't forget worming, flu/tet injections six weeks before foaling.
When the mare is in at night do put a rug on her, feel her ears to check she is warm enough.
Do check your hay — mares at grass prefer crested dogtail, perennial ryegrass, timothy, dandelion, chicory, yarrow, sanfoin and small quantities of wild white clover (NOT red clover).
OPEN WIDE
Few people relish the though of a visit to the dentist, but neglecting your horse's teeth could affect your riding and the horse's condition and comfort.
Jo Osborne reports
Like people, horses need regular dental attention to ensure healthy teeth and gums.
Sharp teeth can cause terrible ulcers and anyone who has had a mouth ulcer himself will know what agony they can be.
A painful mouth will never be a responsive one and it is hardly surprising that the horse will try to evade the bit.
In addition, sharp teeth impair effective chewing which prevents proper digestion of food.
This means that the horse won't get the full benefit from his feed and it may also lead to digestive disorders.
No one knows better the importance of regular tooth care than the horse dentist and Joint Director of ‘Surrey Treadmills’, Tom Reid.
Tom has been a horse dentist for fifteen years, having learned his trade from Mr Harry Holmes, a well-known and respected horse dentist of his time.
Tom, based in Sussex, travels all over the country, even to Wales and Scotland, to work on horses' teeth.
He also lectures annually at Brinsbury and Chichester Colleges of Agriculture making ‘Horse Students’ aware of the importance of proper equine dental care.
I went along to Tom's yard to find out what the horse dentist actually does, how often he should attend and how the owner can tell if his horse's teeth need further attention.
Tom's work mostly involves checking for sharp teeth and rasping them smooth.
He also removes old teeth if they interfere with the bit.
At the same time he checks the mouth for any other problems that may have evolved since his previous visit and, because every month is different, he can give valuable advice to the horse owner on the shape of the mouth and type of bit most suitable for the individual horse.
Tom explained that throughout his life the horse develops two sets of teeth: the temporary or milk teeth and the permanent teeth.
The temporary teeth consist of six incisors on both top and bottom jaw and a total of 12 molars, three on each side of the top jaw and three on each side of the bottom jaw.
The temporary molars, or caps as they are often called, usually present no problems and are relatively soft.
However, they readily form sharp points along their edges and need rasping until smooth especially prior to the young horse being mouthed, or bitted, for the first time.
These caps are pushed out by the permanent molars usually with little trouble but sometimes they can become lodged and require some outside assistance.
The adult horse has a maximum of 44 teeth but often has less.
These consist of 12 incisors (six top and bottom), 24 molars (six each side, top and bottom), four tushes and a maximum of four wolf teeth or vestigials.
Tom adds however that he has only ever seen a maximum of two wolf teeth grown in the upper jaw; four wolf teeth are extremely rare.
The front teeth or incisors are shaped so they can cut the smallest blade of grass and are sometimes known as the chopping teeth.
The molars are shaped in an upward arch as can be seen from photo one and it is these teeth that become sharp and  need rasping.
The tushes, otherwise known as canine teeth, are common in make horses but less so in mares.
The tushes that mares have are usually much smaller.
The tushes come through when the horse is between three and four years old, the upper ones being set higher up than the lower ones.
They usually pose no problems but sometimes the upper tushes are high enough to interfere with the bit which should be especially considered if the horse is to wear a double bridle.
Photo two is an example of a horse which has unusually high tushes.
Wolf teeth, not always present in the horse's mouth, form in front of the first cheek, or molar, teeth.
Because of their position they often interfere with the bit and are sometimes even broken by the bit.
You can see this tooth and its position in the upper jaw of the horse in photo six.
They have very little root, thus being referred to as floating teeth, and are easily removed by either the horse dentist or vet.
The horse softens food before swallowing by chewing the food between his molars with a sideways grinding action of the lower jaw.
You can see in photo one that the surfaces of these teeth have long ridges which increase the grinding power of the teeth.
Unlike us, the horse's teeth continuously grow upwards to compensate for wear which is why they need regular checking and rasping.
Why do the teeth become sharp?
The lower jaw is narrower than the upper jaw and because of this, the teeth become sharp on the outside edges of the upper molars and the inside edges of the lower molars.
If the teeth are allowed to become sharp, the cheek then becomes bruised and cut, causing pain thus making it difficult for the horse to chew properly.
The tack adds to this by rubbing the cheek against the sharp teeth.
What does the horse dentist do?
The horse dentist will smooth the sharpness away by using a metal rasp which is rubber backwards and forwards over the teeth.
To do this he must first be able to assess the teeth by feeling them thoroughly and, to make this possible, Tom always uses a gag.
The gag is worn as a bridle but, in place of the bit, has two metal plates which the incisors rest upon.
Before placing the gag in the horse's mouth however, he first checks to ensure that there are no new or sore front teeth.
The gag is the only way of allowing him to feel and check the teeth properly even to the last molars which are situated parallel with the eye.
The jaw can be kept open allowing Tom to work unhindered and with no fear of being bitten.
If needed, the teeth are then rasped as in photo seven.
More enamel is rasped off the upper outside edges than the lower inside edges because the bit and tack are likely to rub here.
The sound of the rasping changes as the teeth become smooth and Tom again feels the teeth to ensure they are all smooth.
Rasping is entirely painless and many horses even appear to enjoy the experience.
How often should the teeth be checked?
The jaw does not become fully grown until the horse is between five and eight years old.
The molars will be at their sharpest between the ages of four and six years of age.
Up until this time, the horse will need to have its teeth checked at least every six months.
Tom adds that it is very important for young horses to have their teeth checked before they are bitted and broken; racehorses usually have their first session at two years-old.
It is very important for the horse to be comfortable in his mouth or he will soon seek evasions of the bit.
Mature horses need less frequent attention but should be checked annually.
I was surprised to hear Tim say that he had heard some owners state that horses' mouth for sharpness.
Tom showed this by running the fingers firmly down the outside of the horse's face along the line of the teeth as can be seen in photos, three, four and five.
Remember that the teeth run in an upward direction and the last tooth sits a couple of inches below the eye.
While applying this pressure, the horse should not move or flinch away.
If he does, it may signify that the cheek has become sore and the teeth need attention.
Other typical signs indicating a problem with sharp teeth are, as already mentioned, the evasion of the bit and the horse quidding while eating (food drops out of the mouth); nodding while being ridden, hanging on the bit to one side, ie pulling on one rein and, in more extreme cases, rearing and bolting. teeth should be left until they are mature.
This is obviously not the case.
Because teeth are at their sharpest when the horse is four, five and six years old, the mouth is more prone to ulcers.
Tom told us of one horse whose molars on one side of the mouth were excessively short and on the other very long.
This was due to the horse having sharp teeth on one side of its mouth for many years and, by chewing on the other side, was able to avoid the pain.
The situation could have been avoided had the teeth been regularly checked and rasped.
The owner can check the teeth for sharpness
As well as the regular visit from the horse dentist, the owner can check the horse's
The horse dentist may find other complications such as broken or bad teeth.
Broken teeth usually result from the horse crunching on a stone which could be amongst his food or while grazing.
This can be rasped down effectively to give no further problems.
Sometimes a tooth will become decayed which will need to be extracted with an anaesthetic and thus by a veterinary surgeon.
Bad breath could indicate this.
The owner should remember that the teeth grow continuously, wearing against each other.
If one tooth is removed, the opposing tooth will require regular rasping or it will continue to grow into the opposite jaw.
Prevention is better than cure and regular attention of the horse's teeth prevents any unnecessary health problems or vices and will thus ensure a healthy and happy horse.
Cross Country Jumping
Jane Wallace, former Burghley winner and British Three-day-Event team member, introduced her new series on riding cross country fences.
The aim of every cross country rider is to negotiate a variety of obstacles as quickly and safely as possible.
Each fence on a cross country course varies, if only a little, and requires a different method of approach.
Whatever the fence may be, the same principles apply.
These are rhythm, balance and impulsion.
If you watch our top riders in action such as Ginny Leng, Mary Thomson, Mark Todd and the like, they demonstrate perfectly how to keep a horse in rhythm and balance with the correct amount of impulsion to jump each fence.
It is possible to ride a cross country course with the necessary verve and attack provided that these principles are kept in mind.
Safety First
Speed is of course important, but safety must come first.
Never forget that it is not the speed that the horse jumps the fence, but the rhythm maintained and picked up immediately on landing and the economy of route both into and away from fences that gives a fast time.
The top riders never appear to be hurrying — in fact Mark Todd often appears to be quite casual as he clocks up the fastest time of the day.
He is a master at keeping a rhythm throughout, picking up speed as soon as he has landed over a fence, and taking the most economical route.
This method of riding is less tiring for the horse and less risky.
A novice horse and rider should wait until they have gained experience before trying to go fast.
The most precious asset is confidence in both horse and rider.
This confidence is easily lost.
A mutual trust has to be formed to create a successful partnership, whatever the level and this can be achieved with time and practice.
However straightforward a fence may be, it is important that the horse jumps it correctly and does not simply ‘hurdle’ it.
By sticking to the rules of keeping rhythm, balance and impulsions and allowing the fences to come to you, the horse is given the chance to jump athletically and can alter his stride if necessary.
If the rider drives the horse into a fence in such a way that he alters rhythm and balance, the horse will be forced onto his forehand and not given chance to jump off his hocks.
To cope with the variety of take-offs and landings, it is imperative that the horse is light on his forehand and well-balanced with the weight on his hocks.
With his hocks under him, the horse has power, acceleration, braking power and the balance necessary for turning and changing pace.
Balance
The rider must also be in perfect balance and should stay in behind his horse until the moment of take-off.
For safe cross country riding, the rider's balance should be slightly behind the horse's.
This means that the rider can help his horse should he peck on landing or hesitate into a fence.
If the rider's weight is in front of the horse's, he may cause the horse to fall or stop in the above instances.
The weight of the ride should always be in his heel and the weight on the stirrup.
It is important that the rider does not collapse in the forward swing and so rely on his horse's beck for support.
By keeping the weight in the heel and your head up and shoulders back, you should have a secure, independent seat which will mean ‘stickability’ in moments of stress.
Walking the course allows the rider to study each fence and decide his line into and away from them.
It is vitally important that the line chosen is correct and straight so that the horse has a chance to assess each problem.
The speed must  be correct for each fence and impulsion created as necessary.
Terrain can be used to great effect by the course designer.
Up and down hill fences pose problems for the horse by placing a premium on balance and impulsion.
The horse needs to help the rider to a greater extent over these fences and they must be made careful note of when walking the course.
You should make note of the going especially on the take-offs and landings of each fence and decide how it may change or deteriorate.
When walking the course, it is important to note how each fence strikes you on first impression because this is how the horse will see it.
Some fences can be deceiving from a distance, so the horse must be given clear aids as to what to expect so he is not taken by surprise.
Each fence should be studied, but not over-analysed otherwise they end up being impossible to jump!
Decide exactly where and how you will jump them and avoid wasting time by taking long sweeps before and after fences.
Uneconomical routes waste time.
The distances between combination fences should be walked and noted and you must decide which route to take if there is a choice.
Always have a plan B in case your original choice becomes impractical for any reason.
Always ride through the course in your mind before you set off.
Twenty minutes sitting quietly in the horsebox beforehand gives you this opportunity.
A large part of successful cross country riding, or indeed riding in any competition, is concentration — of both horse and rider.
A young horse should never be hurried but allowed to enjoy himself and gain confidence.
Enough emphasis cannot be laid on the importance of rhythm, balance and impulsion.
These coupled with correct training plus correct lines into fences and grit and determination should produce many clear rounds.
The Start and the First fence
It is important that the horse is warmed-up properly before he starts on his cross country round.
If you are eventing rather than hunter trialling and the horse is standing in the horsebox between phases, he is likely to ‘go off the boil’ and although he should not require work as such, he will probably need a sharp canter and four or five practice jumps before he is ready to go.
The practice fence should be jumped slowly initially, then a couple of times a bit faster to get into cross country ‘mood’ and a couple of times on the angle so that the horse is awake and ready to think about the task ahead.
You should then walk round quietly at the start until your number is called.
Make sure that the horse stays calm and does not work himself into a frenzy.
As soon as the starter says ‘Go’, ride positively towards the first fence, picking up a good rhythm as soon as possible.
The horse is leaving ‘home’ so make sure that he is going forward and is concentrating on the first fence ahead.
He may be rather reluctant and could need stronger riding initially until he is underway.
Do not allow the horse to wander into the first fence.
Encourage him to attack it enthusiastically but without losing rhythm or increasing speed.
If he hangs badly towards home or the other horses, he may need a kick or a smart smack with the whip to remind him of his job.
The good cross country horse must think forwards at all times.
If the horse jumps the first fence stickily, a smack on landing will sharpen him up.
It is important that you start as you mean to    go on and the horse must understand what is expected of him.
Keeping her head and shoulders back would have improved this rider's stickability!
Mark Todd often appears to be quite casual as he clocks up a fastest time of the day.
Although the first couple of fences are usually very straightforward, the horse must jump them correctly.
He must not sneak over them in a halfhearted way nor must he be allowed to flatten over them.
He must be encouraged to bascule over them so that he is ready to jump the more demanding and athletic type fences he is bound to encounter later on.
Final Fence and Pulling Up
The great temptation, particularly after a good round, is to fly over the last fence and gallop through the finish invariably trying to make up some time over an easy fence.
The final fence is usually an inviting, straightforward obstacle but it can still cause problems.
Being uncomplicated, the riders tend not to take much notice of it and in their minds, they have already finished.
This is often far from the case and many a combination has come to grief at the very last fence.
Treat it with respect.
remember that the horse is perhaps feeling a little weary and that his concentration may wander as he returns to the welcome sight of home.
I always erred on being over-cautious at the last, but never faulted there so obviously my caution paid off!
Standing by the final fence and watching competitors riding over it can be a sobering experience and there are often heart-in-mouth sights to be seen.
Make sure that the horse is on his hocks, that he is balanced, in rhythm and with enough impulsion to jump the fence.
Once you have landed, you can ride for the finish.
Remember that it is not a race, so do not suddenly ask your horse for maximum speed.
Keep him between hand and leg and ride forward in rhythm.
Pull up gradually and straight.
Dismount (in the case of a threeday event, wait until the steward gives you permission) and loosen the girths and the nose-band a couple of holes then walk the horse quietly back to the box for washing down.
It is an awful spectacle to see a ride galloping through the finish with reins flapping, bouncing around on the horse's back.
Again, study our leading riders to see how they keep hold of their horses' heads and remain balanced themselves.
So much can be learned by watching and copying.
Take careful note of take-offs and landings and re-walk several times if necessary.
In Sickness and In Health The Today's Horse vet Mark Lucey BVM&S, MRCVS, looks at NEONATAL DISEASES IN FOALS
Following on from last month's article covering problems at foaling, this month I will look at some common veterinary problems associated with the first four weeks of a foal's life.
The most important thing to remember is that a foal should get adequate colostrum from the mare in the first four to eight hours of life.
There are several reasons why this does not always occur:
a) The mare runs milk before foaling.
Some mares can run milk for up to two weeks before foaling and the colostrum is lost.
b) The foal is very weak at birth and slow to get to its feet to get its first suck of colostrum.
In these cases, either assist the foal to get to its feet or if necessary, milk the colostrum from the mare and give it to the foal using a rubber teat and a bottle.
c) The mare will note let the foal suck.
This can occur with the mare having her first foal.
She becomes frightened of the foal or aggressive towards it and will not let it suckle.
Also mares can be ticklish round the udder and resent the foal nuzzling around that area.
Sometimes if the mare is held firmly and the foal coaxed to the udder area, she will start to accept the foal.
In extreme cases, sedation is administered to the mare.
Occasionally mares completely reject their foal and can be vicious towards it.
I have seen several foals which have had to be reared on the bottle having been completely rejected by their mother.
d) The mare dies at foaling or shortly thereafter.
Many studs keep a supply of frozen colostrum for these eventualities or as at point a) when the mare loses her colostrum.
A foal requires about one pint of colostrum to give it sufficient antibiotics to help fight neonatal infections.
Health check for mare and foal
It is always advisable to have the mare and foal checked over by your veterinary surgeon during the first day of life.
He/she will check that the mare has passed all her afterbirth and she is not damaged as a result of foaling.
Some mares require vulval stitching after foaling.
The foal is given a health check and normally given a routine antibiotic and tetanus antiserum as well as an enema to aid the passing of meconium.
Meconium retention is one of the most common causes of problems in young foals.
Meconium is the foal's faecal material that has built up in the rectum before foaling and sometimes gets quite firm and impacted and must be passed within the first 24-hours of life.
Many foals, especially colt foals and those born early in the year, become constipated and need continued enemas to soften this material and allow it to be passed.
Foals with meconium retention exhibit colic-type signs or continued straining.
If left untreated, they stop suckling and quickly get weakened.
Some foals can suffer from so-called neonatal maladjustment syndrome.
This  can be seen in premature foals or those which have had an unduly prolonged birth resulting in temporary lack of oxygen to the brain.
They can often appear normal at birth but then start to either wander about aimlessly as if blind or even in more serious cases show convulsions.
For this reason, owners often call them ‘dummies’ or ‘barker’foals as these that show convulsions also produce a barking sort of sound.
The only treatment is symptomatic and supportive therapy and using sedatives to control convulsions.
They cannot suck from a mare and must be bottle fed if they still posses a suck reflex or by stomach tube if they cannot suckle.
It is most important to ensure that they get enough milk.
They require feeding every two hours giving a total of three to five litres per day depending on size.
Bacterial and Viral Infections
Foals can suffer a variety of bacterial or viral infections in the first fourteen days of life.
The most common is diarrhoea.
The younger the foal the more serious is the illness.
Foals rapidly stop sucking and can dehydrate very quickly.
Do not delay requesting veterinary attention for any young foal which is not sucking and has diarrhoea.
They will die within twelve hours if treatment is not commenced.
Antibiotics and more importantly intravenous fluid therapy are most important and the only way to save serious cases.
Some foals develop a milk diarrhoea when the mare shows a foal heat usually six to eight days after foaling.
This is usually transient and the foal does not stop sucking or look ill.
Pneumonia is another infection which can strike at young foals.
It can start as the result of a chill.
For this reason, young foals under a month old should only be turned out in the field if the weather conditions are good.
Do not let foals get cold or wet out in the field.
Pneumonia is characterised by dullness and reduced inclination to suck, rectal temperature is normally raised above 102F and the respiratory rate is increased with an exaggerated chest movement indicating laboured breathing.
Again, professional help should be sought and broad spectrum antibiotic therapy will be administered by your veterinary surgeon.
Serious cases of pneumonia can leave damaged areas in the lungs which can affect future athletic ability.
Navel-ill is another disease condition which can affect your young foal.
The stump where the umbilical cord breaks after foaling is a potential route for pathogens into the foal's system.
Once the umbilical cord has broken, the stump should be dusted or sprayed with antibiotic to dry it up as quickly as possible.
Check that no swelling occurs in the navel and that the end remains dry and there is no discharges present.
Once bacteria enter through the navel stump, they can either cause a local infection in the umbilical stump or invade the bloodstream and cause infection most commonly in one or more joints of the body.
Both mare and foal will need a veterinary check within 24 hours of foaling.
Joint-ill, as this infection is commonly called, can occur at any age up until three to four months of age, but is most common in the first six weeks of life.
It is characterised by a sudden lameness in one limb, usually with swelling or one or more joints.
Often, owners tend to put this lameness down to bruising etc. but with any lameness in a young foal, joint-ill should be suspected.
Normally the rectal temperature of the foal is raised above 102F, which would not occur with simple traumatic lameness.
A blood test will also show a raised white blood cell count, indicating infection present in the system.
If a joint is swollen and there is increased synovial fluid in the joint, a sample of this fluid can be taken by your vet and tested for the presence of white blood cells in the joint.
They appear in the synovial fluid in large numbers in response to infection.
The most commonly affected joints are the stifles, knees, fetlocks or hocks, and more rarely, the shoulders or even the joints between the spinal column anywhere in the back.
Joint-ill should be vigorously treated with a prolonged course of broad spectrum antibiotics and often flushing out of the affected joints with sterile saline, under deep sedation.
I have tried to mention the more common diseased which we see in young foals.
I must stress that foals are delicate and any signs of dullness, disinclination to suck, etc., should be treated promptly.
All too often, we are called to see foals which have been ill for 24 hours or more and by that stage they can be very sick indeed.
If in doubt, telephone your vet to discuss your foal's symptoms.
Infections can be fatal if not treated early enough.
Joint-ill can affect the older foal so any lameness should be treated with suspicion.
Richenda Oldham visits THE HORSE RANGERS OF HAMPTON COURT
Every Saturday and Sunday, on the dot of 8.30am, hordes of uniformed children of all ages can be seen converging on Hampton Court in Surrey.
Dressed however in striking green riding outfits and cowboy-like felt hats, these boys and girls are no school outing participants.
They are in fact Horse Rangers and their destination is the Royal Mews of Hampton Court Palace.
Built in 1540, these lovely red-brick stables have been loaned to the Horse Rangers by grace and favour since 1964, and could not have a better tenant than this exclusive voluntary organisation — exclusive that is to children who do not have their own horses and ponies.
The Horse Rangers Association was founded in 1954 by Raymond Gordon FRSA to teach young people from the age of seven and upwards how to ride and look after horses and ponies.
The organisation first began life in Shepperton with four ponies, two saddles, four bridles, four stalls and a shed.
In those days, it was known as the Girl Horse Rangers, later changing to Horse Rangers of the Commonwealth before finally becoming the Horse Rangers Association in 1972.
But the Horse Rangers does much more than just bring young people in urban areas into contact with horses.
It is also dedicated to teaching them qualities such as self-discipline, loyalty, integrity and to help those in need at all times.
The cobbled yard outside the stables which were built in 1540.
If this all sounds a bit old-fashioned and too good to be true, you have only to look at the happy faces of these children who thoroughly enjoy spending their weekends mucking out, cleaning tack and grooming, while waiting their turn to ride.
They are all proud to be Horse Rangers and the demand to join is so high that there is a waiting list of four years for junior members (known as Ponies) aged seven to ten years, and two and a half years for seniors, aged ten and over.
Because the Horse Rangers is a voluntary, self-supporting organisation, members pay a weekly subscription of 5, waived if they cannot afford it.
Handicapped members, who play an important role in the Rangers, pay no subscription.
Additional money is raised by members, parents, friends and supporters through jumble sales, sponsored rides and walks, raffles and the highlight of the year — the annual Horse Rangers' Horse Show and Gymkhana.
All tacked up and ready to go.
Membership at Hampton Court, the head branch of the Horse Rangers, currently stands at 450 seniors and 80 juniors.
In addition, there are 50 would-be members who come along on Thursday evenings for a special reduced-rate session.
The large numbers of children are, however, well contained within the Horse Rangers' spacious accommodation and discipline is strict, as the organisation is run on military lines, although the atmosphere is relaxed and friendly.
Busy Weekends
Weekends are the busiest time for the Horse Rangers.
This is when members are divided into two squadrons and allocated either an 8.30am or 12.30pm session on either day.
Each squadron consists or around 100 youngsters who are divided into four separate companies which, at the beginning and end of each session, muster in a large hall above the stables.
There they are addressed by Mrs Doreen Gordon (wife of the founder) who is Commandant General and Mr Gerry Tribe who is the Commanding officer.
The muster is treated just like a proper parade.
Everyone arrives punctually and the Rangers all stand to attention to salute their senior officers.
Afterwards, the session's duties are divided out between the companies, two of them will stay behind to muck out, clean tack etc, while  the other two ride over to nearby Bushey Park, where the Horse Rangers have a small schooling area.
Having been dismissed from parade, the children race downstairs to where the Rangers' 22 horses and Ponies are housed in splendour.
The stables are a hive of activity as the session's mounts are groomed and tacked up, and then led out into a small ménage, in a cobbled yard at the rear of the stables.
Everything, from the stables to their occupants, is immaculate with not a wisp of straw out of place.
Despite their antiquity, the mews are light and airy with flower baskets hanging over each arched doorway.
The original stalls have all been converted into loose boxes with a small plaque beside each one denoting the occupant's name, breed, height, age, colour and how it was purchases.
The Hampton Court Horse Rangers, unlike their six fellow branches around the country which are attached to riding schools, owns all its horses and ponies, and either fund-raises money to buy them, or has mounts donated by anyone from Capital Radio to pop group The Moody Blues.
The Horses and Ponies
The horses and ponies, varying in age from 4–30, are well cared for and certainly appear to enjoy their busy lifestyle.
All kinds of breeds are represented here from Arab and Thoroughbred to Haflinger and Falabella — a far cry from the average urban riding school hack.
‘We get give all types and temperaments, but rarely have to turn a horse down.
We've had several ex-racehorses who have suited us very well and we've even had a Gelderland carriage horse.
The children learn never to take for granted a horse's temper ,’ says Mr Tribe.
Although Mr Tribe and Mrs Gordon are on hand to supervise, the weekend sessions are in fact the responsibility of the senior Rangers aged between 17 and early 20s, together with junior instructors.
But from Monday to Friday, BHSI qualified head girl Hilary Dodd, together with three assistants, looks after the horses and stables.
Ready for a session in Bushey Park.
It is the seniors who inspect the tack and turnout of their fellow members in the ménage prior to riding out.
When everyone has been checked, a senior Ranger leads about a dozen riders over to the park where less experienced riders are given lessons.
Members are taught by seniors as well as junior instructors who are supervised and examined by the chief instructor, Mr Norman Baker, an ex-equitation instructor from the Metropolitan Mounted Police.
All Rangers have the opportunity to ride for a minimum of half an hour once a fortnight, however, they can also participate in picnic rides, lasting three to four hours, as well as one hour-long evening rides.
Standards of horsemanship and stable management are closely monitored and Rangers are encouraged to take three basic equitation badges, based on Pony Club tests: The Horse Badge (D test equivalent); The Intermediate Badge (C test equivalent); and the highly prized Golden Spur (B test equivalent).
The Pony Club's Manual of Horsemanship has also been adopted as the training manual for Horse Rangers.
Junior Instructors, who must be over 20 years old, take an equivalent exam to BHSAI.
Although Rangers are taught to put their horses' comfort before their own, smartness in their personal appearance is not by any means neglected.
The military style of the Rangers includes an exacting dress code: girls wear an emerald green blouse, red scarf, jodhpurs and jodhpur boots or long boots, and a felt cowboy-style hat; the boys' attire includes a fawn shirt, red tie and a dark green beret.
Hard hats are, of course, obligatory of riding.
Mrs Doreen Gordon, the Commandant General and Gerry Tribe, the Commanding Officer.
Fund-raising
Horse Rangers are involved in all sorts of activities, most of them fundraising for charity.
They help out at a number of horse shows, provide the guard of honour for the Carriage Society at Hampton Court and are the only civilian unit allowed on Horse Guards Parade.
The Rangers also perform musical rides and have a display team as well as a trumpet band.
The keenness of the Horse Rangers is particularly evident during the build-up to their annual horse show.
Lots are drawn to see which lucky members will have a horse or pony to compete on, and the excited youngsters have to be forcibly restrained from arriving at the stables before 5am and disturbing the local residents with their assiduous preparations.
It says a great deal for this extraordinary organisation that it can inspire such dedication in children who, prior to joining the Horse Rangers, would never have even so much as patted a horse.
HORSE CUISINE ELECTROLYTES
Most of us have heard of them even if we don't understand exactly what they are.
Zoe Davies MSc asks what are electrolytes and how necessary are they?
Electrolytes are more commonly known as ‘blood salts’.
They are mineral salts which are contained in the blood plasma of the horse and they are vital for fluid balance.
Sweat is derived from blood plasma and blood salts.
These electrolytes include SODIUM, POTASSIUM, CALCIUM, MAGNESIUM, PHOSPHOROUS and CHLORIDE.
Heat Production
Most of the body's heat is produced during the breakdown of feedstuffs and the burning of oxygen.
When the horse is resting, this heat production is minimal because the muscle cells are fairly inactive.
However when the horse is working, the muscle cells are contracting and there is a large increase in heat production within them.
This heat is in effect waste energy from the chemical reactions which occur inside the muscle cells to make them work.
The amount of heat produced will depend upon the muscles involved and the number of contractions of those muscles.
Even during light exercise the heat produced is 20 times that at rest.
If the horse is working in a high temperature (ie on a hot day), he will also be absorbing heat.
The horse therefore must have a mechanism to remove this excess heat build-up to prevent his body temperature increasing with fatal results.
His normal body temperature is about 38°C (101°F).
If this rises above 41°C (105°F), the horse may collapse and die.
This is known as the CRITICAL TEMPERATURE.
At temperatures above 44°C the tissues themselves start to break down.
So how does the horse lose this excess heat ?
Well he does it through the skin by sweating.
This involves the evaporation of liquid (sweat) excreted from the sweat glands and is a very efficient cooling mechanism.
The efficiency of sweating can be affected by the external environmental conditions.
It hot, humid, windless conditions, effective sweating is difficult and these conditions can rapidly lead to severe fatigue and exhaustion as the horse's body temperature rises.
What is Sweat?
As mentioned before, sweat is produced from the sweat glands in the skin.
Sweat is not just pure water, it also contains electrolytes and some protein.
The protein is mostly lost during the early stages of sweating and has detergent-like properties.
This allows the sweat to spread out along the horse's hair and makes heat loss more efficient.
This protein also causes the white lather seen on profusely sweating horses or those which are very nervous/excited.
Try the ‘pinch’ test if you suspect your horse may be dehydrated.
A horse's sweat is hypertonic ie it contains a higher concentration of salts  than the plasma from which it is derived.
The composition of sweat is shown in the table.
It can be seen that human sweat is actually hypotonic ie it contains a lower salt concentration than the plasma.
A horse can lose as much as three gallons (15 litres) of sweat in one hour of hard work in hot conditions and he may well become dehydrated.
You can tell if your horse is dehydrated by the pinch test or the capillary refill test.
1.
PINCH TEST : This involves picking up a fold of skin (on the horse's neck) between your forefinger and thumb, lifting it away from the neck, and then releasing it.
If it does not return to its normal flat state immediately, and stays ‘pinched’ without your assistance, then the horse is dehydrated and would certainly benefit from some electrolytes.
2.
CAPILLARY REFILL TEST : This involves pressing your thumb onto the horse's gum.
When you remove your thumb you will notice that the area has gone white.
The colour will return to normal.
It is the time taken for this to occur which tells you if the horse is dehydrated.
This is not as simple as the pinch test.
How Often is a Horse Deficient in Electrolytes?
Any horse which works hard, particularly in the summer months, or which sweats a lot at any time in the year, may be suffering from electrolyte loss.
This is not a problem reserved for eventers or endurance horses, this can and does frequently occur in unfit animals used excessively in the summer.
When conditions are hot, horses can lose a lot of sweat without you even knowing because it evaporates so quickly.
I have seen this problem many times in the past couple of years when the summers have been very hot.
Hunters are prone to dehydration and electrolyte loss.
In hot weather you may not be aware of how much a horse is sweating because it evaporates so quickly.
The Equine Research Station in Newmarket is currently carrying out research into azoturia (set-fast, tying-up, etc.)
They are finding definite links between these common conditions and electrolyte imbalance or deficiency.
Many horses with these conditions are successfully treated with the addition of electrolytes.
Hunters are also prone to dehydration and electrolyte loss as they work very hard, sometimes hunting two or three times per week.
They would certainly benefit from electrolytes at the end of a day's hunting.
The traditional bran mash is very low in calcium and can therefore add to the problem instead of helping it.
Remember calcium is an electrolyte and is vital for the contraction of muscle fibres.
Many types of muscle fatigue could be attributed to calcium deficiency.
(All the cereals are very low in calcium).
How Do You Feed Electrolytes?
These are available in powder, liquid or paste form.
They should be fed according to the manufacturer's instructions.
Some are added to the drinking water, others are given in the feed.
If your horse is dehydrated, give the electrolytes for a couple of days and then only give them when the horse has worked hard or competed or you feel has sweated excessively.
Excess electrolytes are excreted through the urine, but it is not wise to overdose them.
With training, many horses will accept water with electrolytes in it, but plain water should always be available as well.
Horses competing in long distance events should not use a brand which contains bicarbonate.
These horses are more likely to suffer from alkalosis than acidosis.
It is a good idea to provide endurance horses with electrolytes DURING the rides.
Horses cannot store electrolytes, so giving them before a event will not be beneficial.
I would also advise that a plain salt lick (not one of the mineralised ones) should always be available in the stable, so that the horse can help himself to salt as and when he needs it.
Want a word…?
MONEY SAVING TIPS
Dear Kate,
Following your recent ‘money savings tips’, I would like to suggest the following:
Try simple tack repairs yourself rather than taking them to a saddler.
Some, such as restitching stirrup leathers are surprisingly easy as long as the holes are correctly lined up.
Obviously, make quite sure that the repair is strong before using the tack again.
Rubber reins are quite simple to recover and be careful prodding with the needle you can stitch the rubber into the reins through the original holes, rather than making fresh ones which would weaken the reins.
Spare rein tubes can be obtained from tack suppliers (such as Banks Horsewear of Meadow Bank, Hamnish, Leominster, Herefordshire HR6 0QN).
If there is a special gadget you wish to try but are unable to borrow, consider the possibility of making one yourself.
For example, I recently made quite a serviceable Market Harborough from an old pair of continental reins and a running martingale.
All I needed to buy (again from the tack supplies) were two spring hooks, a length of nylon webbing and six D- rings.
An old bucket kept just outside the stable is handy for picking up manure every time you go in with your horse and helps to save money on bedding.
Teaching him to stale into the bucket helps save even more!
Club together with others at your yard and buy wormers in bulk at a cheaper rate.
Buy stockfeed carrots from a market rather than Grade I vegetables from the greengrocer.
Make roller/surcingle pads from foam rubber.
Old freezers make excellent feed/tack bins.
Make fillet strings, either by French Knitting or by raiding the bottom of your wardrobe for self tie belts off old clothes.
Collect and dry your own herbs in summer for use during the winter months.
Could even be worth devoting a small corner of the garden to convert into a herb bed.
THE ‘SEXIEST’ ISSUE CONTINUES
Dear Kate,
Yes it's me again, Lisa Robillard, the controversial lady on sexist language.
Thank you for printing my letter.
I was amazed at the answers and simply had to reply.
Firstly, I understand that you must edit letters, but the crucial point on avoiding sexist language was omitted.
Namely, the use of the word ‘they’, eradicating the need for (in some minds) the climsy he/she.
I must say that I feel Charles Greenwich must have been joking in his reply.
I am fascinated by the use of the English language, I do not wish to undermine it, but, as I would argue, it does overtly undermine 50 percent of its users (i.e. women).
It is not a petty matter.
Language is one tool by which women are given an artificial sense of inferiority.
Tests have shown that women are more likely to respond to unbiased employment advertisements.
They do not see themselves included in the generic ‘he’.
The ‘generic’ he is a poor excuse.
Yes, the Oxford English Dictionary may say that it exists, but on-one who speaks English understands every intricacy, let alone uses English entirely accurately.
Now to the second point of ‘Ms’.
I am nineteen, not married yet, yet alone divorced.
I enjoy a fantastic relationship with my boyfriend and I'm certainly not a lesbian.
I just don't want to be judged — or prejudged — by a title that shouts out my marital status or availability.
Mr Greenwich's dislike of the use ‘Ms’ is his problem — not mine.
He suggests women should relax and not worry or ‘complicate’ life.
To relax would mean giving in and conceding to a common prejudice which does nothing to enhance women's esteem.
As to complicating life — I suspect he sees complication as a masculine domain — for us women wouldn't want to worry ‘ our pretty little heads’ over ‘complicated’matters.
As to Jessica Frank's letter, I do have a problem with use of ‘God’ and ‘he’.
There is no evidence of him/her being a male (let alone of his existence).
It is a prejudice whereby anything omnipotent must be masculine.
Lastly to Ruth Gray's letter.
These grammatical prejudices do marr my enjoyment of articles.
Lastly, to say I don't enjoy life just because I fight for things I believe in is incorrect.
I've just got into my college's riding team and am over the moon at this exciting prospect.
Thankfully, I really do enjoy my life.
I adore opera, music, literature, ballet, etc the list is unbelievably long.
Although I am not a Christian and certainly do not read the bible, God, for me would have been an excuse not to sort it out myself.
Being Christian, Ruth should understand that in order to enjoy life one must often help others and obliterate situations that make people unhappy.
You and others can almost always do something to alleviate the situation.
I feel that many people made a lot of assumptions about me.
This is ironic, seeing that I was campaigning about making assumptions about gender through language.
Sorry for the long letter, but I've been itching to write this for a long time.
Once more thanks for a super magazine.
LIGHT-HEARTED TOUCH
Dear Kate,
John Henderson is utterly brilliant!
His last two articles ‘Baby Talk’ and ‘Horse for Sale’really had me in stitches.
In fact it got me some funny looks because I was reading Today's Horse on the tube and couldn't help laughing out loud!
Some of the things he says are really quite outrageous — do you ever get any complaints about his language?
Good on you, I say, it adds a light-hearted touch to a great magazine and we all need a laugh now and again, don't we?
We haven't had any complaints yet!— Ed.
MARY FAN
Dear Kate,
I would like to say how very much I am enjoying Mary Thomson's new series.
I have been a fan of hers for a long time and it is wonderful to see that she is now achieving the status and success that she deserves.
Her flatwork is superb and is the reason why she consistently produces good horses.
Is it possible to see some photos of her at home with her horses?
Mary has suffered notoriously bad luck in the past but I strongly believe that 1992 will be her year.
She has never had a stronger string of horses and must be a runner for our Olympic team.
I have bought Today's Horse since the beginning and I am happy to say that it is getting better and better — something which cannot always be said for the other horsy magazines, which are often repetitive and patronising.
Keep up the good work on a super magazine!
Thank you for your kind words.
You'll be pleased to hear that we have just done a photo session with Mary to get some exclusive ‘at home’ photos.
‘A Lesson with Mary’ will also appear next month so watch out for that.
It's just a pity that it is a 500 mile round trip to visit her!— Ed.
TAILOR-MADE POLICY
Dear Kate,
I refer to the letter headed ‘Rider Insurance’ in your February issue.
British Equestrian Insurance Brokers Limited have had policies available for 15 years for riders who do not own horses as well as those who do.
We are able to arrange all types of insurance, tailor-made to a client's specific requirements.
We would also recommend that readers join the British Horse Society or the Pony Club.
By doing so, they will obtain free Personal Liability insurance for £2,000,000 and free Personal Accident insurance for Death and permanent Disablement up to £10,000, both in respect of horse related incidents.
POOR SHAMROCK
Dear Kate,
Please print this letter because I want people to know that horses are not something that you can forget.
Don't depend on other people to look after them.
My name is Lucy and I want to tell you what happened when we were asked to look after a horse.
About three years ago we moved to a farm.
People we knew asked if they could leave their horse, Shamrock, in one of the fields.
We agreed as they were in London during the week; we looked after her and paid all the bills.
Unfortunately a New Forest stallion got into the field and Shamrock got in foal.
When it was time for the foal to be separated from its mother, the friends took the foal but no longer visited Shamrock.
Soon afterwards we were moving to the town so we got in touch with Shamrock's owners to tell them we could sell her along with all our horses.
They said that another friend would look after her, but when we went to see her a month later, she looked absolutely awful, in a field all on her own and full of worms.
She was obviously not being looked after at all.
Another friend said she would keep an eye on her, but four weeks later we had a phone call from her saying that Shamrock was desperately ill.
The vet said that nothing could be done to save her and that she had to be put down.
It broke my heart.
She looked up at me with a ‘Why did you go ?’ look in her eyes.
Why hadn't Shamrock's owners looked after her and loved her as we had done?
It was as if they had forgotten they owned her.
I'm crying as I write this because we might have been able to save her.
Horses are not things that can be forgotten about.