

HASTINGS SEA-LIFE CENTRE
DISCOVERING HASTINGS From Underwater
A DIVER'S EYEVIEW
WALK UNDERWATER…
Experience a completely uninterrupted view of life at the bottom of the sea in our spectacular Underwater Tunnel as dozens of sharks, stingrays and a host of other sea creatures swim all around you.
A unique opportunity to enjoy the magical experience of a dive beneath the sea…without getting wet!
Hastings Sea Life Centre takes you on a journey beneath the crashing waves that surround our coastline to discover a whole new world…
Thousands of gallons of water surround you as you come face to face with hundreds of fascinating sea creatures from around our own shores…octopus, conger eels, starfish and rays to name just a few, and all from astonishing angles and amazingly close quarters.
Daily feeding displays, talks and demonstrations provide a chance to gain a real insight into this marvellous underwater world.
IT'S OUT OF THIS WORLD
A WHOLE NEW WORLD UNFOLDS
STOP PRESS NEWS
‘For the first time…an easy way to meet beautiful and surprisingly exotic creatures which inhabit British waters.
Educational and entertaining for all ages!’
Sunday Telegraph 
UNDERWATER CAVERN OCEAN TUNNEL HARBOUR WALL MARINE OBSERVATION UNIT GIFT SHOP OCEAN DEPTHS VIDEO THEATRE TOUCH POOLS SANDY SEABED BREAKERS RESTAURANT and COFFEE SHOP ICE-CREAM BAR
Kodak PHOTO-TIPS
When taking photographs inside the Sea Life Centre, REMEMBER…
Always use ‘flash’ and fresh camera batteries
For exhibits behind glass, shoot at 45° to avoid glare
Get as close to subject as you can
Hold camera steady
Include people in picture for added interest and scale
FREE KODAK LOAN CAMERA FROM THE SHOP Kodak film also available
THE COMPLETE VISITOR EXPERIENCE
A wealth of British marine life…and much, much more to guarantee a memorable visit.
Take a break in our spacious Breakers Restaurant , overlooking the beautiful Sussex coastline, and enjoy your choice from a wide range of carefully prepared meals or light snacks.
Relax outside in a deckchair whilst the youngsters explore the rockpools or play in the sandpit.
Finally, be sure to browse around our Gift Shop for that special memento of your visit.
TAKE A CLOSER LOOK
Discovering the many mysteries of the deep makes learning…
FUN!
Visit the Fish Nursery — where tiny baby creatures are reared, where unborn infants can be seen wriggling in their eggcases and where magnifiers focus on fascinating marine life features too miniscule for detection by the human eye.
The Wildlife Video Unit relays dramatic moments from the ocean world, whilst news boards alert you to creatures and happenings worthy of closer attention.
In this ever-changing world, there's always something different to see!
BEHIND THE SCENES
Our dedicated aquarists are provided with endless opportunities for scientific study.
Any wounded or distressed creatures that are handed to us are carefully nursed back to health whilst our breeding programmes produce an ever-increased number of baby marine creatures, many of which are then released into the wild.
SEAWATCH
The geographic distribution of Sea Life Centres makes us uniquely placed to support marine conservation endeavours right around the UK coastline and, in particular, to encourage public involvement and interest in these endeavours.
SeaWatch encompasses all our environmental projects and was formed to improve everyone's understanding and respect for the seas.
With continued research and conservation planning, there's no telling how much can be achieved in bringing people and marine animals closer together.
SEA LIFE CONTROLS around the country
HASTINGS SEA-LIFE CENTRE EUROPE'S LEADING NAME IN MARINE LIFE ATTRACTIONS
EXTRA VALUE FOR ALL THE FAMILY
EXTRA CARE
Our visitors are, of course, just as important as our marine life residents, so our specially selected and trained staff try to ensure that you receive top quality service at all times.EXTRA SERVICE
We look after those little things, which make such a difference to your enjoyment…baby changing facilities, an exciting quiz trail designed to test the whole family, a free camera loan facility…and more!
EXTRA VALUE
All day enjoyment — all admission tickets allow full use of all facilities all day long!
Season and Holiday Fun Passes enable you to return time and again during your holiday.
Please ask for details.
EXTRA FUN
Sammy the Seal — our new cuddly Sea Life character appears throughout the day to provide an extra treat for youngsters.
Activity programme — regular talks, feeding displays and demonstrations add to the entertainment and the fascination.
You may even be the lucky one asked to help!
EXTRA SPECIAL
The Sea Life Centre is the perfect venue for many a special occasion.
Birthdays, group outings and all manner of special functions become extra special when they are hosted here.
Just imagine sharing your celebration with hundreds of curious sea creatures.
‘Let's go today!’
YOU CAN'T MISS US
Hastings Sea Life Centre is just a stone's throw from the sea itself, at the far end of Rock-a-Nore Road.
Just follow the signs to the historic ‘Old Town’ corner of Hastings.
OPENING TIMES
10am — 6pm (9pm in Summer Holidays) 7 days a week, all year!
GROUP BENEFITS: Special rates, educational packs and projects available.
SCHOOL PARTIES: Special rates, educational packs and projects available
FUNCTIONS: Available for private hire.
PLEASE TELEPHONE FOR DETAILS
IT'S A NEW ADVENTURE EVERY TIME!
In this ever-changing world, there's always something different to see!
But special new features for 1992 include:
NEW Conger Eel Display
NEW Exciting Quiz Trail
NEW Fish Nursery
NEW Sammy Seal Character
COURT COUTURE ‘92
KENSINGTON PALACE
6 JUNE — 18 OCTOBER 1992
COURT COUTURE ‘92
This exhibition brings the story of the Royal Ceremonial Dress Collection up to date.
Twenty leading British designers together with students from the Royal College of Art have been asked to draw upon the Collection and create dresses which reflect both the flamboyance and strict regulation which characterised Court dress.
Court dress was the particular form of costume worn by ladies when they were presented to the monarch.
The tradition began in about 1700 and continued with the Evening Courts which ended in 1939.
Presentations were later made at Afternoon Parties but these too were discontinued in 1958.
Young ladies being presented for the first time were known as debutantes.
The presentation involved a curtsey before the monarch.
Complex protocol demanded that Court dress conform to a set of governing principles.
A headdress, a train and gloves were mandatory.
At the same time costumes were both spectacular and imaginative, representing the peak of the dress making and tailoring skills of their respective eras.
The dresses in the exhibition interpret the regulation and tradition in a variety of ways.
All of the costumes feature a headdress, train and are worn with gloves.
COURT COUTURE ‘92
1
THE NEW RENAISSANCE
Paper lined with velvet trimmed with artificial flowers and souvenir tokens.
Cape of embroidered organza and paper.
2
ARABELLA POLLEN
Voided velvet and silk taffeta.
3
EDINA RONAY
Silk crepe and georgette.
Hand dyed and printed.
4
RCA
Elizabeth Christian, Miranda Watkins
Shot taffeta and organza.
Chrome plated brass corset and jewellery.
5
RCA
Mark Watson, Adele Dargue
Satin trimmed with lace, velvet ribbon and maribou feathers and embroidered with iridescent sequins and beads.
Beads by Ells and Farrer
6
RCA
Jaimal Odedra, Julie Rooke, Donna Payne
Taffeta and pleated metal lamé.
Yarns by Heathcoat Yarns and Fibres.
7
IAN THOMAS
Silk tulle embroidered with floss silk, opalescent sequins, glass and silver beads.
8
HARTNELL
Silk chiffon trimmed with diamanté and glass beads.
Embroidery by Cécile Henri, Paris.
9
SIR HARDY AMIES
Soft ribbed silk trimmed with silk satin
10
RCA
Brian Kirkby, Joanna Silverstein
Fibre optics and illuminated circuit boards over jersey.
Fibre optics by Eurotec.
11
RCA
Paul Humphreys, Louise Stevenson
Fine metal and handpainted textile.
12
RCA
Maria Heskins and Dominique Croiffet.
Embroidered velvet and satin over fine jersey.
13
TOMASZ STARZEWSKI
Silk net embroidered with glass beads and pearls.
Silk chiffon.
14
ANOUSKA HEMPEL
Silk velvet trimmed with artificial fur.
15
BRUCE OLDFIELD
Silk jersey lined with plain weave silk.
16
DAVID EMANUEL
Silk crepe embroidered with pearls, beads and diamanté.
Embroidery by S Lock Limited.
Jewellery by Adrien Mann.
Evening bag and shoes by Rayne.
Gloves by Cornelia James.
17
CHRISTIAN DIOR
Black silk embroidered with sequins, and gazar.
18
RCA
Miranda Tsui, Helen Rawlinson, Sian Fletcher.
Organza, net and hand woven gauzes decorated with embroidery in floss silk and beads.
19
RCA
Damien O'Brien, Heike Selmer
Handpainted and pleated paper.
20
WORKERS FOR FREEDOM
Painted silk organza and jersey.
Shoes by Oliver Sweeney
21
BELLA FREUD
Silk satin and chiffon trimmed with black taffeta.
Headdress by Philip Treacy
22
Amanda Wakeley
Crepe and silk velvet lined with silk satin.
23
RCA
Pearl Walton, Dominique Croiffet, Joanna Silverstein
Textile collage appliqued with metal threads.
Overdress of glass beads, ostrich feathers and yarn.
Artificial fur train.
Beads by Ells and Farrer.
24
RCA
Suzanne Huey, John Macaulay.
Court silk handpainted.
25
KATHARINE HAMNETT
Silk satin and chiffon trimmed with coloured glass beads.
26
MURRAY ARBEID
Silk crepe embroidered with glass beads and diamanté.
Headdress by Frederick Fox.
27
VICTOR EDELSTEIN
Silk taffeta embroidered with floss silk, glass beads and diamanté.
28
BELVILLE SASSOON
Grosgrain brocade trimmed with silk satin ribbon and diamanté.
29
ZANDRA RHODES
Printed silk organza and georgette embroidered with silver beads and trimmed with silk flowers.
Gloves by Dents.
Shoes by Charles Jourdan.
Jewellery by Andrew Logan.
Headdress by Philip Treacy.
30
VIVIENNE WESTWOOD
Tulle overprinted in gold.
Boned stomacher.
Adel Rootstein DISPLAY MANNEQUINS
With special thanks for their generous support to Adel Rootstein, Dents Limited and Jimmy Choo, London.
Situated on the western of Kensington Gardens, off the Broad Walk, Kensington Palace has its own fine gardens — the Sunken Gardens and The Orangery Gardens, with Queen Anne's beautiful Orangery which she used as a ‘Summer Supper House’.
From April to September every year, the Orangery is open as a Tea-Room.
Kensington Palace is a few minutes walk through the park from Kensington High Street or Bayswater Road where buses and underground stations are located.
BUSES: Bayswater Road — 12 Kensington Road — 9, 10, 33, 49, 52, 52A
UNDERGROUND: Central Line — Queensway, Notting Hill Gate District/Central Line — High Street Kensington
THE Wonders of WYEDEAN
1.
THE NATIONAL BIRDS OF PREY CENTRE
Second largest collection of Birds of Prey in Western Europe.
Eagles, Vultures, Owls and Falcons get exercised daily for your education and entertainment.
The National Birds of Prey Centre has bred 35 species of Birds of Prey and is actively engaged in several Conservation projects.
We are situated in beautiful countryside just south of Newent, a few minutes from the M.50.
Schools are always welcome.
Ring the office for party rates and details of our educational publications.
CAFE
SHOP
BOOKSHOP
HAWK WALK
WHERE BIRDS CAN BE VIEWED WITHOUT WIRE
TRADITIONAL PARKLAND SETTING
2.
THE SHAMBLES
A highly original museum of Victorian family and commercial life.
Victorian shops and workshops display a fascinating and large collection of period merchandise, tools and utensils.
These are set around a cobbled square behind the 18th Century building.
The main building is laid out as a four-floor room-by-room illustration of working family life — from the prim living room, to the children's bedroom and maids' cramped attic costume workshop and living quarters.
LICENSED REFRESHMENTS
GIFT SHOP
3.
HILL COURT GARDEN CENTRE
Set in the grounds of a William and Mary Mansion, the three acres of ornamental gardens include a Yew Walk, Rose Gardens, Water Gardens and Herbaceous Borders.
An old stable block houses the Garden Centre Shop with an exclusive range of products, gifts and plants.
A Tea Garden, serving home made cakes, is set in one of the walled gardens.
FREE ADMISSION
Leave Ross on the Walford road, fork right at The Prince of Wales public house, continue for 2–½ miles.
4.
THE JUBILEE MAZE
‘Welcome to the Maze!’ say Lindsay and Edward Heyes, Makers of this traditional Hedge Puzzle.
Play games and have fun with your family at this Active Entertainment, conducting the confusion from the viewing platform.
Look into the past at our Museum of Mazes.
Our Amazing Puzzle Shop holds thrills in store for all ages with puzzles, games, souvenirs and books.
WONDERFUL WELCOME
SCHOOLS BOOK FOR MAZE GAMES
NEW IN 1990 PUZZLE SHOP
5.
WYE VALLEY FARM PARK
We are beneath the famous Symonds Yat Rock, in a large horseshoe bend of the River Wye.
You can see a collection of old fashioned and rare farm animals:— horses, mares and foals, donkeys, cows and calves, pigs and piglets, goats, rabbits and domestic poultry.
Children can get close to and touch many of our animals.
Picnic beside the River Wye, walk in the spectacular woods and see the wild flowers on our Riverside walk.
TEAS
FARM SHOP
FREE PARKING
RIVERSIDE PICNICS
6.
THE WORLD OF BUTTERFLIES
Myriads of living Butterflies display their delicate beauty in a Tropical Garden, at this Entomological Zoo.
These ‘Jewels of Creation’ are free to flutter as you discover their intriguing life story in a journey past unusual plants, set in a landscape to create a natural environment of leaf and flower for these fantastic creatures.
Beautiful gifts and educational souvenirs in our Butterfly Boutique.
BOOK FOR CONDUCTED TOURS
ALL INDOORS
TERRIFIC PHOTO OPPORTUNITIES
BUTTERFLY GIFTS
7.
THE NELSON MUSEUM, MONMOUTH
Horatio Nelson was born in Norfolk, died at sea, and is buried in St. Paul's Cathedral — why does Monmouth have a museum full of objects associated with the famous admiral, including weapons, pictures, fine ceramics, silver and glass, ship models and letters?
Find out about his life, loves, death and commemoration in Britain's only Nelson Museum, AND also about the history of this ancient Wye Valley town.
EXHIBITIONS
SALES DESK
CHILDREN'S WORKSHEETS
IN TOWN CENTRE
CLOSE TO PARKING AND SHOPS
8.
MODEL FARM FOLK MUSEUM AND COUNTRYSIDE CENTRE
Victorian nostalgia in a countryside setting
There's something for everyone in this out-of-the ordinary attraction — a folk collection of Victorian memorabilia, farm animals, poultry, waterfowl, Shetland ponies and a very friendly donkey, adventure playground and picnic area.
And the setting — historic farm buildings amongst  breathtaking countryside.
A licensed restaurant serves good food all day.
An ideal venue for school and adult group visits either in the daytime or evenings by arrangement.
Between Usk and Chepstow just off the B4235 at Llangwm or from the B4293 Monmouth — Chepstow.
9.
STUART CRYSTAL
See — glass being decorated by sand engraving (weekdays)
— a glass repairer at work (Saturday — Wednesday)
— a film explaining all aspects of crystal glass production and decoration
— a museum display of old Stuart Crystal glass and artefacts
FACTORY SHOP
FREE PARKING & ADMISSION
PICNIC AREA
TOILET FACILITIES (INCLUDING DISABLED PERSONS AMENITIES)
EVENING TALKS FOR PARTIES (BY PRIOR ARRANGEMENT)
10.
DEAN FOREST RAILWAY
DAILY STATIC DISPLAY 
REFRESHMENTS
GIFT SHOP
LARGE CAR PARK
RIVERSIDE WALK
MUSEUM
THE OLD STATION, TINTERN
Travel back to Victorian times.
Take a stroll along the beautiful Wye Valley line, see the fascinating railway exhibition or a craft display, stop for tea on Platform 2 and watch the world go by.
WALKS
EXHIBITIONS
REFRESHMENTS
SOUVENIRS
PICNICS/BARBECUE FACILITIES
MODEL RAILWAY
EVENTS
11.
PUZZLE WOOD
Puzzle Wood is an area which has remained unaltered since it was transformed into tranquil woodland walks in the 1800's.
It has been open to the public for some 50 years.
A fascinating ancient open iron workings in beautiful surroundings.
A maze of paths with unique wooden seats and bridges enables the weathered and moss-covered rocks to be seen at their best.
ROMAN IRON MINES
SYKES TROPHY WINNER 1984
SOUVENIR SHOP
TEA GARDEN
SCHOOL PARTIES (BY ARRANGEMENT)
12.
LYDNEY PARK GARDENS
Close to the busy A48, between Lydney and Aylburton, these beautiful rhododendron and azalea gardens are set in a peaceful lakeland valley.
Magnolias, daffodils and bluebells bloom in profusion in early spring.
Picnic in the Deer Park.
Visit the Roman Temple site and the Roman and New Zealand Museums.
TEAS
SHRUBS FOR SALE
COACHES WELCOME BY APPOINTMENT
COUNTRY SHOP OPEN THROUGHOUT THE YEAR
THE CANTERBURY TALES
A Medieval Adventure
Bringing the past to life
THE PILGRIMAGE TO CANTERBURY
At The Canterbury Tales you can step back in time to the 14th Century.
Experience and enjoy the sights, sounds and even the smells of the period!
Become one of Chaucer's happy band of pilgrims, walking from Southwark to Canterbury and the miracle working tomb of St Thomas Becket.
Along the way you will be enthralled by the realistic recreation of everyday life in the Middle Ages and entertained by your fellow pilgrims.
The courtly Knight, the bawdy Miller, the Wife of Bath, the Nun's Priest and the Pardoner will recount their colourful and humorous tales of chivalry, romance, jealousy, pride and avarice.
These 14th Century tales are brought vividly to life by the latest audio-visual technology and the voices of the following celebrities: Roy Kinnear, Prunella Scales, Robert Powell, Ronald Pickup, Bernard Cribbins and Geoffrey Banks.
YOUR HOST — HARRY BAILEY
THE WIFE OF BATH
THE PARDONER'S TALE
THE MEDIEVAL DENTIST
THE WIFE OF BATH'S TALE
SPECIAL CHILDREN'S COMMENTARY
(Available on request in advance and in English only.
Please note that a minimum of 24 notice is required)
The commentary is also available in Dutch, French, German, Italian and Spanish.
The Canterbury Tales is appealing to people of all ages and is situated in the heart of the historic Cathedral city of Canterbury.
So come take a pilgrimage to the past and embark on a Medieval adventure.
THE MILLER
OPEN 7 DAYS A WEEK THROUGHOUT THE YEAR
Admission charges (including group, school and other concessionary rates) and opening times are available on request.
English Heritage
Exploring Dover Castle
From the Romans to World War II
Includes entry to Hellfire Corner
THE KEY OF ENGLAND
Dover is a giant among castles.
Perched high above the famous White Cliffs, this vast fortress commands the shortest Channel crossing to the Continent — a strategic position which earned it the title ‘The Key of England’.
Dover has the longest recorded history of any major fortress in the kingdom — a history to begins in the Iron Age and continues beyond World War II.
The Romans built a lighthouse here, and the Anglo-Saxons a fortified a town.
Soon after the Battle of Hastings, William the Conqueror strengthened Dover's defences.
Yet most of the buildings we see today date from the 12th century or later — Henry II's great medieval fortress, strengthened in the 13th century, was remodelled by Georgian and Victorian engineers to keep it up to date.
And as late as World War II, the castle played a crucial role in Britain's defence.
There is a wealth of things to do at Dover Castle.
You can discover the great square keep, and enjoy the panoramic view from the top over the town below.
A tour of the inner court around the keep can take in ‘All the Queen's Men’, a lively exhibition telling the story of the Queen's Regiment, long associated with the castle.
And be sure not to miss a unique medieval Underground Works, adapted in Napoleonic times when invasion threatened and ingeniously planned to deflect attack.
For a longer tour, you can explore the impressive outer towers, gatehouses and artillery works, and see how Dover's defences have kept pace over the centuries.
The remains of a rare Roman lighthouse and the restored Anglo-Saxon church beside it are remainders of earlier times.
SPECIAL FEATURES
All the Queen's Men:An exciting recreation of the history of the Queen's Regiment, with stunning sets and special effects.
Battle of Waterloo Model:A rare model, made in the last century, with thousands of lead soldiers depicting scenes from the famous battle.
With modern commentary and sound effects.
Church of St Mary of Castro:Restored Saxon church.
Underground Works:Take an audio guided tour of these fascinating tunnels and works that date back to 1216.
EVENTS 1992
Medieval Weapons and Warfare.
Music of the Cavaliers and Roundheads. 3rd Annual Dover Castle Festival of Archery.
105mm HOWITZER SALUTES
In Honour of HM The Queen's Birthday.
In Honour of HM The Queen's Official Birthday.
In Honour of HM The Queen Mother's Birthday.
HELLFIRE CORNER
Finally, there is the castle's secret history — Dover's involvement in World War II, now vividly and dramatically displayed at Hellfire Corner.
For it was from a network of tunnels beneath the castle, dating from Napoleonic times, that Admiral Ramsay master-minded the evacuation from Dunkirk.
Veiled in official secrecy until 1986, this atmospheric underground complex is now revealed in a fascinating guided tour which takes in the room where Operation Dynamo was planned, the anti-aircraft control area and even the telephone exchange.
A film, newsreel and illustrations of the tunnels in use bring the atmosphere of Hellfire Corner to life.
And finally you can look out from the balcony, high up in the White Cliffs, from which Winston Churchill viewed the Battle of Britain.
FREE ADMISSION FOR MEMBERS
JOIN ENGLISH HERITAGE for free admission to more than 350 historic places.
We offer you our nation's history — from prehistoric and Roman landmarks to medieval castles and abbeys, from stately homes to working industrial monuments.
Wherever you are, there is an English Heritage property nearby.
At only £15 for an adult and £30 for a family, joining English Heritage could mean substantial savings when compared with paying normal admission prices.
Other categories are available too, including life membership.
But just as important, you will be contributing to the conservation and protection of England's historic environment.
English Heritage is dedicated to preserving it all, not just the properties we currently manage.
We need your help to save the past for future generations.
JOIN US NOW
Join at one of the properties mentioned in this leaflet and you will receive your membership pack straight away, including your free guide and map.
Or just complete and send us the application form overleaf, and we shall send your membership card and pack within 28 days.
ENGLISH HERITAGE 
TOURS OF HELLFIRE CORNER
Admission is by guided tour lasting 45–50 minutes.
Tours are approximately every 15–20 minutes in summer; last tour begins at 5.00 pm.
In winter tours are every 30–40 minutes; last tour begins 3.00 pm.
FACILITIES
Access for visitors on wheelchairs to courtyard and grounds (some very steep slopes), and to Hellfire Corner (including toilets).
Toilets; car park; coach parking (¼ mile, with convenient setting down and picking up points); education room.
HOW TO FIND OUT MORE
Full details of over 350 historic landmarks will be found in the Guide to English Heritage Properties 1192 , available at £3.25 from PO Box 229, Northants NN6 9RY, or at £2.25 from any staffed English Heritage site.
MUSIC ON A SUMMER EVENING 1992
Open air concerts and opera are staged at several English Heritage properties.
EVENTS DIARY 1992
For details of special events taking place across the country, see the English Heritage Events Diary 1992 .
Ask at any site, or call 071–973 3457 for you free copy.
ENGLISH CIVIL WAR
1992 is the 350th anniversary of the outbreak of the English Civil Wars — the greatest single period of conflict ever to occur on English soil.
Many English Heritage properties were involved, and to mark the occasion several Special Events are taking place and a special English Heritage leaflet,The English Civil Wars , is available.
Look out for this symbol.
PLEASE NOTE
Concessions apply to senior citizens, students and UB40 holders.
Some properties may be closed 1pm-2pm.
Most sites are closed 24–26 December and 1 January.
Access for dogs varies from one property to another, according to the nature of the site.
If in doubt, please telephone the property first.
There are no restrictions on guide dogs.
These are just some of over 350 properties cared for by English Heritage.
We also provide expertise and funding to help conserve many other historically important buildings throughout England.
Without your support many fascinating places would otherwise be lost for present and future generations to enjoy.
HASTINGS SEA-LIFE CENTRE
DISCOVERING HASTINGS From Underwater
VISIT BEFORE 12 NOON TO RECEIVE £1.00 OFF ADMISSION PRICE OF TWO FULL-PAYING ADULTS Valid until end 1992 1 Voucher per visit Not to be used in conjunction with any other offer
DISCOVER HASTINGS, THE HEART OF 1066 COUNTRY
What is the best-known date in England?
What's the best-kept secret on her coastline? 1066 and Hastings!
The name of Hastings is, of course, inextricably linked with the last successful invasion of Britain when the French arrived, conquered the English and a new age of Norman influence and culture spread throughout England.
The town today is one of the most interesting resorts on the south coast — as you'll soon discover.
At the eastern end of a three mile seafront lies the Old Town — once a small fishing village and later a major Cinque Port.
The ‘stade’ is the fishermen's beach with its colourful jumble of fishing boats (or luggers) pulled up onto the shingle awaiting the next tide.
Nearby, fishermen sort their nets before hanging them up to dry in the tall net ‘shops’ that are unique to Hastings; and delicious fresh fish is always available from the fishmarket.
A newcomer to the fishermen's beach is the ‘Sea Life Centre’ which opened in 1990 and gives a fascinating glimpse at life beneath the waves — you can actually walk beneath the water!
Behind the Stade the Old Town nestles in a valley filled with twisting passageways, flower-filled squares and lovely cottages.
The atmosphere is that of a village with antique shops, delightful pubs, tea shops and bistros.
The George Street precinct is a great place to pause, enjoy the frequent street entertainment and watch the world go by.
A special ‘Old Town Walk’ leaflet is available to ensure that you miss none of the highlights!
Above the Old Town, on the West Hill, lies  Hasting's most important monument to her famous past: the ruins of William the Conqueror's first castle.
Originally a wooden fortress, Hastings Castle was later built from stone shipped by the Normans from Caen in France.
In the Castle grounds you will find the ‘1066 Story’ where the story of the Castle and the famous Battle of 1066 is portrayed in an exciting audio visual presentation.
Beneath the Castle you will find dungeons and ‘A Smuggler's Adventure’ in St. Clement's Caves where strange tales of smuggling are retold daily.
If you want to follow the Conqueror's footsteps you should start at Pevensey — just north of Eastbourne — where the invading army landed, and which already boasted an impressive Roman fort, Anderida, built centuries earlier.
The Normans were later to add their own castle, Pevensey Castle, inside the Roman walls.
From here William marched his men to the spot, a few miles north of Hastings, where the Norman and Saxon armies met in bloody battle on October 14th, 1066.
King Harold was slain — some say by an arrow piercing his eye — and the rest, of course, is history.
To thank God for his victory over the English, William founded an Abbey — Battle Abbey — with its altar erected on the very spot where Harold fell.
Today the Abbey's massive gatehouse overlooks the ancient battlefield and, on the opposite side, the lovely little market town called Battle, which grew up around the Abbey walls.
In fact all around Hastings are Castles, medieval hill towns, country manors, thatched and half-timbered farmhouses and lovely countryside where sheep, fruit, hops and vineyards prosper in this delightful area.
1066 Country contains three Cinque Ports.
Rye, with its cobbled streets, picturesque jumble of houses and timeless atmosphere is, perhaps, the prettiest.
Long since abandoned by the sea, Rye is now a hilltop town affording super views of the surrounding countryside.
Other attractions to visit include historic houses such as Michelham Priory; Great Dixter, a fine example of a XVth century manor house; and the magnificent moated Bodiam Castle.
Then there are steam railways, zoo parks, and all those cosy pubs and beer gardens where local ales provide the perfect complement to fine food.
You'll also discover Sussex wine — and methode champenoise ‘champagne’ which regularly competes successfully against its French counterpart.
Poetic justice for our defeat in 1066?
Perhaps!
Come and see this lively, and lovely, corner of Britain — soon.
PLACES TO VISIT IN HASTINGS AND 1066 COUNTRY.
‘1066 STORY’ HASTINGS CASTLE
Ruins of Britain's first Norman Castle, with fine views and the mysterious Whispering Dungeons.
The ‘1066 Story’ set in the Castle grounds, an exciting audio visual experience about the Castle and the famous battle of 1066.
Open daily.
PLEASURE ISLAND
The Stade, Old Town
Fun for all the family with traditional seaside amusements.
Including boats, go-karts and dodgems.
CANNON CINEMA
While discovering Hastings why not visit the Cannon Cinema in Queens Road opposite the Town Hall?
Our luxury three-screen complex shows a range of popular children's and adult films in the afternoons and evenings plus specially selected children's movies every Saturday morning at 9.30.
For further information and programme times please telephone 420517.
SMUGGLERS ADVENTURE IN ST.
CLEMENT'S CAVES.
This themed experience is set in a labyrinth of passages, caverns and secret chambers, 60 feet below ground!
Realistic recreations of past dark deeds are dramatically brought to life through tableaux, scenic effects and spectacular sound and lighting.
HASTINGS AND OLD TOWN MUSEUMS
Hastings Museum and Art Gallery in Cambridge Road has regular exhibitions and a spectacular room from an Indian Colonial Palace.
The Old Town Museum (High St.) features Hastings and the district through the ages.
JUNGLE TUMBLE
The Stade, Old Town
Open all year round.
A supervised indoor play area for Tarzans and Janes between 1–½ and 12.
Features ball pond, tunnels, slides ropes, etc, with a soft play area for toddlers.
Refreshments available.
OLD TOWN
Wander around streets full of character and half-timbered houses, interesting shops, cafés and pubs.
FREE OLD TOWN WALK with guides from the Old Hastings Preservation Society.
Meet at top of West Hill Cliff Railway.
Alternatively pick up the Old Town Walk Guide from the Tourist Information Walk.
SHIPWRECK HERITAGE CENTRE
Rock-a-Nore, Old Town
Visit this exciting museum.
Spectacular audio-visual show ‘A SHIPWRECK ADVENTURE’, videos and 3,000 years of sunken treasures.
Live RADAR of shipping in the Channel and daily weather satellite pictures from space.
HASTINGS GOLF COURSE
This undulating course at Beauport Park is situated in picturesque surroundings and each hole is tree lined.
There are separate practice greens for pitching and putting, a 275-yard driving range, a clubhouse with catering and a fully stocked golf shop run by our resident PGA professional.
For further details please contact Hastings Golf Course, Beauport Park, Battle Road, St. Leonards-on-Sea, East Sussex.
EMBROIDERY
Town Hall, Queens Road
By the Royal School of Needlework, here are depicted events from the Battle of Hastings to modern times.
Plus a Battlefield model and period costume dolls.
BURTON'S ST.
LEONARDS
The original St. Leonards-on-Sea, now merged with Hastings, was a classic 19th century planned resort, with landscaped gardens and spectacular architecture.
FREE CONDUCTED WALK with guides from Burton's St. Leonards Society.
Each Thursday at 14.15.
Assemble outside The Royal Victoria Hotel.
Walks last approx. 1 hour.
ALEXANDRA PARK
Over 120 acres of flower gardens and areas of natural woodland.
With Bowls, Putting, Tennis, Boating Lake, Floral Hall and Swannery.
Major events for 1992 include the Beer Festival and the Town and Country Fair.
WHITE ROCK THEATRE
Summer ‘Season of Stars’ variety shows, concerts, plays, etc.
Lecture series ‘Hastings and Its Historic Countryside’ most weeks FREE.
Whilst having a meal at the Garden Buttery Restaurant enjoy superb views across the English Channel or have a relaxing drink in one of the theatre's bars.
EAST AND WEST HILL CLIFF RAILWAYS
The East Hill Railway is one of the steepest in Britain and runs from Rock-a-Nore, near the Fishermen's Museum, to the Country Park.
The West Hill Railway takes you up to the Castle and Smugglers Adventure in St. Clement's Caves from George Street.
FISHERMEN'S MUSEUM
Plenty to see where the Old Town meets the sea: fishing boats on the beach, Lifeboat House, net huts (illustrated) and the Fishermen's Museum.
Admission: free.
HASTINGS SEA LIFE CENTRE
Rock-a-Nore, Old Town
DISCOVER HASTINGS FROM UNDERWATER.
An amazing Ocean Tunnel and a host of multi-level viewing displays provide close encounters with sensational sharks, fascinating rays and hundreds of other intriguing sea creatures.
Daily talks and feeding displays.
Restaurant and themed gift shop.
MARINA PAVILION
St. Leonards seafront
Lively seafront venue.
Cafe and bar open daily for seaside refreshments.
Open for Easter weekend and then from 1st May to 27th Sept.
Live evening entertainment Wednesday (dancing), Thursday and Friday (jazz on Friday).
Enquire at the Tourist Information Centre for fuller programme or telephone the Marina.
SIGHTSEEING TOUR
Sightseeing tour with commentary by open top bus every hour on Sundays to Fridays throughout the summer.
Tickets: £2 Adult, £1.50 Child/Senior Citizen.
Lasts all day so you can hop on or off at leisure to visit attractions en route.
Full details from the Tourist Information Centre.
BEXHILL
A non-commercialised resort with European Blue Flag Award for clean beaches and safe bathing.
Plenty to do for the young and elderly including windsurfing, sailing, bowls, tennis and horse riding.
Visit the Costume Museum and the majestic De La Warr Pavilion and enjoy various entertainments, sun terraces, restaurant, cafeteria and bars.
Excellent shops, fine coastal walks and lovely gardens complete this picturesque resort.
BATTLE
The site of the ‘1066’ Battle of Hastings, this charming medieval town which is dominated by the magnificent Battle Abbey.
Now a thriving market town with many excellent shops and restaurants.
Visit the reproduction Bayeux Tapestry in the town museum, or Senlac field where William the Conqueror defeated Harold.
At the end of May Battle hosts a ten-day festival of music and drama.
FARM WORLD THE CHILDREN'S FARM
Great Knelle Farm, Beckley
Visit the dairy, lamb flock, hop picking, children's playground and new theatre and children's holiday club.
Join in morning and afternoon feeding sessions.
Also coarse fishing and craft workshops.
Seek for buried treasure — £1,000 hidden in Smugglers Country.
Farm now linked to steam railway!
New for ‘92 grass karting and archery.
GREAT DIXTER HOUSE AND GARDENS
Northiam
A superb timber-framed hall house built in 1460.
Antique furniture and needlework with a wide variety of unusual and interesting plants in the gardens.
Open daily.
Also open Bank Holiday Mondays and weekends in October.
BUCKLEY'S YESTERDAY'S WORLD
Next to Battle Abbey, High Street, Battle, Nr.
Hastings
Walk through this most charming 600 year old Wealden Hall House and experience a bygone age, with push-button commentaries, smells and full-size animated figures.
Over 75,000 nostalgic exhibits dating from 1850 to 1950 crammed into many old-fashioned shop and room displays.
SURPRISES FOR THE WHOLE FAMILY.
Open: all year from 10.00.
CARR TAYLOR VINEYARDS
Westfield, East Sussex
Carr Taylor's Winery, one of England's foremost, gained another 10 trophies and medals, both nationally and internationally, in 1991.
The estate offers individual trails*, guided tours of vineyards, modern winery and a wine tasting.
The shop sells both wines and unusual gifts.
Open all year 10.00–17.00.
MICHELHAM PRIORY
Upper Dicker, Hailsham off A22 and A27
13th-16thC buildings, tudor barn, 14thC gatehouse, 7 acre moat, working watermill, crafts and bookshop, gardens, trees, varied exhibits.
Open daily.
Special terms for groups booked in advance.
Licensed restaurants.
RYE
A medieval town with charming olde worlde timbered buildings and cobbled streets.
The history can be seen via the town model at the Heritage Centre.
Arguably the most beautiful town in Britain.
Pass through the Landgate — the original medieval gateway — to visit Ypres Tower and the Gun Garden.
Rye has excellent shops and potteries.
The beauty of this ancient town is that told and new have be carefully mixed.
ROMNEY, HYTHE AND DYMCHURCH RAILWAY
New Romney, Kent
Follow the A259 into Kent and take the family for a trip on the world's only main line in miniature.
Travel 14 miles across historic Romney Marsh, from Hythe to Dungeness lighthouse, behind one of our fabulous ⅓ scale steam or diesel locomotives.
Visit the fascinating Toy and Model Museum at New Romney.
Fast and frequent trains run daily from Easter to end of September, weekends March and October.
Hastings also offers the visitor a comprehensive range of sporting facilities including swimming, squash and badminton at Summerfields Sports Centre; ice-skating at the White Rock Ice Rink.
LOOK FOR THIS SYMBOL — IT MEANS WE ARE OPEN ALL YEAR.
HOW TO GET TO HASTINGS
Served by a good road network, Hastings is 62 miles (100km) from London.
The major road route is the A21 which is linked to the M25, providing the quick route around London.
The coastal road to the A259 linking the town with the Cross Channel Ports.
Frequent fast trains run from two main London stations, Victoria and Charing Cross, and the journey takes approximately 110 minutes.
The coastway service runs the length of the South Coast.
National Express operate regular daily services from Victoria Coach Station.
A number of independent coach companies offer a range of departure points and times throughout the London area.
Hastings is ideally situated for the ports of Dover (45 miles), Folkestone,(38 miles) and Newhaven (31 miles).
Between the three ports, a number of destinations are available, ideal for a day excursion.
In addition to the Cross Channel Ferries at Dover, there is also a Hoverport.
The International Gatwick Airport handles direct flights from all parts of the world, with internal flights operating from the rest of Britain.
Gatwick in on the Victoria line, offering a direct link with Hastings, and is approximately 50 miles by road.
In addition, charter services operate from Lydd Airport (21 miles).
Tourist Information
A friendly face and a wealth of knowledge will greet you at Hastings Tourist Information Centre.
We stock books, souvenirs, maps, etc.
Also we stock a range of ‘Taste of Sussex’ produce — locally produced honey, tea, biscuits and much more.
So if there are any further specific details you need do not hesitate to call into or telephone the: Tourist Information Centre.
DISCOVER Hastings
HASTINGS AND ST.
LEONARDS — HEART OF THE 1066 COUNTRY
MUCH MORE THAN YOU EVER IMAGINED THE SEASIDE
WIN A WEEKEND IN HASTINGS FREE PRIZE DRAW SEE COUPON INSIDE
MICHELHAM PRIORY
Property of THE SUSSEX ARCHAEOLOGICAL SOCIETY
MICHELHAM PRIORY
Experience the beauty and tranquillity of the gardens and buildings, surrounded by one of the largest moats in England, when you visit Michelham Priory
Situated at the head of the Cuckmere valley, on an impressive site in the heart of the Weald and protected by the great bend of the Cuckmere River, this site was chosen for an Augustinian priory in the 13th century and became part of the religious life of the time.
It became a farmhouse after the dissolution of the monasteries in the 16th century.
Access is through the imposing 14th century gatehouse, bridging the moat whose flow is used to power a working watermill.
In the grounds, buildings of the Priory can be viewed.
The Tudor wing was constructed in Elizabethan times, and now features various permanent and temporary exhibitions.
Other buildings include an impressive Elizabethan barn, a blacksmith and wheelwright's shop, and a rope museum.
The moat attracts many varieties of waterfowl throughout the year.
The spacious gardens include herbaceous, rose and evergreen borders, and many specimen trees.
The Physic Garden is planted with examples of herbs used in Medieval times for medicinal purposes.
In the grounds of Michelham Priory is a working watermill, powered by the flow of the moat, where flour is ground in the traditional way.
MICHELHAM COUNTRY FOODS
Michelham Country Foods are at the Priory to provide you with the best of A Taste of Sussex.
Coffees, country lunches and traditional teas with home-made fare from our own bakery, using flour ground in the Priory water mill, are available during Priory opening times.
We are fully licensed, and specialise in local ale, apple juice and Sussex wines.
Please ask about our winter programme and Priory Restaurant Discount Pass.
The dramatic and beautiful moat-site of the 16th century Great Barn, the Moat Room and Priory Room restaurants and the grounds provides an ideal venue for up to 600 people.
At night the floodlit buildings offer an unrivalled setting for all types of function.
We cater for conference evenings, traditional Sussex dinners, balls, wedding receptions, celebration dinners, and all types of dances.
1992 EXHIBITIONS
NEW…
IN HOUSE
25 March-31 October.
Exhibition to celebrate 1992, the European Single Market, featuring the Méréville-Cuckmere Valley Link Association founded in 1988 to maintain bonds between two rural areas and foster the spirit of European friendship.
THE LIVING WORLD
Seven Sisters Country Park, Exceat, Seaford, East Sussex
Forest Estuary Downland Seashore
THE LIVING WORLD is within the Sussex Downs Area of Outstanding Natural Beauty, and on the Southdowns Way long-distance footpath.
It is next to Friston Forest with its forest walks and picnic areas, and is a short walk from the sea.
Children admiring Living World stick insects.
Member of the South East England Tourist Board
Main car park plus woodland car park nearby.
Toilet facilities
A regular ‘712’ bus service from Eastbourne stops outside the exhibition.
This unique zoo, with exhibits in beautifully landscaped settings is fun for all the family.
Whether you are fascinated by the unusual, or enchanted by sheer beauty, there is something for everyone here.
Eggs, caterpillars, chrysalids, stick insects and equipment are available for sale from the showroom.
All parts of THE LIVING WORLD are accessible to wheelchairs.
The spectacular and fascinating world of Natural History.
A LIVING selection according to season includes:
Butterflies
Bees
Beetles
Tropical Ants
Snails
Scorpions
Stick Insects
Spiders
Exotic Creatures
Mantids
Moths
Marine Life
Locusts
Freshwater Life
Reptiles
A diverse and entertaining LIVING exhibition, with informative text and photographs plus an extensive gift shop.
THE LIVING WORLD
Open daily 10 a.m. 'till 5 p.m., mid-March to 1st November.
Also open weekends, half-terms, school holidays in winter.
Rates for parties and OAPs.
Under fives free admission.
Special family ticket.
Free entry to gift shop.
BATTLE 1066
enjoy east sussex country
THE TOWN BUILT ON THE SITE OF THE BATTLE OF HASTINGS
TWINNED WITH ST.
VALERY-SUR-SOMME
MEMBER South East England Tourist Board
BATTLE ABBEY
The atmospheric ruins of Battle Abbey stand on the site of the famous Battle of Hastings.
The abbey was founded by William the Conqueror to celebrate his victory over King Harold and as an atonement for the loss of life suffered in the battle.
Visitors can see the spot where Harold fell, walk the now serenely peaceful battlefield and view the fine examples of surviving monastic architecture.
An audio-visual presentation relates the story of the Battle of Hastings and further attractions opening in the spring of 1992 include an exciting exhibition in the gatehouse and a carefully restored Georgian dairy.
The abbey ruins and battlefield are in the care of English Heritage.
ST.
MARY'S CHURCH
St. Mary the Virgin The Church on the Battlefield 1066.
On a visit to this historic church you will see a magnificent Romanesque nave, a Norman font with  medieval cover, rare wall paintings of the 14th century, the gilded alabaster tomb of Sir Anthony Browne to whom Henry VIII granted the Abbey, Crusaders’ crosses carved by sword and the Senlac Commemorative Window.
Stewards on duty to welcome you.
Special guided tours contact Mrs. Patricia Roberts, Bull Cottage, Parks Yard, Battle.
BATTLE MUSEUM OF LOCAL HISTORY
opposite Abbey Green carpark.
A small and interesting display of local artifacts.
FACSIMILE DOMESDAY BOOK (SUSSEX) & BAYEUX TAPESTRY
COINS
MAPS
ASSIZE RECORDS
DINOSAUR REMAINS
IGUANODON FOOTPRINT
SAXON v NORMAN BATTLE SCENE
OLD TOWN & GAMES
COME FOR 5 MINUTES — STAY FOR AN HOUR!
Easter to Sept. 30th and mid-term hols.
Adults 75p, Children 25p Children with adults FREE .
School groups catered for.
Battle offers all the pleasures of a small country town — for a day out, a week-end or a longer holiday.
Set in delightful countryside 6 miles from the sea.
It is unique in being the site of the terrible Battle of 1066 when William the Conqueror defeated King Harold and his Saxon army.
BUCKLEYS YESTERDAY'S WORLD
Visitors to Buckleys will see many NEW attractions opening in 1992 — The Yesterday's World main complex building has tripled in size with many new Victorian and Edwardian shop and room displays, push-button commentaries, animated life-size figures, old fashioned Penny arcade machines and much more…
Outside there is a beautiful English County Garden with a refreshment kiosk, picnic area and Children's play area.
THE BATTLE HERITAGE SHOW
Situated in the historic Almonry building surrounded by delightful gardens, come and see history unfold before you eyes on the town model.
From 1066 and Battle of Hastings, you pass through the Abbey Gatehouse and see how the town has developed over the years.
From the days of gunpowder, clock-making and leather products, you will be shown, in a sound and light experience, the contribution the town has made to our heritage.
Browse in the gift shop or enjoy refreshment in the restaurant, and you can reflect for a few moments on how different things might have been without the events of 1066.
Group books & School Parties.
SHOPPING
Battle specialises in small, independent, retail shops, each offering its own individual style and high standards of service.
Gourmet shops and galleries, furniture and fashion, antiques and 1066 collectables, books on the Battle of Hastings and, of course, the Sussex trug, will make for a shopping experience surrounded in history.
ACCOMMODATION
Choose from several comfortable town-centre hotels, all of which have at least 3 Crowns.
Or you may prefer one of our country-house hotels nearby, in beautiful settings and with recreational facilities.
Battle and the surrounding villages also offer farmhouse and ‘B & B’ accommodation.
For the camper and caravanner, we offer may attractive listed sites.
Remember to take advantage too, of the many week-end and holiday packages on offer.
For a full accommodation list and booking service contact the Tourist Information Centre, opposite Battle Abbey.
EATING OUT
From Sussex cream teas to stylish restaurants, Battle offers the widest range of refreshments.
Take a walk through the town, and you will also find a choice of pub-fare, wine-bars, bistros and take-away restaurants, catering to every taste and with facilities for families.
Several picnic areas are situated within sight of Battle Abbey.
DIARY OF EVENTS
You will find that there is always something happening in Battle which you will enjoy.
Here are just some of the events which take place each year.
GOOD FRIDAY: Annual Marbles Match and Easter Bonnet Parade
MAY: Battle Festival — 10 days during latter part of May with music, art and drama.
Medieval Fair — Spring Bank Holiday
JUNE — SEPTEMBER: Award winning ‘Battle in Bloom’
SUMMER EXHIBITION: Battle Arts Group (Memorial Hall)
SEPTEMBER: Battle Fun Run (10 kms.) 1st. or 2nd.
Sunday
OCTOBER:(14th) Anniversary of the Battle of Hastings.
Commemorative Service in St. Mary's Church on Sunday nearest to 14th October.
NOVEMBER: 1st.
Saturday — Battle Bonfire.
Torchlight Procession, Bonfire and Fireworks Display
Last Saturday — Father Christmas arrives to switch on festive Christmas lights
DECEMBER: Gala Late Night Shopping — a Thursday in early December (5.30 — 9 p.m.)
Boxing Day — Annual Meet.
Pink-coats on the Abbey Green.
Also —
Weekly markets at Battle Market Site on Fridays and Saturdays — bargains galore!
Modern Sports Centre at Claverham Community College
Wednesday sale of antiques, furniture, etc.
Abbey Auction Galleries
Wines, tastings and tours at several local vineyards
And much more!
Ask for details at the Tourist Information Centre
HOW TO GET TO BATTLE
Served by a good road network, Battle is 57 miles from London via the A21/A2100.
The A21 links to the M25.
The A259 is the coastal road to the Cross Channel Ports.
Frequent fast trains run from London/Charing Cross, and the journey takes 75 minutes.
Battle is ideally situated for the port of Dover (45 miles) and Newhaven (30) miles.
There is also a SeaCat service to France from Dover/Folkestone.
The International Gatwick Airport is linked directly by train from Bexhill (9 miles), and is approximately 50 miles by road.
Battle: 1066, where it all began…
Find out all about life then, and what's on offer now at The Tourist Information Centre.
ACCOMMODATION BOOKING SERVICE.
WELL STOCKED SHOP
Open daily 10–6 p.m.
Summer 10–4 p.m.
Winter
Ask for Town Guide
Produced by Battle Promotion Ltd., with support from Rother District Council, Battle Chamber of Commerce and South East England Tourist Board.
PLEASE NOTE: Whilst every care has been taken to ensure factual accuracy in the production of this guide, Battle Promotion Ltd. will not accept liability for any error or inaccuracy.
AMERICAN MUSEUM AND GARDENS
CLAVERTON MANOR, BATH
The first American Museum outside the United States of America illustrating 200 years of American history and art through a series of furnished rooms and exhibitions.
some interesting things you can…
17th-CENTURY KEEPING ROOM 1 This low-ceilinged Keeping Room is constructed with beams and floorboards from a house (c .
1690) formerly at Wrentham, Massachusetts.
QUILTS 2 Detail from North Carolina Lily Quilt — 19th C.
CONESTOGA WAGON 3 Also in the grounds, an observation platform of a railroad car and a Cheyenne Indian tepee.
SHAKER ROOM 4 A religious sect whose craftsmen evolved an original style guided by the principles of order, harmony and utility.
STENCILLED BEDROOM 5 From the Joshua La Salle house of Windham, Connecticut c .
1830.
WEATHERVANE 6 Gilded Indian weathervane — mid-19th C — on view in the Folk Art Gallery.
If you are interested in fine eighteenth-century furniture, in hooked rugs or in quilting, in mushroom arm-chairs or in Duncan Phyfe, in Shakers or in the West, in cracker barrels or in ‘Borning Rooms’, you will find something to interest you at the American Museum in Britain.
The Museum, which was opened in 1961, was initiated by two Americans who combined a deep appreciation of the American arts with a desire to increase Anglo-American understanding.
Friends in both countries now help to support it.
An active educational programme, in co-operation with schools and colleges, is carried on throughout the year (except January) and a library is available for research.
about the American Museum
The American Museum in Britain shows, through a series of completely furnished rooms with original panelling brought from the United States, how the Americans lived from the seventeenth to the nineteenth centuries.
Contrasts in the life of colonial New England are shown in the Puritan Keeping Room of the 1680s and the cosy tavern kitchen of the 1770s with its beehive oven and well protected bar, in the blue-green panelled living room from Lee, New Hampshire, and the mid-eighteenth-century parlor of Captain Perley, who led his Minute Men at the battle of Bunker Hill.
The sophistication of the parlors from Colchester, Connecticut, and Baltimore, Maryland, introduces the period of the new Republic.
An early nineteenth-century country-style bedroom contrasts with the elegance of the Greek Revival diningroom of New York and the richly ornate bedroom from New Orleans at the time of the Civil War.
In addition there are also galleries devoted to the American Indian, the Pennsylvania Germans, the religious community of the Shakers, and the isolated Spanish colonists of New Mexico.
Further exhibits depict the opening of the West, Whaling (with a Captain's Cabin reproduced from the last of the great Yankee whalers), Textiles (with a fine collection of quilts and hooked rugs), Pewter, Glass and Silver.
The gardens include an American Arboretum, and a semi-circular gallery presenting the vigorous forms and primitive designs of American Folk Art.
There is also an 1830 Conestoga wagon, an observation platform of a railroad car, and a replica of a Tepee.
A new gallery contains a reference library covering American history and the decorative arts, a map relating to the discovery of the New World, and a hall showing special exhibitions.
1992 General Information
The Museum is open daily from 2–5 p.m. (except Mondays) from the 28th March to 1st November, Sunday and Monday of Bank Holiday weekends 11 a.m. — 5 p.m.
Gardens open 1–6 p.m. every day (except Monday).
Educational tours and special adult tours are arranged the year round upon advance application only (January excepted).
Parties of children are only admitted during public opening hours with adult supervision.
Membership
Apply Membership Secretary.
The NATIONAL WATERWAYS MUSEUM at GLOUCESTER
OPEN ALL YEAR ROUND
WELCOME ABOARD No 1
For two hundred years the Waterways carried the goods of Britain.
Two centuries, thousands of lives, in a museum where the building is a part of the display, where the feet of visitors follow the path of the people who once worked the canals.
The Nation's Waterways collection on three floors of a warehouse; vast timber beams, wooden floors and cast-iron pillars form the backdrop to displays, simulators and models.
Have a go:
Steering a narrow boat is not as easy as you think, and opening paddles and gates on a lock could spell disaster if you get things in the wrong order!
From boats to nuts and bolts, from the past to the present, the Museum provides hours of fun for all ages, and a few surprises as well.
Around the warehouse, at the quayside, are moored a variety of narrowboats, barges, and the massive Number 4 Steam Dredger.
To one side of the main building is Llanthony Yard where you will find a forge, Engine House and workshops, with regular demonstrations of the skills needed on and around the waterways.
Enjoy a ride in a cart, pulled by Peter the shire horse who spends his days in a stable at Llanthony Yard.
Take a short cruise from the Docks on board the trip boat, Queen Boadicea II.
For younger visitors there is an activity room with plenty to keep small hands busy.
Throughout the year, on the quay and in the yards, are a variety of displays and special events; ropes, railways, cranes, horses, crafts.
Please phone for our Special Events brochure.
The Museum Shop sells a wide range of souvenirs, books and clothes, and an amazing variety of traditional items and ornaments from the canal era.
The waterside cafe serves everything from a pot of tea to a full range of appetising snacks and meals.
Activities and displays take place on most days.
However, if there is something you would especially like to see, please phone to be sure it will be happening on the day of your visit.
With the support of British Waterways 
HEVER CASTLE
NEAR EDENBRIDGE KENT
VISIT ANNE BOLEYN'S CHILDHOOD HOME
HEVER CASTLE
Hever Castle dates back to 1270 when the massive Gatehouse, the outer walls and the moat were first constructed.
200 years later the Bullen (or Boleyn) family added a comfortable Tudor dwellinghouse inside the walls.
Hever Castle was the childhood home of Anne Boleyn, second wife of Henry VIII and mother of Elizabeth I, and the Castle contains many memories of her.
In 1903 William Waldorf Astor acquired the estate and invested time, money and imagination in restoring the Castle, building the ‘Tudor Village’ and creating the gardens and lake.
The Astor family's contribution to Hever's rich history can be appreciated through the superb collections of furniture, paintings and objets d'art and through the quality of workmanship employed, particularly in the wood carving and plasterwork.
Hever Castle is a warm and welcoming place, giving continued enjoyment to visitors.
The Drawing Room
The Henry VIII Room
HEVER CASTLE GARDENS
The gardens at Hever Castle were created between 1904 — 1908.
They have now reached their full maturity and are a blaze of colour for most of the year.
The spectacular Italian Garden contains statuary and sculpture dating from Roman to Renaissance times.
William Waldorf Astor made the collection in Italy and brought it to Hever where it forms a magnificent sight among the glorious display of shrubs and climbing and herbaceous plants.
the formal gardens include a walled Rose Garden, fine topiary work and a maze.
There is a 35 acre lake and throughout the gardens there are streams, cascades and fountains.
SO MUCH TO SEE AND ENJOY 
The Italian Garden
The Half Moon Pond
The Maze
Adventure Playground
Regimental Museum
Pavilion Restaurant
Right — The Loggia and Lake
KING HENRY VIII AND ANNE BOLEYN AT HEVER CASTLE
The Tudor Long Gallery at Hever Castle features scenes from the life and times of Anne Boleyn.
The 25 costumed figures, created by Bermans and Nathans Ltd., include King Henry VIII, who courted Anne at Hever Castle, Anne Boleyn, Katharine of Aragon, Jane Seymour, Cardinal Wolsey and Sir Thomas More.
Anne Boleyn
King Henry VIII
THE ASTORS OF HEVER
The Astors of Hever exhibition looks at Hever Castle and gardens in the 20th century, and at the important part the Astor Family played in its restoration.
The exhibition contains memorabilia from four generations of the Astor family, including letters and photographs, with graphic panels to tell the story of their position in society.
Astor Suite
William Waldorf Astor
The Astors of Hever exhibition looks at Hever Castle and gardens in the 20th century, and at the important part the Astor Family played in its restoration.
The exhibition contains memorabilia from four generations of the Astor family, including letters and photographs, with graphic panels to tell the story of their position in society.
HEVER CASTLE AND GARDENS
HEVER, NEAR EDENBRIDGE KENT TN8 7NG
Open daily mid March — early November (telephone for actual opening dates)
Gardens open 11.00am, Castle opens 12 noon
Last admission 5.00pm (4.00pm Winter time)
Final exit 6.00pm (5.00pm Winter time)
Hever Castle is situated three miles SE of Edenbridge, off the B2026, between Sevenoaks and East Grinstead.
British Rail — London Victoria to Edenbridge Town (3 miles — taxis available) and Hever (1 mile — no taxis).
BUCKLEYS Yesterday's World
EXPERIENCE A DAY IN A BYGONE AGE 1850–1950
BATTLE Nr.
HASTINGS E. SUSSEX
Yesterday's World BATTLE E. SUSSEX
Visitors to Buckleys Yesterday's World, the original Sussex Museum of Shops, will see many NEW attractions opening this year.
The main complex building has tripled in size with many new Victorian and Edwardian displays, such as a bygone chemists, grocers, sweet shop, railway station, wireless shop, maid's bedroom, photographer's studio and a World War II street scene plus much more…
You will find a surprise around every corner to delight all the family.
When you walk through this most charming 600 year old Wealden Hall House, you can experience the past with push-button commentaries, smells and animated life-size figures.
You will see over 100,000 fascinating nostalgic exhibits dating from 1850 to 1950.
Every day objects, now grown quaint with age, evoke memories in everyone old enough to remember them and give youngsters a chance to see how their grandparents lived.
Justly recommended by BBC & ITV Television for a great day out.
Relax in our beautiful English Country Garden with a picnic, whilst looking across the lovely Sussex Countryside.
For younger members of the family, there is an exciting children's play area*, an old-fashioned Penny Arcade, and a working miniature fairground to be enjoyed, as well as many special events and exhibitions held throughout the year.
Make your day special by visiting Buckleys Yesterday's World; visitors return again and again, always finding something new to see and do.
Our large gift shop os considered one of the best in the South East and offers a vast range of quality nostalgic gifts, such as Victorian style dolls, enamel advertising signs, tins and teddy bears.
A full-size figure of Queen Victoria , moving and speaking, comes to life in our Royalty Room, where her nightdress, chemise and silk stockings are on display, along with other items of clothing once owned by members of the Royal Family.
See the velvet poke-bonnet and purple satin shoes worn by Victoria's daughter, Princess Alice in the 1860's.
Listen to the Queen recalling the changes which took place in her long reign, the inventions which led the  way for others today, and the discoveries that were made…
Escape back into a past era of gaslights and horse-drawn carriages, of wind-up gramophones and china-faced dolls.
Come and visit Buckleys Yesterday's World.
OLD GROCERY STORE
IRONMONGERS
VICTORIAN KITCHEN
1066 COUNTRY
The historic town of Battle is the perfect place to enjoy a wonderful day out — there are several visitor attractions, lots of shops, pubs, restaurants and a weekly market.
The other major attraction is Battle Abbey, built on the site of the Battle of Hastings 1066.
OPENING TIMES: 7 days a week, 10am to 5.30pm (last admission may be extended subject to demand)— Winter times may change.
ADMISSION: Price reductions for senior citizens, students, children, families & disabled guests.
Children under 5 admitted free.
GROUP AND EDUCATIONAL VISITS: Group visits discounts and catering available.
‘NEW’ coach driver benefits offered.
Teachers' notes, worksheets and outside exhibition details on request.
For further information, telephone or fax Yesterday's World Group Booking Office or phone Hastings Central Group Booking Service and ask for the Groups and Schools Visits brochure.
GENERAL TRAVEL & TRAVEL INFORMATION: Battle Tourist Information Centre.
HOW TO GET TO YESTERDAY'S WORLD
BY CAR — Please see the back page.
BY BUS/COACH — There are regular travel services and special day trips to Yesterday's World and Battle from most towns in the South East — Yesterday's World is only 50 yards from the High Street bus stops — contact the following companies for more details:
Maidstone & District provides an hourly bus service ‘4’ and ‘5’to Battle, 6 days a week, with a limited service on Sundays, departing from Hastings via St Leonards — Battle — Hawkhurst — Maidstone, bus services also run in reverse order departing from Maidstone.
At Maidstone, connections can be made with bus services from Tunbridge Wells, Tonbridge and the Medway towns.
Eastbourne Buses run a frequent service ‘28’ to Battle, departing from Eastbourne via Pevensey Bay — Bexhill — Battle — Bodiam — Northiam — Rye.
Service ‘28’ also runs in reverse order departing from Rye.
Waterhouse Tours run regular day trips from Eastbourne Pier to Battle.
Southdown Buses run services from many towns in East & West Sussex.
BY BRITISH RAIL NETWORK SOUTH EAST or contact your local B.R. station for train times to Battle station.
WE ARE NEXT TO BATTLE ABBEY, 89–90 HIGH STREET, BATTLE, Nr.
HASTINGS, EAST SUSSEX.
By car — the 1066 town of Battle is situated 6 miles north of Hastings, on the A2100, just off the A21 (Junction 5 off the M25).
The town is easily reached from the A259, A22, A23, A27 & A28 roads.
Follow the toad signs to Hastings or Bexhill, Battle is clearly signposted off all the main roads leading to these towns —There is ample car parking close by.
Buckleys Yesterday's World reserve the right to alter or withdraw any facility or details without prior notice.
*The play area will open subject to planning approval.
English Heritage PLACES IN HISTORY
Introducing England's Historic Landmarks
ENGLAND'S HISTORY FIRST HAND
English Heritage is an organisation dedicated to preserving England's historic environment.
It provides funds and expertise to maintain and restore ancient sites, castles, monuments and historically important buildings all over the country.
Many fascinating sites and buildings would otherwise be lost for present and future generations to enjoy.
Each year thousands of visitors come to more than 350 properties and historic landmarks cared for by English Heritage.
Each place has a special story to tell and offers a new experience of history: from neolithic man to Roman invasion, from William the Conqueror to the Civil War, from the Restoration to Queen Victoria and beyond.
Wherever you travel in England we invite you to some unforgettable places in history.
This leaflet samples a handful of sites that should not be missed.
Conservators at Audley End House
Egglestone, Co Durham
Ranger's House, London
Orford Castle, Suffolk
TREASURES OF LONDON
So much to do and see!
London is one of the most exciting cities in the world, famous for its parks, gardens, monuments, museums and galleries, its shopping streets and malls.
In the heart of London and in its leafy suburbs, English Heritage cares for some marvellous properties which survive, after extensive restoration, almost in their original state.
These are a few we hope you will find the time to visit.
THE CHAPTER HOUSE AND JEWEL TOWER
These two medieval buildings adjoin Westminster Abbey, close to the Houses of Parliament and Whitehall's corridors of power.
The Chapter House was built by the royal masons in 1250 and contains some of the finest medieval sculpture in England.
The floor of this high-ceilinged, octagonal building still has its original glazed tiles.
The Jewel Tower is a fascinating remnant of the medieval Palace of Westminster which housed Edward III's treasure until the death of Henry VIII.
A new exhibition on the history of Parliament will open in Spring 1992.
Chapter House
SPECIAL FEATURES
Chapter House:Tape tour, museum.
ADMISSION 1992 
HOW TO GET THERE
The Chapter House is on the east side of the Abbey cloister.
Approach through the Abbey or through Dean's Yard and the cloister.
The Jewel Tower is opposite the south end of the Houses of Parliament (Victoria Tower).
Buses: Frequent from surrounding areas.
Trains: District Line to Westminster; BR Charing Cross (¾ mile).
KENWOOD
The Iveagh Bequest in Kenwood is one of the most important private collections of paintings in the country.
Works by Rembrandt, Vermeer, Turner, Reynolds and Gainsborough are beautifully set in this neoclassical house, remodelled by Robert Adam in 1764.
The Kenwood library is prized as the finest Adam room in England.
The Guitar Player by Jan Vermeer
SPECIAL FEATURES
Tape tour; colour souvenir guidebooks; restaurant; gift shop.
June-Sept: Open Air Concerts.
Spring and Autumn Recitals.
FACILITIES
Access for visitors in wheelchairs to grounds and ground floor, toilets (suitable for wheelchair users); car park.
HOW TO GET THERE
Road: Hampstead Lane, London NW3.
Bus: 210 (Finsbury Park station-Golders Green).
Train: Hampstead Heath station, 1–½ miles; Northern Line to Archway or Golders Green (then bus 210).
CHISWICK HOUSE
Set in its own park, Chiswick House was built around 1725 for Lord Burlington's library and art collection.
The house has magnificent interior decorations and is surrounded by Italian style gardens including a lake, a flourishing orangery, classical statues and neoclassical temples.
The perfect place for a family visit followed by a walk and picnic.
SPECIAL FEATURES
Tape tour included in admission price.
Exhibition and audiovisual presentation about the house.
Colour guidebook; gift shop; picnics welcome.
FACILITIES
Access for visitors in wheelchairs to exterior and ground floor only; toilets (in grounds); car park (off westbound A4).
HOW TO GET THERE
Road: Burlington Lane, London W4.
Bus: 190, 290 (Hammersmith-Richmond); E3 (Greenford-Chiswick).
Train: Chiswick station, ½ mile; District Line to Turnham Green, 1 mile (then bus E3).
MARBLE HILL HOUSE
Built for George II's mistress, Henrietta Howard (later Countess of Suffolk) in 1724–29, this magnificent villa is set in open parkland by the Thames.
The Great Room is exceptional — lavishly gilded with architectural paintings by Panini.
Marble Hill House
RANGER'S HOUSE
This elegant, 18th century villa built in red brick is a short walk across Greenwich Park from the National Maritime Museum.
It was once the home of the Ranger in Greenwich Park and also a retreat from the City for the statesman, Lord Chesterfield.
Today it houses the Suffolk Collection including several Old Masters and fine Jacobean portraits; also the Dolmetsch Collection — one of the most comprehensive collections of musical instruments in England.
SPECIAL FEATURES
Marble Hill House:Tape tour; colour guidebook; restaurant.
July-Aug: Open Air Concerts.
Ranger's House:Tape tour; colour guidebook.
FACILITIES
Marble Hill House:Access for visitors in wheelchairs; toilets; car park.
Ranger's House:Access for visitors in wheelchairs; toilets.
HOW TO GET THERE
Marble Hill House:Road: Richmond Road, Twickenham.
Bus: Frequent from surrounding areas.
Train: St Margarets station, ½ mile; District line to Richmond, 1 mile.
Ranger's House:Road: Chesterfield Walk, London SE10.
Bus: 53.
Train: Maze Hill station, ½ mile.
DOVER CASTLE
Built high above the White Cliffs of Dover, Dover Castle is one of Western Europe's most impressive medieval fortresses.
The castle is known as the ‘Key of England’ having guarded this vulnerable coastline for centuries.
Visitors can see the Great Keep in the centre of the fortress as well as a rare Roman lighthouse, a Saxon church and a network of ancient earthworks.
Deep under the cliffs is Hellfire Corner a labyrinth of secret tunnels where the evacuation of Dunkirk and the defence of the south east during World War II were planned.
SPECIAL FEATURES
Exhibition; audiovisual centre; colour souvenir guidebook.
Restaurant; Hellfire Corner tea shop (summer only); gift shops.
FACILITIES
Access for visitors in wheelchairs to courtyard and grounds (some very steep slopes), and to Hellfire Corner.
Toilets; car park; coach parking.
HOW TO GET THERE
Road: on E side of Dover, overlooking the town.
Follow the signs.
Bus: D77, 90, 90A.
Train: Dover Priory station, 1–½ miles.
BATTLE ABBEY AND BATTLEFIELD
Come to the village of Battle in East Sussex and stand on the field where William the Conqueror and Harold II fought the Battle of Hastings in 1066 — an event that changed the course of England's history.
The battle of devious tactics and heroic action ended with William's victory and crowning as King of England.
On the battlefield today, you can still sense the extraordinary fight.
Visit Battle Abbey, founded by William to commemorate his victory and to remember the fallen.
The substantial remains include a large 14th century gatehouse where you an see the newly opened exhibition on the history of this momentous site.
SPECIAL FEATURES
Great Gatehouse exhibition, open spring 1992.
Audiovisual —1066: The Battle of Hastings .
Route for disabled visitors around the abbey ruins, including special tape tour.
‘Battlefield Walk’ approx 1 mile, ‘Country Park Walk’approx 1 mile.
Gift shop; colour souvenir guidebook and tape tour.
FACILITIES
Toilets; car park (charge payable); refreshments nearby.
HOW TO GET THERE
Road: At S end of Battle High St. Bus: ⅘ (Maidstone-Hastings).
Train: Battle station, ½ mile.
THE ROAD TO CANTERBURY
A powerful defensive outpost, Rochester Castle was an important royal stronghold for hundreds of years.
It remains dominant in a position close to where the Roman road of Watling Street crosses the River Medway, on the road to Canterbury.
St. Augustine's Abbey, founded nearly 1400 years ago, was the first Christian site established after the Saxons attempted to eradicate Christianity.
The remains of the Abbey are only a short distance from Canterbury Cathedral and include parts of an Anglo-Saxon church and a medieval monastery.
St. Augustine's Abbey is a World Heritage Site.
Rochester Castle
SPECIAL FEATURES
Rochester Castle:Tape tour; colour souvenir guidebook.
FACILITIES
Rochester Castle:Toilets, car parking.
St. Augustine's Abbey:Access for visitors in wheelchairs (some steps).
HOW TO GET THERE
Rochester Castle:S. of Rochester Bridge on A2.
Bus: Tel (0634) 832666 for details.
Train: Rochester station, ½ mile.
St. Augustine's Abbey:Road: In Longport, ¼ mile E of Cathedral Close.
Train: Canterbury East and West stations.
STONEHENGE
Stonehenge is a unique and powerful prehistoric monument started over 5000 years ago on Salisbury Plain in Wiltshire.
The largest stones weigh over 50 tons apiece and some of the smaller ones were transported to the site from over 100 miles away.
The neolithic builders were highly accurate, curving the stone lintels to follow the circumference of a circle and aligning the stones with the exact positions of the midwinter and midsummer sun.
What was the original purpose of the site?
Possibly for ceremonies marking the annual seasons but no one can be sure.
This World Heritage Site remains a mystery.
SPECIAL FEATURES
Colour souvenir guidebook; gift shop.
FACILITIES
Access for visitors in wheelchairs; cafeteria; toilets; car park.
HOW TO GET THERE
Road: 2 miles W of Amesbury on junction of A303 with A344/A360.
Bus: 3 (Salisbury station-Stonehenge).
Train: Salisbury station, 9–½ miles.
Tel: English Heritage Area Office
AUDLEY END HOUSE
When you visit the ancient university town of Cambridge and enjoy the historic college buildings along the River Cam, you should not fail to travel a few miles south to Audley End House in neighbouring Essex.
This is a palatial Jacobean country manor house with exquisite interiors and wooden carvings.
Each of the 30 rooms is arranged as if it were still in use — the Little Drawing Room was designed by Robert Adam with gilded mouldings and intricate wall paintings.
The landscaped gardens outside the houses remain a tribute to the great 18th-century landscaper, Capability Brown.
SPECIAL FEATURES
Tape tour; colour souvenir guidebook.
Exhibition of farming implements in the stables.
Restaurant; gift shop; garden centre.
Picnics welcome.
FACILITIES
Access for visitors in wheelchairs to substantial ground-floor area and gardens; toilets; car park.
HOW TO GET THERE
Road: 1 mile W of Saffron Walden on B1383.
Train: Audley End station, 1–¼ miles.
(Local taxis available)
SUFFOLK CASTLES
Each rural county in England has a special charm and character.
Suffolk, where the famous annual festival of music is held each year at Aldeburgh, is no exception.
History lives on in the towns of Framlingham and Orford each with its own splendid medieval castle.
Framlingham Castle, built in the 13th century, has 13 towers linked by a continuous wall.
From the top you see excellent views over the town and surrounding countryside.
Orford Castle was built by Henry II as part of his coastal defences and remarkably well preserved.
It has a massive 90 foot tower from which you can see across Orford and the seashore nearby.
Framlingham Castle.
SPECIAL FEATURES
Framlingham Castle:Museum of local bygones in the north wing; colour souvenir guidebook; gift shop.
Orford Castle:Exhibition on Orford and the Suffolk coastline.
Colour souvenir guidebook.
FACILITIES
Framlingham Castle:Access for visitors in wheelchairs to grounds and ground floor; toilets; car park.
Orford Castle:Car park; coach park (450 yards); refreshments nearby.
HOW TO GET THERE
Framlingham Castle:Road: In Framlingham on B1116.
Bus: 80, 82, 83 from Ipswich.
Train: Wickham Market station, 6–½ miles.
Orford Castle:Road: In Orford, ½ mile NW of Orford Quay on B1084.
Bus: 1, 122.
Train: Wickham Market station, 8 miles.
KENILWORTH CASTLE
Kenilworth Castle in Warwickshire is probably the most important castle in the Midlands.
The walls of red sandstone are up to 20 feet thick, surrounding the strong 12th century keep.
You can also see the remains of the state rooms built and furnished for Queen Elizabeth 1st by Robert Dudley, Earl of Leicester, the virgin queen's favourite.
The surrounding Tudor gardens have been reconstructed to convey the formalized symmetry of the period.
Warwickshire is Shakespeare country and there are many other towns, villages, parks and historic monuments well worth a visit, not least Stratford-upon-Avon, Shakespeare's birthplace.
SPECIAL FEATURES
New souvenir guidebook; exhibition; tape tour; gift shop.
FACILITIES
Toilets; car park; education room.
Refreshments on Castle Green.
HOW TO GET THERE
Road: On W side of Kenilworth, off B4103.
Bus: X12, 16, 17 & 19, 18 & 63 (Coventry station-Leamington Spa).
Train: Coventry station, 4 miles.
YORK: CITY AND SHIRE
From Clifford's Tower, the 13th century keep of York Castle erected by the Normans, you can enjoy a panorama over this historic walled city.
This powerful and unusual defensive tower was never put to the test and was almost solely used to keep prisoners in rather than invaders out.
York, with its Minster, the Castle Museum and Jorvik Viking Exhibition can reveal some 2000 years of history.
Outside the city walls, Yorkshire is the largest county in England with a varied landscape of dales and moors, rich farmland and historic monuments.
Rievaulx Abbey is one of the most important of these.
This beautiful monastic ruin is set in a deeply wooded valley by the River Rye.
Founded in the 12th century by Cistercian monks, the three-tiered walls and graceful pointed arches still reflect the ideals of the early Christians.
SPECIAL FEATURES
Clifford's Tower:Exhibition Rievaulx Abbey:Exhibition; tape tour; colour souvenir guidebook; gift shop; picnics welcome.
FACILITIES
Clifford's Tower:Car park (city council).
Rievaulx Abbey:Access for visitors in wheelchairs; toilets; car park.
HOW TO GET THERE
Clifford's Tower:Road: In Castle Street, York.
Bus: Tel for details.
Train: York station, 1 mile.
Rievaulx Abbey:Road: 2–¼ miles W of Helmsley on minor road off B1257.
Bus: York Tour Heritage Bus from York station.
HADRIAN'S WALL
Hadrian's Wall, a World Heritage Site, marks the northern frontier of Roman Britain and stretches over 70 miles from the Solway Firth to Wallsend in the east.
This exemplary piece of Roman military engineering, built over 1,800 years ago, still has many sections that stand to their original height.
CHESTERS ROMAN FORT AND MUSEUM Set in the ancient wooded valleys of Northumberland overlooking the River North Tyne, Chesters is one of the best preserved buildings on Hadrian's Wall.
The substantial remains of the cavalry fort include a bath house showing the sophisticated workings of the underfloor heating system.
The museum contains Roman sculpture and inscriptions from many sites along the Wall.
SPECIAL FEATURES
Museum; gift shop.
FACILITIES
Access for visitors in wheelchairs (limited); toilets; car park.
HOW TO GET THERE
Road: ½ mile W of Chollerford on B6318.
OS Map 87, ref NY913701.
Bus: 890 (hail-and-ride, mid-July — early Sept only); 880 & 882 from Hexham station, to within ½ mile.
Train: Hexham station 5–½ miles.
INTRODUCING ENGLAND'S HISTORIC LANDMARKS 
VISIT ENGLAND'S HISTORY
The historic landmarks of England are a wonderful legacy that must be preserved for the future.
They reveal to us the astonishing cultural achievements and spirit of our ancestors; they also document the power struggles, intrigues and invasions that have shaped English history.
This legacy includes great beauty in the form of architecture, sculpture, sculpture paintings, furniture and artefacts that have no like today.
English Heritage helps to preserve this legacy and welcomes you to visit as many as possible of the 350 or more properties and sites in its care.
Keep this leaflet with you as you travel in England.
You can find out more about the sites to visit at your nearest Tourist Information Centre or English Heritage property.
We wish you many happy hours exploring places in history.
English Heritage
WHITBREAD HOP FARM
ESTd. 1742
BELTRING PADDOCK WOOD KENT
STEEPED IN TRADITION
Introducing THE WHITBREAD HOP FARM
A visit to the Whitbread Hop Farm is a unique experience enabling you to encounter a historical part of the Garden of England and delight in the atmosphere of this famous piece of Kentish Heritage.
Situated in the heart of the beautiful Kent countryside the Whitbread Hop Farm boasts the most magnificent collection of Victorian Oast Houses in the World and is the home of the famous Whitbread Shire Houses.
The Whitbread Hop Farm features some fascinating examples of Kent rural life.
To relish the full history of the occasion take yourself on a tour of the Farm or just enjoy the peace and  tranquillity of this beauty spot by meandering around our enchanting Nature Trail and grounds.
Indulge in a lunch at the Roundels Restaurant or picnic in our courtyard among the  oats .
The choice is always yours at the Whitbread Hop Farm.
WHITBREAD SHIRE HORSE CENTRE
For years these beautiful grey shires were a familiar sight in the City of London where the Whitbread Brewery upheld the tradition of using them to deliver beer.
Since moving to their country home at the Whitbread Hop Farm their role has changed and the horses now make special appearances at event such as carnivals, pub openings, and county shows.
Every November six of these fine shires pull the ceremonial coach in the Lord Mayor of London's show.
The shire horses are direct  descendants of the great war horses, and each one weighs a ton.
They are named in pairs such as Royal and Sovereign, and Jupiter and Saturn, and once paired will work together for the rest of their lives until retirement at the Farm.
Displays of Horse Drawn Drays and Harness can be seen at the stables as well as daily demonstrations of grooming, driving harnessing.
There is also a shire horse souvenir shop.
ANIMAL VILLAGE
Children and adults alike will be enchanted by the unusual and lovable collection of animals and can learn all about them by completing our special Animal Village Activity Pack.
BIRDS OF PREY
Whilst waling around the Hop Farm you can encounter our magical collection of fascinating owls and birds of prey and watch flying displays most days (weather permitting).
THE GIFT SHOP
Our newly extended gift shop stocks a wide range of arts, crafts and superb gifts to suit all tastes and pockets, with special seasonal gifts for Easter, Christmas, etc.
Visitors please note no admission fees is required for entry to the gift shop alone, which is open all year round.
NEW FOR ‘92 THE KENT HOP PICKING STORY
Housed in Bell 3 one of the Farm's beautifully restored oast houses, this brand new exhibition is a unique reconstruction of the Hop Picking Story.
Utilising modern technology and traditional hop aromas to recreate the atmosphere of the bygone days spent ‘Hopping Down in Kent’.
Se the Whitbread Hop Farm's colourful history unfold in this authentic insight into the lives and times of the people who lived and worked at the Beltring Farm — A nostalgic experience not to be missed!!
OPENING SOON A NEW ANIMAL CENTRE
A rare breeds and endangered species Animal centre to augment the Animal Village is soon to be opened, at the Whitbread Hop Farm.
This is part of the farm's continued commitment towards preserving wildlife and the environment.
Many different species will be featured for visitors to see, learn about and enjoy in rural surroundings.
‘Hadleigh's’ THE UNIQUE CONFERENCE & BANQUETING FACILITY
The Whitbread Hop Farm proudly present ‘Hadleigh's’— a new conference and banqueting suite now available for exclusive hire for private functions, conferences, wedding receptions, banquets and corporate entertaining.
Situated in the beautiful surroundings of the farm's oast complex, ‘Hadleigh's’ private dining facilities can accommodate up to 200 guests, and makes the ideal venue for any event.
‘Hadleigh's’ offers superb cuisine with imaginative menus and a collection of fine wines ranging from a simple buffet to a banquet.
Our professional Banqueting Department will be pleased to discuss your individual requirements.
KENTISH GOURMET SUPPERS
During those hazy summer evenings The Roundels Restaurant offers, by prior arrangement, a charming setting for a gourmet meal, where you will be able to relax and enjoy the fine flavour of Kent.
(For groups of 20 or more).
COUNTRY PURSUITS
Where old traditions enhance modern pursuits.
The Whitbread Hop Farm offers corporate clients falconry, clay pigeon shooting, hot air ballooning, parascending, archery, driving skills and many other activities throughout the year.
THE WHITBREAD HOP FARM
The foundations of the Whitbread Hop Farm have been traced as far back as 1836, when it was known as Beltring Farm.
The farm was purchased by William Lambarde for £550.
When he died he left the land to the Drapers Company — a charitable institution for residents of East London.
From 1887 the land was farmed by E.A. White who was a hop grower and constructed the four magnificent Victorian oast houses which now stand on the site known as Bells 1, 2, 3 and 4.
In 1920 the farm was purchased by Messrs. Whitbread and Co. who went on to develop the site into one of the largest working hop farms in Kent, to satisfy the county's growing thirst for beer.
More recently the Whitbread Hop Farm has become renowned as one of Kent's major tourist attractions.
Business Facilities are available for seminars, exhibitions, weddings, corporate functions and conferences.
The Management reserve the right, without notice, to cancel or amend any of the attractions and special events detailed and determine the prices according to the circumstances.
GOOD FACILITIES FOR DISABLED.
COACH/SCHOOL PARTIES WELCOME.
FREE CAR PARKING.
AUDIO TOURS AVAILABLE.
FOR FURTHER DETAILS OF CAMPING AND CARAVANNING FACILITIES PLEASE ENQUIRE AT LEISURE OFFICE.
PIRATES EXHIBITION
AT GREENWICH National Maritime Museum
Original costumes from ‘Hook’ the movie.
Read stories of cutthroats & buccaneers.
Triads & executions of pirates
PIRATES FACT & FICTION
Tales of pirates and their dastardly deeds have captured the imagination of children and adults through the centuries.
Whether you love the adventures of ‘Swallows & Amazons’ or fancy being marooned on a desert island like Robinson Crusoe you will know that behind these exciting stories lies a real world of evil men (and women) who terrorised merchant ships to satisfy their own greed.
PIRATES — FACT & FICTION tells both side of the story.
Here you will meet favourite characters from stage and screen, also learn about the activities and suppression of piracy right up to the present day.
There is much to interest children and adults, educational groups and serious scholars.
STAGE & SCREEN Walk through our re-creation of the famous set of the Pirate Ship from the original 1904 production of Peter Pan.
See the original manuscripts of Lord Byron's Corsair, Arthur Ransome's adventure stories, and early editions of Treasure Island.
See the magnificent pirate costumes worn by Dustin Hoffman and Bob Hoskins in Hook .
Watch Douglas Fairbanks Snr in excerpts from the 1920's movie of the Black Pirate on our film set.
REAL PIRATES Three hundred years ago, Port Royal, ‘The wickedest city in Christendom’ was hit by an earthquake and sank beneath the sea.
come and see the original artefacts used by the buccaneers which have been rescued from the sea bed in Jamaica.
Find out why men and women became pirates, where they operated and how they met their end.
Authentic pirate flags and weapons are combined with stories of the raiders of the Spanish Main — Drake and Hawkins, of buccaneers like Sir Henry Morgan, of the terrifying Blackbeard and of the hugely successful Bartholomew Roberts.
Our desert island storyteller tells how pirates were marooned.
The story is completed with the punishments of those pirates who were captured and brought to trial.
Also featured are female pirates Mary Read and Ann Bonny.
They fought alongside Calico Jack Rackham, whose flag is our exhibition motif.
PIRACY TODAY Starting with the 19th century pirates of China and South East Asia, that exhibition concludes with a chilling reminder that piracy remains a modern day problem in the Far East.
Historic Maritime Greenwich is just four miles downstream from Tower Bridge or a short drive from the M25 (exit 2).
Pirates exhibition tickets include the National Maritime Museum.
A Passport ticket also includes the Cutty Sark; the Queen's House, a Stuart Queen's residence; and the Old Royal Observatory in the beautiful Royal Park.
Pirates feature among the 250 events of the Greenwich Festival (5–14 June) which includes ‘Walk the Plank’ a ship-based show; Natural Theatre Company's swashbuckling characters; colourful Moroccan events and jazz.
Call Greenwich Festival Hotline.
Travel by river cruises from Westminster, Charing Cross or Tower Piers, or by frequent River/Bus services.
Docklands Light Railway provides a link from London's tube system through Docklands to Island Gardens (for Greenwich).
Trains from Charing Cross, Waterloo East and London Bridge take 16 minutes to reach Greenwich or Maze Hill.
Coaches can park on Blackheath or close to the Cutty Sark.
Groups There are generous discounts to groups of 10 or more.
Schools School bookings and educational services.
Hotels Advice from Greenwich Tourist Office.
Access The Pirates exhibition is accessible by lift.
Visitors with mobility, sight or hearing impairments will be sent an information sheet and plan on request.
PIRATES FACT & FICTION
Open daily:
Admission:
Passport ticket to all four Historic Maritime Greenwich sites.
Season ticket:(unlimited visits for one year £14)
School groups: £1.75 per pupil
Pleasure Island
THE STADE HASTINGS OLD TOWN
PATIO
A selection of reasonably priced meals and snacks always available in the Patio cafe.
JUNGLE TUMBLE
An exciting indoor venture play for ‘Tarzans’ and ‘Janes’aged 1–½ to 12.
Open all year.
GO KARTS
Fast and exciting Honda powered Go Karts for the more adventurous.
BOATS
A modern fleet of pedalos and canoes on the extensive Boating Lake.
ARCADE
All the latest amusement machines in a comfortable lounge setting.
RIDES
Many thrill rides for all the family including Dodgems, veteran car ride, roller coaster and ghost train.
GIANT SLIDE
Let yourself go on the giant slide for an exciting ride.
RADIO CONTROL
Radio controlled boats and tanks to test your skill.
ROYALTY & EMPIRE WINDSOR
THE GREATEST BRITISH ROYALTY EXHIBITION
CELEBRATE QUEEN ELIZABETH II'S 40th ANNIVERSARY & QUEEN VICTORIA'S DIAMOND JUBILEE
1837–1897 1952–1992
Royalty and Empire Exhibition
Next to Windsor Castle, Royalty & Empire celebrates two magnificent Royal occasions in the lives of two great British Queens — Queen Victoria's 60th anniversary, her Diamond Jubilee in 1897 and in 1992 the 40th anniversary of Queen Elizabeth II's accession to the throne.
Set in Windsor Central Station, the Great Western Railway's Royal Station, the exhibition brings to life the pomp and pageantry of these historic events using artefacts, film and Madame Tussaud's waxworks.
Royal Station Arcade
Situated at the entrance to Royalty & Empire, the Arcade captured the atmosphere of a bustling Victorian Street Market, and includes:
The Royal Station Gift Shop
Victorian Portrait Studio
Hobson's Confectioners
Traditional Craft Stalls
Lily's Tea Rooms
Tourist Information Centre
After shopping and browsing, step inside the Royalty & Empire Exhibition — it will make your visit to Royal Windsor complete.
HASTINGS ADVENTURES IN TIME
SMUGGLERS ADVENTURE ST CLEMENT'S CAVES
SEE AND HEAR THE 1066 STORY HASTINGS CASTLE
TWO EXCITING ATTRACTIONS ON THE WEST HILL, HASTINGS
SMUGGLERS ADVENTURE ST.
CLEMENT'S CAVES
The Smugglers Adventure is set in a labyrinth of caverns, tunnels and secret passages deep under the West Hill.
Here you can descend into the secret underground haunts of the Smugglers of Hastings for a journey through time, reliving the dangers and excitement that faced Smugglers and Customs Men in times past.
The romantic yet often bloody heyday of the Smugglers is brought to life in a themed experience which includes an exhibition and museum, video theatre, subterranean adventure walk, with over fifty life-size figures, push buttons, dramatic sound and lighting — and also a few surprises!
MIDNIGHT LANDING
END OF A GOOD NIGHT'S WORK
WATERING DOWN THE SPIRIT
TIME TO REFLECT
EXHIBITION AND MUSEUM
SEE AND HEAR THE 1066 STORY HASTINGS CASTLE
Hastings Castle is forever connected with that most famous date in history, 1066.
The ruins of this 900-year-old castle, the first Norman castle in England, stand on the West Hill cliff top commanding panoramic views.
Today it is home to the 1066 Story.
Within a medieval siege tent you are transported in time to the castle keep; the lights dim and the 1066 Story begins…projected images, lighting, multi-track sound and even an appearance by King Harold and William the Conqueror!
A stunning finale is created when panoramic views of the existing castle ruin are overlaid by specially commissioned paintings reconstructing the entire castle as it was 700 years ago.
The extraordinary 1066 Story is narrated by Richard Baker and Sarah Greene.
HASTINGS is 62 miles (100km) from London.
The major road route is the A21 which links with the M25.
Frequent trains run from London Victoria and Charing Cross, and National Express operate regular daily coach services from Victoria.
VISIT THE GUINNESS WORLD OF RECORDS EXHIBITION
SIX AMAZING WORLDS IN ONE AT THE TROCADERO PICCADILLY CIRCUS
Experience the Guinness World of Records, Europe's greatest three dimensional display of all that is superlative around the globe.
The exhibition, imaginatively divided into six ‘worlds’, brings the famous Guinness Book of Records vividly to life.
THE HUMAN WORLD
‘The Human World’— Compare your weight on the scales with one of the world's heaviest men.
Match your hand and foot size to those of the tallest man the world has known.
Marvel at Henri La Mothe as he dives 28 feet into 12–⅜ inches of water.
THE ANIMAL WORLD
Enter ‘The Animal World through the spectacular lifesize jaws of a blue whale, the worlds largest and heaviest animal.
Just the tongue from such a mouth can weigh up to 4.22 tonnes.
The ‘Noahs Ark’ of extremes, shows the heaviest snake, the largest primate and the oldest vertibrate, which can life beyond 152 years.
Enjoy the fun of the ‘greatest leaps’ display which illustrates that the leap of a kangaroo is double that of the human Olympic record.
The frog makes a respectable showing, the flea, however, is better at the high jump!
OUR PLANET EARTH
‘Our Planet Earth’— Watch on video an exciting chronicle of Man's exploration of space, a journey which has extended our horizons beyond the wildest dreams of even recent generations.
STRUCTURES AND MACHINES
Creative engineering achievements are illustrated in ‘Structures & Machines’.
Match the world's tallest structures against the familiar London skyline and compare the man-made air, water and land speed record holders with those of the natural world.
SPORTS WORLD
Recapture great moments of supreme physical endeavour in ‘The Sports World’.
The multi-screen computer and the Sports Recall Data Bank enable you to select your choice of sporting records, then meet the sporting greats, presented in an exciting multi-media display.
WORLD OF ENTERTAINMENT
Stars of stage, screen & radio welcome you to the ‘World of Entertainment’.
Hear the songs that sold millions and in the Exhibition's very own cinema, enjoy excerpts from the greatest movies of all time.
Using the latest in audio visual technology, the wonders of these six fascinating ‘worlds’ are at your fingertips.
Guinness World of Records — Fascinating in the Extreme.
GUINNESS WORLD OF RECORDS EXHIBITION
The Greatest Show in Town
Through the use of life size models, videos and the latest audio-technology, thousands of records come alive at the touch of a button.
Now divided into six themed areas depicting The Human World, The Animal World, Planet Earth, Structures and Machines, Sports World and The World of Entertainment.
GROUP VISITS
Reduced rates are available for groups of 10 or more visitors.
Free admission for an accompanying organiser/guide.
EDUCATIONAL GROUPS
We offer special facilities for schools and colleges, including worksheets for children of all ages.
FASCINATING IN THE EXTREME
The Guinness World of Records is open 7 days a week from 10.00am to 10.00pm.
Closest underground stations, Piccadilly Circus and Leicester Square.
TROCADERO PICCADILLY CIRCUS
TOP ATTRACTIONS to visit in EAST SUSSEX 199⅔
1
HOVE — SPORT AND HISTORY
The King Alfred Leisure Complex guarantees outside fun inside.
Waterslides, tropical pools and sporting activities.
Beach and esplanade include croquet, tennis and water sports centre.
Museum and Art Gallery host exhibitions and a permanent collection.
Home of County cricket, League football and a greyhound racing stadium.
Hove has beautiful Regency architecture, colourful floral displays and panoramic views of the Downs from the new Camera Obscura at Foredown Tower.
Further information from the Tourist Information Centre .
2
THE ROYAL PAVILION, BRIGHTON
The former seaside Palace of King George IV is an oriental fantasy no visitor should miss.
The completed restoration programme reveals the true magnificence of the Indian exterior.
The interior is richly decorated in a lavish Chinese style.
The adjacent Museum and Art Gallery features many temporary exhibitions.
Preston Manor (2 miles north on the A23 ) offers visitors a chance to relive the Edwardian era both ‘upstairs and downstairs’, and in Dyke Road see The Booth Museum of Natural History.
3
BRIGHTON SEA LIFE CENTRE
Explore the exciting underwater world at the Brighton Sea Life Centre…discover one of England's largest collections of marine creatures from shrimps, starfish and stingrays to sensational sharks and octopus.
Multi-level viewing and innovative displays provide thrilling encounters.
Explore perfectly recreated rock pools and enjoy daily talks and feeding displays.
Other facilities include Ocean Film Theatre.
Coffee Shop.
Themed Gift Shop.
Exciting new developments planned for 1992!
4
BRIGHTON MARINA VILLAGE
The heart of the 127 acre Brighton Marina Village is the Village Square.
Encircled by courtyards, overlooking the yachtfilled Lagoon, this charming Square is host to a cosmopolitan mix of gift shops and boutiques.
Of course no marina would be complete without the inevitable Yacht Brokers and Chandlery Store.
A selection of attractive pubs, restaurants and pavement cafes, each with its own particular architectural style, provide popular venues for a special occasion or a quiet drink and there is now a new MGM 8-screen cinema.
Located 1 mile east of Brighton there is plenty of easy parking and entry is free.
OPEN DAILY THROUGHOUT THE YEAR .
5
THE BLUEBELL RAILWAY
Operates Vintage Steam Trains between Sheffield Park and Horsted Keynes.
Situated on A275 between Lewes and East Grinstead.
Collection of 30 historic locomotives dating from 1872.
Savour the sights and smells of the age of steam.
Visit the museum, look around the engine sheds.
Large buffet and shop at Sheffield Park; picnic field at Horsted Keynes.
Pullman dining trains operated.
6
SHEFFIELD PARK GARDEN
Midway between Lewes and East Grinstead.
East of A275. 100 acres of beautiful gardens and woodlands with 5 lakes on different levels joined by cascades and waterfalls.
The 18thC garden is carpeted with daffodils and bluebells in Spring followed by magnificent rhododendrons and azaleas.
Its many rare trees turn into a blaze of red and gold in Autumn.
Tearoom (not NT ) and shop.
7
BARKHAM MANOR VINEYARD
A 35 acre vineyard beautifully situated surrounding the Manor House and gardens.
Visit the magnificent thatched 18thC Great Barn, idyllic for wedding receptions and other functions.
Our modern winery produces wines which have won international Gold Awards.
There is a shop full of wines and souvenirs, and a pleasant picnic spot together with the site of the ‘Piltdown Man’ find.
Vineyard trail and tour of the winery including two tastings.
Guided tour and ploughman's for groups by arrangement.
8
HISTORIC LEWES
Set in beautiful Downland scenery, Lewes' attractions include the Norman Castle, Anne of Cleves House and other museums, remains of the Cluniac Priory, and the famous gardens at Southover Grange.
The town offers a tempting range of shops, olde-worlde pubs and restaurants.
Visit the Living History Model to see Lewes' fascinating past recreated by an audio-visual display and superb scale model.
9
NEWHAVEN FORT
Newhaven Fort covers 10 acres — plenty of space and no overcrowding.
Feel free to wander around as you please.
Explore the underground installations, browse in the museum, stand by the guns and look out over the Channel as gunners did in two wars.
Picnic on the ramparts or enjoy a quiet ‘cuppa’ while the children try the junior assault course.
Make your own day at Newhaven Fort.
10
GARDEN PARADISE
Discover the secret of Garden Paradise.
Trace the history of the world from 4500 million years ago to the present day.
Journey through time and see how plants and animals lived 200 million years ago.
See thousands of flowering desert plants.
Visit the tropical and sub-tropical plant-houses and hear the sounds of the rain forest and desert.
Two acres of gardens include many unusual features such as the Newhaven Gnome Settlement and the Lakeland Miniature Railway.
Alongside the attractions is one of England's leading Garden Centres, a superb self-service restaurant and coffee shop.
Garden Paradise is situated in Avis Road, Newhaven.
11
BENTLEY WILDFOWL AND MOTOR MUSEUM
Bentley is unique!
Where else will you find a thousand swans, geese and ducks, a superb collection of Veteran, Edwardian and Vintage cars and motorcycles plus art and antique collections in a Country House with its formal garden set in beautiful countryside.
A new adventure playground, picnic area, small animals, a Flint Barn tearoom (licensed) and shop.
12
BARNSGATE MANOR VINEYARD
At Herons Ghyll on the A26 four miles north of Uckfield.
More than just a vineyard!
A 56 acre Wealden farm with magnificent views across the Weald to the South Downs.
Barnsgate Manor has a 12 acre vineyard, a llama herd, donkeys, a museum, winery, tearooms and restaurant.
There is also an extensive vineyard giftshop which includes the tasting and sale of Barnsgate Manor wines.
Good facilities for the disabled.
13
GOLDSMITHS LEISURE CENTRE
Enjoy beautiful panoramic views of the Sussex countryside from the bar and restaurant.
On offer at Goldsmiths Leisure Centre, Crowborough, are a competition swimming pool, 4 badminton courts, 2 squash courts, a well-equipped fitness room and a special dance studio complete with sprung floor, bars and mirrored walls.
We have an extensive fitness programme which includes aerobics, callanetics, and dance which keep you trim all year round.
14
ST.
GEORGE'S VINEYARDS, WALDRON VILLAGE
You'll receive a warm welcome at England's prettiest and most popular family-run vineyard of 20 acres, set in an ancient estate.
Vineyard walkabouts, conducted tours, winery visits, English Wine exhibition, wine tastings plus a summer programme of events (craft fairs, art exhibitions etc ).
Lunches, cream teas, special dinners in gardens or unique Winery Restaurant.
Adopt-a-Vine scheme.
Substantial vineyard shop sells wines, local crafts, Sussex cheeses and produce.
15
MERRYDOWN VINTAGE CIDER MAKING
Horam Manor, at Horam on the A267 north of Eastbourne, is the home of Merrydown, makers of Vintage and Vintage Dry Ciders.
Founded in 1947, Merrydown maintains a tradition of cider making dating from Norman times.
Merrydown gives guided tours and an audio-visual presentation.
16
DRUSILLAS PARK
Probably the best small zoo in the country.
Get really close to the happy animals at Monkey Mountain, Meerkat Mound and Penguin Bay with dramatic underwater viewing.
Kids go crazy in Adventure Playland, with all-weather playbarn and railway.
New this year ‘Down on the Farm’.
8 country-style shops set in beautiful gardens.
Toucans Family Restaurant of the Year (Egon Ronay ) for lunches and teas, or Inn at the Zoo for pub grub all day.
17
ALFRISTON HERITAGE CENTRE AND BLACKSMITH'S MUSEUM
in the picturesque village of Alfriston at the heart of the lovely Cuckmere Valley this 15thC Forge Museum and adjoining Heritage Centre traces Alfriston's history from Saxon times.
They join the many delights to be found in the Cuckmere Valley, from the National Trust Clergy House and Alfriston church — the Cathedral of the Downs — to Drusillas, The Living World and Charleston Farmhouse; Michelham and Wilmington Priories, and the busy shops, inns, and tearooms of Alfriston village.
Above all — the rolling Downs with endless walks, scattered hamlets and Nature Reserves.
18
THE LIVING WORLD
A spectacular display of exotic and native creatures awaits you at The Living World, where according to season, fascinating living exhibits include giant silkmoths, tropical butterflies, praying mantids, tarantulas, bees, marine and fresh water aquaria and much more.
In beautifully landscaped settings, this unique zoo is great fun for all the family.
Situated in 700 acres of the beautiful Seven Sisters Country Park on the A259, 5 miles west of Eastbourne, 1 mile east of Seaford.
Main car park opposite, plus woodland car parks nearby.
19
MICHELHAM PRIORY
Upper Dicker, Hailsham.
Off A22 and A27.
Founded in 1229 for Augustinian Canons.
Situated in 6 acres of gardens surrounded by large moat and approached through an imposing 14thC Gate House.
Also Physic Garden, working Watermill, Tudor Barn, Picnic area and Playground.
Blacksmiths and Rope Museum.
Free car park.
Licensed Restaurant for A Taste of Sussex, Luncheons, Teas, Private Parties etc.
20
SPEDEWORTH INTERNATIONAL MOTOR RACING — ARLINGTON STADIUM
Motor racing at its best from the mind bending speed of the hot rods and stock cars to the fun and crasherama of bangers.
Great family entertainment!
This quarter mile raceway is situated in lovely open countryside just off the A22 at Hailsham.
21
EASTBOURNE ATTRACTIONS
Eastbourne seafront features the magnificent Carpet Gardens and popular bandstand.
Ride along the promenade in a Dotto Train or relax on our award winning beach.
Visit the Redoubt military museum, housed in a Napoleonic fortress, or Treasure Island children's play centre.
Princes Park has pony rides, a boating lake and mini golf while inland the Towner Art Gallery and Local History Museum offers a fascinating outing.
22
‘HOW WE LIVED THEN’ MUSEUM OF SHOPS
20 Cornfield Terrace, Eastbourne (just off the seafront between the War Memorial roundabout and the main Theatres ).
Visit the Famous South Coast Museum of Shops.
See well over 50,000 exhibits collected by Jan and Graham Upton during the past 30 years and now shown on three floors of authentic Victorian style Shops.
Many other fascinating displays including Wartime.
As recommended on BBC2 television's ‘The Travel Show’.
23
THE BUTTERFLY CENTRE, EASTBOURNE
Walk into another world!
Whatever the weather outside it's always summer inside The Butterfly Centre .
On Eastbourne promenade we have created a tropical paradise with flowers from all over the world, and into this setting, flying around in the natural habitat are 100's of LIVE butterflies.
Don't forget your camera !
Suitable for all ages; parties catered for; coffee shop.
24
FORT FUN — EASTBOURNE
Adventure for the under 12s and the young at heart is the promise at Fort Fun, an action packed 2 acre family fun park with a Western theme.
For one inclusive price you can enjoy the thrills of the Astroglide (a six-lane slide that's as tall as a house ), roller-coaster, Western train ride, adventure play area plus roundabouts specially for the very young.
Refreshments and picnic area.
Adjoining is a thrilling Go Kart circuit (separate admission )
25
EASTBOURNE SOVEREIGN CENTRE
One of Europe's largest Water Leisure Complexes, with a Fun Pool and Big Wave Sessions, exciting Water Flume rides and Bubble Pool.
For the dedicated swimmer — a 33m Competition Pool, separate Diving and Training Pools.
Away from the water there is a shop, continental Piazza with Cafeteria and Bars, a supervised children's soft play area and organised fun and games during weekends and school holidays.
26
PEVENSEY CASTLE
The immense Roman fortress and ruins of the Norman Castle at Pevensey was first built as a coastal fort to protect the anchorage used by the Roman fleets.
William the Conqueror occupied it when he landed at Pevensey in 1066 before the Battle of Hastings.
Since then, the Castle has been defended against many sieges and attacks and its walls have never been breached.
Trace the eras of fortification as you wander round the Roman ruins and enter the courtyard and rooms of the castle through the gatehouse.
You will be treading in the footsteps of soldiers from all the centuries of Pevensey's past.
27
BEWL WATER
Take a leisurely cruise around Southern Water's beautiful reservoir at Lamberhurst near Tunbridge Wells, the largest area of inland water in south east England set in the most attractive countryside.
Lovely waterside walks, picnic areas, new adventure playground, refreshments, Visitor Centre.
Special events on summer weekends.
Bewl is renowned as one of the very best trout fisheries in Britain.
28
BATTLE ABBEY
The Battle of Hastings, 1066 —probably the best known date in English History — was fought in the grounds of Battle Abbey.
Built by William the Conqueror in thanks for his victory over King Harold — legend has it that the high altar marks spot where Harold died from an arrow through his eye.
Come and see an audiovisual presentation of the famous battle performed by The Marcher Lords.
29
BUCKLEYS YESTERDAY'S WORLD — BATTLE
Visitors to Buckleys ‘The Original Sussex Museum of Shops’ will see many new attractions opening in 1992 — The Yesterday's World main complex building has tripled in size with many NEW Victorian and Edwardian shop and room displays, push-button commentaries, animated life-size figures, old-fashioned Penny Arcade machines and a beautiful English Country Garden with a picnic area and a thrilling children's play area.
Experience a day in a bygone age at Yesterday's World .
30
BODIAM CASTLE
On the Kent border east of the A21.
Bodiam is a picture book castle and a favourite with children of all ages.
The outside walls are virtually complete and the floors have been replaced in some of the towers allowing access to the battlements via spiral staircases.
Built in 1385 just before the development of gunpowder made such structures obsolete Bodiam now stands as a magnificent example of a medieval fortress and is much in demand by film companies as a location.
Car park 50p.
Tea room, shop and museum.
31
GREAT DIXTER HOUSE AND GARDENS
Built in 1460, this fine timber-framed hall-house was restored by Sir Edwin Lutyens for the family who still live there.
The interior features fine furniture and needlework.
The surrounding informal gardens, separated by yew hedges and original farm buildings, contain a wide variety of unusual and interesting plants, many for sale in the Nurseries.
Of special interest is the Meadow Garden in Spring.
32
KENT AND EAST SUSSEX STEAM RAILWAY
There are 16 steam engines waiting to take you for a ride from Northiam, the setting for Anneka Rice's famous ‘Challenge’, to historic Tenterden, the station seen in ITV's ‘The Darling Buds of May’— you can even travel in Ma Larkin's steam train!
The seven mile journey is an experience not to be missed.
33
HASTINGS
An historic seaside resort full of colour, character and attractions.
Medieval Old Town, great for shops and restaurants.
Attractions — many open all year round — include 900 years of history at the Hastings Embroidery , drama and action about the Battle of Hastings at Hastings Castle 1066 Story and Victorian Cliff Railways .
Events include: Morris dancing, Town and Country fair and excellent theatre shows.
See the ‘Sea Life Centre’ and ‘Smugglers Adventure’entries next .
34
HASTINGS SEA LIFE CENTRE
Experience the world of a deep sea diver at Hastings Sea Life Centre where you can walk underwater…without getting wet!
An amazing Ocean Tunnel and a host of multi-level viewing displays provide close encounters with menacing sharks, fascinating rays and hundreds of other exciting sea creatures.
Children will love the Sea Lab and new Touchpool whilst Daily Talks and Feeding Displays will bring the world beneath the sea right to everyone's fingertips!
Restaurant and Gift Shop.
35
SMUGGLERS ADVENTURE — ST CLEMENTS CAVES, HASTINGS
Descend into the secret underground haunts of the Smugglers of Hastings.
Embark on a journey through time, reliving the dangers and excitement that faced smugglers in times past.
Set in a labyrinth of passages and secret chambers deep below ground, realistic recreation of past dark deeds are dramatically brought to life with scenic effects and spectacular sounds and lighting.
A smuggling museum and exhibition; video theatre and adventure walk —press the buttons and be prepared for a few surprises!
RYE TOWN MODEL
Murder!
Mayhem!
Smuggling!
see & hear Rye's exciting history at the HERITAGE CENTRE 
ALL RYE LIES BEFORE YOU as you sit round a grand, authentic scale model of this ancient town.
The lights dim, the music starts, and just for a little while you journey into the past.
The town is swept by fire; the ghost appears in Turkey Cock Lane; the bells ring out as the church is gloriously floodlit.
As night falls the houses light up one by one, and smugglers move stealthily about in the moonlight.
These are but few of the dramatic effects produced with directional sound and subtle lighting as the story of Rye unfolds.
Many castles have their son et lumiere shows, several model towns have bee built; but here we combine the model makers craft with the most sophisticated electronic techniques, toe create the Town Model Sound and Light Experience.
RYE TOWN MODEL Sound & Light Show HERITAGE CENTRE 
THE ROYAL FOREST OF DEAN
FREE HOLIDAY COMPETITION
Places to Visit
An introduction to the Major Attractions In the Forest of Dean and Wye Valley
Set between the mighty River Severn and the scenic grace of the River Wye, The Royal Forest of Dean, for centuries the hunting ground of Kings, is rich in customs and traditions.
It was the first National Forest park, created over 50 years ago, the 28,000 acres of verdant forest contain a history as colourful and as remarkable as its setting.
As a cradle of the coal, iron and steel industries many of its age-old traditions still continue to this day.
The historic Court of Verderers, the Freeminers and the Commoners are the living proof.
The Forest's colourful past is never far away, with a fascinating range of working museums, mines, interpretation centres and ancient houses vividly bringing it all back to life.
The surrounding natural beauty of the region lends itself to every kind of outdoor activity.
Most outdoor pursuits are available and cater for all ages and abilities — from a gentle riverside stroll and picnic to a long distance hike, climbing and caving, fishing for trout and salmon, bird watching and falconry, canoeing, horseriding and mountain biking.
So STAY A WHILE and discover the beauty and variety of one of the greenest and most tranquil corners of England.
Enjoy a visit to CLEARWELL CAVES Ancient Iron Mines
THE ROYAL FOREST OF DEAN'S MINING MUSEUM NEAR COLEFORD
AN ALL WEATHER ATTRACTION
GREAT FOR ALL THE FAMILY
EIGHT LARGE CAVERNS
MINERS CANTEEN
GIFTS, BOOKS & EQUIPMENT STORE
LARGE PICNIC AREA
SANTA'S SECRET WORKSHOP 1ST — 24TH DECEMBER
Educational visits a speciality Guided Tours and Caving Trips available throughout the year by appointment
SORRY NO DOGS OR PETS
DEAN FOREST RAILWAY
NORCHARD STEAM CENTRE
B4234 off A48 at Lydney
A DAY WITH A DIFFERENCE
OPEN EVERY DAY FOR STATIC DISPLAY
Large Free Car Park Riverside Walk Picnic Area Museum & Gift Shop Toilet Facilities
Steam Train Rides
Visit the DEAN HERITAGE CENTRE
Discover DEAN — the story of a Forest and its people in the MUSEUM OF FOREST LIFE with reconstructed forester's cottage and smallholding, Lightmoor beam engine, recreated coal-mine, 12' overshot waterwheel, wood ant's nest, 15' frame observational beehive and much more.
NATURE TRAILS, ADVENTURE PLAY GROUND, CAFE, SHOP, CRAFT WORK SHOPS, PICNIC & BARBEQUE SITES
OPEN DAILY ALL YEAR at Soudley, Cinderford, Glos
NEWENT
Spend a day at NEWENT, the delightful market town on the northern borders of the Royal Forest of Dean, close to Gloucester and the M50, with its half timbered market house and lakeside walks.
Explore the town, its shops, the glass works and silversmith.
Visit the Shambles Museum (5).
The Butterfly and Natural World Centre (7) and the National Birds of Prey Centre (6) are close by; or what about a trip to one of the local vineyards or ‘pick your own’ farms.
At one time Newent was a bustling industrial centre with an iron works and a coal field which was one of the main factors behind the promotion of the Gloucester to Hereford Canal.
All this had passed into history by the close of the 19th Century.
Newent is now a peaceful market town lying in the heart of the rich farming and market gardening country of the Leadon Vale, an area full of wild daffodils in the Spring.
With the Malvern Hill rising to the north; the Wye Valley and rolling Herefordshire stretching to the Welsh borders to the west; the secret Royal Forest of Dean to the South; and the Severn Vale, Gloucester, Cheltenham and the Cotswolds to the east; surely Newent must be the centre of England at its best.
THE SHAMBLES Newent
A highly original museum of Victorian family and commercial life.
Victorian shops and workshops display a fascinating and large collection of period merchandise, tools and utensils.
These are set around a cobbled square behind the 18th Century building.
The main building is laid out as a four-floor room-by-room illustration of working family life — from the prim living room, to the children's bedroom and maids' cramped attic costume workshop and living quarters.
THE NATIONAL BIRDS OF PREY CENTRE
Flying Demonstrations Falcons, Vultures, Eagles and Owls are regularly flown.
Hawk Walk View and photograph trained birds free from wire and obstructions
Aviaries One of the most impressive collections of Birds of Prey in the Western World, with over 60 species on view at any one time.
See birds building nests, incubating eggs and rearing young.
Coffee Shop Serving light meals, refreshments, tea, coffee and snacks.
Gift and Book Shop A packed souvenir shop full of interesting and unusual gifts and informative and entertaining books.
Picnic Area Take a break.
NEWENT BUTTERFLY & NATURAL WORLD CENTRE
ONE OF THE MOST UNIQUE NATURAL HISTORY ATTRACTIONS TO SEE INTERESTING AND FUN TO VISIT TROPICAL BUTTERFLIES, JUNGLE TYPE GARDEN, NATURAL HISTORY EXHIBITION, LARGE LIVE INSECT GALLERY, SNAKE & LIZARD DISPLAYS, LARGE WATER LIFE EXHIBITION & PET ANIMAL ZOO
COMPETITION
Win a luxury weekend for two at Clearwell Castle, Nr.
Coleford, Royal Forest of Dean , Gloucestershire, with £100 spending money and free admission to all the main attractions in the Forest of Dean.
1.
Each of the attractions featured in this leaflet will be displaying a letter of the alphabet somewhere on their premises.
These letters when arranged in the correct order will spell a word which you fill in on this grid.
Clue : Tarzan would have done it.
You may be able to guess the word when you have nearly all the letters.
2.
To enter the competition, you must get this leaflet stamped at each of the attractions you visit and collect the letters.
When you have worked out the words send the whole of this leaflet to:—
Tourist Information Centre, Coleford, Royal Forest of Dean, Gloucestershire , marked competition entry.
Your name: Your address:
Rules
a) The first correct entry drawn in November 1991 wins the luxury weekend.
The winner will be notified by post.
There will be a number of runner up prizes.
b) Only one entry per family.
c) Staff or families of members of the Royal Forest of Dean Tourist Association and staff of the Forest of Dean Tourist Information Centres may not enter this competition.
THE JUBILEE MAZE
Symonds Yat, Ross-on-Wye Herefordshire HR9 6BY.
Meet the Maze Makers LINDSAY & EDWARD HEYES
A great place to play with all your family.
The world's only Museum of Mazes gives a fascinating insight into their 5000 year history.
Puzzle Shop Visitor Centre & Sheep Shop
Phone to book for School Games NO PETS PLEASE
THE WORLD OF Butterflies
Exotic Butterflies flying free in a Tropical Garden
Visit the Wonderful WORLD OF BUTTERFLIES
A magic opportunity to experience the warmth, light and colour of the equator.
Myriads of free flying butterflies display their delicate beauty.
BUTTERFLY BOUTIQUE
Phone to book for Keepers Tour NO PETS PLEASE
Two great attractions, with FREE PARKING, 100m from the A40 at the Wye Valley Visitor Centre.
Also Craft Workshops, Refreshments, a Country Promenade and Garden Centre.
SIGNPOSTED, HALFWAY BETWEEN ROSS & MONMOUTH ON THE A40
WYE VALLEY OPEN FARM
in a spectacular and unspoilt riverside setting
We are beneath the famous Symonds Yat Rock, in a large horseshoe bend of the River Wye.
Here you can see a collection of old fashioned and rare farm animals:— Shire and Suffolk Punch horses, other mares and foals, donkeys, Longhorn cows and calves, a variety of pigs and piglets, goats, rabbits and numerous breeds of domestic poultry.
We like children to get close to and to touch many of our animals.
We offer a full day out with a chance to picnic beside the River Wye, then a walk in some of the most spectacular woods on the Welsh Borders and see the wild flowers, on our Riverside walk.
TEAS.
FARM SHOP.
FREE PARKING.
RIVERSIDE PICNICS 
Follow OPEN FARM from Goodrich 
GREAT WESTERN RAILWAY
A MUSEUM HOUSED IN THE ORIGINAL GWR GOODS STATION OF 1883
Free car park, craft/railway shop.
Coach parties and educational visits by arrangement.
TOURIST INFORMATION CENTRES AND POINTS provide a local bed booking service and information packs.
THE ROYAL FOREST OF DEAN TOURIST ASSOCIATION AND THE DESIGNERS BELIEVE THAT ALL STATEMENTS HEREIN ARE CORRECT AT THE TIME OF GOING TO PRESS AND CANNOT BE HELD RESPONSIBLE FOR ANY ERRORS OR OMISSIONS.
THE NATIONAL TRUST VISITORS' GUIDE Kent and East Sussex
LANDSCAPE YEAR 1992
INTRODUCTION
This guide describes National Trust houses and gardens in Kent & East Sussex, ranging in scale from the simple Wealden Hall House to the grandeur of Knole and from the romantic Scotney Castle Garden to the 100 acre landscape garden at Sheffield Park.
There are famous figures, Churchill at Chartwell, Kipling at Bateman's and Wolfe at Quebec House, and wonderful views — over the rolling Weald from Emmetts, the highest point in Kent, and of France from South Foreland Lighthouse — and don't forget the Trust protects long lengths of coastline including 4.5 miles of the famous White Cliffs, as well as acres of open countryside and woodland where everyone can walk completely free of charge.
Whether you choose house or garden, coast or countryside, enjoy your visit!
CHARTWELL Westerham, Kent.
Home of Sir Winston Churchill from 1924 to the end of his life.
The house is much as it was when he lived there.
There is a beautiful garden, and Sir Winston's studio containing many of his paintings.
Events: Sheepdog Trial.
Big Band 40's Dance.
Picnic area next to car park.
Dogs on leads allowed in garden only.
EMMETTS GARDEN Ide Hill, Kent.
Five acre hillside garden.
One of the highest gardens in Kent, with wonderful views across the Weald.
Rare trees and shrubs, bluebells, rock garden.
3 wheelchairs available.
Event: Very popular 2 day Country Fair 
KNOLE Sevenoaks, Kent.
Knole is one of the largest private houses in England.
Begun in 1456, it was granted to Thomas Sackville by Queen Elizabeth I. The house contains one of the most important collections of 17th century furniture in the world.
No indoor photography 
QQUEBEC HOUSE Westerham, Kent.
17th century, red brick, gabled house with Tudor origins, where General Wolfe, one of England's greatest soldiers, spent his early years.
The Tudor stable block contains an exhibition about the Battle of Quebec.
No picnics 
SCOTNEY CASTLE GARDEN Lamberhurst, Kent.
The garden surrounds the moated ruins of a 14th century castle, and later house.
Rhododendrons, azaleas, waterlilies and wisteria flower in profusion to create one of England's most romantic landscapes.
Event: Open air opera
No dogs or picnics in garden.
Picnic area next to car park.
BATEMAN'S Burwash, East Sussex.
Home of Rudyard Kipling from 1902 until 1936.
Kipling's rooms and study are left as they were when he wrote many of his best known works.
Attractive gardens.
Working Water Mill.
Event: Outdoor orchestral concert with fireworks.
SMALLHYTHE PLACE Nr.
Tenterden, Kent.
This early 16th century, timbered, yeoman's house was owned by Dame-Ellen Terry from 1899 until she died there in 1928.
The house remains much as she left it, and contains many personal and theatrical mementoes.
The house is small and can only take max 25 people at one time.
BODIAM CASTLE Nr.
Robertsbridge, E Sussex.
This exciting castle was built in 1385.
It is possible to climb the circular stairs to enjoy far-reaching views from the towers and battlements.
Audio visual and video about aspects of medieval life.
Small museum.
Event: Archery
N.B. Castle may be closed for brief periods for filming.
Dogs on leads in grounds only — not castle.
Picnics on grounds.
ALFRISTON CLERGY HOUSE Alfriston, East Sussex.
A thatched, 14th century house, the first building acquired by the National Trust in 1896.
There is a medieval hall with crown post roof and original timbers.
Attractive cottage garden.
Exhibition on medieval building techniques.
Parking and lavatories in village car park.
SHEFFIELD PARK GARDEN Nr Uckfield, East Sussex.
100 acres of landscape garden with five lakes on different levels laid out in 18th century.
Carpeted with daffodils and bluebells in Spring, followed by magnificent rhododendrons and azaleas.
The garden contains many rare trees and shrubs, and is beautiful all year round.
Picnic area by car park.
IGHTHAM MOTE Ivy Hatch, Sevenoaks, Kent.
Beautiful, medieval, moated manor house in the heart of the Kentish Weald.
Dating from the 14th century, the house still retains its original great hall, chapel and crypt and has a major exhibition on conservation.
5 newly restored rooms are open from 1992.
Event: Outdoor orchestral concerts.
Black Tie.
Picnic area by car park.
Note: A long-term programme of repair is in progress, giving the visitor an excellent opportunity to see skilled conservation in action.
SISSINGHURST GARDEN Nr.
Cranbrook, Kent.
A five and a half acre connoisseurs' garden created by the late Vita Sackville-West and her husband, Sir Harold Nicolson.
A series of small romantic areas enclosed by the surviving parts of an Elizabethan mansion.
Daily visitor numbers are restricted.
Timed tickets in operation: visitors will be asked to wait at busy periods.
The Garden may be closed at short notice once its daily capacity is reached, but visitors are welcome to visit the Oast House exhibition, woodland walks, restaurant & shop.
Picnics, pets, children's toys and games outside the garden only.
Pushchairs and prams are not admitted — backpacks available.
Disabled Visitors: Narrow and uneven paths and many steps, not ideal for wheelchairs; no more than 2 admitted at one time; may be loaned at ticket office.
MONK'S HOUSE
The home of Leonard and Virginia Woolf.
Small house, max 15 people.
Road too narrow for coaches.
No lavatories.
LAMB HOUSE
The home of Henry James from 1898–1916.
No lavatories 
OLD SOAR MANOR
Late 13th century solar block in the guardianship of English Heritage.
No lavatories.
Dogs admitted on lead.
Narrow lane — unsuitable for coaches.
TUDOR YEOMAN'S HOUSE  
CANTERBURY SHOP & INFORMATION CENTRE
Situated in the centre of Canterbury, near the Cathedral.
Information and excellent selection of gifts.
OWLETTS Cobham, Kent.
ST JOHN'S JERUSALEM GARDEN
Garden and remains of a commandery of the Knight's Hospitallers.
THE GEORGE INN, SOUTHWARK
Situated near London Bridge Station.
The only remaining galleried inn in London, built 1677.
Leased to Whitbread.
Bar food and restaurant.
SPRIVERS GARDEN 
STONEACRE Otham, Kent.
A 15th century half-timbered manor house.
WOOL HOUSE 
SOUTH FORELAND LIGHTHOUSE 
COAST & COUNTRY
The National Trust protects over half a million acres of countryside, mountains and lakes, farms and woods, and over 500 miles of coastline, nearly all of which is free to be enjoyed by everyone, to walk, sail, climb, picnic, or just simply relax.
In Kent and East Sussex the Trust cares for woodland, downland, farmland and coast.
Woods such as Toys Hill, and Ide Hill near Westerham, downland at Wrotham, north of Sevenoaks, where part of the Pilgrims Way crosses Trust land, and at Ditchling Beacon on the South Downs.
Coastline in the Trust's care includes 4–½ miles of the White Cliffs of Dover.
Langdon Cliffs overlooking Dover's Eastern Docks, prolific with wild flowers in late spring and early summer, is a recent acquisition, and near Eastbourne at Crowlink there are invigorating walks along the cliffs forming part of the magnificent Seven Sisters.
All this is under the protection and care of the Trust so that future generations may enjoy beautiful countryside and breathtaking coastal views and walks.
Access is free although there might be a small car parking charge.
Further details about these and other areas of countryside including nature reserves and archaeological sites in Kent and East Sussex can be found in the booklet ‘The National Trust Handbook 1992’, available in bookshops and National Trust shops.
NOTES FOR VISITORS
1.
Children under seventeen and accompanied by an adult are welcomed half price unless otherwise stated.
If unaccompanied they are admitted at the discretion of the Trust.
Children under five are admitted free.
2.
Car parking is free unless otherwise stated.
3.
Dogs: The Trust regrets that dogs are not allowed in houses or restaurants, and seldom in gardens or parks (with the exception of guide dogs for the blind).
4.
The Trust welcomes photography in the grounds of its properties, but for reasons of conservation and security and to avoid inconvenience to other visitors, we regret that we cannot allow photography of any kind inside our historic buildings.
Commercial photographers need prior permission from the Regional Office.
5.
Disabled Visitors: many of the properties in this leaflet are accessible to visitors in wheelchairs, and are suitable for escorted visually handicapped visitors.
Please check with the property before making a visit; special parking arrangements are often available.
6.
Sharp heeled shoes are not allowed inside buildings as they cause great damage.
7.
Properties marked ∘ may be busy on Bank Holidays and Summer Sundays and visitors may be asked to wait.
8.
Full details of all National Trust properties regularly open to the public are given in ‘The National Trust Handbook 1992’.
For further details of National Trust houses, gardens and countryside in Kent and East Sussex, contact the Regional Public Affairs Manager, Scotney Castle, Lamberhurst, Tunbridge Wells, Kent.
THE NATIONAL TRUST
The National Trust was founded to protect the best of our heritage for ever.
It is quite independent of the Government.
Maintaining over 200 historic houses with rare and precious contents; 100 beautiful gardens, protecting over 600,000 acres of varied unspoilt coastline, and preserving even entire villages, is an expensive business.
The Trust depends upon the generosity and support of its members.
Membership of the National Trust
The National Trust is a charity depending on the support of people like yourself.
Help us by becoming a member.
Membership entitles you to free admission to all the Trust's properties open to the public in England, Wales and Northern Ireland, and also to those owned by the National Trust for Scotland.
Join now at any of the places listed in this leaflet (and have your entrance money refunded) or fill in this coupon and send it to: The National Trust, Membership Department, PO Box 39, Bromley, Kent BR1 1NH.
THE MAIN EVENT
Massed Pipes & Drums The Scots Guards — 350 Years The Massed Pipes and Drums together with the Pipes and Drums from Adelaide University, Australia Massed Scottish Dancers The Massed Bands of HM Royal Marines The Band, Pipes and Drums and Corps of Drums of the Scots Guards Music of the Massed Military Bands
Programme subject to alterations
Edinburgh Tattoo
GLAYVA Edinburgh Tattoo
The Edinburgh Military Tattoo gratefully acknowledges the support of Glayva in mounting the 1992 Tattoo
You may be no stranger to our Tattoo and indeed this information may come to you at your own request.
It may be however that this will be your first contact with us.
Whatever the case, rest assured that the 1992 Tattoo will amply fulfil your expectations of it.
The programme includes the world-famous display by the massed Pipes and Drums.
The Massed Military Bands lead into the Finale sequence providing the time honoured climax to the Edinburgh Military Tattoo, join us then in singing the evening hymn.
With hands across the world, join also in that well loved song, AULD LANG SYNE.
As the lights fade on the lone piper, with a wish and ‘Haste Ye Back…
The 1992 performance dates are as follows:
BOOKING ARRANGEMENTS
POSTAL BOOKINGS accompanied by payments are accepted from the 1st January each year.
See details on page six of this leaflet.
Attached POSTAL TICKET ORDER FORMS may be photocopied, or additional forms will be sent on request.
EARLY BOOKING will improve your chances of obtaining first choice allocations and tickets will be despatched as soon as possible.
After 26th July NO TICKETS will be sent out, but can be collected from the Tattoo Office, 31/33 Waverley Bridge, Edinburgh, on your arrival in the city.
If you ask us, we will HOLD your tickets whenever you place your order.
Please Note:Orders which are accompanied by payments are dealt with in strict order of receipt.
Remember — bookings are accepted from 1st January each year.
TELEPHONE BOOKINGS cannot be accepted except for CREDIT CARD bookings (booking fee 50p per transaction).
CREDIT CARD BOOKINGS:Tickets can be booked using ACCESS, AMEX, DINERS or VISA credit cards, using the Postal Ticket Booking Form or by telephone or 031–225 3661 BUT NOT ON THE DAY OF PERFORMANCE.
PARTY BOOKINGS:1 FREE seat for every twenty (and multiples thereof) booked and PAID FOR at FULL PRICE.
This offer is valid,on request only , at the time of booking and applies to all performances except Saturday evenings — POSTAL BOOKINGS ONLY.
FACILITIES FOR THE DISABLED:
Handicapped persons are welcomed and facilities exist for the siting of wheelchairs at ground level at all performances.
Passes may be issued which will allow access by car, coach or ambulance tot he esplanade, but they CANNOT BE ISSUED for performances on Saturdays under any circumstances.
A pass will permit the bearer to transport wheelchair patrons on to the esplanade AT LEAST 60 MINUTES BEFORE THE START OF THE PERFORMANCE.
The pass is not a permit to park on or near the esplanade and is valid ONLY ON THE DATE SHOWN.
If you wish to apply for such a pass, please do so at the time or order, giving the following details and indicate whether or not your order is dependent on the allocation of a Vehicle Pass: Date required, Vehicle registration number, Vehicle type, Drivers’ name or organisation, Number of persons with disabilities and total number of passengers.
PHOTOGRAPHY:
Photographs may be taken for PRIVATE USE.
The use of FLASH equipment is expressly forbidden.
The normal lighting used during the Tattoo can produce satisfactory results if high speed film is used in an appropriate camera with the necessary shutter and aperture adjustments.
ACCOMMODATION PACKAGES
Accommodation requirements should be sent to the Accommodation Bureau, Edinburgh & Scotland Information Centre.
Or try an Accommodation Package as arranged for a visit to Edinburgh during the Festival which includes a visit to the Edinburgh Tattoo.
All prices are PER PERSON and include a booking fee and VAT at the standard rate.
SCOT WORLD TRAVEL
PACKAGE No.
A/1 Price £162
Three nights accommodation Bed & Breakfast basis in three-star Stakis Grosvenor Hotel or similar, in rooms with private facilities.
Reserved seat at the Edinburgh Military Tattoo
Half day sightseeing tour of Edinburgh
SUPPLEMENTS:
Single room £64.50
First class hotel £12.00 per night.
Extra night £47.00
We will be pleased to purchase tickets for other Festival events on behalf of our clients.
CAPITAL TRAVEL
PACKAGE NO.
C/1 Price £120
Three nights Bed & Breakfast accommodation in a comfortable guest house.
Reserved seat at the Edinburgh Military Tattoo
Half day sightseeing tour of Edinburgh including entrance fees to Edinburgh Castle and Holyrood Palace
Full day tour of Lock Lomond and the Trossachs
Voucher for a meal in a pub on the Royal Mile — Bar Lunch or Supper, the choice is yours.
A miniature of Glayva Liqueur.
Entrance to the Scotch Whisky Heritage Centre.
SUPPLEMENTS:
Private facilities where available £5.00 per person per night, sharing a twin/double room.
Single room £5.00; with private facilities £10.00
Children's price on request.
WELCOME HOMES ORGANISATION
PACKAGE No.
W/1 Price £72.00
Three nights Bed & Breakfast accommodation with a selected Edinburgh host family.
Reserved seat at the Edinburgh Military Tattoo
Discount vouchers
PACKAGE No.
W/2 £215.00 (16 AUG. — 5 SEPT.)
Seven nights Bed & Breakfast with a selected Edinburgh host family
Reserved seat at the Edinburgh Military Tattoo
Tickets for three major Festival events (see order form)
Membership of Festival Club
SUPPLEMENT (Packages W/1 and W/2):
Single room £4.00 per night, extra night £16.00 per night
Optional extra: A Taste of Scotland Evening at Prestonfield House — £25.00
IMPORTANT — please read
a) Help us by sending only:
(i) This Form duly completed.
(And date stamped by the Post Office if paying by Transcash).
(ii) Self addressed envelope 11x22 suitably stamped.
(From overseas enclose an International Reply Coupon — two or more for AIRMAIL replies).
(iii) Payment (this may be by CREDIT CARD — your signature is required together with A/c No. and card expiry date.
If you prefer to pay at Post Office please use the Transcash payment slip attached.
b) POSTAL BOOKINGS are accepted from 1st January each year and tickets will be despatched as soon as possible.
c) We will acknowledge receipt of your order if you ask us to but please enclose the appropriate postage.
(From overseas enclose an International Reply Coupon, two or more for AIRMAIL replies).
Such acknowledgement indicates receipt of your order and carries with it no guarantee of ticket availability.
d) All monies are banked immediately on receipt.
This does not imply acceptance of an order which are dealt with subject to availability.
e) PLEASE DO NOT FORGET to enclose PAYMENT.
Cheques, Postal Orders, etc., should be made payable to the Edinburgh Military Tattoo.
Remittances from overseas should be made in the form of an INTERNATIONAL MONEY ORDER.
US/Canadian DOLLAR cheques are accepted but the sum of $3 must be added to cover BANK CHARGES.
Details of Prices, Seating, Ticket and Booking Agents are published annually in late December and may be obtained from the Tattoo Office, 22 Market Street, Edinburgh EH1 1QB or from the office which supplied you with this order form.
IMPORTANT — please read
a) Send the items at (b) below to the Tattoo Office in the first instance (for allocation of Tattoo tickets).
Your application will then be passed to the organization of your choice by Tattoo Office staff.
b) Please send only:
(i) This Form duly completed
(ii) Self addressed envelope 11x22 cm suitably stamped.
(From overseas enclose an International Reply Coupon — two or more for AIRMAIL replies).
(iii) Payment.
c) Receipt of your order on behalf of the operator of your choice will be acknowledged if you so request but please enclose the appropriate postage (from overseas enclose an International Reply Coupon, two or more for AIRMAIL replies).
Such acknowledgment indicates receipt of your order and carries no guarantee of availability.
However, a full refund will be given if the package of your choice is not available.
d) PLEASE DO NOT FORGET to enclose PAYMENT.
Cheques, Postal Orders, etc.,should be made payable to the organisation of your choice and crossed — No Credit Cards.
Remittances from overseas: Payment should be in the form of an INTERNATIONAL MONEY ORDER.
US/Canadian DOLLAR cheques are accepted but the sum of £3 must be added to cover BANK CHARGES.
THE EDINBURGH MILITARY TATTOO DOES NOT ACT AS AN AGENT ON BEHALF OF THE OPERATORS IN PUBLISHING THIS BROCHURE AND NO CONTRACTUAL RELATIONSHIP IS ESTABLISHED WITH OR THROUGH THE EDINBURGH MILITARY TATTOO WHEN YOU MAKE YOUR HOLIDAY ARRANGEMENTS WITH ANY OPERATOR WHOSE FACILITIES ARE ADVERTISED HEREIN.
IN YOUR OWN INTEREST YOU ARE ADVISED IN THE STRONGEST TERMS TO CHECK WITH OPERATORS THE INFORMATION GIVEN HEREIN AND ANY OTHER MATTERS WHICH YOU WISH TO RAISE BEFORE MAKING YOUR BOOKING.
THE EDINBURGH MILITARY TATTOO PUBLISHES THE INFORMATION GIVEN HERE AS SUPPLIED TO IT BY THE OPERATORS WHOSE FACILITIES ARE ADVERTISED AND ALTHOUGH THE EDINBURGH MILITARY TATTOO HAS TAKEN ALL REASONABLE STEPS TO ENSURE THAT, AT THE DATE OF GOING TO PRESS, SUCH INFORMATION WAS ACCURATE, NO WARRANTY OR REPRESENTATION IS GIVEN IN THIS RECORD.
THE EDINBURGH MILITARY TATTOO ACCEPTS NO RESPONSIBILITY OR LIABILITY FOR ANY ERRORS, OMISSIONS, INACCURACIES OR MISSTATEMENTS OF PRICE OR FACILITIES OR ANY OTHER INFORMATION GIVEN IN THIS BROCHURE.
PARKING OF COACHES:Edinburgh is an old and historic city, the oldest part being the Royal Mile with The Palace of Holyroodhouse at one end and The Castle at the other.
The most popular tourist areas are the Royal Mile and Princes Street, attracting visitors from all over the world throughout the year, but reaching a peak of popularity during the Festival.
As the Tattoo takes place every day except Sundays during the Festival, streets are very busy and congestion quickly occurs if indiscriminate coach parking is allowed.
As at any other time of year, coaches may be parked at Lothian Region Transport Marine Garage, Seafield Road.
However, special arrangements have been made for coaches bringing people to the Tattoo and your cooperation is sought to ensure that your drivers are fully conversant with the information given below.
The arrangements have been made so as to enable spectators to be SET DOWN AND PICKED UP AT THE SAME POINT in a city unfamiliar to them.
The following have been reserved for coach parking from the times stated (coaches parking earlier than the times given risk being towed away):
a)From: 7.00 pm — and for the first performance when there are two performances from 6.00 pm — GEORGE IV BRIDGE both sides and CHAMBERS STREET both sides.
b)For the second performance on nights when there are two performances: KING'S STABLES ROAD both sides.
It must be understood that on nights when there are two performances, coaches arriving after the streets mentioned in a) above have been filled, with be diverted to King's Stables Road.
Coaches will be parked in these streets under the discretion of the Police and will remain in situ until passengers return after the performance.
Please note that a) coaches will set down and uplift passengers only as directed by the Police in the streets mentioned, and b) that access to King's Stables Road is only by Princes Street and Lothian Road.
If in doubt on any matter please refer to the Police Officers in attendance and by guided by them OR contact Lothian & Borders Police, ‘B’ Division Headquarters, 14 St. Leonard's