

An Essence of Fire — up to George III's jubilee
Still only insolvent ‘traders’ could be discharged from their liabilities by bankruptcy.
But towards the end of the eighteenth century the courts developed what Jay Cohen calls ‘a more expansive definition’ of the term, which made many non-traders eligible for discharge in bankruptcy.
In the 1770s, however, there were great numbers of ordinary people who overnight had become ‘prisoners’ of whom few, if any, of the gentry and nobility, let alone Members of Parliament were aware.
Fifty years earlier James Oglethorpe had revealed their existence, and now James Neild and Revd Dr William Dodd decided to take over where Oglethorpe had left off.
Their plan was a simple one: pay the imprisoned debtors' debts, plus the fees demanded for their clearance and what they owed the keeper for lodgings and the rest, and they could be released.
Dodd outlined their idea, and painted a dramatic picture of the need for it, in a sermon in the Charlotte Street Chapel in Pimlico.
The collection taken at the end of the service ‘for the benefit of unfortunate persons confined for small debts’, amounted to £81 1s.
It was the beginning of the funds of The Society for the Relief of Persons Confined For Small Debts, which James Neild, a Londoner jeweller, had founded in February 1772.
Dodd preached a second sermon in the Bedford Chapel on the same theme, and the collection, together with the proceeds of the printed sermon, went to the society's funds.
But the main source of money for releasing the poor and insolvent came from the rich and solvent; Neild placed advertisements in the newspapers appealing for donations.
The response was immediate.
The social conscience of England, it seemed, was shocked at a situation of which it claimed it was not aware.
The society's committee were pleasantly surprised at the size of the field of compassion.
Many donors declined to identify themselves —‘From an anonymous subscriber, an Heart Blessed with Humanity.’
But the Archbishop of Canterbury sent £20; the Bishop of London ten guineas; the Grand Jury of Westminster Quarter Sessions subscribed five guineas.
Thirty guineas came from the Earl of Hertford, ten guineas from Lady Frances Coningsby, five from the Earl of Breadalbane.
The  Earl of Radnor and Lady Windsor each gave ten guineas; John Thornton the notorious City speculator and gambler, twenty pounds.
There were donations from Lord Willoughby de Broke and a High Court Judge with a conscience, Mr Justice Nares.
The society also placed advertisements asking for applications to draw on its funds for the purpose of release from debtors' prisons, and backed this up by sending two members of the committee on a tour of London's gaols to receive applications and arrange for the release of ‘the most distressed objects, preferring the most useful Artists and Manufacturers, and those who have the largest families.’
None were to be relieved who had a right to the benefit of the Insolvent Act currently going through Parliament, except by paying their clearance fees.
Their advertisement inviting applications read:
On 11 March 1772, two weeks after the society had its first meeting on 23 February, they reported discharging five debtors from the Marshalsea Prison in Southwark — the biggest debt was £2 5s 8d — two from the Poultry Compter (biggest debt £6 18s 5d); one from the Kings Bench Prison; five from the Borough Compter; four from the Wood Street Compter; three from Whitechapel Prison; five from Newgate Prison; and one from the New Gaol in Whitecross Street, Southwark.
And so it went on.
An unknown benefactor gave them £100, and they received a legacy for £200 ‘to be distributed to the full list of everyone in Fleet jail’.
A Mr Dixon sent five guineas .
In June they released James Matthew Calcott, a surgeon, by paying his debt of £3 10s —, read the record.
Five of those released on Christmas Eve 1772 had been gaoled for each owing 12s 8d, and were given half a crown (2s 6d) on discharge.
By the end of the year they reckoned they had released some 432 men, 180 wives, and 1,341 children.
They had paid out some £800.
The society's charitable project soon got round the underworld, and in January 1773 they had a card hung in Westminster Jail stating that their charity was likely to be imposed upon ‘by artful and designing villains who cause themselves to be arrested and imprisoned a day before the Society makes a distribution and thus come in for relief designed for the Poor distressed debtors imprisoned for a long time.‘
The Committee met weekly at the Thatch'd House Tavern in St James's Street and for that reason became known as The Thatched House Society.
Later it extended its operations to gaols outside London.
Small debtors remained those that owed less than £10.
As a fund raising exercise William Dodd staged The Debtor Relieved , a Sacred Ode he had written, with music by a Mr Hook, in the Charlotte Street Chapel, after he had preached another sermon.
It was in this vein:
In 1774 he published An Account of the Rise, Progress and Present State of the Society for the Discharge and Relief of Persons Imprisoned for Small Debts .
In his Introduction, Dodd reminded his readers that if a person owed only forty shillings, an extortionate litigious creditor could immediately obtain a writ, often by a false malicious oath, and deprive him of his liberty.
The very payment of the sum at the instant of arrest would not, on many occasions, prevent him from being taken away.
A man's house or apartment was not always a refuge against such malevolent surprises, insults and arrests.
Though the law prohibited the forcible opening of a door, yet the bailiffs found means to evade that prohibition by indirect, unjust  stratagems , treachery or bribery of servants, ‘even by force’.
What good could be done by it?
Every feeling of humanity reverted from it and it would scarce be believed, in that age and kingdom of philanthropy, that such cruelties were exercised from man to man even for the mean, the paltry sum of eighteen pence.
The Thatched House Society saw their role not only as releasing debtors but making sure they never had to rescue them again.
In an Exhortation to Released Prisoners they pleaded with them not to pursue their former vices of Folly, Extravagance and Dissipation.
Sin no more, since a second term of imprisonment would deservedly be unpitied.
If imprudence, ignorance or unskilfulness caused their debt, want of experience or the common unforeseen occurrences of life, they should frame their future plan of conduct on the principles of prudent care and  deliberate circumspection.
They should study to improve and grow wary from their past mistakes and inadvertencies, act with caution, advice and consideration.
A most unforeseen occurrence cut short the Revd Dr William Dodd's participation in this crusade when, a few years after he wrote his Account , he was charged with the capital offence of forgery.
After a trial which ended with his conviction, the well-known preacher was publicly hanged — which shocked those who read of it, and even more those that witnessed it, but did not deter James Neild and The Thatched House Society from continuing its fine work.
None of the small debtors whom the Society freed from prison ever considered saving themselves, even though temporarily, from the hounding of their creditors by borrowing.
Most of them were used to paying regular visits to the friendly neighbourhood pawnbroker, but on the objects they brought to him they could not  expect to raise any great sums.
And in any case they wanted them back as soon as possible, and there would be the interest to pay.
James Grant included ‘The Pawnbroker’ in Pictures of Popular People in 1842, their reputation having improved since the Gentleman's Magazine of 1745 which had deplored the pawnbroker's role of living by the miseries of mankind.
Pawnbrokers had a role in society, and it was one which writers in social and literary reviews were constantly querying.
A mock ‘Petition of the Pawnbrokers’ said the petitioners who were in the business of lending small sums on pledges were not legally justified in charging more than five pounds for the loan of a hundred pounds for a year.
They were not authorized to sell the goods pledged to them however perishable, which meant that many vexatious and expensive lawsuits were commenced against them every day.
It would be of much greater service to the honest and industrious poor if the business was regulated, and reputable persons were licensed by a proper authority.
It would hinder persons of ill fame acting in the business from whose ill conduct the public odium had arisen.
In fact, from 1785 all pawnbrokers had to register.
If the bad image of the pawnbroker kept would-be customers away, many of the small debtors would have been even more reluctant to seek relief from the grander money-lender whose role was not so much, it seems, to relieve the impoverished of misery as to maintain the well-off in their excesses.
When in Sheridan's comedy The School For Scandal (produced at the Drury Lane Theatre in 1777) Rowley tells Sir Oliver Surface that Mr Moses is below waiting his commands, he explains,.
Money-lenders came to borrowers' houses, not vice versa.
Sir Peter Teazle suggests to Sir Oliver Surface that he impersonates this Mr Premium whom Charles had never met, and ‘you'll see your nephew in all his glory’.
It will be the easier since Premium is not a Jew but a Christian.
Sir Oliver is  sorry to hear that; but would he not be too smartly dressed to look like a money-lender?
Not at all, says Sir Peter, nor would it be out of character if he went in his own carriage — and Mr Moses agrees.
But what about the cant of usury and the mode of treating that he ought to know?
The main point, said Sir Peter, was to be exorbitant enough in his demands.
When Sir Oliver suggests asking eight or ten per cent on the loan, Mr Moses says if he asks him no more than that his impersonation will be discovered.
Moses, played by Oscar Quitak, gives advice to young Surface in the National Theatre's 1990 production of Richard Sheridan's The School for Scandal, first staged in London in 1777.
They agree it would be a good idea to refer to the passing in that year of 1777 of the annuity bill which made void all contracts for annuities made with people under twenty-one.
It would be in keeping with Mr Premium to lament that a young man must now be at the years of discretion before he is allowed to ruin himself.
Mr Premium, thought Sir Peter, would abuse the public for allowing merit to an Act whose object was to snatch misfortune and prudence from the rapacious gripe of usury, and give the minor a chance of inheriting his estate without being undone by coming into possession.
Richard Brinsley Sheridan was well qualified to write about such matters.
He had no income when he married The Maid of Bath, the singer Miss Linley, but he used the £3,000 she had just been given by a disappointed but grateful, rich admirer, to buy a grand house in London's fashionable Portman Square, and furnish it lavishly.
With no more resources than Charles Surface, he entertained London society with great panache and little regard for mounting debts.
As Guy Boas has described, he would welcome his creditors, immaculately dressed, and ‘beg them to share a bottle of the best wine, charm them with the wit of his conversation and send them away exchanging many mutual compliments and almost oblivious of their mission.’
He somehow bought David Garrick's share (with his father-in-law and a friend) of the Drury Lane Theatre, and subsequently the whole ownership.
In deference to the apparent madness of King George III he agreed to the Lord Chamberlain's proposal, as play censor, to omit Shakespeare's King Lear from the repertory which told of a monarch similarly afflicted; but clashed with him over The School for Scandal , the objections to which, however, he managed to resolve, bringing him a period of near prosperity.
He was rarely solvent however.
When he stood for Parliament numbers of poor people crowded round the hustings demanding the payment of outstanding bills.
He remained light-hearted and cracked jokes at their expense.
He gave a dinner to Lord Palmerston and others at which he put the bailiffs, who were in possession of his house, in livery, and had them officiate as waiters — reminiscent of the bailiffs' scene in The God-Natured Man .
So long as he was a Member of Parliament he could not be arrested for debt, but bailiffs were in the house when he was taken mortally ill.
One of them proposed arresting him as he lay on his bed and taking him off to prison with all the bedclothes.
Only the playwright's doctor warning them of their responsibility should he die on the way, prevented them carrying out so insensitive a duty.
Some time later a creditor did succeed in having him removed to a sponging house, where friends subscribed £500 to make life more bearable for him.
However, when a one-time tenant called to say his possessions had been seized to pay his debts, Sheridan gave him the £300 which the man said would restore him to his former state.
Sheridan's flippant attitude to the management of his personal finances was  typical of the time.
, wrote Adam Smith in The Wealth of Nations published in the year Sheridan was writing The School for Scandal ,.
The hospitality of luxury and the liberality of ostentation had ruined many.
Among their feudal ancestors however the long time during which estates used to continue in the same family sufficiently demonstrated the general disposition of people to live within their income.
Adam Smith instanced cock-fighting as a pleasure that had brought ruin, but card games probably accounted for even more insolvency.
The losses of many players drove them to suicide, not insolvency.
When Charles James Fox lost £200,000 at the gaming tables as a young man, his father and others came to the rescue.
Others not so fortunate in their relations borrowed from money-lenders who, in this time of gambling mania, set up businesses exclusively devoted to advancing money at extremely high rates for settling gambling debts.
While most eighteenth-century beaux were obviously not disposed to live within their income and affected a bland indifference to the need to manage their personal finances, the tradesmen, the creditors on whose forbearance their insouciance depended, were campaigning against any legislation which seemed to reduce any further the chances of recovering what was owed them.
In February 1780 merchants of Westminster, Southwark and Middlesex petitioned against Lord Beauchamp's bill for amending the so-called Lords' Act (32 Geo II of 1759) to extend the escape route afforded by the bankruptcy laws to non-traders.
It amounted, they said, to a total alteration of the law of the land and the establishment of a permanent act of insolvency at a time when trade was embarrassed and credit had sunk to its lowest ebb.
Henry Erskine, counsel for the Middlesex committee, said it was a common trick for people claiming benefit of the acts of insolvency, and the bankrupt laws, to bargain for goods to a large amount from strangers to enable their estates to make a better dividend among their old creditors.
In that way they secured a majority to sign their certificates.
One man who had got himself clear in that way drove in his own carriage by the very commissioners to whom he had but lately surrendered, and splashed both them and his creditors with the dirt of his chariot wheels.
Lord Beauchamp said his bill was not only founded in charity but good policy.
Trade would benefit from gaols being cleared of debtors who were of no use to their creditors or the community while in confinement.
The only alteration was to relieve debtors who owed larger sums than £100.
Instead of putting it in the power of the creditor to prevent his debtor from obtaining his liberty on giving up his all, it vested the right of a negative in the judges in open court, where it was more just  to place it than to allow it to remain in the power of the creditor who, from motives of resentment, was less likely to decide impartially in his own cause.
Among the great number of debtors who crowded the gaols of the metropolis there might be fifty who were detained by inexorable creditors animated by motives of revenge, without the least hope of obtaining payment of their debts.
A debtor swearing an affidavit that he had resigned his all would not wipe away the claim his creditor had on him.
A debtor who did that and swore that his all amounted to less than £5 would be brought before a court.
If the bench believed him, they would set him free.
Giving him his liberty would not cancel his debt however.
As before, whenever his acquirements enabled him to pay, he would be called upon to do so.
No such abuse of the bankruptcy laws was to be dreaded as Mr Erskine had feared.
The creditor who had been splashed by his debtor's wheel could have his carriage seized the next day.
His bill was intended to deprive the debtor of the power of insulting his creditor on the one hand and to restrain the creditor from tyrannizing over his debtor on the other.
The trading lobby were not to be fobbed off with talk like that.
Any new insolvent debtor's bill was rejected one after another.
They remained fearful of the opening of any loophole that would more easily expose them to fraud or abuse of the credit they had extended in good faith.
It was back to the ‘miserable refuge’ of the Lords Act of 1759 with its ‘great error’in giving all to one creditor, which induced many prisoners to stay and waste their property in prisons rather than by complying with the Act, obtain their discharge and be sent back to prison by other creditors.
If a prisoner did not apply in the next term after execution to receive the benefit of the Act, he lost it.
If he did apply in time and gave up all to one creditor, he remained a prisoner in the rest of the actions.
The man who in 1788 wrote the pamphlet New Candid and Practical Thoughts on the Law of Imprisonment for Debt & c , shared the attitude of the majority in condemning the ability of a creditor to confine his debtor where there was no question of fraud or abuse of credit.
And what a long time it took for a tradesman to recover what he was owed!
Proceedings invariably dragged on for eighteen months.
And then, anyone who owed less than £200 had to wait for the start of the next law term in another four months if he wished to apply for the discharge which would come upon his delivering his whole property to the single creditor who had stayed with the process as long as that.
At that point the creditor could still refuse to have the man released from prison and insist of his being kept there, so long as he paid him a groat a day.
Offers of loans at 10 to 14 per cent interest to nobility, gentry, merchants with incomes for life, persons of known properties, heirs apparent to large estates (if not minors) and ladies of character, in The Times of 8 June 1792.
But what grieved the author of the pamphlet even more was the cost of it all.
Experience showed, he said, that the proportion which debts recovered bore to the cost of the court proceedings was less than one in twenty, and so a burden on trade and business.
It was not only the tradesmen and merchants but the Lord Chancellor who opposed any bill which tried to remedy defects in the Lords' Act.
He and other noble lords admitted the principle of the bill which a Lord Rawdon introduced in 1792 but ‘disapproved the mode’.
None of them could disagree that it was a species of tyranny that left an unhappy debtor to the mercy of a remorseless creditor whose affluence prevented him from knowing the sorrows of adversity and who, nursed in the lap of plenty, had never heard the call of hunger or knew the cry of distress.
They probably could not wholly concur, however, with the pillorying of the legal profession (as the 1788 pamphleteer had done)—.
In prison for a debt of £5, how could he pay five plus the thirty of law expense?
He was at all times happy, said his lordship, to give his assent to any measure that could relieve the unfortunate debtor without giving an opportunity to the adulterer, the swindler etc. to take advantage of the same law —.
When the House of Lords reconsidered Lord Rawdon's bill in March the next year they were told that, if they would assent to it, in a short time all debtors' prisons would become the residence of swindlers only.
Lord Rawdon felt no one should be arrested for owing less than £20, as it was when George I came to the throne; that a creditor should pay the debtor he had put in prison 4s 8d a week; and the warden of The Fleet and the marshal of the King's Bench Prison (who made around £3,000 a year out of fees) should be compensated if the rules were abolished which allowed them their fees.
In short, said The Times ,
Lord Rawdon told the Committee of the whole House of Lords, which read his bill clause by clause in May, that he thought a debtor should be able to swear to the real cause of his debt and, if there was no question of fraud or any intention to abscond, he should not be held in custody for more than eight days and be discharged on filing common bail.
Lord Kenyon was outraged.
Lord Loughborough agreed with Lord Rawdon when he said that  pettifogging attorneys were the bane of civil society; they were a pest.
A way must be found of ending their practices, but not at the expense of the Constitution.
Lord Kenyon was of the same opinion.
The next day The Times carried an announcement headed  
The twenty-six signatories invited their fellow traders to come to the Crown and Anchor Tavern in the Strand on Thursday 9 May.
Lord Rawdon's bill was dropped.
Justice to creditors was paramount.
And when the person who owed them money was the heir to the throne they still deserved to be treated justly, perhaps even more so.
For surely they could be forgiven for believing that a prince's promise to pay later must be firmer than a pauper's?
In this, said A. Hanoverian in A Letter to the House of Peers on the Present Bill depending in Parliament relative to the Prince of Wales's Debts (1795), they were mistaken.
With their bill the House of Commons had just burdened the people of Britain with a near million of debt contracted by the Prince of Wales.
Only a maniac, he said, would think that the wretched pittance of the industrious poor should be wrung out of their pockets to pay for the follies and profligate expenses of anyone.
No measure had raised such general indignation.
Every peasant knew what it was to pay what he spent; every peasant comprehended the character of a prodigal.
In 1787 the prince promised the king not to exceed his income and, trusting this promise, Parliament agreed to pay £190,000 of debt.
But in 1795 came another demand, so the promise/contract was broken, for he was spending £45,000 a year more than his income.
Penitent for this lapse, he dismissed his household and sold his stud.
Parliament paid his debts and added another £10,000 to his income.
The prince's response was to spend £100,000 more than his augmented income.
He obtained money by false pretences, said the pamphleteer, a crime recognizable at common law.
If the £190,000 had never been paid, he would have been importuned by his creditors.
His furniture, perhaps his carriages, would have been seized; he would have had to hire others.
He would not have found it possible to gamble deeply or to accumulate more debt.
Parson James Woodforde must have thought the throne was already shaking when, as he described in his diary on 29 October 1795, he saw the prince's father being grossly insulted as he drove in the state coach through St James's Park.
King George 
The rector of Weston-Longville in Norfolk was well placed to appreciate the contrast between the six-figure income of Prinny at Carlton House, the building of which accounted for much of his debt, and the nine pounds annual wage he paid his servant Ben Leggatt.
Woodforde was himself meticulous in keeping account of his outgoings and making prompt payment to tradesmen.
It was not a way of life he would have considered particularly pious; to be content with it, and not strain to improve it, he would not have considered unmanly or unadventurous.
Only cynics would have called him stick-in-the-mud or sneered at him being ‘worthy’.
Paying Your Way made for a comfortable life, with plenty of unsolicited adventure on the way.
It was not a conscious avoidance of the Debtors Prison but the more positive, good-humoured attitude which was part of Making Your Bed and Lying On It.
It still behoved the middle class trader to play fair with his customers and not take advantage of good-natured country parsons and ignorant members of the labouring classes.
Nor, said Thomas Gisborne in 1795, must he himself disdain to borrow money at the appropriate moment if he is not to put his credit to real and serious hazard.
In the chapter ‘On the Duties of Persons Engaged in Trade and Business’ in his Enquiry into the Duties of Men in the Higher and Middle Classes of Society in Great Britain , he said the foundations of a trader's credit were ‘property, integrity, punctuality, industry, prudence, openness in dealing, freedom from extravagance, from a spirit of wild speculation and from vice, and the character of the partners and of others with whom he is closely connected.’
He should not overrate his resources, the goodness of his debts or the probable sale of his merchandise.
If people were making demands on him for what he owed them, he should assemble them and lay before them a fair statement of his past transactions, of his present condition and his future prospects.
If he thought instant bankruptcy would result from such disclosures, he must be no less earnest to become a bankrupt for the just advantage of his creditors than he would have been resolute not to fail by collusion for the purpose of defrauding them.
He must stop paying.
For, if he did not, he would have to continue to make partial payments to some of his creditors to the injury of others.
So long as he was solvent in law, he could not proportion his payments to creditors according to their respective debts.
For that he must have the aid of the law.
A trader should never act on the presumption of retrieving his circumstances when he had become flagrantly insolvent.
If he soldiered on, he was open to the temptation of setting up false credit, to engage in adventurous speculation, to concealing his true situation from his clerks, and to despair of mind.
He could terminate his affairs in two ways.
A commission in bankruptcy would cost him £100 and be subject to considerable delay; but the consent of a certain proportion of his creditors was sufficient for his discharge for ever from his debts.
Under the second method, surrendering his effects under a Deed of Trust, the expense was little.
But the signature of all his creditors was needed to exonerate him.
It was considered the less discreditable way than a commission of bankruptcy, said Thomas Gisborne.
A Letter of Licence, by which creditors agreed to postpone claims, brought only temporary respite and did not remove the evil day.
As seen, no such means of escaping their liabilities was available to non-traders.
In any case, if Parson Woodforde's manservant Ben Leggatt found himself temporarily ‘out of pocket’, all he had to do was to pawn the best pair of trousers he had been wearing over the weekend and redeem them in time for church on Sunday.
Since the Act of 1800 pawnbrokers were allowed to charge an annual interest of 20 per cent on all sums under 42s, and 15 per cent on larger sums.
A customer who wanted to raise more than ten pounds had first to agree terms and interest with the pawnshop-owner.
Many would regularly ‘pop their ticker’— pawn the watch they may have bought for five pounds, on which they may have raised forty pounds or more in loans, as Melanie Tebbutt showed in Making Ends Meet (1983).
Others, who of course never used a bank, would pawn a five pound note for a few shillings, with instructions ‘don't break the note’ so they could redeem it still in one piece.
Money borrowed from a pawnbroker did not have to be repaid for fifteen months.
In 1872 however the period was reduced to twelve months and seven days.
Pledges on which less than ten shillings had been lent became the property of the pawnbroker if they were not collected on the appointed day.
A pledge on which a loan of more than ten shillings had been made would be put up for auction, but its owner could come and redeem it on any day up to that of the sale.
If Ben Leggatt had earned his living, not as an odd job man at Weston Longville rectory but as a private soldier in one of His Majesty's foot regiments billetted in Bungay, he would have found the shopkeepers overwilling to let him take away purchases on a promise to pay later — had it not been for the ‘Crying Down The Credits’.
This warned the inhabitants that the average infantryman, in spite of his glamorous uniform, was lowly paid and impecunious.
It was in the days before soldiers were housed in barracks and were left to their own devices in the taverns and private houses in which they were billetted.
The first day a battalion moved in, the Provost Sergeant would march to the market cross, accompanied by drummers  and fifers who then started playing to attract attention.
To the crowd who assembled, the Provo Sergeant announced that anyone giving credit to members of the regiment which had just arrived did so at their own risk.
They were warned of the danger of giving credit — or too much credit at any rate — to mostly illiterate other ranks who were here today and gone tomorrow, and allowing them to run up debts which they had not the slightest chance, or intention, of paying.
When the regiment was about to leave, the same little posse returned to the centre of the town to tell tradesmen they were on the move, and it would be in their interests to stop giving further credit immediately.
The likelihood of a hard-up, poorly-paid soldier who had left town for good  ever returning to pay his debts was negligible.
This second ceremony was known as ‘All Debts Paid’.
There was no such distrust of the ability to pay later of officers of the army and navy — or their mistresses.
Couturiers and provision merchants, caterers and decorators never refused Lady Hamilton, mistress of Admiral Lord Nelson, all the credit she needed.
Six months before her husband died in April 1803, she had a letter from Coutts her bankers to say she had outstanding bills for £700 but her current account balance stood at 12s 11d.
Sir William Hamilton paid the bills (as the creditors knew he would), and in his will he left her £300 and an annuity of £800, which should have enabled her to live comfortably though not perhaps ostentatiously.
The luxury-loving Lady Hamilton who, on becoming insolvent after the death of Admiral Lord Nelson, the father of her daughter Horatia, was confined to a Sponging House within King's Bench Prison, Southwark, in 1812.
In a codicil Sir William asked Charles Greville, his heir, from whom he had  ‘bought’ Emma, to pay the debts she had accumulated since his last settlement.
Throughout 1802 she had entertained at Merton Place, where she and Sir William and Horatio had a strange ménage à trois , in a lavish style which cost around £65 per week.
And when Sir William died she saw no reason to slow down.
Nothing in Emma's actions suggested alarm at the deterioration of her resources, says her biographer Hugh Tours (The Life and Letters of Emma Hamilton, 1963 ).
‘Nevertheless from the moment of her widowhood the tide of debt which was eventually to overcome her relentlessly started to mount.’
Though she had the money from her late husband's estate and another £1,200 from Nelson for the upkeep of Merton Place, by 1805 she owed £7,000.
The death of the admiral on his flagship at the Battle of Trafalgar in October of that year did nothing to stem her spending — of money that was no longer there.
She chose not to reduce the scale of expenditure at Merton, which remained as high as ever throughout 1806 and 1807, and no tradesman saw fit to say No to her.
Could she not sustain the momentum, not just on tradesmen's credit but on borrowed money?
Her friend Abraham Goldsmid arranged a loan, but it did not last her long.
Her admirer, Old Q, the eighty-four-year-old Duke of Queensbury, let her have his house at Richmond at a nominal rent, but declined to buy Merton Place from her.
She had hopes of an East India merchant taking it off her for £13,000, and the shock of it falling through brought her to her senses, and to a realization of the depth of the hole she had dug for herself.
Her first reaction was to appeal to Greville to get her out of it .
Otherwise lawyers would involve her every day more and more; debts would increase more debts.
In November 1808 ten of her friends met in London to formulate a rescue plan.
They heard that her debts were £8,000 exclusive of the £10,000 needed to pay off annuities; and that her house, land, furniture, books and wine were valued at £17,500.
They decided to assign all these assets to five of their number as Trustees for Sale.
Six of them lent her £3,700, secured by the Trust with interest, to pay ‘all incumbrances absolutely necessary to be immediately discharged’.
All her creditors were asked to execute the Debt of Trust, and agree to accept payment out of the Trust Estate.
Emma could go on receiving the income from the annuities.
Old Q injected a further £2,500 for old times sake, and when he died shortly afterwards he left her £500 a year.
If she calmed down, she might just weather the storm.
Early the next year Lord Mansfield told her:
But caution was not her style.
In December 1812 one of  her creditors had her arrested for debt, as he was entitled to under the still operating Lords' Act of 1759.
She and Horatia, her daughter by Nelson, were taken from their house in Fulham to a Lock-up or Sponging House within the ‘Rules’(boundaries) of the King's Bench Prison in Southwark — no. 12 Temple Place on the east side of Blackfriars Road where it joins St George's Circus, one of a terrace of twenty houses.
It was the ante-chamber, so to speak, as it was in Tom Verney's day, to the prison itself.
There she could call for any food or liquor she wanted, so long as she had the wherewithal to pay the inflated prices demanded by the Sponging House keeper.
For the privilege of staying within the rules and not fully ‘inside’, she paid the marshal of the prison ten guineas.
Here at least she would not be hounded by her other creditors.
In fact, in her uncomfortable lock-up, she managed to play the hostess to royalty, to HRH the Duke of Sussex, whom she entertained to dinner.
She wrote a memorial to his brother George, now Prince Regent, Nelson's friend, reminding him of the codicil which the national hero had made to his will leaving her and Horatia to the nation, and asking for it to be recognized in some tangible form.
After four months Alderman Joshua Smith, president of Southwark Borough Council, secured her release from prison — but not of course from the rest of her debts.
When it became known that the Government had said it could not afford to honour Nelson's wishes and help her out, the tradesmen to whom she still owed money closed in.
She sold her silver and plate, but the proceeds fell short of what was required.
In June 1813 she was back at Temple Place, and she arranged for the auctioning of the contents of her Bond Street house.
However, Joshua Smith intervened by buying it all up before the sale, and advanced Emma a sum on its security with which she could pay more outstanding bills.
She would have recovered some of her old high spirits if it had not been for a bout of measles and turning more and more to alcohol.
She spent the first three months of 1814 in bed.
She persuaded Earl Nelson, the admiral's doctor brother, to give her £250 of the Bronte Pension which had never been paid her, and with this she procured her final release from prison.
She had £50 in her purse when she and Horatia took ship to Calais where she brazened it out until January 1815 when she died — not in disgrace but hardly gracefully.
Nell Gwynn played her cards more deftly.
Whether or not the Merry Monarch's real last words were, ‘Let not poor Nelly starve!’ the court saw that that courtesan, once raised from her humble origin, never sank back.
Emma Lyon, who made her way up the social scale by similar means, would have found herself in prison earlier had it not been for the lifeline thrown to her by her friends and former lovers.
But by the end she chose to overplay her hand and lost the sympathy of those who could have saved her from her last indignities — though perhaps not from the bottle.
None of the Establishment lifted a finger to save William Cobbett from what they considered he well deserved.
He was taken to the same King's Bench Prison in June 1810 to await his trial, not for debt but seditious libel in The Political Register .
He certainly owed money but none of his creditors needed to obtain a writ to have him confined when the Government had arrested him for them.
‘Everyone will easily imagine’, wrote Cobbett whose ‘crime’ had been objecting to flogging in the army,
He was fortunate not to be in prison for debt for, on the tour of British prisons which he made in 1812, James Neild of The Thatched House Society, found debtors were discriminated against.
In Dorchester Gaol criminal prisoners were allowed a peck of coal for their common room every day during the six winter months, and half a peck in summer.
But there was no allowance of coal for debtors, male or female, except in very severe winter weather, or unless a special order was made by visiting magistrates.
In a notice about Neild's State of Prisons in England, Scotland and Wales (1812), the Edinburgh Review commented:.
In the county gaols of Gloucester and Dorchester it was only debtors who were burdened with fees.
The Under-Sheriff of Gloucester demanded 6s 8d for the discharge of every debtor.
A note under the Table of Fees at Dorchester Gaol read:
More intelligent inmates of debtors' prisons needed no such inducement to behave themselves.
The shock of the change of circumstances was sufficiently numbing to dampen any inclination to run riot, particularly after the painful build up of events which led to the final arrest.
The artist Benjamin Haydon was already £600 in debt when he heard that the Royal Academy would not after all be buying his painting Macbeth for 500 guineas.
He had been selling his books and clothing to pay for his day-to-day needs, and now he owed his landlord £200.
He had just embarked on another huge canvas Solomon .
Should he abandon it?
Sell all, retire to an obscure lodging and do anything for a living?
But he could never realize enough to pay all he owed.
In any case it would be cowardly, he told himself.
‘Something instantly circulated through me like an essence of fire, and striding with wider steps I determined to go at once for my model, to begin tomorrow and to make the most of my actual situation.
‘Well done’ said the god within, and instantly I was invincible.’
But what would the attitude of others be?
He went to his usual restaurant intending to dine without paying.
His heart sank as he said falteringly, ‘I will pay you tomorrow.’
As he was escaping from the room with a sort of lurking horror, the servant girl called after him.
Her master wished to see him.
It was, he thought, to tell him he could not trust him.
He walked in like a culprit.
‘Sir’, said the owner, ‘I see by the papers you have been ill-used.’
He hoped the artist would not be offended, but as he had dined there many years, if it would be a convenience during his present work to dine until it was done, he need be under no apprehension for his dinner.
His heart filled.
From then on the pretty servant girls eyed him with a lustrous regret and redoubled their attentions.
When he told Perkins his landlord of his case, and that it would be a pity to leave Solomon unfinished, Perkins blanched when he heard it would take another two years, gave him his fat hand and told him if the painting did not sell after two years, and Haydon still could not pay, ‘…why, sir, we'll consider what is to be done, so don't fret, but work.’
That was in 1812.
He sold his Solomon , repaid what he borrowed, and four years later felt justified in borrowing again.
But, he told himself, it was a fallacious belief, because borrowing had to stop sooner or later.
If one was punctual and could pay in the long run, why incur the debt at all?
To pay his landlord another £200 he borrowed £100 and paid £22 10s for the favour.
A reptile of a money-lender from Poland Street offered to accommodate him at 40 per cent, '20 less than any other of the trade.’
He advanced £100 for £10 at three months.
Five years later happened what he always dreaded.
His mistake was employing more than one man to decorate his rooms.
He paid one of them £300 ‘who, because I employed another to fit up my last room, out of pique arrested me for the balance.’
He told the bailiff who came for him that he must shave, and suggested he stepped into his studio where on an easel he was confronted with the half finished Lazarus .
‘Oh my god sir!’ he exclaimed, ‘I won't take you.
Give me your word to meet me at twelve at the attorneys and I will take it.’
The attorney agreed with Haydon about the injustice of the proceedings, and told him to return that evening to settle the matter finally.
But he must remain in the custody of the bailiff, who said however there was no need for it.
‘Not he.
Let him give me his word and I'll take it, though I am liable to pay the debt.’
That night he settled everything, and his expenses were £11.
The following November another officer entered his studio while he was at work on the massive Crucifixion and said, ‘Sir, I have an execution against you.’
But he had paid part of that apothecary's bill that very morning, and the attorney to whom the bailiff took him agreed there had been a mistake.
But there was no mistake when on 21 April 1823, while still at work on the Crucifixion he had to put the project on hold.
The entry in his Journal was headed ‘King's Bench’:
His creditors met on the 28th and they read a letter from their debtor telling them the law was an enemy he could not conquer.
He hoped they could come to an arrangement which would prevent the dishonour of his claiming its protection.
He had nothing to offer them, he said, not a shilling.
His property was entirely gone; those who were the most severe had possessed it.
It was hard to be torn up by the roots, to have his books, easels, prints and materials of study dragged from their places.
Want of support was his only failure.
Sir Walter Scott was one of many who wrote to offer sympathy, enclosing a small sum which might stop a leak in a vessel.
Haydon should take comfort, said the novelist, from knowing that no species of legal distress could attack the internal resources of genius, though it might for a time palsy its hand.
Haydon failed to come to any agreement with his creditors.
But in July a court released him from prison, and two days later he heard that out of 150 creditors none opposed his being discharged.
‘One villain entered his name but lost courage.
I consider this an ordeal that has tried my character, and I feel grateful for it.’
Borrowing on the security of high hopes and honest intentions, as Malcolm Elwin observed in his edition of Haydon's autobiography and journals (1950), and an unsuccessful attempt to live by credit, had brought insolvency and imprisonment, and now he had to make a new start.
When later in 1823 he was once again arrested for debt, he watched fellow debtors in King's Bench Prison perform a mock election which became the subject of a famous painting exhibited in 1828 and bought by George IV for £500 —‘baronets, and bankers, authors and merchants, painters and poets, dandies of rank in silk and velvet and dandies of no rank in rags and tatters, idiotism and insanity, poverty and affliction, all mingled in indiscriminate merriment, with a spiked wall twenty feet high above their heads!’
His release on this occasion was secured by friends subscribing to a fund for which Coutts Bank acted as trustees.
In a letter to Mrs Coutts he described the horror and the misery from which the mock election was a welcome diversion.
This was his picture The Raising of Lazarus now in the Tate Gallery.
When he  was arrested in his house he found it impossible to parry any longer such a mass of events, and surrendered to them.
The King's Bench Prison was a sad refuge as a reward for nineteen years of intense devotion to painting and having his works received with enthusiasm in England and Scotland, and visited by thousands in both countries.
He would have had to herd with less congenial characters than gamblers if he had been sent to The Fleet or the Marshalsea.
The King's Bench Prison was for gentlemen debtors, for ‘men born to property and a high station in life who by their folly and crime reduced themselves to wretchedness and loaded themselves with disgrace’— though James Grant's description in Pictures of Popular People could not be said to fit poor Benjamin Haydon.
It was melancholy to see in the civil prisons of the metropolis, remarked Grant, men whose birth, education, manners and appearance would have fitted them for occupying the highest positions in society and consequently of proving benefactors to their species, spending no inconsiderable portion of the prime of life amid scenes of deepest degradation.
Few ever recovered their status in society, he said, or got rid of the bad habits they contracted while there.
Grant had never been able to comprehend the reason for this inveterate enmity to the poor tailor.
It might be supposed that to injure him by getting deeply into his  debt sufficed to satisfy any unfriendly feelings they might entertain towards him.
‘Not so, however.
They must needs add insult to injury.’
In sending his contribution to the fund for Benjamin Haydon, Sir Walter Scott apologized for its smallness, but he had been ‘a little extravagant lately’.
He had purchased a lot of land and even more books and ‘expensive trifles’.
He had already paid the debts of his brother Tom, an army officer in Canada, but with Ivanhoe selling 10,000 copies at 30s each, he sent the further £800 requested.
His financial position dramatically changed, however, when in 1825 the publishing house of Constable, in which he had invested, were refused further credit by their bankers.
It came as a great shock.
‘I really believe they have not had any capital for twenty years, but were entirely trading on credit.’
Everyone thought they were worth at least £150,000.
In fact they had unpaid bills amounting to £256,000 on which they were only able to pay 2s 9d in the pound; their London agents, Hurst & Robinson, only managed 1s 3d on a debt of £300,000.
Scott sent Constable £5,000 and borrowed another £5,000 on his own and Constable's security.
It put him, as investor in these two as well as Ballantynes the printers who were also insolvent, in deep trouble.
When the Duke of Buccleugh offered to take the whole of his losses on himself he said, ‘I will involve no friend, rich or poor — my own right hand shall do it.’
It was hopeless waiting for miracles, he said.
He made an arrangement which, he claimed, would make him far richer than generals and admirals who led armies and fleets, a Trust Deed by which his assets were assigned to Trustees who made all the payments to creditors on the lines of that set up for Emma Hamilton.
If he managed economically he hoped that in five years' time, if the public continued to buy what he wrote, he would retrieve more than he lost.
‘It is a bad business, but might have been much worse.’
It was bad enough.
His creditors who met in the Waterloo Hotel in Edinburgh on 20 January 1826 were told Scott's liabilities were £104,081 and his estate available for realization was worth £48,494.
His assets were his house in Castle Street, Edinburgh, his library and furniture, and the value of the life-rent on Abbotsford the house he had built on The Border.
If his creditors allowed him to be, he would be their vassal for life.
He would not put out of the power of his creditors the mental and literary resources which yet remained to him.
The Trust paid a first dividend of 6s in the pound.
He sat down to write himself out of insolvency with a series of new novels starting with A Fair Maid of Perth .
Soon he was earning £20,000 a year.
His so-called Magnum Opus , the forty-eight volumes of his novels, generated an income of £5,000 a year.
On Christmas Eve 1827 he arrived at Abbotsford which he had left six months before, as he wrote in a  letter, ‘in doubt whether I should fly my country and become avowedly bankrupt and surrender my library and household furniture with the life-rent of my estate for sale.’
When the Bank of Scotland had threatened to imprison his Constable partner Robert Cadell in Calton Hill Gaol, Cadell took refuge in the debtors' sanctuary at Holyrood — where Thomas de Quincey had also stayed for some time.
Walter Scott seriously contemplated doing the same, or perhaps fleeing to the Isle of Man, as his brother Tom had done, but was persuaded that a better way out was the Trust Deed.
When Scott died, after six years of hectic literary activity, he had paid £70,000 of a debt that then stood at £117,000.
It took another fifteen years to wipe out the debt completely.
His attitude was that of one the soldiers whose income by the sword he said he would better with his pen.
When Arthur Wellesley was in command of the British troops in Spain he refused to pay for their upkeep by pillage and plunder.
But it meant their being overwhelmed with debts.
‘I can scarcely stir out of my house’, he told his political masters in Whitehall, ‘on account of public creditors waiting to demand payment of what is due to them.’
Relating the story of the future Duke of Wellington in Self-Help , Samuel Smiles commented that the general had no intention of acting grandly or nobly, ‘merely regarding the punctual payment of his debts as the best and most honourable mode of conducting his business.’
The old campaigner's sense of what was honourable in such matters was more acute than the three sons of George III who, in the words of the author of the tract The Royal Criterion (1814)‘resorted to every mode of raising money without a scruple as to the means.’
The Prince of Wales, he claimed, wanted money to support his horse racing; the Duke of York to pay his bets and preserve his credit at Mucklow's Tennis Court where he spent much of his time and lost a great deal of money estimated at £200,000.
The Duke of Clarence was also always overspending.
The three brothers raised a sum upon Post Obit Bonds through one Louis Weltzie, Clerk of the Prince of Wales's Kitchen, and a man who had been a Lottery Office Keeper near Carlton House, called Annesley Shee.
They also enlisted the help of John Cator MP ‘a mean, avaricious money-lender very much employed by men of fortune in trafficking for annuities, reversions and post obits.’
Cator engaged to pay them £10,000 down against a bond for treble that amount, £30,000, which the holder of the bond would be paid when ‘a certain event’ took place — the death of the king and the succession of any one of the three royal borrowers.
Much  to William Pitt's disgust Cator sold the bond by public auction to a solicitor called Yates.
King George thought his sons should be able to live on their official incomes which he was not prepared to augment so they could indulge their more frivolous pastimes.
Any spare cash he preferred to donate to more worthy causes.
In 1809 he celebrated his Jubilee, fifty years on the throne.
In that year the secretary of the Society for the Relief of Persons Confined for Small Debts received a letter from Spencer Perceval the Prime Minster (who was later to be assassinated by a bankrupt, John Bellingham) to say that His Majesty had graciously given orders to present The Thatched House Society with £2,000 from his private purse.
In addition the king gave £1,000 for the liberation of prisoners confined for small debts in Scotland, and another £1,000 for those in Ireland.
The Corporation of London and the Merchants of London also marked George III's Jubilee by donating £2,000 to The Thatched House Society.
This advertisement in the Morning Post of 23 October 1809 asked for money towards a fund for offering compositions to creditors which would effect the debtors' release — 10s in the pound for every debt under £20; 7s 6d under £50; 5s above £50.
No Longer a Crime — up to 1869
The law, which Benjamin Haydon regarded as an enemy, remained hostile to insolvent debtors throughout this time.
Since the lawmakers were mostly of the creditor class, their attitude was to retain a statute by which they could obtain a writ for the arrest of their debtor and his detention at their will.
The old Lords' Act was a long time a-dying; and non-traders were still unable to claim the benefits of bankruptcy open to traders.
There were changes however.
By an Act of 1808 (48 Geo III cap 123), anyone who had been a year in prison for a debt of less than £20 was thought to have suffered enough and must be allowed to go home.
A creditor could no longer stop the release of anyone, however short their confinement, who was willing to pay what he owed.
On discharge he was still not free of his debt, but the Act greatly improved the insolvent debtors' lot.
An even greater improvement came in 1813 with 53 Geo III cap 102 which created a scheme involving a new ‘Court for Relief of Insolvent Debtors’ which, as Sir William Blackstone saw it in his famous Commentaries , ‘first provided permanently for the relief of insolvent debtors’.
Its purpose was to hear prisoners' petitions for release.
It was the court which Benjamin Haydon appeared before and ordered his release.
Either the debtor or the creditor could appeal from the decision of the court to a single-judge Court of Appeal which gave a final decision.
The judge was chosen from among the judges of King's Bench, Common Pleas or Exchequer.
Anyone who was prepared to submit himself to a debtors' prison for a token period could apply from The Fleet or the Marshalsea for the help of the Insolvent Debtors Court.
He then had to stay in prison for two months while a schedule of his debt was prepared, he was examined by the court and he agreed to surrender his property.
His debt did not have to be less than £20; it could be for any amount.
He was immediately released from his confinement, but he was still liable to the man who had given him credit in the belief he could keep his promise to pay later.
Not everyone had sufficient assets of sufficient value to cover what he still owed, or was willing to surrender them, but the new scheme certainly benefited a large  number.
‘Even so’, said W.R. Cornish and G. de N. Clark in their Law and Society in England 1750–1950 , ‘there was a growing feeling that a system which sent 10,000 or so debtors into prisons each year (a quarter or more on the mesne process) was too expensive, too indiscriminate, too open to abuse and overweening pressure.’
The mesne process allowed a creditor to have his debtor arrested and detained before the case came to court and judgement was made on it.
Apart from anything else, the procedure became a method of habitual fraud.
Unscrupulous operators took the two months' imprisonment in their stride.
They cynically referred to it as ‘college’ where they picked up further tips in the arts of fraud from their cell mates.
However it did enable anyone who was in fact a trader, but the law did not recognize as such, to achieve something resembling the benefit of bankruptcy.
In fact the procedure was similar to bankruptcy procedure, with the debtor's property transferred to an assignee who had to pay the creditors in proportion to what they were owed.
Charles Dickens described the scene in Pickwick Papers .
It was the common resort and daily place of refuge of all the destitute shabby-genteel people in London.
A casual visitor might suppose it to be a temple dedicated to the genius of seediness.
The barristers' wigs were ill-powdered and their curls lacked crispness.
All sorts of dodges were resorted to for ‘surrendering’ property.
The clever ones soon discovered that while banknotes could be seized a bank balance could not.
As E. Welbourne showed in ‘Bankruptcy Before the Era of Victorian Reform’, ‘men in prison who had stripped themselves of all they had, could produce £2,500 in notes from under the bed.’
But the misery of those who could not obtain their release, either honestly or dishonestly, by appearing before an Insolvent Debtors Court and agreeing to assign their property, still drew sympathy.
The debtor might have been reduced to his inability to satisfy his creditor, asserted Thomas Foxwell Buxton,
The reviewer of his book in the Edinburgh Review thought half of the thousands of imprisoned debtors had been reduced to their state by ‘venial errors’ or innocent misfortune.
Clearly all inflictions beyond that of mere detention were illegal; fetters were contrary to the law.
For the Quakers their fall illustrated the danger of making haste to be rich and deviating from safe and regular methods of business.
No one could expect the blessing of the Most High for such pursuits.
Now that the law embraced the principle of what lawyers called cessio bonorum — yielding up of goods — some thought imprisonment should be regarded as punishment and not just a way of preventing the debtor absconding.
For anyone with few possessions who chose to contract a variety of debts, said Lord Althorp in a Commons debate in February 1820 on a Bill that would refine the 1813 legislation, it would only be ‘a slight visitation’ to have to surrender them to his creditors.
But was it not partly the fault of tradesmen?’
Lord Redesdale wanted to see a revision of the procedure in small debts courts.
Their jurisdiction should be raised from 40s to £10; similar courts should be set up in every county; the jury should be reduced to four.
John Bright wanted the benefit extended to crown-debtors who should be released after a full disclosure and a  discharge of all claims above £200.
In that way, said the Attorney General, the revenue would be defrauded with impunity.
For the law applied to smugglers, and they were rarely men of property.
Individuals on the other side of the water would pay five or seven hundred pounds to procure their discharge, which could not be expected to continue if they could be released by other means.
It worried Lord Auckland that a court could now refuse to free a prisoner whom his creditor wished to see released.
In the debate on Lord Redesdale's insolvent debtors bill in 1820, he said he would like to see the debtor the creditor's prisoner once more, not the court's.
And should not those in Sponging Houses, who squandered what properly belonged to their creditors, be removed to the actual prison?
The discipline there would put a stop to any more of that .
And maybe they would be cowed not only by the discipline but by the man who wielded it.
Any who were unfortunate enough to find their lives being ruled by James Spencer, keeper of the Debtors' Prison for London and Middlesex, soon learnt to keep their wits about them.
Spencer's conduct at the new Debtors' Prison in Whitecross Street, where in 1828 he had been keeper for six years, was the subject of a Memorial from James Neild's Thatched House Society to the Lord Mayor and Court of Aldermen of the City of London.
They accused him of altering the figures on receipts for money they had given for the release of prisoners, handing over a smaller sum to creditors and pocketing the difference; charging prisoners for candles; taking £5 out of the Poor Box to free a prisoner; lending them money on their plate and watches which belonged to their creditors.
But James Spencer's most improper conduct, said the petitioners, was towards Solomon Neete and his wife, a dealer in smuggled silks and other contraband goods,
The Court of Aldermen investigated these allegations, but before they had finished them they received a grovelling letter from the keeper of Whitecross Street Gaol tendering his resignation.
The painful state of his feelings rendered him incapable of personally addressing them.
He would not attempt to vindicate the incorrect manner in which he had acted and sincerely lamented.
Imprudence  which could not be pardoned had blighted his life.
He, his wife and seven children were left without any means of support…and so on and so on.
The City aldermen accepted his resignation and appointed Samuel Barrett, a glover, in his place.
By 1830 the number of towns which had obtained Acts of Parliament to have their own Courts of Requests or Courts of Conscience, on the lines of those established in London in 1749, had risen to fifty-four.
The Southwark Court of Requests was still functioning, and the process there was initiated by a tradesman or individual lodging a complaint against another for non-payment of money owed, after less formal requests had been ignored.
He went to the court where he found himself dubbed the plaintiff, paid a fee and a deposit for which he received a receipt.
If he was suing for less than 20s in 1830 he left a deposit of 5s; 7s 6d for one between 20s and 40s; 10s between 40s and 60s, and 12s 6d for 60s.
He gave the Clerk of the Court his name and that of the person he was suing whom the clerk called the defendant.
This action by the creditor set in motion the issuing, by the clerk, of a writ or summons which was formally delivered to an officer of the Chief Bailiff who served it on the defendant at his house.
It told him to come to the court on a certain day to defend himself before a Commissioner and the man who said he owed him money.
If he failed to turn up, the Commissioner had the power to hear the plaintiff's case only and give immediate judgement on it.
But he almost always gave the defendant a second chance, and sent him a second summons to appear the following week.
If he was absent again, the plaintiff declared on oath the amount of the debt, whereupon the Commissioner could order an ‘execution’ either against the body or goods of the uncooperative debtor.
If for any reason the plaintiff was unable to come at the time fixed for his hearing, he became ‘non-suited’, and the man he hoped to sue could collect the deposit he had left with the clerk on starting the action.
If the plaintiff/creditor was unable to prove his case and had judgement given against him, he also lost his deposit to his debtor.
But if the defendant lost, he was ordered to pay his  outstanding debt by instalments and if he defaulted on any one of them, he had to pay over the rest in one lump.
The debtor who refused to go and defend himself against his creditor's charges risked having some of his possessions seized and sold to pay what he still owed.
He also risked being arrested and put in gaol.
Frederick Meymott, Clerk of the Southwark Court of Requests, whose Analysis of 1830 has already been referred to, thought the latter was the most usual and advisable course.
However unpopular such a measure might at first appear, the long experience of the commissioners had shown them not only the inefficacy in most cases but also the cruelty of issuing executions against the goods of defendants —‘as regards the wives and children of debtors by selling their beds from under them, and the expense and oppression attending the levy’.
Proof of that was to be found in the returns to Parliament during 1826 and 1827 which showed that out of sixty-seven executions ordered against goods only forty produced payment.
The remaining twenty-seven were obliged to be withdrawn in  consequence of action brought or disputed ownership.
But in the same period upwards of 10,000 executions were ordered against the bodies of defendants.
Of that number considerably less than one-tenth were actually imprisoned for the full period specified, the mere ordering of the execution against the body having produced the almost immediate payment of the debt in nine cases out of ten.
But this was not always so.
Obtaining judgements against unemployed ironstone miners in the Merthyr Court of Requests, and writs for bailiffs to seize goods, was a cause (among others) of the fearsome Merthyr Rising of June 1831.
Armed with guns stolen from gunshops, they revenged themselves on creditors who had ‘restrained’ their property.
When a detachment of Argyll and Sunderland Highlanders tried to restore order, twenty-four of them were killed and seventy wounded.
Whether or not attitudes changed in the next ten years, by the Act 1 & 2 Victoria cap 110 of 1837 abolished arrest by ‘mesne process’ by which, as seen, a debtor could spend time in prison before his case had been tried in court and judgement  made on it.
In the speech which he made in the House of Lords debate on the bill, Lord Brougham pointed out that one half of the cases where ‘serviceable process’ had been used were settled before even an appearance was entered.
Many opinions in its favour on that ground had been advanced by tradesmen.
A grocer with dealings of £200,000 a year once favoured arrest on the mesne process as favourable to creditors.
Then he set off the expense of having a debtor arrested in this way, which failed to produce payment of the debt against the sums he recovered.
There was no balance left.
The money he had fruitlessly spent was equal to what he successfully gained.
Lord Lyndhurst had argued that fear of imprisonment operated beneficially to both parties by deterring men from imprudently contracting debts.
But the power of arresting made tradesmen more ready to lend.
For they knew that they could, in an instant, pounce upon their debtors and obtain payment for themselves even if all other demands went unsatisfied.
Payment under pressure, moreover, prevented any narrow scrutiny of its amount or its justice.
Parliament passed the bill and thereafter a creditor no longer had the power to detain a debtor already in prison at his pleasure, since the man could at once petition the Court for Relief of Insolvent Debtors for his discharge on the terms of his whole property, present and future, being given up for distribution among his creditors — and not only in London but to Commissioners who made circuits to hear such petitions in country districts.
For a tradesman or businessman to allow himself to become over indebted to the extent of being taken to court, let alone jailed, remained a slur if not, at least temporarily, a disgrace and a mark of unreliability.
In 1837 the Committee of The Baltic Exchange, where the owners of cargo ships met shippers wanting cargo space, ensured that everyone who struck a bargain on the floor at St Mary Axe was in a financial position to honour it, that no one was admitted who was insolvent.
In that year they introduced a new rule which stated:
It was a rule they later applied also (in the face of considerable opposition) to the guests whom a member signed for in the Visitors Book and introduced on to the floor of the Baltic Exchange.
The Society of Friends were equally severe about members who fell into debt.
Quaker businessmen were meant to act with integrity  and caution.
When Quaker tea merchant Joseph Fry went bankrupt in 1828 his monthly meeting disowned him.
His Quaker wife, the famous prison reformer Elizabeth Fry, felt members of her own family were also giving him the cold shoulder when they heard he was being ‘investigated’ by the Ratcliff and Barking monthly meeting.
The failure of Frys Bank — a new venture for the tea importers — was due, said his investigators, to dangerous advances made ‘to persons not worthy of such credit, by which the property of others confided to their care was unjustifiably risked’ resulting in ‘great and lamentable loss’to a large body of creditors.
Quaker creditors showed great tolerance to those who were tardy in paying their bills.
At the end of 1836 the Quaker biscuit-makers, Huntley & Palmers, were owed £466, a third of their total credit sales.
A year later unpaid bills amounted to £590 on credit sales of £1,300.
For working class folk wanting to borrow sums between £2 10s and £100 to keep them out of debt or buy something special, the Government passed legislation in 1835 (5 & 6 William IV cap 23) creating Loan Societies.
A second Act of 1840 amending the original law set out twelve ‘schemes’ in three columns.
The Act stated that all instalments after the first were to be paid weekly.
The borrower had to pay a shilling for a promissory note stamp and a fee of two shillings for enquiring into the sufficiency of his security.
The first loan society opened for business in 1838, and within five years there were 150.
The Act stated that other schemes could be formed from the schedule of twelve by advancing or postponing the day of payment of the first instalment, provided that the first payment was not  made sooner than the eleventh day, and that not more than one penny per pound was added to the interest for every thirteen days of such postponement.
Thus scheme six, for instance, might be altered by making the first instalment payable on the 22nd day after the loan and taking 7d per pound for interest.
In fact few were conducted in strict accordance with the Act.
The director of each society was required to submit its rules for approval to Mr Tidd Pratt the barrister who certified Saving Banks regulations, and afterwards to have them approved by the magistrates at quarter sessions.
The number of sureties needed was in proportion to the sum borrowed, one housekeeper for £5, two for £10 and so on.
Societies deducted the interest at the time so never paid the full amount of the loan, which greatly enhanced their profits.
The security search fee was non-returnable even if a loan was not granted, and increased by a shilling for every mile the searcher had to go beyond two miles.
There was an additional charge of twopence a week for the secretary's salary and office expenses.
Anyone borrowing £5 would in fact collect only £4 10s, on top of which he paid around 18s in fees and expenses.
If he failed to pay one instalment, he was fined a halfpenny for every shilling, which became a penny after the second omission when the loan society secretary sent him a circular letter for which a fee of threepence was exacted.
If he accepted the letter he had to pay 2d postage, but more and more of these ‘loan letters’ were returned to the loss of the Post Office.
The Times was highly critical of what it called ‘these usurious companies’, but their creation was a genuine attempt by the government of the day to provide the less privileged members of society with a state money-lender which hopefully they would find more trustworthy than the neighbourhood pawnbroker; and presumably each society's secretary was able to provide some kind of money management advice to those who needed it.
The second version of the Insolvent Debtors Act did not prevent anyone who mismanaged his finances, or who was commendably cautious but overwhelmed by catastrophe, from being forced to spend two months in prison.
Whatever the outcome, he not unnaturally regarded his time in gaol as a stigma, as a stain on his character.
The tradesman who put him there knew this, and hoped that by being removed to such unfamiliar and unpleasant surroundings his debtor would soon see the sense of agreeing to do what would immediately return him to the comparative comfort of his own home, namely to surrender, in settlement of his debt, the real estate which the law did not allow the trader to touch.
The 1837 statute (1 & 2 Victoria cap 110) only applied to those already in prison.
But then, as Blackstone pointed out, the opinion gained ground that it would be to the advantage of trade, and of creditors in general, if debtors outside the scope of the bankruptcy laws who were on the point of insolvency could also surrender their property for the benefit of their creditors, and in return be protected from legal process.
This protection from the impending danger of imprisonment was afforded  by the so-called ‘Protection Acts’(5 & 6 Victoria cap 116 and 7 & 8 Victoria cap 96).
Under these a relief, similar to that given to prisoners for debt, was afforded on the same terms to traders owing less than £300 and to all other insolvents.
Many tried and failed to introduce legislation to remedy the situation.
The Whigs rejected Lord Lyndhurst's bill of 1842 for a small debts court, and the Lords shelved Lord Cottenham's bill which The Times called ‘as masterly a measure as was ever submitted to Parliament’, in deference to a pet bill which Lord Brougham had drafted.
But while the legislators were vying with each other to amend insolvency laws which all were agreed were far from fair or just, in 1842 they were able to agree on the need to do away with the notorious symbol of that unfairness and injustice, the Fleet Prison.
News of the passing of the Act for the demolition of the gaol in Farringdon Street (5 & 6 Victoria cap 22) was celebrated by Philip Ball, a Chancery prisoner, with  
Philip Ball and his fellow prisoners feared that life in the stricter Queen's Bench Prison (so named since 1837), to which they would be transferred, would be less jovial.
No beer or ale, victuals or food could be sent in to the Southwark gaol ‘except as may be reasonable and expedient to prevent extravagance and luxury.’
But the country would save £15,000 a year by The Fleet's demolition, stated The Times , ‘besides getting rid of an ugly object’.
Judges would have difficulty in removing the prisoners by habeas corpus however, and a short bill would be needed.
The Commissioners of Woods and Forests invited tenders for the one acre site, and it was sold to the Corporation of the City of London for around £29,000.
When the prisoners were moved, two of them had been in The Fleet for thirty years.
The site was not finally cleared until 1846.
There were still plenty of ugly and unpleasant prisons attached to Courts of Requests outside London, like that at Kidderminster, a dungeon with an exercise yard of only twelve square feet.
It had one small room which acted as both day-room and bed-room.
The authorities provided neither fire nor blankets in the winter, and gave prisoners no food other than the regular allowance of a half-quartern loaf for two days and water, with maybe a little tea.
The beds were of loose straw, and the debtors were locked up from six in the evening to nine the next morning.
There was no resident keeper.
They were in the custody of the court beadle who lived some distance away.
There was no way they could call for help if any of them fell ill.
In the Marshalsea Prison in Southwark on the other hand, Charles Dickens (whose father spent a time there in 1824) made clear in Little Dorrit the prisoners were able to find help of every kind within the prison's walls.
When one prisoner who had been there six months found his wife was about to have a baby, he was taken by the turnkey to the room of a shabby man dressed in a torn and darned rough-weather sea jacket who had once been a surgeon on a passenger ship but was now ‘a ghastly medical scarecrow’, Dr Haggage.
The three of them ran downstairs to the debtor's room where they were joined by a fourth helper, Mrs Bangham, charwoman and messenger who volunteered her services as flycatcher and general  attendant, and fanned the patient with a cabbage leaf throughout her delivery.
The prison was populated with people of every trade and profession only too pleased to give advice and apply their skills, from all sections of society, thrown together by the common circumstance of overindebtedness and reconciling themselves, some willingly some reluctantly, to its consequences.
They had little alternative but to stay there ‘for as long as it takes’.
The plasterer dressed in his working clothes of fustian splashed with white lime, seen in the Little Dorrit illustration saying goodbye to the Father of the Marshalsea, managed to settle with his creditors after only a week.
But the man whom he promised to come back and visit had been there for twenty years, the oldest inhabitant, as the turnkey would tell newcomers; he could play the piano and speak fluent French and Italian.
How did he get there?
His case, as described by Charles Dickens, was probably typical in arising not from sinister intent or even negligence, but from pure confusion.
To question him in detail and endeavour to reconcile his answers, to closet him with accountants and sharp practitioners learned in the wiles of insolvency and bankruptcy, was only to put the case out at compound interest of incomprehensibility.
The legislators, said The Times in May 1844, were equally confused.
They had been unable to decide whether creditors preferred the property or the carcase of their insolvent.
They had indulged them with a capricious dominion, sometimes over the one, sometimes over the other object of desire.
They showed a mercy to house and land which they denied to flesh and blood.
It was but lately that realty had been made liable for the debts of its deceased owner.
The greater part of the property of Britain used to be surrounded by a kind of magic circle within which the law of honesty could not penetrate.
Instead of boldly breaking the charm and paying every man's debts out of his property, the legislature attempted to turn the flank of the evil — to extort justice by persecution, to arm the creditor with powers of vexation instead of powers of sale, to satisfy his vindictiveness instead of his bill delivered.
The principle of the old law was that the rich man who had property to pay his creditors was allowed to spend it comfortably in The Fleet or Marshalsea.
On him the squeezing was neutralized.
On the  penniless alone fell the horrors of imprisonment.
The screw was only allowed to be effective where nothing could possibly be effected by its application.
The new Insolvent Act had made considerable inroads on the whimsical principles of those days.
But in some ways the law was worse than it was ten years ago.
Then you could catch your knave speedily and keep hold of him.
But Lord Cottenham's bill, to which this leading article referred, was not to have the easy passage through the legislative machine the writer looked forward to.
The minds of the legislators were still in a state of confusion.
Read the first time on 12 February 1844, his creditors and debtors bill was read a second time on 30 April.
When it came up for its third reading on 21 June it was referred to a select committee who on 18 July reported that they were of the opinion that the bill ought not to be proceeded with.
When he next turned his attention to the matter,The Times leader writer had to explain to his readers that the law of debtor and creditor was as yet only in a transitional state and that a very unsatisfactory one.
They were renouncing the wholesale cruelty which, with a uniform and general severity of punishment treated all, the unfortunate dupe as well as the designing knave, alike as guilty.
They had already renounced the more savage brutalities which less refined times reserved for the particular distinction of fraud and knavery.
But they were still as far from anything like a real and right discrimination between the guilty and the unfortunate.
‘And we seem disposed now to frame our laws as if everybody were alike innocent.’
The passing of the Insolvent Debtors Act in August 1844 (7 & 8 Victoria cap 96), abolishing imprisonment for debts of less than £20, however, was widely  welcomed.
It also had the effect of materially abridging the business of loan societies, most whose loans did not exceed £20.
They could no longer have anyone who defaulted on a loan put in prison, and had to take proceedings against his goods, a process The Times described as ‘uncertain, expensive and tedious’.
Up to the passing of the new Act, the loan societies recovered money owed to them either by a summons to a Court of Requests or to a Police Court.
But now, neither commissioners nor magistrates would issue any more summonses against debtors who owed less than £20.
Few tradesmen were happy with the state of affairs.
But if the operation of the Act should prove as detrimental to the interests of trade as many of them imagined, said ‘A Merchants Clerk’ in his letter to The Times of 22 August 1844, they were surely powerful enough to cause their just complaints to be heard.
Had they considered the previous state of the law?
‘Another Clerk’ wrote the next day to say the first writer must be blind to his own interests.
For now he had lost the friend who five weeks before the quarter day used to discount a bill for £10 ‘at something like a trifling interest of 200 per cent.’
Most early Victorian men of commerce saw their priority in balancing their books, leaving the achievement of justice and other abstractions to their betters.
Recovery was the name of the game.
They could take those who still owed them large sums to the Insolvent Debtors Court.
From 1846 they could sue those who owed them small sums under £20 in county courts, created for that purpose in that year.
When he heard that one of these new county courts was to have its first sitting in County Hall, Lewes on 27 April 1847, Thomas Bance, a leading tailor of the town, was quick to register claims against eight customers who had delayed paying for their suits longer than most thought it traditional to do so.
James Brown only owed Bance 8s 6d which, if he had paid earlier, he would not have found increased by 3s 6d costs which Judge William Furner ordered him to pay in monthly instalments of 4s on top of his debt.
He was one of only three ‘defendants’ of Bance's claims to appear personally.
In the leather-bound Minute Book, solicitor Edgar Blaker, Clerk of the Court, entered the words ‘Default — Service Proved’ against the names of the absentees.
They were all ordered to pay what they owed  the creditor/plaintiffs, plus costs varying from 14s 2½d to 3s 1Od.
The largest debt was £9 1s 6d which incurred 33s 6½d costs.
James Lower was ordered to pay £4 at once and then 5s a month.
Few defendants were represented by attorneys.
The reporter from the Sussex Express , who described the novel scene, was impressed — and surprised.
Many of the debts sued for, all undefended, had been outstanding for three, four, five and six years, or even for a longer period.
‘The unfortunate creditors, it was obvious from the nature of the cases, could never have recovered the debts, had not the County Court been established.’
Though forty-five causes were entered in the list for the March session, ‘so efficacious did the mere issuing of the summons prove, that this number was reduced by a third before the opening of the court.’
Those who were called upon to defend non-payment of what they owed beyond the promised date were, as they had always been and were to go on being, in the minority.
Most, like Miss Matty in Mrs Gaskell's novel Cranford about life in Knutsford in the 1850s, were proud of the way they ‘managed’.
When catastrophe hit her in the shape of the Town & County Bank stopping payment, she was ruined.
When she tried to explain that she would now have to live on five shillings a week, she could not restrain a few tears.
What had happened was no fault of hers, and she set herself to live with it.
And it won her admiration.
For her, as with George Eliot's Caleb Garth in Middlemarch , it was a matter of making the exertion.
For years Caleb conducted his failed building business entirely for the benefit of his assignees,
Unlike one of those characters whom Charles Dickens described as taking ‘Night Walks’ in The Uncommercial Traveller , the well-to-do, clever, suitably married man who  Should society sit by and allow ‘characters’who chose to be loose with their money to get away with it?
People who maybe started by being genuinely forgetful of the date on which they had promised to pay later and then, when they became too dangerously indebted, developed a sense of cunning in their schemes to evade their obligations?
Their medieval neighbours who considered their conduct unneighbourly, unjust and unfair, would have had no hesitation in attempting to tighten their looseness in the interests of the common good.
In the 1840s the aim would have been not so much to save the debtor's soul as to save his creditors the expense and boredom of having to sue him.
Some saw old laws which gave a creditor tyrannical powers of coercion over his insolvent debtor as the barbarous expedients of a rude age which were both unjust and inhumane.
One of them was John Stuart Mill who feared, however, that the reform of them which was taking place in the 1840s was being taken as an affair of humanity only, not of justice.
The then modish humanity had gone into a violent reaction against the ancient severity, ‘and might almost be supposed to see in the fact of having lost or squandered other people's property a peculiar title to indulgence.‘
The mitigation of the law was at first carried so far as to sacrifice that object, said J.S. Mill.
He agreed with The Times that imprisonment at the discretion of the  creditor was a really powerful engine for extracting from the debtor any property he had concealed or done away with.
Had the law furnished a sufficient equivalent? he asked.
The doctrine that all the law was expected to do was to put creditors in possession of debtors’ property was a totally inadmissible piece of spurious humanity.
No debtor, he said, should find it an answer to make themselves unable to pay their just debts by spending the money of their creditors in personal indulgence.
Anyone who became insolvent by keeping no books, never taking stock and going on year after year without knowing how their affairs stood, was like a child at school who found to his surprise that he had but one halfpenny left in his pocket.
A case of Dry Rot?
No one wished, said Mill, to curtail ‘commercial credit’, but ‘that which is given by retail dealers to unproductive consumers is no doubt, to the excess to which it is carried [in 1848], a considerable evil.’
The usefulness of large and long credits by tradesmen to suppliers was well known to the businessman who was secretary to several railway companies and later the editor of the Leeds Times .
Narrow-mindedness in living and in dealing was short-sighted and led to failure, wrote Samuel Smiles in his best-seller Self-Help (1859), but every man ought to live within his means.
It was of the very essence of honesty.
For if he did not, he must be living dishonestly on the means of somebody else.
The proverb said that an empty bag could not stand upright.
Neither could a man who was in debt.
It was also difficult for a man who was in debt to be truthful; hence it was said that lying rode on debt's back.
The debtor had to frame excuses to  his creditor for postponing payment, and contrived falsehoods.
The facility of incurring the first obligation became a temptation to a second.
Smiles quoted Benjamin Haydon as dating his decline from the day he first borrowed money.
Haydon realized the truth, he said, of the proverb, ‘Who goes a-borrowing goes a-sorrowing’.
The painter told a young man joining the navy, ‘Never purchase any enjoyment if it cannot be purchased without borrowing of others.
Never borrow money; it is degrading.’
Haydon's autobiography, said Samuel Smiles, showed but too painfully how embarrassment in money matters, produced poignant distress of mind, utter incapacity for work and constantly recurring humiliations.
And the minority who chose to behave in this way were mostly aware that they had no one to blame but themselves — which made it all the more painful.
It led to the condition of which William Cowper wrote in The Winter Evening :
Most had no occasion to change their lifestyles in accordance with such advice; they had always acted on it instinctively.
Those few who consciously risked the consequences of disregarding it, or allowed themselves unthinkingly to slide into overindebtedness, could still suffer the degradation of what went for life behind the walls of the Marshalsea or the Kidderminster dungeon.
In 1859 the legislators were still wrestling with (so far) insuperable objections to abolishing imprisonment for debt.
After seeing his 1853 bill side-tracked by a Royal Commission, Lord St Leonards was moving the second reading of another debtor and creditor bill in the House of Lords in 1859, but once again many of their lordships found it all too complicated, and wanted it examined by a select committee.
The Lord Chancellor said the bill was entirely one of principle: abolition of imprisonment for debt except in cases of fraud, no more distinction between traders and non-traders, debtors able to liquidate their liabilities by private arrangement or by a public enquiry in the Insolvent Court.
Lord Brougham held that a debtor should also still be imprisoned if he refused to pay what he owed when he could do so by executing a deed, or if he was culpably extravagant or reckless in contracting debts which he had no reasonable expectation of being able  to pay.
The debtor was prima facie in the wrong and the creditor in the right, and it was up to the former to extricate himself from the charge to which he had laid himself open.
Lord Cranworth agreed, but held the House should remove the anomaly that no MP or Peer could be imprisoned for debt.
Sir John Pope Hennessy, an Irish adventurer, successfully claimed immunity from arrest for the recovery of the huge debts he accumulated while the Member for King's County in the 1860s.
When defeated in the election of 1865, he had to go into hiding.
He accepted Disraeli's offer of the post of Governor of Labuan —‘about as far from his creditors as he could get’.
He stayed in the South China Sea four years and was Governor of the Bahamas and Hong Kong, all safe sanctuaries, until in 1883, following investigation of his activities as Governor of Mauritius, he was ordered home.
Parliament did not finally merge bankruptcy and insolvency until 1861 (24 & 25 Victoria cap 134) following the report of the House of Lords' Select Committee.
It was only in certain cases however that a non-trader could be adjudicated bankrupt.
And some acts committed by a trader were considered misdemeanours which, committed by a trader, were no offence at all.
The Act of 1861 abolished the Court for Relief of Insolvent Debtors and transferred its jurisdiction to the Court of Bankruptcy.
The final chapter in the story of imprisonment for debt came eight years later with the simultaneous passing in 1869 of the Debtors Act (32 & 33 Victoria cap 62) and the Bankruptcy Act (32 & 33 Victoria cap 71).
Under the Debtors Act no one could be imprisoned except (and then for only twelve months) for default in payment of a penalty; default by a trustee ordered to pay a sum in his possession; default by an attorney in payment of costs; or default in the payment for the benefit of creditors of any income which a court ordered or any other sums.
Fraudulent acts would be tried as misdemeanours and punished by up to two years in prison with or without hard labour.
A typical fraudulent act was withholding information from a trustee administering a debtor's estate for the benefit of his creditors, or failing to give a trustee all his books and papers.
The Bankruptcy Act ended distinctions between trading and non-trading debtors.
It defined traders as all persons using the trade of merchandise by way of bargaining, exchange, bartering, commission, consignment or otherwise, in gross or by retail, or who sought their living by buying and selling, by buying and letting for hire or by the workmanship of goods and commodities.
A farmer was not considered a trader, but those who were included apothecaries, bankers, brokers, innkeepers, millers, printers, shipowners, stockbrokers, warehousemen, victuallers, ship insurers and scriveners.
As Jay Cohen has pointed out, after the promulgation of these two statutes all insolvents who had contracted debts by non-fraudulent means could discharge their liability through personal bankruptcy.
‘New Years Day 1870’ recorded solicitor G. Manley Wetherfield in A Manual of Bankruptcy and Imprisonment for Debt under the Bankruptcy and Debtors Act 1869 (1870),.
The ‘Act for the Abolition of Imprisonment for Debt, for the Punishment of Fraudulent Debtors and other purposes’, to give it its full name, was, said Wetherfield, a very short, simple and sweeping measure, ‘a great innovation upon what we have become accustomed to as the legal relations of debtor and creditor.’
Since those relations were daily growing in importance with the increase in trade, it was becoming more and more essential that all should try and give life to that necessary fiction of government that every man knew the laws of his country.
His manual was a contribution to that worthy objective.
In 1861 the Insolvent Debtors Court had been abolished, he said, but imprisonment for debt continued.
Now both had been swept away and under the new Act a debtor could only be adjudicated bankrupt on his creditor's petition.
He could not make himself bankrupt.
The new Act abolished the old method of arranging with creditors by a deed of composition, assignment or otherwise ‘which has for so long a time disgraced our law’.
Creditors would no longer have the absolute right of imprisoning their debtors upon a judgement over £20 ‘which they have for so many years possessed and in some cases abused’.
The best remedy for a creditor owed more than £50 was to make his debtor bankrupt.
If fraud could be proved, the debtor could be punished criminally.
The new Act gave creditors more authority over their debtors' estates.
In place of an ‘assignee’ came the ‘trustee in bankruptcy’who was one of themselves, and responsible to a Committee of Inspection.
Since the abolition of direct imprisonment for debts not exceeding £20, the Insolvent Debtors Court and, after its abolition, the Bankruptcy Court in London and the county courts in the provinces, had possessed the power of imprisonment for forty days or less upon proof of means to pay or fraud.
‘It has been the aim of the Debtors Act of 1869 to simplify this rather complicated machinery.’
It seemed to Wetherfield to follow that where a creditor had proved his debtor's means, he might have him committed to prison, and that he could then levy on those means, if tangible and available, to obtain payment of what was owed him.
Formerly, intent had to be proved by the prosecution, but after 1870, claimed Wetherfield, it would be implied and ‘thus the onus is thrown upon the debtor of proving that the act done by him, though suspicious, was committed with an innocent intent.’
While aware of its shortcomings,The Times welcomed the Act as a promising experiment which should be tried.
To do away at a blow with the protection against dishonesty, which the power of arrest and detention had been supposed to afford, it declared in its leading article 2 April 1869, would appear little short of revolutionary to anyone who had not followed the course, and watched the tendency, of modern legislation.
Half a century ago it would have been so in fact.
Then the doctrine common to all ages and nations had been that insolvency was a crime, and that the debtor might be properly made to pay in person the penalty for his offence.
It was a doctrine which had grown obsolete.
The presumption that insolvency was criminal was no longer allowed.
The principle of bankruptcy law was that the debt was essentially a charge on the debtor's property and not on his person.
The debtor had no personal claim to a change in the law.
There was no reason why the contract by which a debt was undertaken should not imply the liability to be imprisoned in default of payment.
He was free not to contract the debt.
Dishonest people would now be free of the salutary fear which alloyed their admiration of the confiding temperament of tradesmen.
They might well be inspired with the hope that the millennium of impecunious debtors was at hand.
The public interest would hardly suffer by the curtailment of temptations to give or accept credit which were likely to follow the abolition of so dubious a guarantee of honesty as furnished by the liability to imprisonment.
No legislation could be  expected to make ready-money dealings the universal rule.
There was sure to be a considerable though decreasing number of households to which the credit system was indispensable, and whose custom tradesmen must lose if refusing to accede to these terms.
The main drawback of the bankruptcy laws as they stood was the high cost to creditors of realizing the estates of their insolvent debtors — between 30 and 40 per cent of the amount they hoped to recover.
At the end of it all little was left for the tradesmen who had resorted to the complicated machinery.
Of the 9,123 adjudications in 1868 there had been 6,489 in which no dividend had been realized.
How did that come about?
The result was disastrous and a scandal to the country's law and trade.
It was clear to The Times that bankruptcy was far less of a protection to creditors than a licence to dishonest traders to speculate with other persons' property.
That being the case how did it happen that a system which worked so ill had not been altered long ago?
‘Chiefly, no doubt, the extraordinary complexity of the subject.’
To master the details of bankruptcy law was a task requiring not only skill but assiduous and prolonged attention.
There was not time to have so complicated a measure thoroughly discussed in both Houses in a single session.
But the 1869 Bankruptcy bill was a third of the length of its predecessor.
It was framed on the principles of modern political economy.
A free system of administration was substituted for an official system.
Court rules and restraints were done away with.
The functions of the judge were curtailed and his quasi-criminal jurisdiction transferred to a criminal court.
Inducements were offered to the debtor to confess his insolvency and be frank in his discussion of assets.
The system of management by a Trustee was the main feature of the bill.
His accounts underwent a double audit every quarter and his acts could be reversed by a court on the application of the bankrupt.
County courts could still, in spite of the 1869 Acts, commit small debtors to prison, on the principle that imprisonment was a penalty which should be reserved for what was in the nature of the crime.
The penal jurisdiction of the county courts was to apply only where the debt had been contracted under circumstances which implied an intention to defraud (which upset Wetherfield) or where the debtor had the ability to pay but would not.
These, as The Times said, ‘may be plausibly construed as approaching very near the confines of crimes.’
In the House of Lords debate on 27 July 1869, Lord Romilly deprecated continuing the power of imprisonment for debt in the hands of county courts.
Credit was given for goods sold in the ordinary way, he said, only because the vendor believed the purchaser would pay, and fear of imprisonment benefited no one but the tallyman who forced his credit on the unwary poor.
His objections were overruled.
Judge Furner was still presiding over the county courts at Lewes after twenty-two years, and he continued to order defaulting and mostly absent debtors to be punished by having to spend short terms in the county gaol, for some time after New Years Day 1870.
It was part of the routine he had got used to.
At the first session of the court in January 1869 he gave judgement to James Sprinks, who had sued Harry Carroll for 7s 6d to be paid the full amount plus almost as much in costs, 6s 3d.
He showed no such leniency to Edward Childs who, unlike Carroll, appeared in person, and was sued by Edmund Geering for 14s 6d.
Furner gave judgement for 14s 6d with 3s 6d costs.
Three years later he was still exercising the same power.
On 9 January 1872 the Minute Book kept by the clerk now called Registrar, recorded the commitment of Richard Piper sued by Henry Pierpoint for 5s (money lent on 14 November 1871).
Judgement was entered for the 5s plus 3s costs.
Half was to be paid in fourteen days and the balance in a month.
But Dick Piper stood his ground.
He had seven days in Lewes Gaol to consider the consequences of his ‘having had means to pay but refusing so to do.’
For Debt Read Credit — into the twentieth century
The lower classes were not of course alone in making a habit of over-indebtedness, nor indeed were the middle classes.
While Dick Piper was hard pushed to find the five shillings he had borrowed from Harry Pierpoint, the father of the princess who was to become Queen Mary was jibbing at paying tradesmen's bills which he had allowed to grow to around £20,000.
Prince Teck, later the Duke of Teck, and his wife Princess Mary Adelaide, had apartments in Kensington Palace where they entertained lavishly.
They had an annual parliamentary grant of £5,000 and another £5,000 from the princess's mother, the Duchess of Cambridge.
They should have been able to live on that, but Teck was worried about losing his status at court if he did.
In 1870 he persuaded Queen Victoria to let him, in addition, the substantial White Lodge in Richmond Park which doubled his household expenses.
Reckless extravagance?
The Queen was far from amused when they soon got themselves grievously in debt, and refused to help them.
Baroness Burdett-Coutts lent them £50,000 and the princess's mother made regular contributions.
But the more the Duchess of Teck received the more she spent, and shopkeepers, who had sent round goods on a royal promise to pay later, started pressing for payment now.
She demonstrated her apparent unawareness of her position in the speech she made at the opening of the church hall in Kensington to which the grocer John Barker, from whom she bought provisions, had contributed.
‘And now’, she said, ‘I must propose a special vote of thanks to Mr Barker to whom we all owe so much.’
Her husband vaunted what he called his ‘poverty’, without, of course, ever explaining its cause.
When asked by playwright Joseph Comyns Carr to chair a dinner in aid of the Actors Benevolent Fund he said, ‘My dear fellow, it is not possible.
If I do it I must give at least ten pounds and I simply haven't got ‘em.’
Just when their creditors were on the point of issuing writs the Tecks left England for the continent, insolvent and heavily in debt.
It was the traditional way of avoiding the consequences of such cavalier an attitude to the obligation of Paying Your Way.
Their son Prince Francis (Frank) inherited the habit, and as an officer with his regiment in Dublin he soon amassed debts of up to £1,000.
No need to worry.
He knew of a ‘sure winner’ in the Stewards Plate for two-years-olds at The Curragh race meeting.
He placed £10,000 which he did not possess on a 10 to 1 favourite, Bellevin, to win £1,000.
Only four horses were entered for the five furlong race, and he saw Bellevin beaten by Winkfield Pride.
So now he owed £11,000.
It was June 1895.
To avoid family disgrace, his sister's husband, then HRH the Duke of York and later to become King George V, agreed to help pay his debts, and Frank was packed off to India.
No shame, just a bit of a lark.
Owing large sums of money and not caring a damn, as Anthony Trollope recorded in The Way We Live Now (1875), was one way of making sure there was no doubt about being one of the top people.
Augustus Melmotte, the rich entrepreneur hero of the book, feared his debts would not allow him to go on living anywhere, and killed himself.
Asked why she thought Melmotte had spent such a lot of money, Lady Carbery said, ‘because he thought he could conquer the world by it and obtain universal credit.’
It was the childlike attitude which Walter Bagehot alluded to in Lombard Street ,A Description of the Money Market (1873).
Writing of the credit system of those times, he said:
The great grandchildren of those who had been gulled by the infantile speculative ventures on offer during the manic South Sea Bubble phenomenon had obviously been conditioned to react in the same wild way.
For the man-about-town of the 1890s betraying concern at owing money to tradesmen was bourgeois, boring and absurd.
Oscar Wilde had his Algernon Moncrieff in The Importance of Being Earnest (1895)— the original four-act version — fob off the solicitor Gribsby who came to serve a writ on him, with frivolous repartee.
It was beneath people like Algy to carry ‘ready money’, let alone pay anyone with it except cabbies.
Traders like tavern-keepers in the Strand and wine merchants in St James's Street, learnt to expect and tolerate late payment, and to ensure that any steps to obtain settlement were taken with the greatest diplomacy.
Henry Berry, grandfather of Anthony Berry who retired as chairman of wine merchants Berry Bros & Rudd of 3 St James's Street in 1990, waited three years for what one of his noble customers owed him.
At last, his patience exhausted, he reluctantly sent his lordship a letter threatening legal action unless the debt were 
Later, Berry Brothers introduced discount schemes to encourage early payers by making their wine purchases cheaper.
The firm's Wine Lists stated ‘Terms Cash’ but printed parallel columns of the ‘Price for Cash’and the ‘Price for Credit’.
Two shillings was added to every pound for credit, and five per cent interest charged after twelve months (which became six per cent in the 1920s).
Such attitudes were far removed from the world of the fictional Sir Joseph Bowlem in Dickens's Chimes short story who boasted ‘I allow nothing to be carried over into the New Year; every description of account is settled in this house at the close of the old one’, and the real life employee of Manders the Wolverhampton paintmakers who scribbled on the flyleaf of a 1896 catalogue:
Crafty debtors might escape their obligations by crossing the Channel and going to live on the continent where their creditors could not reach them, like the Duke and Duchess of Teck.
The unsophisticated and desperate ones brazened it out by maintaining a facade of affluence or normalcy by borrowing.
The reader who signed his letter to The Times in February 1869, ‘J.W.’, offered a word of warning.
He had had some experience, he said, of the extent to which thoughtless, incautious young men were ‘victimized and not unfrequently involved in utter ruin on the very threshold of their career by money-lenders who prey upon their credulity and inexperience.’
A young friend of his, aged nineteen, needed a loan of £150 to pay horse-racing bets.
As a great favour, the well-known proprietor  of a cigar shop he frequented introduced him to a ‘gentleman’ with a den in Piccadilly who offered to ‘help him out of his difficulty’by lending him the money.
Hearing that the young man was the only son of a gentleman of wealth, the money-lender begged of him never to hesitate in coming to him again whenever he stood in need of a ‘friend’.
The Piccadilly money-lender gave the young man not only the £150 he needed but a £10 diamond ring and an £8 gold watch.
In return the borrower gave 
The young man, with no means of meeting the acceptance when it came due, took fright and told the whole story to J.W. who told his father who, on the advice of his solicitor, consented to pay back the borrowed £150 with interest at five per cent per annum, and to return the trumpery jewellery which luckily his son had considered too worthless to sell.
Most of the minority who were suddenly faced with ‘pecuniary embarrassment’ would have taken fright and felt a sense of failure, if not disgrace — sometimes needlessly, and for the most part would not have displayed it openly.
By resorting to a money-lender it became more difficult to conceal their embarrassment — than if they had merely run up bills with retailers.
‘To a man who has been accustomed to obtain credit from those who have supplied him with goods’, wrote Thomas Farrow in The Money-Lender Unmasked (1895),
In the chapter he headed ‘Cost of Captivity’ Thomas Farrow gave a List of fifty money-lenders and their rate of interest.
At the top was James Frederick Townend trading as The Strand Bank and Pall Mall Bank, London: 60 per cent per annum.
Most of them charged 60 per cent a year or 5 per cent a month.
However John Edwards —‘Union Deposit Bank’— of King William Street off the Strand charged 120 per cent.
To illustrate the way many of them operated he cited the case of a  widow who in 1894 borrowed £50 from a London loan bank on the security of her furniture which was valued at £250.
She had repaid £35 in seven monthly instalments of £5, when she asked for a second loan.
The money-lender gave her £20 and took a further charge on her furniture — Bill of Sale no 1.
She had received £70 in cash, repaid £35, and still owed £101 15s.
Farrow quoted a Lieutenant Colonel as saying that his neighbours knowing he had money on a Bill of Sale would mean ruin.
He gave another instance of a farmer who obtained a loan of £100 on a promissory note of £140 to be repaid at a rate of £8 a month.
He had repaid £64 when the money-lender sued him and obtained judgement for £283 8s 1d which was accounted for in this way:
The farmer went bankrupt.
Magistrates said, ‘If there are no borrowers, there are no lenders.’
But, said Thomas Farrow, in 1895,
Farrow urged the abolition of Bills of Sale, the statutory form for which is reproduced here.
He had no quarrel with the honest money-lender, only the unscrupulous extortioner.
His aim in publishing his book was to ameliorate the lot of those who appeared to be victimized because they were honest, poor or in needy circumstances.
Under the heading ‘Money-Lenders’ Baits' he showed his readers how the cormorants attempted to lure them into their net — advertisements from loan merchants hiding behind grand names like The Clerical and Medical Bank, in all parts of Britain, none of whom saw fit to mention the rates of interest they would charge, and some specifying Without Sureties.
Plus marks to Mr Grunwell of Leeds for giving a telephone number.
Many of the minority who reluctantly chose to borrow money did so as preferable to having to spend forty days in Winson Green Gaol like Tom Broadbent, the Birmingham brass-dresser, who in 1899 was committed in default of a small debt to a coal merchant, and died there.
At the inquest a fellow debtor, Harry Wood, told the coroner the routine was to rise at six and then busy themselves among the cells till breakfast at 7.15.
They were locked in their cells till 8.30 when they were let out for chapel.
‘The honour was accorded the poor debtors of being the first to enter the place of worship’, he said.
The half hour service ‘was most heartily enjoyed’.
After the Officer-in-Charge had inspected their cells they spent the rest of the day in the Association Room.
They were never given any work to do.
That year, however, at the suggestion of Admiral Tinklar, the new Governor of Winson Green, an Act of Parliament was passed providing useful work for debtors in prison — making post office bags, naval hammocks and army haversacks, grinding corn and picking oakum.
If anyone needed a small amount he could still raise it on the security of a treasured possession left with a pawnbroker.
The Pawnbrokers Act of 1872 had raised the annual interest chargeable to 25 per cent— a halfpenny a month for every 2s. lent on loans under £2.
For more than £2 the rate was 20 per cent or a halfpenny a month for every fraction of 2s 6d.
A pawnbroker could charge a ticket fee of 1/2d if less than 10s was advanced, and 1d on larger loans.
By an Act of 1922 a pawnbroker  could charge a ‘valuation fee’ of 1/2d for each 5s lent for pledges under £2.
The cost of the ticket and valuation fee was deducted from the loan.
North of The Border the escape route provided by sanctuary in Edinburgh became redundant by the passing of the Bankruptcy (Scotland) Act of 1913, though the last entry in the court book of the Bailie of Holyrood under whose care the debtors lived, was dated 1880, when imprisonment for debt was in most cases abolished.
No Act of Parliament ever repealed the privilege of sanctuary within the girth of Holyrood Abbey, but defaulting Abbey Lairds no longer occupied the area where Thomas de Quincey knew he was safe from his creditors and Walter Scott seriously thought of doing the same thing.
One way of never having to become a hostage to the tolerance of a credit-giving retailer, the patience of a money-lender, the goodwill of a pawnbroker, to surrender to the sorrow of exile or the safety of sanctuary, was to emulate Thomas Creevey of whom Charles Greville wrote in his journal in 1829:
Few could be expected to assume that eccentricity.
More would be likely to take to heart Samuel Smiles's advice to look their affairs in the face.
It was their bounden duty, he said, to keep an account of their incomings and outgoings in money matters.
Half a century later the top-hatted, side-whiskered Stingy Uncle in Punch was giving the same advice.
‘Pay as you go, my boy!
Pay as you go!’ he told his nephew.
No money to pay with?
Then don't go.
There had always been that choice, and it was as difficult to take, and as easy to reject, in the twentieth century as it had been in any other.
And still popular was the middle way of going, and shouldering the cost of it later — if anyone could be found trusting enough to allow you to.
Tailors were traditionally tolerant in this  respect.
For a gentleman, a tailor's bill had always been very low in his priorities for settlement.
Savile Row tailor R.J.W. Gieve suspects that it was an attitude born of the realization that the tailor would probably wait for his money rather than press for payment and jeopardize goodwill and the prospect of future orders.
Gieves, a business that dates back to 1785, were above all tailors to the officers of HM Navy, many of whom, the management appreciated, could not afford to buy a good quality uniform, which they had to provide themselves, and pay for it in cash.
Naval officers received no help from the Treasury for their outfits, though they were given a small tax allowance.
Between 1903 and 1921, when the Royal Naval College at Osborne on the Isle of Wight closed, 98 per cent of the cadets were outfitted by Gieves who then continued their service to Dartmouth cadets.
Making them pay cash too often resulted in debt, followed by embarrassment and loss of custom.
So James Gieve introduced the Gieve Account and the use of credit.
He organized a sales ledger which offered a credit account to naval customers, and even encouraged payment by instalment.
Each officer had an account number which could be used in any of the firm's branches.
Family tradition had it, says David Gieve in his bicentenary history of Gieves Hawkes 1785–1985 , that it was James Gieve who first persuaded the Director of Navy Accounts to extend the allotment system from the lower deck to officers.
This allowed a rating to allocate a proportion of his pay each month to be sent direct to his family.
This was extended to officers who were allowed to authorize payments from source direct to naval tailors for their uniforms.
In this way many kept an account going at Gieves over a period of years for a modest monthly sum of two or three pounds.
Shortly after the First World War the firm had occasion to make a loan of £27,000 — for the crew of a cruiser that sailed into Portsmouth Harbour with paying-off pennant flying, only to find that someone had forgotten to order the cash.
Tempers ran high, and the dockyard authorities were unable to help.
And then the Paymaster Commander had an idea.
He went to the Portsmouth branch of Gieves and asked Mr Alderman, the manager, for a loan on his personal account.
Lloyds Bank cashed a Gieves cheque for £27,000, the crew were paid and a crisis averted.
On Monday morning an armed guard escorted the Admiralty's cash for repaying the loan to Mr Alderman's office on The Hard.
Credit was the solvent that oiled the wheels of many other retailers' businesses.
The upper middle class customers of Harrods, Marshall & Snelgrove, Shoolbreds, Maples and Debenham & Freebody, and in the provinces of Kendal, Milnes and Lewis's, who spent whole mornings walking their floors, completed the inspection and sampling in each department by telling the assistant behind the counter, ‘Put it down on my account.’
Having ‘an account’ was a status symbol.
Retailers were confident that they could trust such customers implicitly to pay for the goods they  took away or had delivered.
They were equally trusting in sending country customers goods ‘on approval’, selected from catalogues received in the mail which they retained and paid for by cheque, or returned.
Telling shareholders of his Deferred Payment Scheme of 1901, Sir Blundell Maple said he had found no one coming to his Tottenham Court Road store with a dishonest intention to defraud.
Anyone wishing to buy furniture out of income rather than capital could have it at the cash payment price plus 5 per cent commission, a quarter of which they had to deposit before the goods were delivered.
They paid the balance in monthly or quarterly payments spread over one, two or three years with interest at the rate of 5 per cent a year.
Anyone settling their account within twelve months had half the commission returned.
Britain's first hire purchase?
Only occasionally was a management's confidence misplaced in extending credit in any of these ways.
There was always the last resort of threatening to take a persistent defaulter to court, as wine merchant Henry Berry had done.
Debenham & Freebody's of Wigmore Street did so in 1920, but not for tardy payment of a long outstanding account but for an order which the customer denied had ever been given.
They sued the well-known actress Constance Collier for the £16 9s 3d which they said she owed them for the flowers which her maid had ordered by telephone to be delivered to the Savoy Theatre.
Miss Collier told Judge Bray in Bloomsbury county court that her maid often ordered flowers on the telephone on her instructions, but that she had not done so on this occasion.
Whereupon Debenham's counsel said he had no more questions to ask the actress.
‘It looks’, said the judge who was plainly captivated by the actress, ‘as if I am the only one who would like to see Miss Collier again.’
Telling the story in his book Fine Silks and Oak Counters, Debenhams 1778–1978 Maurice Corina says,
It was obviously desirable for such stores to have a trusting public image which invited people to indulge freely in the convenience of spending money without actually paying it out.
But at the same time, away from public scrutiny, many of these same stores reduced the risk of their credit being abused through a semi-secret organization known as The Mutual Communications Society which circulated to its members the names of habitual defaulters.
Though it was holding weekly meetings in the 1920s it was no new group, having started a hundred years previously in a London coffee house where members met to discuss debtors and exchange information about how best to deal with bad payers.
At their 113th annual dinner in the Connaught Rooms in London in November 1920, A.E.W.  Cooper of Selfridges said the idea of the society was reciprocity.
There was never a time when such a society was more important.
The need for tighter control of credit was seen as vital.
It was taking time for Britain to recover from the First World War.
Members of the society were sending 100,000 enquiries a year to its central office about credit worthiness.
Agents throughout England, Scotland and Ireland (not, for some reason, in Wales) undertook debt enquiries as part of the paid-for service of The Mutual Communications Society.
A central register of information blacklisted certain people, particularly those who passed bad cheques and placed fraudulent overseas orders.
The sums which people paid Maples for furniture were very small compared with what they had to pay for a house to put it in.
Very few could produce the cash to cover the cost of building a new house, and from the 1770s they started clubbing together to pool their money to buy a plot of land and pay a builder to erect houses on it.
They called themselves building societies.
Each member contributed so much a week to form a common fund.
Each house as it was completed was allotted to a member either by ballot or auction.
When every member of the society had got his house the society was wound up.
The first of such groups was Ketley's Building Society known to have been operating in Birmingham in 1775.
At the beginning of the nineteenth century, building societies began to accept investments from people who did not want to buy a house, but use them as a way of investing their savings and obtaining an income in the shape of interest.
As the only funds which the building society possessed were those they received as interest on the sums being borrowed by those buying houses, the payments to these non-house purchasing investors came from these ‘borrowing funds’.
Building societies were legally recognized in 1812, and the first Act of Parliament to regulate them was passed in 1836, when some 150 societies were being formed every year.
In 1845 the first ‘permanent’ society was established which accepted investments and made loans for house purchase on a continuing basis.
A National Association of Building Societies was formed in 1869.
Making landed property the security for a loan —‘mortgaging’ it — was what Sir Giles Overreach was hoping to do in A New Way to Pay Old Debts , as seen; but it was a much older ploy than that.
After the First World War which ended in 1918, local authorities would also advance money for house purchase, as would a body  called the Public Works Loan Board; but between 1920 and 1934 building societies lent £920 million and the others only £94 million.
Between 1932 and 1939 when the bank rate was 2 per cent, a building society's advance was normally around 80 per cent of the value of the house spread over fifteen to twenty years at 4 to 6 per cent interest.
The societies, which had at first been purely local became national, with branches throughout Britain.
At their 1931 annual meeting the Building Societies Association warned that prospective borrowers should have a personal stake in the property to the extent of 10 per cent—‘the limit of safe and prudent lending’.
A Code of Ethics and Procedure was introduced in 1934 to curb ‘uncoordinated activity and unregulated competition’.
Forty societies refused to make acceptance of the Code a condition of membership and broke away to form their own rival society, but the two were merged again in 1940.
People without the ready money to buy a necessity of life like a house, who had to borrow it not from an individual with the distasteful label ‘money-lender’, but a non-profit mutual cooperation body called a building society, were respectable.
The building society movement made borrowing respectable.
It was one of the factors which transformed shameful debt into indispensable credit.
‘Debt’, with its overtones of fault and defaulting, embarrassment and mismanagement, gradually changed into the more significant ‘overindebtedness’— though, of course, newspaper subs hung on to the monosyllabic short word which fitted more easily into headlines and made for more racy reading in the copy.
Organizing respectable credit for respectable people became the respectable part of an accountant's work, whose training enabled him to ensure that it was sound, that is, within the bounds of profitability.
The Americans were one jump ahead of the British in this.
They had created a race of specialist accountants whom they called creditmen.
These individuals had combined into a National Association of Creditmen.
In Britain, from around 1800, traders in towns had done no more than seek to control the sale of goods and services on promises to pay later by combining into Trade Protection Societies, which had grouped into a National Association of Trade Protection Societies (NATPS).
Protection against what?
Buyers' abuse of their credit facilities.
They created machinery to avoid extending them to those whose ascertainable record showed them to be untrustworthy and likely to default.
It was important that they should all be seen to be doing this in a town as a matter of agreed policy, to present a common front to prospective buyers who could not therefore accuse a particular tradesman of unfairly, unjustly discrediting him as a personal vendetta.
In 1934 the British members of the NATPS took another step along this road when, after talking with officials of America's National Association of Creditmen, they planned to form an ‘Institute of Creditmen’, a body of individuals, which  came into being in April 1939 based in London but with local societies all over Britain.
Credit management and credit assessment became a separate professional activity within accountancy, conducted by creditmen or credit managers, the term more generally adopted in the UK.
A central object of the new Institute was to train these specialists in the ‘sanction office’, keep them up to date with legislation and accounting techniques and make credit managers as much a part of a trading company's marketing operation as sales managers who already had their association.
It took time for their role to be accepted and appreciated.
In its early days in Berners Street the Institute was not recognized by Industry and Commerce, as Sir Kenneth Cork recalled in his Foreword to the Golden Jubilee issue of the Journal of the Institute of Credit Management (which it had become in 1989), of which he was President.
As credit managers the members of the Institute were extremely badly paid.
The organization of the Institute wilted and might have collapsed.
Credit assessment — judging the profitable amount of credit to give, in what form and who to give it to — acquired new significance with the social changes that came with and after the First World War, and the even greater upheaval with the much bigger population after the Second.
Traders/sellers found themselves having to sell more sophisticated goods to more sophisticated customers, and had to fine tune credit facilities designed to increase profitable trading to ensure they did not reduce it, let alone end it.
Non-traders/buyers/users — or ‘consumers’ as all the non-traders came increasingly to be called — needed equally to take care, in taking advantage of those facilities, not to be tempted to spend beyond home budgeting limits — economy — and by reckoning debt as part of that budget, they did not fall into or, worse, steer for overindebtedness.
The people from whom the trade protection associations of 1818 were protecting themselves, were smaller in number and simpler in their wants than their 1918 counterparts.
In the Roaring Twenties there were more — and more expensive — things that people wanted, and could become overindebted for.
And they were not ‘luxuries’ but, in the higher standard of living, had become essentials for anyone with the modest ambition of keeping up with the Jones's — wireless sets, gramophones, motor bikes, motor cars, vacuum cleaners, geysers, Oxford Bags, artificial silk stockings, tennis racquets and steel-shafted mashie niblicks.
For those who asked themselves ‘Can we afford it?’ and knew the answer was No, there were  a greater number of tempting schemes, through which they could be led to believe the answer was Yes.
Which scheme they chose depended on their circumstances.
As Sir Gordon Borrie, Director General of Fair Trading, explained in Overindebtedness (July 1989),
And of course there were still a few who would never have dreamt of asking themselves whether they could afford anything, with the attitude to money of an Algernon Moncrieff.
According to Winston Churchill junior, until his mother married Randolph Churchill at the outbreak of the Second World War, ‘she had never been even a penny in debt, but since then worries about bills and people threatening to sue had been endless.’
And then on the troopship to South Africa in 1941, Randolph gambled with his rich friends and lost a fortune.
Pamela Churchill had to leave their house which she had to lease out to others to get income from the rent.
She sold their wedding presents and took a civil service job at £12 a week.
In the telegram which Randolph sent her from Cape Town telling her what had happened, he asked her on no account to tell his father, the prime minister, but to arrange payments on the instalment plan of perhaps £10 a month to a list of the names he enclosed who had fleeced him at the cards tables.
‘In the post-war years’, wrote Randolph's son, ‘Randolph remained for ever in debt because of his determination to live in the grand style to which he had allowed himself to become accustomed.’
He had a retinue of three or four young researchers and kept a full domestic staff, entertaining lavishly.
But the circumstances of the Second World War lessened the gap between the privileged and the less privileged on the home front, between the rich and the poor.
Those who had survived the shooting and the bombing voted Randolph Churchill's father out and Clement Attlee in, looking to a compassionate Welfare  State reflecting the ideas of Sir William Beveridge and his Social Insurance Committee which, it seemed to many, could reduce their need to overspend and provide a safety net if they did.
Security was the end, and Public Social Services the means —'a; set of devices' stated a Political and Economic Planning Report,
Development of the social services was seen as concentrating on improving the Big Four — unemployment insurance, workmen's compensation, health insurance and old-age pensions — which provided against the ‘interruption of earnings’ which caused five-sixths of the want in Britain before the war.
The idea, stated Donald Tyerman in the Army Education's pamphlet The British Way and Purpose , was to provide 
The key element of that standard was a decent house.
A few interpreted that adjective as describing the dream home which was far beyond their present means to run, let alone acquire, but did so none the less with the aid of a mortgage from the friendly building society office in the High Street.
When the breadwinner's earning curve rose, his standard of living rose to the level of his aspirations.
When it fell, the property he had been encouraged to buy by government became the proverbial millstone round his neck and seen too late as a self-inflicted woe.
Most prospective houseowners kept their feet on the ground and proceeded with caution, suspicious of unconvincing voices that called Don't Worry It Will All Come Right In The End.
The end of hostilities in Europe was boom time for the building societies.
Their loans rose from £97 million in 1945 to £242 million in 1947, to £394 million in 1955.
Harold (Never Had It So Good) Macmillan, Minister of Housing and Local Government, introduced a scheme in 1954 to help people buy houses through building societies who were allowed to advance a larger proportion of the price, now rapidly soaring, than hitherto.
The risk was to be shared by central government, local authorities and building societies.
That risk had become proportionately greater.
Because of the role of the home in family life and because the sums involved were so much larger, getting behind with mortgage payments became a more serious potential debt trap than running up bills at retailers.
It  became a more serious potential debt trap than running up bills at retailers.
It became comparable with lax payment of obligatory local and central government rates and income tax, and fines, which could spell real trouble — and gaol.
For Gieves the tailors, the extent to which clients indulged in running up bills regardless had become extremely serious.
In the mid-1950s they had a sum of £600,000 outstanding on their sales ledger which was far in excess of any other asset.
It was a left-over from the days when an admiral, who had spent the greater part of his life in debt to Gieves, none the less had the matter on his conscience and despaired of dying in that state.
So, in his will, he directed that an envelope he had deposited with the firm should be opened after his death and the instructions he had given in it carried out.
When opened, relates David Gieve in his bicentenary history of the famous tailors, it disclosed a small life insurance policy and a charming letter in which he said he wished the proceeds of the policy to be applied to settling his final account, and if there was a surplus he would be glad for Gieves to keep it as a modest token of his gratitude for a lifetime's service.
They sent letters appealing to customers to pay part at least of what they owed in 1955 and within a week the £600,000 had been reduced by £150,000.
The New Orthodoxy — 1980 to 1990
The most significant way in which times were changing was in the emergence of a new attitude to owing money, a new norm, a new orthodoxy.
This, explained Sir Gordon Borrie in his 1986 Rathbone Memorial Lecture, was that everyone should be free to obtain as much credit as he could get, on the easiest terms available on the market.
But that was not to say that people had a right to it, that they were entitled to it.
On this the National Consumer Council, the body which the Labour Government created in 1975 as an independent voice for the consumer, agreed.
It had always been their view, they stated in their 1990 report,Credit and Debt; the Consumer Interest , that consumers did not have the right to credit.
It must be for the lender to take the responsible decision.
In this, consumers and lenders have broadly the same interest.
Consumers who can manage credit should be able to get it, and those who cannot should not.
Lenders will not make money out of consumers who cannot repay their loans.
Lady Wilcox, the NCC chairman, told Valerie Grove of the Sunday Times in September 1990 that she wanted to see responsible lending and responsible borrowing.
The lenders of money have an obligation to lend prudently and if they do not check the creditworthiness of the borrower I think the debt should not be enforceable.
The lenders of the Consumer Credit Association, also formed in 1975, were aware of the reputation of some of them for irresponsible lending.
Ian Stewart warned them not to overload, in his speech as chairman at their 1989 Conference.
In business the objective if you sell goods is to keep selling more goods; if you lend money, to keep lending money and increase ever increasing targets.
That's all very well if people/customers can repay.
If they can't it is misery for both borrower and lender.
My  message therefore, boring but always to be heeded, is ‘watch your credit control, say NO more often, ask for increased payments more often, use the reference bureaux more often, if in doubt say no — cash in the company is better than a lazy or non repaying loan.'
This was the voice of a separate business activity, the credit industry, for which money-lending was conducted to make its own profit, not just as a means of increasing the sales of the company who employed it as part of its marketing.
When Stewart said the boom in consumer credit during the previous decade had been phenomenal and some said dangerous, the danger to which he was alluding was not to the consumer/borrower who might incur overindebtedness, but to the professional finance houses.
Their problem was not an increasing percentage of defaulters, but the same percentage owing more.
Their concern was that the lenders might find themselves debtors.
They had no need to worry about what the National Consumer Council called ‘manageable commitment’, in which the customer operated a system of precisely monitored deferred payment, only ‘overcommitment’ and ‘unmanageable commitment’.
Overcommitment was most common among younger adults before they reached peak income and in families with young or dependent children.
Unmanageable commitment implied accounts three months in arrears for fuel, telephone and mortgage payments, and maybe cars and furniture were seized.
When a borrower was systematically unable to meet commitments by the required date he became insolvent, the final stage when all his remaining assets were repossessed.
The end result was misery — the word used to describe the final stage consistently for seven centuries, whether in or out of prison.
To enable as many as possible to run their lives on the basis of the manageable commitment which was the essence of the new orthodoxy, credit had to be available from a variety of sources from which each could make his choice to suit his circumstances.
There was no lack of commercial money-lenders, who combined into bodies like the Finance Houses Association, the Consumer Credit Association, the Institute of Credit Management, to satisfy the growing urge to borrow and purchase goods and services on a credit basis.
The Macmillan era in the late 1950s and early 1960s, with its catching slogan ‘You never had it so good’ was an appropriate optimistic backcloth for a great surge forward in the provision of consumer credit [said Sir Gordon Borrie in that Rathbone Memorial Lecture].
The new consumer durables (TV, washing machines, refrigerators) were much in demand, and it made sound economic sense to enjoy the use and benefit of such things at once and pay for them out of rising real incomes.
This was after all a period of full employment and marked growth in people's real earnings.
Moreover as inflation began to rise in the 1970s it made no sense to wait before buying; the price would inevitably be higher if you did so.
Two-digit inflation was a great boost to buying on credit, and buying a house on credit made the greatest sense of all because inflation  ensured that the capital value of your house increased while your repayments took a gradually smaller percentage of your income.
The Conservative administration had not made it good, said Borrie; government had not created either the demand or the supply of credit.
The Labour Party disagreed.
It was ‘irresponsible government policies’ which had promoted credit, and ‘Mrs Thatcher's consumer boom’had been fuelled by a credit-led economy.
Government policy, stated the party's Economic Secretariat, had directly contributed to the surge of personal debt.
Its belief in the free market mechanism has meant the scrapping of credit controls in 1982 and the abolition of the supplementary special deposit scheme (the corset) in 1980, which restricted a bank's ability to lend.
This ended a long history of credit controls in Britain since the war.
(Economic Brief, ‘Household Credit — Personal Debt’, 14 June 1989)
They might have added that government's encouragement of home ownership, already alluded to, had reinforced the need for credit.
But if the then Prime Minister had been governing by decree based on policies formed by her own beliefs, credit might have been easy.
‘My policies’,The Economist quoted her as saying,
are not based on some economic theory but on things I and millions like me were brought up with: an honest day's work for an honest day's pay; live within your means; put a nest egg by for a rainy day; pay your bills on time; support the police.
('Margaret Thatcher's Ten Years', 29 April 1989)
A one-time Economic Adviser to HM Treasury turned university Professor of Personal Finance, K. Alec Chrystal, gave no discernible answer to the question he posed in his Social Affairs Unit report Consumer Debt: Whose Responsibility?
But he had no hesitation in recommending the provision of consumer credit on the widest scale — and no bars to the easiest access.
Whoever was responsible for it, Britain had grown into a credit society and looked like staying that way.
Janet Ford, a Senior Lecturer in Sociology at Loughborough University, preferred to call it ‘The Indebted Society’, the title of the book she wrote in 1988, but her sub-title ‘Credit and Default in the 1980S’ showed that she meant overindebted.
‘Credit’ when you can afford the loan, ‘Debt’when you cannot?
The Economist called it the Consumer-Credit Snowball and pronounced it well and truly rolling.
Yet in the 1960S some members of the credit industry had feared it would grind to a halt unless they could threaten promise-breakers with prison.
Imprisonment for ordinary civil debt was abolished by statute in 1970 — another hundred years had had to pass since the enactment of the 1869 measure which was seen as the triumph of liberal attitudes over the  centuries-long stand of the powerful trader lobby.
Regret for the loss of the use of force against those who reneged on their promise to pay later may still be harboured by some in secret, but no longer publicly.
In no circumstances can a debtor now be sent to prison for failing, no matter how deliberately, to pay a hotel bill or an account with a shop or a hire-purchase debt, yet the air has not been filled with the ululations of stricken credit traders unable to recover their money.
(Lord McGregor of Durris, Legal Fiction and Social Reality: the Case of Maintenance Defaulters, 1979)
Contempt of Court could still bring a custodial sentence.
In a well-publicized case, Judge Peck sitting in Wandsworth County Court issued an order committing the thirty-one-year-old Lord Mancroft to jail for seven days for contempt of court after repeatedly failing to meet four court orders to pay debts totalling more than £4,000 to Moss Bros the tailors, Barclaycard, a firm of vets and an international transport company.
The committal order was for failing to attend court for examination of his means in proceedings to enforce judgement debts against him.
In upholding Peck's committal order, Judge White said Mancroft was not protected from arrest under Parliamentary privilege or as a peer of the realm in a situation where the courts were exercising their punitive disciplinary powers.
In giving his ruling Judge White said the court had more cases waiting in which judgements in default against Lord Mancroft totalling more than £16,000 had not been satisfied.
He had execution of the warrant for his arrest stayed for twenty-one days to allow the young peer to appeal.
In its 1969 report, the Committee on the Enforcement of Judgement Debts chaired by Mr Justice Payne recommended the setting up of a Court Enforcement Office, the functions of which would include assisting the creditor to obtain from the debtor ‘as much as he can properly afford’, to liquidate the debts as soon as possible and to protect the debtor against undue hardship or harassment.
It was all very much less threatening an atmosphere than Judge Furner's county court in Lewes in the 1840s.
Credit managers had had their prison threat weapon taken away from them after reports of exploitation and deceptive trading practices by certain ‘loan sharks’ became too numerous for the government to ignore.
In 1968, to restore public confidence in the so-called finance houses, banks and other money-lending agencies, a Committee of Enquiry was appointed under the chairmanship of Lord Crowther who had been Governor of the Bank of England.
The authors of the Crowther Committee Report of 1971 saw no benefit in controlling credit, though it would be socially harmful for money-lenders to risk lending money, at the high interest rates which would bring them a commercial profit, to anyone unlikely to be able to pay it back.
Their main conclusion was that 
on balance credit is beneficial, since it makes a useful contribution to the living standards and the economic and social well-being of the majority of British people.
They were aware of the danger of individuals being tempted to enter into excessively burdensome commitments, but that was no reason to restrict access to a facility which the vast majority used with discretion.
Consumer credit, they said, could help even the poorest in society with planning their household expenditure.
It would be difficult to draft measures which protected the minority who borrowed unwisely without depriving the large numbers of others, who knew how to use it wisely, of its benefits.
It was a basic tenet of a free society that people themselves must be the judge of what contributed to their material welfare.
The Government responded to these recommendations by passing the Consumer Credit Act 1974.
There was no intention of controlling credit, only the credit givers.
The object of the Act was to protect the minority of unwary consumers from possible exploitation by the minority of unscrupulous lenders who took unfair advantage for their own gain of their ‘victims’ ignorance.
The means was to restrict the legal provision of credit to those who applied for it and were granted a licence.
The system of licensing and control was to be operated by the Director of Fair Trading.
‘Fair’ was the key word.
Make borrowing fair and honest; bring bargaining between borrower and lender out into the open, with the borrower being given the opportunity to understand precisely what he was letting himself in for, and in that knowledge to make his choice.
What he must expect, and assume, was truth in lending.
So that one bargain could be fairly compared with another, the cost of borrowing — the interest charged — should in all cases and by all lenders be expressed in terms of an Annual Percentage Rate (APR), not solely in weekly or monthly interest.
Sales talk and advertising must not be ‘false’ or ‘misleading’.
Only those who were regarded as ‘fit’ could be trusted not to trade on the despair of people, at their wits end, reduced for the first time in their lives to seeking a loan.
Fitness was the applicant's clean record, his ability to show that he had never committed fraud or any act of dishonesty or violence, or indulged in any deceitful or oppressive, unfair or improper practices.
Once licensed, the lender must not make an ‘extortionate’ charge for the loan.
If a borrower had rashly signed a credit agreement and then discovered he had committed himself to paying what he considered disproportionate interest, he could have his opinion confirmed, or shown to be unreasonable, by a court.
Clause 137 (1) reads:
If the court finds a credit bargain extortionate it may re-open the credit agreement so as to do justice between the parties.
So not only fair but just.
A credit bargain was considered ‘extortionate’ if it required the debtor to make payments ‘which are grossly exorbitant, or otherwise grossly contravenes ordinary principles of fair dealing.’
Regard should be had, however, to the interest rates prevailing at the time, to the debtor's age, experience, business capacity and state of health and ‘the degree to which, at the time of making the credit bargain, he was under financial pressure and the nature of that pressure.’
Factors which applied to the lender included the degree of risk he accepted having regard to the value of the security provided, his relationship to the debtor and ‘whether or not a colourable cash price was quoted for any goods or services included in the credit bargain.’
A credit agreement could be re-opened, if the court thought just, on the grounds that the bargain was extortionate, on the debtor's application to the High Court, a county court or a sheriff court.
In re-opening the agreement, the court had a number of ways of ‘relieving the debtor or a surety from payment of any sum in excess of that fairly due and reasonable.’
They included setting aside the whole or part of any obligation imposed on a debtor, requiring the creditor to repay the whole or part of any sum paid under the credit bargain, direct the return to the surety of any property provided for security, altering the terms of the credit agreement.
Under the 1974 Act it was creditors not debtors who were liable to imprisonment.
They could be jailed for two years and fined £400 for ‘engaging in activities requiring a licence when not a licensee’, and thirteen other offences which included inserting false or misleading advertisements, canvassing debtor-creditor agreements off trade premises, sending circulars to minors, and supplying unsolicited credit tokens.
In some cases the term of imprisonment was only for one year, and the fine was £200.
Presumably either a creditor or a debtor could commit the offence of ‘Knowingly or recklessly giving false information to the Director’, which carried a penalty of £400, two years in gaol, or both.
Except under an order of the court, a creditor could not enter any premises to take possession of goods subject to a regulated hire-purchase agreement or other such agreements.
A lender who wanted to terminate an agreement, to recover possession of any goods or land, or demand earlier payment of any sum, had first to serve a notice on the debtor.
Obligatory use of Annual Percentage Rate was introduced in 1980, but the main regulations issued under the Act did not come into force until May 1985.
The reaction of members of the Consumer Credit Association of the UK, whose declared aim was to promote the highest standards within the unsecured credit industry, was to produce a Code of Practice.
They launched it in May 1984 (and it was updated in 1989).
They also produced a range of agreement documentation written in simple English but legally correct within the terms of the 1974 Act.
They held a series of seminars and workshops to indoctrinate their members  in the newly defined ways of fair trading from which they should not stray.
They intended, they said, to be stricter in the way they selected credit traders who applied for membership, and to distance themselves from ‘rogue moneylenders’.
It was, they contended, in everyone's interest to recognize ‘the legitimate industry’.
Their Code of Conduct, drafted in consultation with the Office of Fair Trading, supplemented the legislation by setting out guidelines of ‘good business conduct’.
Any lender who displayed the Association's symbol indicating he was a member was also publicly acknowledging adherence to the Code.
Continued non-appliance or a serious breach would probably lead to a warning from the Disciplinary Committee followed maybe by ‘a recommendation of expulsion’.
The Code enjoined members to trade fairly and responsibly, to behave at all times with integrity, comply with all relevant legislation benefiting consumers, act responsibly and prudently in their marketing and advertising, ensure that its debt collection procedures conformed to the highest ethical standards.
They later added a ‘Members Business Conduct Pledge’ regarding selling by telephone, canvassing, harassment, and complaints and redress procedure.
Honesty and courtesy were to be their guides when phoning potential customers, with no misleading statements, exaggerations or partial truths, and no unsolicited calls made to them at their place of work.
It was a breach of the Code to falsely claim that criminal proceedings could be brought for non-payment, or to compel anyone to sign documents which allowed repossession of goods.
Whether or not the Association regarded the method of debt collection adopted by London Manhattan's Smelly Tramps Ltd as conforming to the highest ethical standards, it apparently had a high success rate.
Ninety per cent of debtors paid up in 1979 rather than tolerate the presence of the malodorous individual in reception for another five minutes.
Hiring a disgusting pretend-tramp drenched in stomach-turning chemicals to collect debts cost the creditor customer £20 a time.
The Finance Houses Association were also anxious to ensure that collection practices conformed to the highest ethical standards.
In their 1985 booklet Consumers and Debt they listed sixteen obligations of members.
They should also promote plain English in their contracts, discourage oppressive and intrusive methods of canvassing and encourage prudence in borrowing among applicants for credit.
Only in the most pressing circumstances could members be expected to release customers from the binding legal contracts which they had entered into freely.
Finance houses sought to promote business in a responsible manner, recognizing that only in that way would they be promoting profitable business.
They also recognized that among the major contributory causes of debt problems were accident, sickness, unemployment, divorce or marital difficulty, death or other change of family circumstances.
If a customer's circumstances change adversely for reasons beyond the customer's control, the finance company will look sympathetically at the circumstances and will try, subject to any restrictions placed upon it by the Consumer Credit Act 1974, to reach an accommodation with the customer to pay off the outstanding balance in a practicable manner.
The Finance Houses Association recognized the problems caused by loan sharks often operating illegally.
It was at one with consumer bodies in wishing to see their activities stopped.
While the Consumer Credit Act licensing system imposed a restraint on credit traders and provided for criminal and financial sanctions against unlicensed trading, the Association was concerned in 1985 at the minority of creditors who were either unaware of, or careless of the existence of, the licensing system.
What was it that the lenders had to offer potential borrowers at this time, facilities which would help solvent individuals to meet ‘special’ capital expenditure — buying a boat, adding a conservatory — which they did not wish to, and maybe could not, take out of an adequate income without upsetting the household budget, and many credit traders (mostly credit brokers, agents who ‘arranged’loans from moneylenders in the style of stockbrokers) highlighted as meeting the needs of those already in debt?
In their advertising these firms represented their service as one that would relieve the anxiety of owing so much to others — borrowing from a single Peter to pay pressing Pauls?
PUT ALL YOUR DEBTS IN ONE BASKET suggested one Licensed Credit Broker.
If you're paying out every month on credit cards, on short term loans, perhaps on an overdraft too, here's a way to simplify your finances and get cash in hand.
Take out one loan to cover them all.
Try us.
You can borrow anything from £2,000 to £50,000 secured on your home with no fuss, and no delays.
It stated ‘APR 16.9% variable’.
They gave the example of someone who borrowed £5,000 over ten years.
He would pay back the £5,000 together with the interest in 120 monthly instalments of £82.89.
By the end of the ten years he would have paid the firm £9,946.80.
Not paying on the nail could be extremely expensive.
Probably some, who considered the idea of Making Ends Meet unacceptable and unbecoming, i.e. those  enjoying the thrusting Live-Now-Pay-Later lifestyle of the 1990s, would think differently if they knew that the cost of borrowing the £5,000 that would extricate them from the consequences of their cavalier attitude would cost them almost another £5,000.
A sobering thought.
In the open market of credit trading there were, of course, all kinds of permutations and combinations, the main variable factor being how long the lender would wait for his loan to be repaid.
£5,000 for just £44.98 per month WOULD YOU BELIEVE IT?
Loans secured on property
That was the cost of borrowing £5,000 over 180 months for the first year ; after that it was £100.77 a month.
And that, said the advertiser, was ‘almost certainly around half of what you pay now (the total cost of £17,469.12 Will be reduced on early settlement).
APR 22.6% variable.
Pay it back over any period between 3 and 15 years.’
In the same 1990 issue of the Birmingham Evening Mail , another Finance broker offered to send readers £500 to £100,000 over two to twenty-five years with interest rates fixed until 1992 and ‘nothing to repay until 7 months’.
Some Mortgage Arrears and Court Judgements are acceptable.
All problems considered sympathetically.
Homeowners and mortgage payers may borrow without proof of earnings — including self-employed.
Their APR for borrowing £3,500 over thirty-six months was 20.9 per cent.
Borrowing £30,000 over twenty years would be repaid plus interest at 16.9 per cent APR in monthly instalments of £411.99.
One of nine lenders advertising in half a page of the Daily Mirror in June 1990 asked
NEED CASH?
NEED IT FAST?
Decision Today!
Loan Refused?
Whatever your needs or circumstances give us a ring now!
Even if you've been turned down elsewhere.
Every day the London Evening Standard carried two or three small classified advertisements headed LOANS from lenders who only gave their telephone numbers, viz:
UNSECURED Loans £1000–£10,000, payout 4–8 days, no bad debtors 081000 0000 up to 8 pm.
Written quotations on request.
Licensed Credit Brokers.
Some 35,000 still used one of the 140 Credit Unions operating in Britain in the 1990s as cooperative savings and loan clubs.
These were groups of people with a common bond who had joined together to make regular contributions into a pool from which they could borrow at low rates of interest.
Most of them would also have borrowed in the open market, maybe from a clearing bank where they had a current account and the manager had allowed them to draw over and above what was in it — an overdraft (the cheapest way of borrowing?)— or perhaps a Personal Loan.
Banks promoted such services by press and television advertising.
And other firms with ‘Bank’ in their title also offered to lend, viz:
CREDITPLAN FLEXI START BANKLOAN was the headline of a large advertisement of such a bank.
The borrower had three ways of repaying his loan, either starting at once, in three months or nine months time.
‘You'll find our current interest rate — 20.9% variable — very competitive.
Let's say you take out a £5,000 loan over two years and you elect to start your payments right away.
You'd pay £130.26 a month with a total amount payable being £7,815.60.’
The loan would be secured by a mortgage on the borrower's property.
Borrowers under sixty got free life insurance.
‘Quick, confidential, no arrangements fee’.
In another advertisement the same firm proclaimed
IF YOUR MONTHLY PAYMENTS ON CREDIT CARDS, STORE CARDS AND PERSONAL LOANS ADD UP TO SAY £200 they could halve them to £100 or even £50 a month.
Some manufacturers had themselves licensed as credit brokers, and in their advertisements offered INTEREST FREE CREDIT to any who purchased their goods —‘over a period of 12 months APR 0%’.
Retailers relied more on bank credit cards or their own ‘store cards’ to maintain and increase their sales with the smallest risk of default.
A customer who produced a credit card could take away goods without payment on the implied promise to pay within a month, and if they did (which the vast majority did) they would not be charged interest for being lent the amount they would otherwise have had to pay across the counter.
The check-out girl gave the customer an invoice listing the purchases and their cost, which was stamped with the credit card, and added to the monthly account.
Anyone failing to pay the total amount shown on that account  when they received it (the end of the ‘free credit’ period) would have to pay what he owed plus interest, which in 1990 was on average 2.2 per cent monthly or 29.8 Annual Percentage Rate (risen from 23.1 per cent in 1988).
Numerous people ran into debt from being unable or unwilling to settle their credit card accounts at all or in full each month, and allowing their purchases to grow in price as every month passed, but the sums people in Britain owed in this way was a very small proportion of the total outstanding personal credit granted, which in 1987 Janet Ford reckoned in her book The Indebted Society was £30,000 million.
It was the lowest cause of overindebtedness, less than two per cent of people's commitments.
The credit card schemes were run by the banks who charged their customers — retailers, restaurants, theatres, hotels, travel agents — for the service.
The card belonged to the bank who issued it under a Credit Agreement, regulated by the Consumer Credit Act 1974, to those who gave what they considered satisfactory answers to the questions put in their application forms.
The applicant had to sign agreement to a statement that confirmed he or she was not less than eighteen years of age, and they understood that the bank reserved the right to decline the application without being required to state any reason, and that no correspondence would be entered into in those circumstances.
‘We may ask for references.’
So not everyone could become a cardholder and admit himself to another potential source of overindebtedness.
The ways cards made spending — and overspending — so easy and painless made it difficult for people not to treat the plastic rectangles as money.
And their novelty.
In the mid-1960s they were unknown.
The first was introduced by Barclays Bank in January 1966 — the ‘Barclaycard’.
By 1990 there were twenty-eight million cardholders, mostly ‘Barclaycards’ and ‘Access’cards, owned by the Midland, Lloyds, National Westminster and the Royal Bank of Scotland (recently renamed ‘Signet’and up for sale), but since a Monopolies and Mergers Commission investigation in 1989, there are a whole lot more.
Britain was the most credit card conscious country in Europe, but less than ten per cent of all payments were made with them.
The banks added to the conventional credit card schemes and others with names like ‘Connect’, a Visa debit card, and ‘Switch’, an electronic-only debit network.
But profits from their credit card schemes slumped; they took advantage of a new government ruling that they could charge for the cards, but felt their schemes were newly threatened by the Government's agreement to allow shops to charge lower prices when customers paid in cash.
The next best thing was being given a month's free credit, and by most people taking this they knocked the wind out of the banker's sails.
When, in an attempt to arrest the drop in profits from their schemes, Lloyds unilaterally changed the terms of its Access credit card by introducing a £12 annual fee, they received a severe reprimand from the Office of  Fair Trading.
From 1 March 1991 they increased the interest rate from 1.9 per cent a month to 2 per cent, raising the APR from 26.8 to 28.3 per cent .
Apart from making it easier for customers to shop at their stores, retailers started their own store card or charge card schemes as a way of adding to their ancillary profits — and reducing outgoings by not having to pay the banks so much for their credit card schemes.
Customers who declined to pay cash across the counter with ‘real’ money, a cheque or by direct debit, or produced a bank credit card, found the price of their purchases greatly increased if they were a store card holder.
Virginia Matthews, Consumer Correspondent of the Daily Telegraph reckoned there were almost eleven million store cards in circulation in Britain in December 1989 with an average APR of 34.5 per cent which compared unfavourably with the 29.8 per cent charged by Barclaycard.
Marks & Spencer, the House of Fraser and the Burton Group had some six and a half million store cards between them.
Burtons were the biggest with a card portfolio of £580 million and profits in 1989 of £40 million.
They were planning to sell Burton Group Financial Services to General Electric of America for £183 million.
They were not the only retailers to be bankers as well.
Marks & Spencer Financial Services offered Personal Loans ‘to help you spread the cost of almost any major purchase…and because it's an unsecured loan, you won't be asked to offer your home as security.’
We will, of course, make sure you're not overstretching yourself.
The checks that we make are quick but thorough as we take our responsibilities seriously-no one wants to add to an existing debt problem.
In spite of the high cost of store credit, said Virginia Matthews, many families were multiple store card users and had accounts at as many as five separate shops.
The number of store cards rose by 1.4 per cent in the six months to September 1989.
However, with other banks following Lloyds' lead to charge for their credit cards, many began to show a preference for ‘debit cards’, cheque equivalents.
The Retail Consortium, which represented 90 per cent of Britain's retailers, said they were cheaper for traders to operate than credit cards.
Few were tempted by credit cards, debit cards, store cards or account cards to overstretch themselves, but ‘in several moments of madness’ Allison Battye was able to do so at Harrods, the House of Fraser store in Knightsbridge, to the tune of £2,300 on a card which Harrods had given her on the strength of her claiming on the application form that she was in employment, which was not true.
Charged at Horseferry Road Magistrates Court in January 1989 with dishonestly inducing Harrods to forego payment, she heard the magistrate Eric Crowther say it was not entirely her fault.
She had been treated with the utmost stupidity.
They just let you go on buying on the never-never.
This is just the kind of system that encourages crime.
If Harrods hadn't in this ridiculous way offered you a credit card, no crime would have been committed.
Harrods is the author of its own misfortune.
It blatantly encourages young people to live on credit which is extremely undesirable, and brought about by their greed in getting people to buy their goods in every possible manner.
Allison Battye's behaviour was as unrepresentative as that of the sales engineer earning £10,000 a year who ran up debts of £141,590 and was said in St Albans Crown Court in March 1990 to have eighty-nine credit accounts; or as that of the thirty-seven-year-old doctor from Gwent, made bankrupt in 1988 with total debts of more than £1½ million and still owing £780,000, who used his credit card to buy £6,000 worth of furniture for his girlfriend.
Living in a fool's paradise?
Nothing new.
The doctor and the engineer were but the latest to follow the folly and beggary route, the minority which every generation throws up thinking they can beat the system.
And of course some do.
From the research which they commissioned into consumer attitudes Mintel concluded there were millions of people in Britain living in a fool's paradise in the 1990s, continuing to borrow money to the very limit on credit cards, store cards, bank loans and mortgages, yet refusing to accept they were ‘in debt’— mainly because of their ignorance of how money was borrowed and paid back.
Marie Jennings of the Money Management Council thought it unfair to expose people with little knowledge of sales techniques to ‘offers’ such as holiday homes and trying out cars.
‘Someone becomes overcommitted and, before the position is recognized, starts slipping into debt in other areas without their prior knowledge of  what could be involved.’
Young and ignorant?
A Halifax Building Society survey found most elderly people with financial difficulties did not resort to credit as a panacea —‘their generation does not approve of credit.’
British and ignorant?
‘Give the Germans five Deutschmarks and they will save it’, said John Major as Chancellor of the Exchequer, ‘but give the British five pounds and they will borrow £25 and spend it.’
If he had a good fairy on hand he would ask her to wave her wand and change British spending habits.
Protecting retailers, banks, building societies and other lenders from exploitation by a heady few set on having a spree was the function of Credit Reference Agencies.
Any organization, in the business of issuing credit cards or lending, employed them to assess the likelihood of applicants for cards being able and willing to keep their implied promise to pay later, and the level of risk that they would not — their credit-worthiness in other words.
It was a precaution any lender had always had to take.
In the 1990s the report of these professional organizations who constituted a separate industry, was based on what they could discover about the applicant's known record to date as regards prompt and full payment, on the applicant's own assertions and, controversially (because of possible contravention of the Data Protection Act) information volunteered upon questioning by third parties.
Most agencies took into consideration the credit rating of other members of the applicant's family, cross-checking which, believed Michael Cronin, chairman of the Independent Forum on Data Protection, was highly relevant.
The National Consumer Council had the impression that consumers wanting to borrow money felt agencies automatically regarded them as ‘guilty’ and that they had to prove their innocence.
They should be able to read the agency's report, the Council thought, and point out what they considered mistakes in it before it was disseminated as fact.
Apart from anything else, agencies had to make absolutely sure they had the applicant's correct name and address, mistakes in which, claimed Simon Moulton, Assistant Data Protection Registrar, accounted for more than 100,000 people being refused credit every year.
Mistakes of that sort apart, it would seem that, as had always been the case, some sort of checking system was needed to give lenders the required degree of confidence to carry on, and that the more thorough and ‘scientific’ it was the better for both borrower and lender, the more effectively it reduced the incidence of overindebtedness, and saved borrowers from overstretching themselves and indulging in mad bouts of impulsive buying.
Few bought a house on impulse.
Much larger sums were involved, almost inevitably in five, or maybe six, figures.
Some paid in cash, most borrowed the whole or 90 per cent of the price from a building society or other mortgage lender.
For the latter the risk was high and he took even more stringent steps to protect himself against default.
As a result many would-be house purchasers never  qualified for a loan.
‘Probably the relatively low level of heavy commitment in the case of mortgages’, stated the Office of Fair Trading report Overindebtedness (July 1989), ‘can be attributed to the detailed investigation into incomes and other circumstances which usually precedes the granting of a mortgage.’
Most of those whom the investigations showed to be credit-worthy justified the faith put in them and stayed the course.
The Policy Studies Institute preliminary report Credit and Debt in Britain (February 1990) emphasized that mortgages did not result in problem debts for the vast majority of borrowers.
The most common debts were rent arrears.
The National Consumer Council report Credit and Debt; the Consumer Interest (May 1990) noted that the number of mortgage repossessions still only represented a tiny proportion of all people with mortgages.
However, in spite of stringent credit referencing precautions, loans in arrears between six and twelve months rose from 24,000 in 1982 to 83,000 in 1988 according to the Building Societies Association statistics, but came down to 58,000 in 1989.
Those in arrears by more than a year rose from 5,000 to 21,000 between 1982 and 1988.
The number of repossessed properties rose from 6,000 in 1982 to 23,000 in 1987, though in 1988 the figure dropped to around 13,800.
‘Underlying factors which affected the growth in arrears and repossessions’, stated the Office of Fair Trading, ‘were increasing unemployment, relaxation of building society lending criteria, competition in the mortgage market and easier availability of credit.’
More than 136,000 mortgage payers were taken to court in 1990, a 63 per cent rise on 1989, according to the Lord Chancellor's Department; but only 55,000 possession orders were made (49,000 in 1989).
The Council of Mortgage Lenders reckoned that at least 40,000 homes were actually repossessed in 1990.
Most were within the first three years of taking out a mortgage and among people who bought property early in 1988 on over-generous terms that stretched monthly payments to the limits.
Most lenders waited until payments were three to six months in arrears before seeking repossession orders, and by the time a court order was granted most families had moved out.
As The Economist pointed out, ‘only a few go through the final humiliation of meeting the bailiff at the door and watching him change the locks’.
For the Government the scale, not of the commitment but of the arrears, was unacceptably large, and in 1990 Michael Spicer, Housing Minister, asked the Council of Mortgage Lenders ‘to develop a code of practice for dealing with people borrowing money and getting into trouble.’
The first general principle of their Handling of Mortgage Arrears code of practice issued in May 1990 was:
Mortgage loans should be made only to people who have the capacity to repay them.
The problem of a borrower who fell into arrears through no fault of his own should be handled sympathetically and positively.
But the borrower must cooperate with the lender, particularly by answering correspondence and making contact at the earliest possible moment.
The most important factor in keeping arrears down to the lowest possible level was exercising proper care in granting mortgage loans, checking the applicant's income, his previous borrowing record, verifying that the property was relevant to the borrower's needs and his ability to maintain it in good order.
It might be in order to lend three times the income of an applicant whose wife was also working, there were no children, a significant salary increase was likely and he had no outstanding hire purchase commitments, but not in less favourable circumstances.
Borrowers do, of course, have a responsibility to ensure that they are not overcommitting themselves, and the vast majority do so.
Lenders sought to take possession only as a last resort, but sometimes there was no alternative.
If the borrower could no longer afford to keep up the payments, the longer he stayed in the home the more the interest bill mounted.
But by handing over the keys he did not necessarily escape his debts.
A borrower had a personal covenant with the lender who could still sue for outstanding debts.
The Building Societies Association were well aware that if interest rates rose sharply, some borrowers might find it difficult to increase their payments in step.
In such cases borrowers with repayment rather than endowment mortgages might be allowed to extend the length of their mortgage instead of increasing the payments.
In extreme circumstances borrowers might be allowed to pay interest only for a while.
Building societies' basic rules of operation were designed for home buyers to repay loans over periods of twenty to twenty-five years without over-committing themselves.
They lent up to 100 per cent of valuation although normally they would ask for a deposit of at least 5 per cent in 1990.
The Association reckoned that in 1986 one third of first-time buyers received an advance for 100 per cent of the purchase price of their houses.
Banks now competed with building societies in mortgage lending.
One of them, the Midland Bank, advertised
FINALLY.
A MORTGAGE THAT RECOGNISES MY POTENTIAL
They offered the person, whose salary did not reflect how handsomely he would be paid in the future, a Professional Mortgage.
‘If you're a first-time buyer we'll lend you every penny you need to buy the place.’
Over-readiness to lend to households contributed to the drop in profits of the Midland Bank whose chairman Sir Kit McMahon resigned in March 1991.
At the beginning of the year they began  an advertising campaign encouraging people to save rather than spend.
Chancellor John Major introduced a Savers Budget in 1990.
By abolishing the composite rate tax in his 1991 Budget his successor Norman Lamont enabled 15 million savers on low earnings to gain at least a quarter more interest on bank and building society deposits.
Thrift was back in fashion.
Britain's largest building society, the Halifax, offered a Fixed Rate Mortgage at APR 14.9 per cent fixed for a full two years, after which monthly repayments reverted to their normal variable rate of APR 16.8 per cent.
Many were tempted to relieve the immediate pressure by obtaining a ReMortgage.
‘For homeowners like you,’ advertised a licensed credit broker,
high interest rates can turn a wise investment into an uphill struggle.
Repayments and other financial commitments (loans, credit cards etc) can suddenly turn your comfortable lifestyle into a tunnel of relentless worry.
But it doesn't have to be.
A simple re-mortgage can release the value tied up in your bricks and mortar.
.. more often than not we can REDUCE your monthly repayments.
It was all made very attractive.
But to keep overindebtedness as low as possible — and in October 1990 Sir Gordon Borrie said the level of default had risen, and was significant and disturbing — the government ruled that every advertisement of a mortgage lender carried the warning:
YOUR HOME IS AT RISK IF YOU DO NOT KEEP UP REPAYMENTS ON A MORTGAGE OR OTHER LOAN SECURED ON IT
A borrower risked more than his home if he chose the wrong lender.
In the autumn of 1990, the Office of Fair Trading warned some thirty High Street estate agents, mortgage and insurance brokers for ‘targeting’ known debtors and bankrupts with offers of credit and for failing to explain the fees involved.
In March 1991 the OFT invited people in trouble over credit to send for Credit Wise , a sixteen-page guide telling them where to go for help, what to look for and what to avoid.
The Consumer Credit Association expelled six companies for contravening their rules.
Credit brokers, said its Director, Michael, were using a loophole in the statutory regulations to charge extortionate rates of interest by manipulating credit protection insurance.
All imposed or compulsory charges, he insisted, should always be included in the APR.
Anyone who looked for a way out of stopping short of the tunnel of relentless worry could telephone Simon Johnson, manager of the Housing Debtline.
Created with a grant from the Government's Department of the Environment (DoE) in 1987 to  give financial advice to people with housing problems, it ran a free and confidential service under the aegis of the Money Advice Association and the Birmingham Settlement.
Financial support also came from the credit industry.
Women make up almost 60 per cent of all first callers to Housing Debtline [said Simon Johnson in 1988], and are usually willing to discuss their problems frankly and be guided by their adviser.
Male callers however are far more likely to be looking for easy solutions to a debt problem, usually a further loan or re-mortgage which in the long term will often make the problem worse.
Since then, as the National Debtline, the service has broadened its scope to give advice on how to stabilize any apparently unmanageable debt, not just on how to save the home.
The Retail Credit Group agreed to fund the service when in 1990 the DoE withdrew its grant of £32,500 a year.
In his report Living in Debt , produced by Birmingham Settlement Money Advice Services, John Brady showed how families lived under tremendous stress, which increased as the situation worsened.
Using credit in today's society is a symbol of sensible financial management.
However, allowing credit to turn into debt is still viewed as a result of inadequacy or recklessness on the part of the individual.
Debtors feel shame and guilt by their continuing inability to pay their creditors, which is made worse by the never ending demanding letters that fall through the letter box and the inability to get proper legal advice due to lack of money.
In Manchester a similar service was offered by Support in Debt founded, also in 1987, by Stuart Giles who three years later was appealing for £500,000 to keep it going.
The National Consumer Council saw the need for a greater effort, particularly in regard to funding, to give advice to the 560,000 households in Britain who at any time had three or more ‘problem debts’, and the 170,000 who had five or more.
The Money Advice Funding Working Party under the chairmanship of Lord Ezra agreed that existing services were not capable of coping with the demand for advice.
They reckoned that some £9.9 million would be needed to finance a plan for educating consumers in the basics of credit and provide funding for rescue services.
When in November 1990 Sir George Blunden, who had been Deputy Governor of the Bank of England, was appointed chairman of The Money Advice Trust (created in January of that year), the aim was to raise £6 million for the purpose.
The contribution of the National Consumer Council was to commission a report by Tim Young of the Community Information Project, on Debt Advice Provision in the United Kingdom (May 1990), listing what services were operating and how, and under whose auspices, they were funded.
One of many such services was the Money Management Council formed in 1985 ‘to advance the education of the public in the efficient management of their own personal financial affairs…to promote financial literacy among the general public.’
They were putting into action the words of Sir Gordon Borrie:
There has been precious little attention to giving basic education to the general public on the art of wise borrowing.
It is all in our interests to see that credit is used wisely and prudently.
Otherwise our credit society could easily go sour on us, with repercussions for the country's industry and commerce which would not be to our benefit.
(1987 Office of Fair Trading Annual Report, published July 1988)
The Money Management Council dispensed its advice through,inter alia , a series of Factsheets.
That on Personal Budgeting advised, ‘Never borrow more money to pay off existing debts; there is always a better solution.’
Debts could be negotiated; decide what of your debts are priority debts.
‘We have to help ourselves by never stretching ourselves to the limit when taking out a mortgage or borrowing money.‘
Consumer borrowing advice was offered to the public by the Citizens Advice Bureaux to be found in towns all over Britain.
In London their 135 bureaux were informed by the London Money Advice Support Unit which in March 1990 reported that consumers then owed £26.7 billion on credit commitments,excluding mortgages , but that in spite of high interest rates, borrowing continued to grow.
The Office of Fair Trading's Consumer Use of Credit Survey showed that the Citizens Advice Bureaux were seen as far the most obvious place to turn to for advice on problems of meeting credit payments with 69 per cent of the 2,155 respondents to the survey.
Typically, debt problems are not presented as the major problem when people in debt seek advice; the nature and scale of indebtedness gradually emerges.
Debt, as experienced by clients is often seen as an aspect of another problem.
Mixed feelings of fear, embarrassment, anxiety, distress, inadequacy and guilt must be overcome before the debt problem can be properly tackled.
In the study which Teresa Hinton and Richard Berthoud made of Money Advice Services , they showed how much the development had been a response to the increasing demands for help at a local level.
‘There is no general policy and this had led to a pattern of provision which is diverse, fragmentary and localised.’
But, as Roger Lawson of Southampton University has pointed out, more efforts have been made to counter this localism by the Money Advice Association (founded in 1984) and the National Association of Citizens Advice Bureaux.
With the growing concern with debt problems, and the difficulties of dealing with new forms of over-borrowing and multiple debt, the credit industry appears to be accepting more responsibility for encouraging and funding money advice services.
There is some scepticism and much caution, based on past experiences.
In one way or another however the credit industry now sees the need to adjust its attitudes and behaviour to incorporate more advice work, and to build on its shared interests with advice agencies.
(Problems With Debt: A Survey of Creditors' Perceptions and Practices, May 1989)
Those in financial trouble who knew of the money advice services but chose to ignore them, or who were unaware of their existence, and as a result let their indebtedness, once just manageable, become unmanageable, were heading for real trouble.
Their debts were on the verge of managing them .
They were risking falling foul of the law whose edge they would not find as rough as their ancestors had, but would soon discover was hurtful enough.
If, having chosen not to take advice, they took the same tack with the process of law once started, and thought that by ignoring it or defying it they could halt it, they were laying themselves open to an even ruder shock.
They were no longer committed to a debtors' prison at the instance of the man to whom they still owed money, to suffer indignities at the hands of a Thomas Bambridge.
But they could still be summoned to appear in court to answer the allegations of their creditor, to admit or give good reasons for disclaiming them — if the sum involved was less than £5,000 in a county court, if more in the High Court.
Not to answer the summons made matters worse, as it had always done, and particularly if it concerned a mortgage.
In 1986 153,870 possession actions were started in county courts in England and Wales.
Of these, 46 per cent were brought by mortgage lenders such as banks and building societies; 38 per cent by landlords such as local authorities and housing associations.
Three quarters involved unpaid rent or mortgage arrears.
According to the National Consumer Council's report Ordinary Justice (1989), from which these figures are taken, few attended the court hearing to defend themselves against the claims.
Researchers for the Lord Chancellor's Civil Justice Review found that three quarters of local authority tenants, half the private tenants and two-fifths of mortgage borrowers failed to go  to court.
And only eight per cent of those that did had engaged a lawyer to speak for them ‘even though, where defendants are represented, they are more likely to receive a favourable outcome.’
For the unhappy family the process began with Mr Dunn the debtor receiving a summons form (or writ, as it once was), and a reply form on which he was invited to write down whether he admitted owing Mr Rich the creditor the sum he claimed was still outstanding.
Yes or No?
If Yes, was he willing and able to offer to pay some of what Rich said he owed?
If No, what reason did he put forward for non-payment?
Or did he think Rich owed him money?
If Dunn admitted he owed Rich the money he claimed, and he had it — he was always going to pay but just forgot — he paid it over and that was the end of the matter.
If he disputed Rich's claim, then he had to set down his reasons.
Dunn should then have returned his reply to the court that issued the summons.
In two-thirds of the cases however, the person receiving such a summons never returned it.
In that event his creditor was entitled to ask the court to register the borrower's indebtedness to him for the sum claimed as a fact without further to-do, and without the borrower's case being heard.
To this request the Registrar of the court acceded by ‘entering judgement’ for the lender who received it in writing.
In 1987, 2.16 million summonses were issued under this Administrative Default Procedure, two thirds of which were for less than £500 — there were only 1.98 million in 1983.
That ended the Registrar's connection with Rich's plaint.
Armed with that written judgement Rich was legally entitled to extract what he said Dunn owed him, in whichever of two ways appealed to him most.
For either he had to obtain another document for which he had to apply to the court and would be given by its clerk.
Most applied for a ‘warrant of execution’.
This empowered him to send bailiffs (county court employees) to the house of the man who owed him money and had made no reply to his allegations.
He would instruct them in the first instance to threaten to seize the man's belongings to the value of the money owed.
If Mr Dunn the debtor refused to be cowed by this threat, Mr Rich the creditor would tell the bailiffs to take the belongings out of the house — and for that service he paid the bailiffs a fixed fee.
In 1987 county courts issued 160,000 warrants of execution but only in 2,882 cases were goods actually seized and sold.
A similar procedure took place when the claim was for more than £5,000 and the case was adjudicated in the High Court, where in 1987 another 67,054 warrants were issued called ‘writs of fieri facias’ shortened to ‘fi fa’.
It was in Mr Dunn's interests to return the summons with his answers, because if he did not he would never know of judgement made against him in court declaring he owed Mr Rich the sum he claimed.
He would never be officially  informed that Rich had applied for a warrant and to expect a bailiff at his door next week.
If he should come to hear of all this, however, he still had the right to apply to the court for a ‘stay of execution’.
If Mr Rich found that way of recovering what he had lent Mr Dunn in good faith unpalatable, he could apply to the county court for an ‘Attachment of Earnings Order’ instructing Dunn's employer to make weekly or monthly deductions from his earnings.
In 1987, 103,078 applications were made for one of these, and 53,297 issued.
A number of other ways were open to him for recovering what was owed him.
He could obtain a ‘Charging Order’ giving him a charge over Dunn's house so that when it was sold his debt was paid out of the proceeds.
He could force the sale of the house, but very few ever did.
Another option was obtaining a ‘Garnishee Order’ requiring money to be paid out of Dunn's bank or building society account.
If Dunn did elect to return his summons.
and to appear in court, he found himself caught up in a drama in which he had been cast as The Defendant, facing the man he had known as Rich whom everyone called The Plaintiff, and being called to order by someone he had never heard of before called The Registrar and his right hand man The Clerk of the Court — and all in the unfamiliar setting (set) of a courtroom.
His affairs had become a ‘case’ which were being given ‘a hearing’.
Or was he on trial?
It was highly disconcerting and unnerving, if not alarming.
The language was comprehensible only by the greatest concentration; the issues mind-boggling; the logic of past actions difficult to recollect and harder still to articulate.
In Ordinary Justice the National Consumer Council were scathingly critical of such court proceedings which in practice, they said, became a rubber stamp.
The documents the court sent out were difficult to understand and no guidance was given on completing it.
The ‘defendant’ was not asked about his personal circumstances.
The Civil Justice Review found that a third of banks and building societies, and a fifth of local authorities, did not enquire about the debtor's circumstances before the hearing.
Three quarters of local authorities did not follow up the Department of Environment's advice and carry out checks to see if the tenant was receiving the right benefits.
Sixty-seven per cent of creditors had no knowledge of the debtor's financial state at the time of the original transaction, and 77 per cent did not obtain any further information before or during the proceedings.
For the inexperienced debtor the arrival of a bailiff at the front door could be a harrowing experience, said the National Consumer Council.
In a study of 150 debtors by Queen Mary College, a third said their health had suffered; just under a third said their family's health had suffered; and two debtors had taken drug doses following the bailiff's visit.
Debt enforcement is a case of every creditor for himself.
Some creditors have far greater sanctions than others.
Landlords and mortgage lenders can threaten to repossess the debtor's home; the gas and electricity boards can threaten to disconnect the supply; non-payment of the rates can lead to imprisonment; hire purchase companies can repossess the goods.
The non-secured county court creditor is at the bottom of the hierarchy.
In her foreword to Ordinary Justice , Mrs Sally Oppenheim-Barnes, chairman of the National Consumer Council, said the Council wanted all consumer debts (even up to £25,000) dealt with in county courts, and the threat to seize goods used as a last resort rather than a first step in the enforcement process.
Debtors who showed the courts that they had made their best efforts to pay, and also showed they were not fraudulent or reckless in incurring debt could be given relief from liabilities after three years.
The multiple debtor can face a bewildering array of different creditors using different courts, different procedures and different threats.
The county court, the magistrates court, and the high court may all be involved.
Generally, debtors must negotiate with each creditor separately, and must face the ordeal without advice.
Debtors have difficult choices about whom to pay first; often they will pay the person at the door at the time.
This can make it very difficult to keep to the repayment plans, and the loss of home and fuel becomes more likely.
It also contributes to debtors' sense of hopelessness, because as soon as one crisis is sorted out, another hits them.
It was happening only to a minority.
But that made it no less a dire experience for those who found their world gradually being pressurized, slowly becoming conditioned by a series of events beginning with the familiar friendly knock on the door — as dramatized in Thames Television's play Not Waving But Drowning , produced and directed by Polly Bide, based on a real-life case history.
On the night the piece was shown in August 1990, and the following day, Thames Television ran a Help Line staffed by experienced money advisers for viewers who had found themselves in the same situation as Sue and Tony.
They also made available a booklet Coping With Credit, Dealing With Debt prepared by the Money Advice Association.
Reducing the emphasis on ‘selling him up’ and making it more possible for creditors' claims to be met out of a debtor's future income was one of the main objectives of the Insolvency Law Review Committee chaired by Sir Kenneth Cork which was appointed by the Government in 1977 and reported in 1982.
Another was to relax the severity of the law towards the individual debtor who might be incompetent but not dishonest.
The Committee recommended replacing Deeds of Arrangements, by which an insolvent individual could execute a deed assigning his assets to a trustee for the benefit of creditors, by Voluntary Arrangements.
By these, creditors would meet to consider proposals for a voluntary arrangement which would be binding on a dissenting minority, and approve a trustee.
In the proposals which the Government made in 1984 in a White Paper,A Revised Framework for Insolvency Law (Cmnd 9175), largely based on the Cork Report, they indicated that they did not intend introducing a debt counselling service, but referring any debtor with liabilities less than £15,000 to an ‘insolvency practitioner’.
That, stated Coopers & Lybrand/Cork Gully in their guide to the Cork Report, would go a long way towards remedying the shortcomings of the present system.
It should however be noted that by virtue of the automatic discharge from a first bankruptcy after three years irrespective of the debtor's conduct (short of criminal offence), an individual debtor will be treated far more leniently than a company director guilty of wrongful trading, who can be disqualified for up to 15 years.
For many ‘a simple way of raising money quickly with no questions asked’, as Steven Squire of the London Pledge Company put it, was still the pawnbroker whose business in 1991, according to the Sunday Times , was ‘riding high’.
‘We have people working in banks coming in because their managers refuse to give them a loan.
And being able to get money on the spot to deal with an emergency can be the difference between coping and despair for some people.’
Some pawned their cars, others their video recorders and televisions along with time honoured pawns like silver candlesticks and family portraits.
There were 3,000 pawnbrokers in Greater London in the 1960S, but in ten years the number dropped to 150.
The National Pawnbrokers Association kept a register of operators they approved.
Insolvency, bankruptcy — in passing from one generation to another, the terms never lost their dread significance.
In the 1990S it was the end of the road that started with living on credit like everyone else on the scale of everyone else, became slightly more extended than most and then wholly unmanageable.
It cast a shadow from which nothing could escape.
Labelled ‘bankrupt’ the whole family which had been at one with their neighbours found themselves set apart.
John McQueen had no reason to belittle its effects.
He was so shocked by the case of his businessman brother who was forced into bankruptcy by the Inland Revenue in 1983, that he founded the Association of Bankrupts to help others in the same position.
Until he was granted a discharge, any income which a bankrupt earned in excess of what he needed to cover basic living expenses had to be paid to the trustee in bankruptcy.
He could not own property which was not necessary for every day living.
But John McQueen learnt it had more serious effects.
Besides all these difficulties, the bankrupt also faces problems with the social stigma still attached to going bankrupt.
In the public eye the bankrupt is seen as a sort of quasi-criminal.
This image is eagerly developed by the popular press, which almost daily produces the most ridiculous and exaggerated accounts of the tiny minority of bankrupts who have run up extremely large debts.
As a result bankrupts often have to face the ostracism of their friends, and sometimes even of their own families.
(Taxation, 31 July 1987)
John McQueen himself had a hard struggle to remain solvent as a twenty-six-year-old university student with a wife and three children.
How he disciplined himself to make ends meet in that difficult time he explained in his book What To Do When Someone Has Debt Problems, A Practical Survival Guide (1985), in the Introduction to which he wrote:
During my own life I have experienced many occasions when debt burdens have dominated my thoughts.
Debt burdens nearly always bring with them a sense of imprisonment.
They also often bring a great sense of humiliation and frustration.
It might be that ‘the climate of opinion’ had changed.
The mortgage debt had grown so fast, explained Robin Leigh-Pemberton, Governor of the Bank of England in June 1990, and was both a symptom and a cause of a wider cultural change in Britain's society.
Thrift has gone out of fashion.
Indeed the all too prevalent outlook on life has become I want it and I want it now.
(Speech at the tenth anniversary dinner of the Association of International Savings Banks in London, 14 June 1990)
The increase in credit had considerable and undesirable effects, he said.
Some people were undoubtedly in difficult situations.
Very often arrears mounted just when borrowers were least able to cope with the situation; they felt vulnerable and confused.
The distress suffered by individuals and their families was obviously a matter of concern for everybody, whether or not they were directly affected.
Being the prevailing wind did not make a storm less stormy; having bubonic plague during a Black Death which affected half the world did not make it less painful; being overindebted at a time when cultural change had made it fashionable neither excused it nor mitigated it.
Reflecting that a lot of other people were in the same boat, that he was in good company — the Overindebted Minority — might bring temporary comfort and make relations with friends less strained.
But it was unlikely to remove what John McQueen called the sense of imprisonment, which might however generate, as it did for Walter Scott and Benjamin Haydon, a determination to escape.
Not self-pity but exertion was what they told themselves was the first requirement, applying their skills to return to normal, to restore the status quo.
In the 1990s there were many more at hand to help them escape, people who might have been more profitably employed than in these negative exercises if there had been fewer who needed their services.
Pundits decried the successful methods taken by the majority, who not only wanted to live within their means but did so, as old-fashioned and ‘Victorian’, out of step with 1990s climate of opinion.
However, the surest way of never having to experience the misery — the most frequently occurring word associated with debt — the misery of debtors down the ages in Britain from Tom Verney to Sue and Tony, was to follow the time-honoured, still practical advice of Lord Chesterfield, Samuel Smiles et al that made boring but good sense in any age.
Pay Your Way.
Up to 1950, said the authors of Social Trends 20 , the respectable were never in debt.
But Paying Your Way was not respectable, any more than Keeping To The Left.
For most it was the air they breathed.
For them there was nothing tame about not living in the fast lane; nothing sanctimonious about unconsciously keeping clear of the edge of the cliff.
None thought of themselves as prudent — the word beloved of the philosophic writers — let alone prudes.
They had no machinery for making ends meet.
The sustained discipline required to keep accounts was boringly time-consuming and beyond the capabilities of most.
In February 1990, a Gallop Survey, found that most people did not know how to manage their money, and just muddled through.
In spite of most people perceiving themselves as planners, the survey reveals that in some of the most important and fundamental areas of life they have not made even the most minimal plans.
They steered their way by instinct.
If they had given the matter any thought, however, and some incident had alerted them to the dangers of being too relaxed, there was no doubt they would have strained every muscle to elude the worst poverty.