

SPRING
HYMN SINGING FROM CHURCH TOWERS
Beverley Minster, Baildon Parish Church
Easter Day is the most joyous in the Christian year, the day of Christ's Resurrection, and at Beverley they proclaim it from the roof top.
To be exact, it is the church choir who climb to the roof top of the northwest tower of the Minster, open their hymn books and sing:
‘Jesus Christ is risen today, Alleluia
Our triumphant Holy Day, Alleluia.’
After another couple of hymns and an anthem, they go down to prepare for the next service.
This custom was started by Dr Arthur Henry Mann in 1876, but no-one seems to know why.
He may have been inspired by the fact that the choristers of Magdalen College, Oxford, sing a Latin hymn at the top of the tower there to greet May Day.
May Day hymns are also sung from the top of Southampton's Bargate by the choir boys of King Edward VI School.
This custom lapsed when the Bargate became unsafe, but was revived after its restoration.
Why Dr Mann chose Easter we don't really know, unless it was simply in recognition of the importance of Easter in the religious calendar.
Dr Mann took up the post of organist and choir master at Beverley at a time when the music at the Minster was at a fairly low ebb.
A father and son had occupied the post for approximately 100 years between them, and the son hardly put in an appearance during the last fifteen years of his appointment.
There was another brief appointment before Dr Mann appeared on the scene.
He made all sorts of innovations during his short stay — only about a year — before moving on to King's College, Cambridge, and starting the now famous service of nine lessons and carols at Christmas.
I suppose the choir at Beverley should be thankful he did not think of performing the nine lessons and carols up there on top of the tower.
As it is they have to brave all kinds of weather, from high winds which whip away  their hymn books to snow which engulfs them in that unsheltered spot.
When I went to Beverley on Easter Sunday 1987 I was invited to join the choristers on the roof.
The 180 foot tower is ascended by climbing a narrow spiral staircase, which becomes narrower and narrower as one reaches the top.
It took about twenty minutes to ascend the 212 steps, but it was worth the effort.
To hear those lovely voices raised in celebration of a glorious event and to see the countryside — almost 200 feet below us — stretching away into the distance on this beautiful spring morning was an experience to remember.
Of course the people who hear the singing don't climb the Minster tower, but congregate outside their houses, in the streets or in their gardens.
Choir and audience wave to each other when the singing is over, some of the little boys leaning perilously over the parapets.
The voices have been heard as far as the race track or right at the other end of the town, depending on which way the wind is blowing.
Occasionally the wind carries the voices too far away for the listener immediately below to hear.
In 1976, the centenary of the event, Mr Alan Spedding, the present organist and choir master, thought it might be time to call a halt but met with such opposition from the townspeople that it was decided to carry on.
For the next 100 years?
Mr Spedding said he at least would continue the tradition, ‘while I am able to stagger up the stairs’.
He then rushed off to prepare for the main service of the morning as the Minster bells began to ring out.
Choristers of the Parish Church of St John at Baildon climb the tower of their church on the morning of Ascension Day to sing a hymn.
Returning to ground level, they continue their outdoor singing with an anthem in the churchyard.
— The custom was started in 1978 by Canon Bruce Grainger, as this had been the practice at Canterbury where he was a minor canon.
The point of it is to take the church celebrations outside to the people.
As Ascension Day is always on a weekday, the passers-by on their way to work are able to enjoy the singing which, as the church itself is on very high ground, can be heard for quite a distance.
KIPLINGCOTES DERBY
To the gentry of East Yorkshire the advent of spring signalled the reopening of the flat racing season.
In order to see how their horses had fared during the winter they devised a gruelling race, the Kiplingcotes Derby.
Though it is thought to have been first run in 1519, it was not until 1619 that it was endowed by forty-nine local gentlemen.
The Earl of Burlington, Sir John Hotham and Sir Marmaduke Constable were amongst those who subscribed £365 to ensure that the ‘Kiplingcotes was ridd yearly on the third Thursday in March’.
Even the two World Wars did not stop the race being ‘ridd yearly’, but the snows of 1947 almost did.
Fred Stephenson, a local farmer, was the only entrant, and the clerk of the course the only spectator, as he rode and walked the course to maintain the continuity of the tradition.
The following year he chalked up his fifth win, even though his horse broke a bridle strap and bolted just before the start.
The Rector of Londesborough saved the day by giving chase in his car and he and Fred caught up with the horse at the farm gate, waiting to be let in.
Instead, a bit of string was used to secure the bridle strap and Fred galloped the horse off to the start.
Another Stephenson, Alyson, came second in 1985.
It was only the second time she had taken part and this race, taking less than ten minutes, had been a particularly fast one, but as she said, it was a family tradition to take part in it and she had really enjoyed it.
The race has changed in that it is no longer just the local gentry who take part.
Entrants are now more varied and include local farmers and horsey young girls, some of whom travel from as far south as Nottinghamshire.
I spoke to a farmer from Catfoss near Hornsea who was looking after his baby grandson while his daughter rode in the race.
A keen cross-country rider, she didn't like to miss it.
The previous year when she finished fifth she discovered she had been pregnant when taking part.
(If her son enters when he is a few years older, he will surely be unique in being able to say he has been taking part since  before he was born.)
She came in fourth this time, riding a horse bred by her father, who is doing his bit for tradition by breeding both the horses and the riders!
As the distance is too far by road, it is impossible to be at both the start and the finish of the race unless you are actually taking part.
The finish is also where the riders assemble and weigh in.
It is in a lane off the A163, roughly half way between Market Weighton and Middleton-on-the-Wolds.
The race has to be held between noon and 1pm according to tradition, so weighing in takes place between 10.30am and 11.30am.
There is a minimum weight of ten stones and the rules state that a rider losing more than one pound in weight ‘will not win prize’, so the entrants are weighed again at the end of the race.
One little girl only fifteen years old had to carry lead weights to make up ten stones, but when she arrived back on foot after the race had finished, she had lost not only the weights but the horse as well!
When the weights had started to slip she dismounted to adjust them, and the horse shot off at great speed.
A message arrived from a local farmer who had found and secured it until it could be reclaimed.
The rules are read by the clerk of the course about 11.30am and admonish the riders to be gentlemanly, for ‘any rider that holds or strikes another, will not win prize’, nor will he ‘win prize’ if he ‘hinder or stop horse’.
The riders then trot the four and a half miles to the start, a sandstone post one mile north of the old Kiplingcotes railway station.
The course, which crosses a narrow railway bridge and a major road, climbs from 160 feet above sea level to 368 feet, drops back to 303 feet, then climbs again to the finish which is 450 feet above sea level.
The last stretch is down a narrow lane bordered by woods and lined with horse boxes, cars and spectators, the latter all striving to catch first sight of the leading riders coming at full gallop.
Mrs Hillaby, the present clerk of the course, told me how she has seen horses collapse at the finish, and one had even laid down and died through being ridden too hard.
This type of rider is scorned by real horse-lovers who always have the horse's welfare at heart.
The finish is now marked by a post presented in 1979 by the pupils and staff of Market Weighton School.
This bears the initials RHR  and commemorates Robert Henry Ruston, known to everyone as Harry.
Mrs Hillaby's father, he was clerk of the course for many years, as was his father before him and his father before him.
Mrs Hillaby, the first woman to hold the post, is at least the fourth generation of the family to carry on the tradition.
Her great-grandfather, a tailor in the nearby village of Middleton-on-the-Wolds, was clerk over 100 years ago.
The family eventually moved to Hull but kept up their connection with the race.
It is the prestige of winning this historic race that is important rather than the prize money, as the winner usually receives less than the runner-up.
This unusual state of events is brought about by the fact that in 1822 the subscribed fund was invested and the winner receives the interest.
All except the 25 pence of the £4.25 entrance fee goes to the rider coming second.
In 1985, this amounted to £64 but the first prize was only £40.
There were sixteen riders that year, but there have been as many as twenty-two or sometimes only nine or ten.
The original trophy that went with the first prize disappeared — it is thought at some time during the eighteenth century — and there was never enough money to replace it.
In 1970, however, a new cup was donated.
This was given by Mrs Jean Mellonie, Jean Farrow as she was in 1939 when, aged nineteen and at her third attempt, she became the first woman ever to win the race and in record time despite rain and hail.
She never entered again after that.
‘It would have taken the gilt off the gingerbread’, she said.
Unfortunately the cup was only awarded for a few years before that too disappeared.
Now there is another cup donated by Jean Farrow's daughter, Victoria Revell, in memory of her mother.
It is hoped that both this trophy, and the unique race for which it is awarded, continue to appear every third Thursday in March.
THE GAWTHORPE WORLD COAL CARRYING CHAMPIONSHIP
On Easter Monday an event takes place which has little to do with traditional Easter activities, but which has associations with a very old May custom, as we shall see.
What started as ‘just a bit of fun’ has now earned a place in the Guinness Book of Records .
Amos Clapham was leaning on the bar of the Beehive Inn in Gawthorpe one Sunday lunchtime in 1963 when in burst another local, Lewis Hartley, who slapped him on the back and remarked how tired he was looking.
This blow, the accompanying words, or both, annoyed Amos who shot back: ‘Ah'm as fit as thee!
If tha doesn't believe me, ger a bag of coil on thi back and I'll get one on mine [not something unusual for Amos who happened to be a coalmerchant]and ah'll race thee to t’ top o' t' wood!’
Fred Hirst, secretary of the maypole committee, was also at the bar and, overhearing this, admonished both to ‘'old on a minute’.
The maypole committee, of which Amos was president, had been looking for ways of raising funds for the May weekend and old folks' treat (of which more later), the most important weekend in the lives of the villagers.
Fred had an idea.
Various schemes had been tried on Easter Monday to raise money — chrysanthemum shows and egg and spoon races included — but nothing had really developed.
Fred suggested, ‘If we're goin' to 'ave a race, let's have it then.’
So they did.
The first race was run by local lads — miners from the surrounding pits — but not including Amos and Fred who must have thought better of it!
The event has changed considerably during its twenty-five years.
As news of it spread, more people became interested and wanted to take part.
The competitors are now drawn from a wide area and it has become sport orientated.
The local pit has closed and the miners have been replaced by serious athletes who wear regulation running gear and train thoroughly, sometimes all year round.
The Solid Fuel Advisory Service sponsor both this and the ladies' race and the  contestants must wear an SFAS t-shirt.
I was told it was not necessary to be big and hefty to take part as it was often fell runners who did well, wiry types with good strong legs.
There are still a few, knowing they have no chance of winning, who enter just for ‘fun’ and the feeling of achievement which carrying fifty kilos of coal over an uphill 1,000 metre course can bring.
Terry Lyons is not one of these.
According to the  Guinness  Book of Records , on the 16th April 1979 aged thirty-six, he ran the 1,012.5 metre (1,107.2 yard) course in the record time of 4 minutes and 19 seconds.
Any competitor who wins three consecutive races retains the cup, and in 1986 Terry was one race away from gaining his second cup when he was beaten by a local lad whose legs had given way just twenty yards from the finish the previous year.
Apart from the trophy the winner receives £60, a tankard and a voucher for £35 for solid fuel.
Second and third receive tankards and money prizes.
The ladies, who run about a third of the distance of the men's race and carry twenty kilo sacks, can win similar prizes, a trophy, voucher, money and goblets instead of tankards.
Not among the winners in 1986, but completing the course and receiving a certificate to prove it, was a sixty-nine year old man.
At the other end of the scale, the youngest competitor was just sixteen years old.
The race has to be limited to thirty entrants on the grounds of safety.
The runners string out in a line across the road as it is unsafe to have them five or six deep; if one of the front runners fell, sacks of coal and people could end up in a nasty heap.
The race starts at the Royal Oak, Owl Lane, and finishes at the maypole in the high street.
By 10am the organisers are at the start, where the sacks of coal are delivered by lorry.
Then begins the arduous task of checking the weight of each sack before it is sewn up by hand to eliminate cheating — and there is no chance of chucking out the odd lump or two en route!
At 12.30pm they are off, sacks on their backs, press lorry in front with cameras busy clicking and whirring.
In less than five minutes, many hopes of success will have been dashed for another year.
THE MAYOR OF SCARBOROUGH RINGS THE PANCAKE BELL AT THE ROTUNDA MUSEUM (Page 1)
SKIPPING AT SCARBOROUGH FORESHORE (Page 3)
COOKING DOCK PUDDING IN THE WORLD CHAMPIONSHIPS AT MYTHOLMROYD (Page 9)
THE BRIGHOUSE PACE-EGG PALY AT HALIFAX (Page 14)
DECORATED EGGS AT HOLYLAND SPRINGWOOD JUNIOR AND INFANT SCHOOL (Page 19)
CHILDREN READY TO ROLL THEIR EGGS IN THE GROUNDS OF FOUNTAIN ABBEY (Page 19)
THE CHOIR OF BEVERLEY MINSTER SINGING HYMNS ON THE ROOF OF THE NORTH-WEST TOWER (Page 22)
PLANTING THE PENNY HEDGE AT WHITBY
‘A farcical, objectless ceremony’ is how Canon Atkinson described, in his Memorials of Old Whitby (1894), an event taking place on the eve of Ascension Day.
Planting the Penny Hedge, in Whitby's Upper H arbour at 9am, is a short unspectacular event but its long history has given rise to strong feelings and much supposition.
Supposition abounds not least because the custom has been shown to be much older than the legend to which its origin is attributed.
The fascination of this odd tradition is in the numerous ideas and theories concerning its real origins and purposes.
The legend, retold by Charlton in his History of Whitby (1779), relates how on the 16th October 1159 two lords, William de Bruce and Ralph de Piercie, together with a gentleman named Allatson, met to hunt wild boar on land belonging to the Abbot of Whitby.
They were in full pursuit of a great boar when it sought refuge, exhausted, in the hermitage of a monk from the abbey.
It soon died but the monk continued his meditations, his door barred against the baying hounds.
The hunters were soon at the door themselves and bade the monk open up.
When he did they saw the dead animal and, in fury at being deprived of their sport, they ran the hermit through with their boar staves.
On the point of death he forgave them their sin, saying they should retain their tenancy of the abbot's lands, and of his successors, by the performance of the detailed penance he laid out for them.
Starting at sunrise on the eve of Ascension Day, they were to cut a prescribed number of ‘stakes, stout-stowers and yedders’ from Strayhead Wood with ‘a knife of a penny price’, and carry them on their backs to the town of Whitby.
Precise instructions as to the building of a hedge at the brim of the water were given.
Built at 9am (unless if ‘it be Full Sea, the Service shall cease’) it had to withstand three tides.
‘And that you may better call to God for Repentance, and find Mercy, and do good Works, the Officer of Eskdale-Side shall  blow his Horn Out on you, Out on you, for the heinous crime of you.’
Failure to carry out the penance would result in the  forfeiture of their lands.
Charlton proved that the legend was fictitious and attributed to it ‘a monkish origin’, invented to ensure the continuance of a service for the abbey for which there was no longer any justification.
Canon Atkinson considered this to be absurd.
Although he agreed that the legend was a piece of fiction, he believed it to have originated with someone unacquainted not only with the real history of the abbey but also with history in general, probably a professional itinerant storyteller in the middle to late sixteenth century.
The historians agree that planting the Penny Hedge is a survival of the much older Horngarth service, an ancient land tenure custom.
In this, tenants of certain lands were responsible for making as much of the Horngarth as belonged to that land — as today, for instance, a tenant may be responsible for maintaining particular footpaths or fences which may cross his land.
The landlords for whom this service was performed also had the wardship of under age tenants.
Canon Atkinson, who traced the history of the Horngarth service, concluded that it originated about the time that St Hilda acquired land at Whitby — or Streonshalh as it then was — to found a monastery in AD 657, 500 years before the appearance of the legend.
We know then that the legend is false and that it became attached to a much older custom, but what was the Horngarth itself and for what purpose was it erected?
Charlton thought it may have been a kind of store-yard where goods for the abbey were landed and deposited.
The Rev Young in his History of Whitby (1817) found that the use of this garth was ‘not easy to ascertain’, but thought the ‘horn’ referred to the fact that the tenants who had to repair the hedge were summoned by the blowing of a horn.
Canon Atkinson regarded the word as indisputedly Old Danish, and the idea that ‘horn’ was something to be blown as another absurdity; ‘horn’meant horned stock and ‘garth’meant fence, so we have ‘horned-stock fence’— but for keeping animals out rather than in.
In an appendix to his book, Atkinson surmises that the Horngarth may have originated in a hedge  bounding the abbot's right of way.
Robert Turton discarded these theories and propounded a new one in the Yorkshire Archaeological Journal (1908–9).
According to this, when King Oswy gave the land for a monastery to St Hilda, he retained the hunting rights.
For this purpose a hedge and dyke were built and kept in repair to make a large enclosure into which deer were driven by men with hounds and horns.
The enclosure stretched from Little Beck to Whitby Harbour, taking in as much land as possible.
A short fence prevented the escape of animals that might attempt to swim the river.
Lords whose lands were included were bound by tenure to take part in the chase.
If this theory is correct, the rendering of the Horngarth service is even older than the era of St Hilda.
To enclose something, to keep something out or even to trap something, we may never know the real reason for erecting the Horngarth.
Today even the legendary reason for erecting it is no longer valid, as in 1981 there was a ‘Full Sea’ rendering the penance duly fulfilled.
The Whitby Gazette announced that there would be a high tide on Ascension Eve that year, and readers were invited to write in with their views on the subject.
This resulted in a massive ‘Save the Hedge’ campaign, with all letters in favour of continuing the tradition, except Mr Allison Hutton of Harton House Farm, Robin Hood's Bay, on whose behalf the hedge was planted.
The Hutton family bought the property from Captain Isaac Mills who had rented it to Mary Elizabeth Hutton, but the Huttons were connected with the custom before this as Isaac Hutton built the hedge on behalf of Dr Herbert who owned the farm before Captain Mills.
Now we come back to the Alletsons (or Allatsons) mentioned in the legend as it was from them the Herberts acquired the property.
Due to very strong local feeling, the subject was discussed by the town council's Finance and General Purposes Committee in February 1982.
Various ideas were put forward, including the suggestion that the council should keep it on themselves or that it could be re-enacted by actors or schoolchildren.
After various consultations with interested parties, it was decided to carry on in the traditional manner.
Arthur Hutton, it was reported, was ‘highly delighted’, as he had been planting the hedge as agent for his cousin George, Allison Hutton's son.
Around 200 people attended the event that year, including the lady of the manor herself who said ‘the Penny Hedge is here to stay’.
In 1985 I stood on the quayside, shivering in the cold drizzle, to watch Arthur Hutton plant the hedge, closely watched by his grandson Martin, who hopes one day to follow his grandfather in keeping up the custom.
He assured me he would, in turn, pass it on to any family he might have.
He benefited from his present involvement by time off school, he said!
Some of the locals watching remembered when all the schoolchildren assembled to watch the ceremony; there were quite a few groups of children there that day, with notebooks, pencils and teachers.
The wood for the hedge arrived not on the backs of the hedge-builders but in the boot of their Ford Cortina.
The small piece of hedge, woven like a basket with the traditional hazel and willow, is now planted facing the harbour side for the benefit of photographers rather than at right angles to the bank.
But the horn was blown and the lady of the manor's bailiff shouted ‘out on ye’ three times before they all changed their muddy boots and went home, happy to have maintained tradition for another year.
MAYPOLE CELEBRATIONS
Gawthorpe, Barwick-in-Elmet
One or two places in Yorkshire still have their maypoles — Aldborough and Long Preston for instance— and May celebrations take place in many other areas, but the villages of Gawthorpe and Barwick-in-Elmet have very long-standing traditions which the local people are keen to maintain.
Barwick's maypole raising is a triennial event, but the Gawthorpe May weekend begins every year on the first Saturday in May, funded partly by the coal-carrying championships previously mentioned.
According to Mr Cecil Hitch, president of the maypole committee, the first written reference to a permanent maypole in Gawthorpe is in 1850, though he had heard mention of earlier ones.
It is probable that a maypole tradition had already been in existence for many years, if not centuries.
Firstly, the feeling for the tradition is very strong in the village; secondly, Gawthorpe is an ancient settlement — its history can be traced back to a Viking chief named Gorky and there is evidence that it existed in Roman times; thirdly, the original custom was to bring in a new May tree each year.
When much of Britain and Europe was covered with forest, tree worship was prevalent and it was  customary to go in spring or early summer into the woods, cut down a tree and bring it, together with the blessings bestowed by the tree spirit, into the village where it was re-erected.
The blessings included making the crops grow, and the women and cattle fertile.
Philip Stubbes, writing in 1583, was disgusted by the goings-on in the woods in the middle of the night when the villagers went to cut their maypole, especially with the fact that many of the maidens who went were no longer maidens on their return!
When the true meaning of the custom had been forgotten, and the maypole had become merely a part of the holiday festivities, people saw no reason for felling a new tree every year and began to leave one erected permanently, merely decking it with flowers and  fresh greenery on Mayday.
In 1644 the Puritans, seeing in them the remains of a pagan tradition, had them banned by Parliament.
Many were destroyed, but a few survived to await livelier times.
Their restoration came with that of Charles II.
To return to the recorded tradition in Gawthorpe.
In 1850 a local man, returning from Mayday festivities in Otley, suggested the village might follow their lead and he gave £5 towards the purchase of a pole, which was duly erected.
The Ossett Observer in 1912 quoted an old resident:
‘When the first maypole was erected the Gawthorpe people regarded it as a sign of their independent spirit.’
When I talked to Mr Hitch's son, also on the maypole committee, he felt that the village had retained this ‘independent spirit’ and the maypole was still symbolic of this.
In 1850, however, the Gawthorpe villagers boasted of their fine maypole and its weathercock to such an extent that the men of neighbouring Chickenley determined to saw it down.
News of this reached Gawthorpe and a watch was set up, but one night when the vigil had become somewhat relaxed the Chickenley men managed to saw part way through before being disturbed.
They bragged about their exploits in Gawthorpe and this, naturally, upset the villagers.
A fight ensued which left one man dead, one crippled for life and several with lasting scars.
Natural forces then took a hand — the wind blew the maypole down shortly afterwards.
It was 1875 before they risked erecting another one.
It was agreed that the new pole, a seventy foot fir from Hull, should stand on the site of the old one.
To find this they enlisted the help of the oldest inhabitant, Betty Bell, who prodded about the village green with her stick.
Coming to a particular spot, she said ‘Dig theear’, and when they did they found the stump of the old one.
The new pole, painted in bands or blocks of red, white and blue — not striped as it is now — was erected complete with weathercock and the tradition was once again established.
Mr Hitch's son told me that there was a lack of enthusiasm a few years ago but, with new blood on the committee, it is once again gaining in popularity.
An enthusiastic  committee is vital as the work goes on throughout the year, starting again as soon as one event is over.
What to do, how to do it and when to do it are instructions passed on by word of mouth from one generation to the next.
Poles do not last forever of course, and have had to be replaced over the years.
It was decided in 1985 that the maypole, which had been standing since 1953, was no longer safe and should be replaced.
The Yorkshire Electricity Board donated a fifty-seven foot redundant pylon and took it to Morley to be treated which, it was hoped, would prolong its life for forty years.
Manpower was then used to tow it from Morley to a warehouse in Chickenley (old scores must have been forgotten!), where it was stored and painted.
Cranes were used to hoist it into place on the 8th March 1986.
After the old maypole was taken down in October 1985 it was sadly missed, especially when the ex-president of the maypole committee, Amos Clapham (of coal race fame), died.
It was customary to fly a flag at half-mast when anyone connected with the May weekend died so, not to be beaten, committee members managed to obtain a telegraph pole, paint and erect it in one weekend so that old Amos would not be cheated of this sign of respect.
This is one example of the feeling for the maypole in the village.
‘Other places have their town hall, we have our maypole’, I was told, ‘it is a focus for the village community’.
Everyone who has left the village makes the effort to come back for May weekend.
The local families put on tea for visiting sons, daughters, aunts, uncles, cousins and friends.
It is difficult to escape involvement if you live in the village.
Schoolchildren may be maypole dancing or in the procession in fancy dress, local groups and societies enter floats, others may be involved in the fund-raising events that take place throughout the year or senior citizens may be invited to the ‘old folks tea and treat’(which takes place on the Monday), organised by the maypole committee and an important part of the May weekend.
The procession, led magnificently by a regimental band, follows a four mile route from the high street to Ossett and back before the May queen is crowned by a civic dignitary.
The procession takes place  whatever the weather but Mr Cecil Hitch thought one year they would have to call a halt because of the terrible conditions.
However, after a brief respite at Ossett everyone agreed to continue.
He said he was very heartened to hear the comments of those taking part; all felt they had to finish as a matter of pride — they do not give up easily in Gawthorpe.
One wartime May queen had just heard that her brother had been taken a prisoner-of-war, but insisted on going ahead with her duties.
That ‘independent spirit’ again.
Horses feature largely in the procession, from tradesmen's turnouts to fancy dress on horseback, with the May queen and her attendants riding side-saddle.
A gymkhana in the maypole field (bought in 1962 for £600) follows the prize-giving.
After tea, the schoolchildren dance round a short maypole erected on the green for the occasion.
These short poles are a later addition to the ancient May traditions and are popular at school functions where the children are taught the intricacies of weaving and plaiting the ribbons.
Gawthorpe girls have three aims: first is to be chosen as a maypole dancer; second, a maid of honour to the May queen: and the final accolade, to be chosen as May queen herself.
One of the teachers said that immediately school re-opened after the Christmas holidays she was likely to encounter little girls doing high kicks in unlikely places in the hope of catching her eye and ultimately achieving one of these aims.
From the very young to the very old, the May weekend is something special for the villagers of Gawthorpe.
A lot of hard work goes into it, but young Mr Hitch felt he was paid in full: ‘When the band strikes up, when you start up that village and folk cheer, there is a big lump in your throat, and that is when you are paid back.’
Every three years the villagers of Barwick-in-Elmet lower their maypole on Easter Monday and raise it, newly painted and decorated, at Spring Bank Holiday using traditional methods — that is, ropes, ladders and a lot of manpower.
The traditional date for the raising was Whit Tuesday but because so many men are required to help, the date was changed to the new fixed Spring Bank Holiday when this replaced the moveable feast of Whitsuntide.
There is a lack of historical evidence relating to the Barwick-in-Elmet  maypole before a poem by Edward Burlend described the stealing of it in 1829 (an event reminiscent of Gawthorpe maypole's early history!).
Barwick is another very ancient village, inhabited by a British tribe, the Brigantes, before the Romans arrived.
Their sense of tradition is also very strong and instead of dying out in 1951 when enthusiasm was beginning to wane a little, it was revitalised when Stanley Robshaw took it in hand and set it firmly on its feet again.
He had always been involved to some extent, but when an old villager came to him and said, ‘You can't let this thing die, your father was a polemaster and we look to you to see this thing doesn't stop’, he couldn't resist the challenge.
He was only just in time, though, as a woodcutter had been called to cut it down.
‘Over my dead body’, said Mr Robshaw, and hurriedly called a public meeting.
This was very well attended and a committee, with himself as chairman (a post he held for the next thirty-six years), was elected and set to work.
There seems to be no particular reason why the event is triennial, apart from the fact that it was thought the pole should be inspected, repaired and repainted at intervals of no longer than three years.
The early poles were made from two seasoned larch trees — spliced and joined by metal hoops — from Parlington Park, the estate of the Gascoigne family, lords of the manor.
Unfortunately when the last one needed replacing in 1960 there was no tree felled and seasoned, so two Norwegian red fir poles were brought from a Hull timber yard.
The height of the spliced poles is 88 feet 6 inches, 4 feet 6 inches of which goes into the ground.
This pole has been treated against rot (previous poles had to have bits chopped of the bottom periodically) so there is no reason now to stick to the three year cycle.
The Barwickers wish to keep their tradition, so when it was lowered on Easter Monday 1987 I was there to watch.
‘George, would you just tighten a little bit please.
Keep your ropes tight chaps, it's moving a little bit now.
Can we have some more men up the yard, please.
Just a little bit George, wherever you are.
Hold it, hold it!
Just let it slacken a little bit, ease off, steady.
There's somebody looking out of a window up there, looking a bit worried.
Whoa, hold it.
It's very heavy this end, can we have a few more men.’
These were some of the instructions being given by the polemaster to the men on the ropes as the two ton pole began to shift.
The first signs of activity had begun around 4.30pm when a number of men started digging up the road.
A climber, Simon Walker, then ascended the pole to the garlands which hang fifty feet above road level.
He hoisted up a plank to sit on and then let down a small rope.
This was then attached in turn to five ropes which he pulled up and fastened to the pole.
Each rope was held by a team of twenty men who spread out in various directions.
When the pole had been lowered to an angle of forty five degrees, ladders, each supported by four men and under the control of a ladderman, came into use.
The men moved gradually outwards, moving the ladders along the length of the pole by use of special hooks.
Men down the hole steadied it as it became horizontal and was heaved on to the shoulders of the men, about 150 in all.
It was then carried to Hall Tower Field — bought by the maypole committee for £2,500 in 1976 — to await repainting and the renewal of the garlands.
The weathervane, a stainless steel fox, was removed for safe keeping, the children pulled off pieces of the garlands for souvenirs and the hole in the road was filled in.
The whole procedure had taken almost three hours.
It was lads from Garforth who stole the 1829 pole, but a group from Aberford managed to make off with the top half in 1907.
Both times it was retrieved but in 1966, while it was lying in the field just three days before it was due to be raised, the top half was stolen by a gang from Aberford again.
This time it had really disappeared and a party was despatched to procure a new length of pole while the remaining villagers continued the search.
The new piece was being frantically prepared when the missing one was discovered, hidden in undergrowth.
This was recovered and rejoined its partner to appear on Whit Tuesday in all its glory.
Stories of poles being purloined occur in various places.
Originally, by taking the maypole they were transferring the luck, bestowed by the tree spirit and which went with the pole, to their own village.
Much symbolism and tradition are attached to these maypole ceremonies, but traditions adapt to the times.
I noticed that the Barwick men took no chances this time; as  the pole lay in the field it was wired up to an electronic burglar alarm system, but they still took it in turns to sit up and keep an eye on it.
Garlands of flowers and greenery have always been traditionally associated with May festivities, being used to decorate the trees brought in from the woods.
In some towns and villages, Garland Day is a tradition in its own right.
In other areas, children take round garlands for the villagers to see and gain their rewards of sweets or money, again based on bringing the blessings of the tree spirit to the household.
At Barwick the new garlands are taken round the surrounding villages and a collection made before they are attached to the maypole.
Each garland has a steel framework which is wrapped with silk stockings before being lined, inside and out, with hessian.
About 6,000 silk rosettes have to be made next, and these are stitched on the inside and outside of the garland before forty-eight red, white and blue ribbons with bells sewn on to the ends are attached.
A basket of artificial flowers is then placed inside.
One lady told me she had learnt to make garlands when she was five years old.
Her mother used to hang them from a hook in the kitchen ceiling in order to be able to work round them.
This lady was typical of the many I came across at these events.
Her whole family had been involved with the tradition for generations: she had just ridden with her daughter in the procession in a decorated pony and trap; her son-in-law was the new polemaster; and her grandson was dancing round the maypole.
She couldn't ever see the village letting the tradition die, especially when the younger members of the local families were so keen.
I was in Barwick again on Spring Bank Tuesday to see the maypole raised, but before that was the gala.
As Mr Robshaw said:
‘The maypole gala is primarily a day for the children.
It is not just an effort to raise funds to pay for the continuance of the maypole-raising, but a way of instilling the custom into the children.
They have the glory and happiness of the custom.
Without the children it would not continue.
All our maypole queens, crown bearers and dancers look back on the ceremony with pride, and they still come back on the day.’
The procession, led by local bands, winds its way through the  village to Hall Tower Field for the crowning of the May queen, a more recent addition to the festivities, surviving from pagan spring fertility rites.
Her attendants pay homage before entertaining her by dancing round the small maypole set up for the purpose.
The spectators have a fine view from Hall Tower Hill, for this is a motte and bailey site of a medieval castle.
In the meantime, the hole in the road is reopened, and at 6pm the men line up by the side of the maypole, the band starts to play and the command to hoist it on to shoulders is given.
The process is of course, the reverse of the lowering, the ladders being used until it is raised to forty-five degrees, then the ropes take over.
Buckets of beer circulate to encourage the men (the pubs are open all day) and the atmosphere is quite convivial by now.
There are shouts of encouragement, gasps as the pole wavers and, above all, the calm voice of the polemaster who must keep complete control of the situation.
It was 9pm before the maypole was safely in place and once again Simon Walker ascended to the garlands to release the ropes.
(It had been the practice for the climber to go to the top and give the fox a spin, but in 1984 the committee got cold feet when it found they might not be fully insured for the climber and a separate insurance would cost too much.
The fire brigade were called in to take down the ropes that year.)
After he had released the ropes, the huge crowd watched as Simon began to ascend rather than descend the pole.
He gradually inched his way up as spectators held their collective breath, for there was no safety net here, only the hard surface of the road.
The newly-painted pole was slippery and he found it difficult to get a good grip.
Then, just ten feet below the fox and some seventy feet from the ground, he stopped and clung tightly as the pole swayed in the wind.
Commonsense prevailed and he shinned down amidst cheers and sighs of relief.
It had been a brave attempt and was recognised as such.
He had been to the top in the past and when asked why he had decided against it today, he said: ‘I was exhausted!’
Morris men began dancing round the maypole as the tension relaxed and the climber, the laddermen, the ropemen and the polemaster had their well-earned pints whilst contemplating a job well done.
WELL DRESSING Cragg Vale, Midhope, Dore, Whirlow Hall Farm, Greenhill, Bradway, Norton.
We move now from tree spirits to water spirits, from maypoles to wells, and another custom whose origins reach back to pre-Christian times.
Water, being a basic necessity for life itself, was highly venerated, and pagan ceremonies and offerings were intended to placate the water deities believed to inhabit springs and wells.
Christianity forbade the worship of these deities, usually goddesses, and attempted to make them respectable.
Their dwelling places were rededicated to saints or the Blessed Virgin Mary, while the ceremonies and offerings became a means of thanksgiving for the pure water.
Springs or wells which were found to have healing properties were especially venerated, and towns such as Bath, with its famous Roman baths, developed.
The health-giving waters of Spa in Belgium became popular and spas developed in England — Harrogate being the notable one in Yorkshire.
It was not necessary, however, to travel to one of these fashionable watering places to partake of the health-giving beverage, and ‘taking the waters’ at a local spring or spa (spaw to many Northeners) became very popular during the last century.
As the waters were considered to be particularly efficacious in spring, the first Sunday in May became known around the Calder Valley as Spaw Sunday.
In 1987, when Tony Heginbottom revived the tradition at Cragg Vale Spa near Hebden Bridge, I was there to taste for myself the chalybeate water.
This was supposed to be very good for skin problems, but one man was known to have visited it regularly to collect the water for his wife who found it beneficial for her arthritis.
The water was quite pleasant, certainly better than when mixed with liquorice to make ‘Spanish water’.
One old man remembered that a visit as a child to the doctor did not result in being given a prescription.
Instead you were given a medicine bottle, bought a stick of liquorice, cut this up and stuck it into the bottle.
Then off you went to fill it with spa water and, after a good shake of the bottle you drank the lot.
This remedy had certainly done him no harm, for he was a sprightly eighty-year old.
Traditional cakes, which are actually biscuits, were also available.
These usually first appeared about Easter and then were baked throughout the year at other holiday times.
Tony's mother had made them for this occasion, and though recipes vary slightly the end result is a large currant biscuit.
A cup of the water (pronounced very pure after chemical analysis) and a biscuit cost twenty pence, as Tony had decided to combine the revival with raising funds for Water Aid.
This charity, sponsored by all the water authorities, aims to bore wells in Third World countries to supply them with an uncontaminated source of water.
Through a project begun by West Yorkshire Archaeological Unit, Tony became connected with the Holy Wells Research and Preservation Group, and from there came the inspiration to revive a local tradition he had heard tales about since his childhood.
As the spring is on private land he had to obtain the permission of the owner, but this was readily given.
About twenty per cent of those who went to the revival (now to become an annual event) remembered the tradition from prewar days.
At the beginning of this century, people walked from neighbouring villages to take the water and listen to the local Labour Party leaders.
‘It was just like Speakers’ Corner in Hyde Park’— for these were the early days of the Independent Labour Party and the politicians took advantage of these large gatherings to make known their views.
The local squire, a prospective Conservative MP, used to mingle with the crowds, taking note of the political mood of the people.
Morris dancers, instead of soap box politicians, entertained the crowd at the revival.
The Puritans frowned on the adorning of wells and springs as much as they did on adorning maypoles, and the tradition of decorating wells with flowers and green branches at the spring festivals, or on the feast of the patron saint of the well, died out.
The custom — like that of the maypole — was revived in some areas, but at Cragg Vale in the  nineteenth century, adornment of the springs was never part of the celebrations.
Tony Heginbottom incorporated the tradition, however, when he revived Spaw Sunday by going early to the well and surrounding it with boughs of may and holly and bunches of wild flowers.
Two wells in South Yorkshire, St James's Well and Potters' Well at Midhope, are also decorated in this traditional manner in mid-September.
A blessing takes place, following a procession from the church by the clergy and congregation.
This custom was started in the 1970's.
There had been no previous tradition of visiting or decorating these wells, so it is interesting that here is an example of an old custom appearing in an entirely new location.
Perhaps there is a feeling that once more we should make a point of giving thanks for our plentiful water supply.
Other decorated wells in the Sheffield area follow the Derbyshire tradition which developed at the beginning of the nineteenth century.
To learn about this, I went to see Mrs Susan Joel and her helpers at Dore near Sheffield, as they prepared their 1987 well-dressing.
Far removed from a few simple flowers and greenery, this is an elaborate screen covered with flower petals stuck into clay to form a picture.
About June, Mrs Joel calls a meeting of all those interested in being involved and ideas for the theme are discussed.
When the theme has been decided, she goes away and prepares a design.
This is then drawn full-size and traced on to acetate film which is put on to a bed of clay covering the board.
This board is about six feet by four feet with two side boards, and has been previously spread to a depth of about one inch with wet clay.
The board itself has been soaked beforehand so the wood does not absorb the dampness too quickly; in fact it feeds it back to the clay, enabling it to stay fresh for longer.
The same clay is used from year to year and takes about three hours to reconstitute by soaking in water and disinfectant.
‘Just to be on the safe side’, said Mrs Joel.
It is then skimmed and resoaked until it is clean.
The clay is keyed into holes on the board, and there are also nails at two inch random intervals to hold it.
With the film over the clay, the design is then transferred to the clay by pricking it through with needles or pastry cutters.
The picture  can then be outlined using seeds — peppers, coriander, melon, etc.
Dry material, which might include honesty, poppy heads and broom pods, are used next to start filling in designated areas, followed by leaves such as cotoneaster or copper beech.
Mrs Joel said that the first year she did it she used almost all privet, as she was frightened of running out of material half way through and she knew there was always plenty of that around.
Now she collects and builds up her stores all year round.
The petals are the last to go on as these will fade and die quickly if a start is made too soon.
The petalling usually starts on the Thursday afternoon previous to the Saturday it is required.
The ‘good-natured’ flowers which sit firmly are used first — mock orange, philadelphus, ‘something with a bit of body’.
Hydrangeas are very good, but these have to come from the corporation nurseries as it is too early for outdoor ones.
Rose petals are too strong; they curl and will not stick onto the clay.
As only a small part sticks they blow off easily, and if they are trimmed they bruise.
Pansies and clay react and the pansies shrivel in a couple of hours.
Sometimes a whole flower is used for effect — Mrs Joel had used pinks in 1986 — to make a three-dimensional effect.
She had also left some grasses free-flowing, stuck only at the bottom so they could move in the breeze, but had been told this was not strictly according to tradition.
‘It's like doing a jigsaw and making your own pieces up’, said Mrs Joel as she deftly removed a petal that was too large and replaced it with a smaller one.
Some people prefer to use tweezers for petalling others use only their fingers.
To do this, the petal is taken between finger and thumb and gently pulled out.
Then you have a bit of the petal free to get hold of right at the very tip.
Next it is laid half way over the other petal and pressed down with the side of the finger.
One lady said she always held her breath when doing this.
Another discovered she had toothache one evening as she had been clenching her teeth all afternoon!
Petalling starts at the bottom and works up, overlapping so it looks like a tiled roof because theoretically that sheds the rain.
The best weather to preserve the finished picture is warm and damp.
One year a thunderstorm washed out a lot of buttercup petals, so at 8am one Sunday morning, ladies were to be seen heading for the well to make running repairs before the blessing of the well took place in the afternoon.
It was very hot in the scout hut where I was watching the preparations, so the clay was constantly being sprayed to prevent it drying out.
At night it was covered with film which made it sweat and again preserved the dampness.
When the screen is completed, a local builder and about half-a-dozen husbands take it to the peace well at the corner of the village green on the Saturday morning.
BRIAN TINSON AND ALYSON STEPHENSON, FIRST AND SECOND IN THE 1985 KIPLINGSCOTE DERBY (Page 24)
NEARING THE FINISH OF THE LADIES' COAL CARRYING RACE (Page 27)
MARTIN HUTTON BUILDS THE PENNY HEDGE IN WHITBY HARBOUR UNDER THE WATCHFUL EYE OF HIS GRANDFATHER (Page 29)
A PHOTOGRAPH OF PLANTING THE PENNY HEDGE BY THE YORKSHIRE PHOTOGRAPHER THOMAS WATSON, 1863–1957 (Page 29)
THE CLIMBER ASCENDS THE MAYPOLE TO RELEASE THE GUIDING ROPES (Page 33)
THE RAISING OF THE BARWICK MAYPOLE (Page 33)
PETALLING AT THE DOVE WELL-DRESSING.
HERE THE PETALS ARE BEING CAREFULLY POSITIONED IN THE DAMP CLAY (Page 41)
The well-dressing was started in Dore in 1959 as an added attraction for the scout gala, which takes place on the second Saturday in July, so an obvious choice for the design was ‘A Boy Scout’, representing fifty years of scouting in the district.
A representation of this picture was incorporated in the 1984 design, the silver jubilee of well-dressing in Dore.
This was the year Mrs Joel took over as organiser and she invited the guides to help.
They so enjoyed the experience that they now do a screen of their own.
Though the completed screens are beautiful to look at, Mrs Joel also likes to provide a talking point.
One year a number of musical instruments were incorporated and visitors enjoyed spotting them, the numbers they found varied from fourteen to twenty-one.
Another year there were a number of small animals and insects.
This time many different organisations were represented by their logos on the side boards, including Save the Children, RNLI, the blood transfusion service, Childline and the neighbourhood watch scheme, to complement the main theme ‘Love thy Neighbour’.
A vase containing flowers that have been left over is also put at the well so people can see for themselves how they have been incorporated into the picture.
Now the Derbyshire tradition has crept into Yorkshire, it seems it may be spreading.
Whirlow Hall Farm, not far from Dore, is run by a trust to provide children and young people from the inner cities with farm experience.
One of the teachers who comes regularly with groups of children is a well-dressing expert from Eyam in Derbyshire, and first dressed a well at the farm in 1980.
This was so successful he has done it every year since, but with a different group of children.
The Girl Guides district office suggested well-dressings were started in the villages of Greenhill and Bradway in 1972.
These are made, with a little supervision, by the brownies to coincide with the flower festival at St Peter's Church in Greenhill on the nearest Saturday to the patronal feast.
The custom was also started in Norton, another South Yorkshire village, in 1974 but, after flourishing for a number of years, appears to have died out there due to lack of interest.
We live in a hi-tech society, so why is it few people can pass a fountain or a well without dropping in a coin?
Are they giving thanks to God, or placating a water deity?
Most people would laugh at either suggestion as they hunt in their pocket or purse for a copper or two, ‘just for luck’.
THE BLACK HATS VERSUS WHITE HATS CRICKET MATCH AT ILKLEY
An event takes place on May Day at Ilkley that has no connection with tree spirits, water spirits or indeed any springtime rites or festivals.
The Black Hats versus White Hats cricket match, which is now held on May Day Bank Holiday, was originally a way of getting Ilkley Cricket Club out of debt.
In the late nineteenth century, debts had been run up due to the club moving premises twice, plus a falling-off of spectators.
Remembering a scratch match played in 1879, which had provided plenty of fun for both players and spectators, Bill Lister had an idea: ‘Thinks I ta meself, if nobbut t' tradesmen cud be gotten together to play a match once a year, ah'm sewer it wod goa, an' 'specially if it war ta tak' place at t' feast.’
He kept the Wharfedale Inn where most of the cricketers met and it was in the front room of that establishment that the idea was developed.
John Beanlands' help was enlisted, as he was able to ‘smittle ivverybody else wi' his own enthoosiasm’.
He must have succeeded in ‘smittling ivverybody’ for he soon had two teams of twenty a side.
Five shillings was to be given by each player, with four shillings of that being returned to each member of the winning side.
The rest of the money was used to pay for a dinner at the Crescent Hotel.
These dinners became an important part of the tradition from the very beginning.
The first match, in 1880, took place on the Thursday of Feast Week in September, and was won by John Beanlands' team.
To liven things up a bit and stimulate rivalry, it was decided in 1882 that one team should wear tall black hats and the other tall white ones.
In 1883 hats were out and rosettes, red or white, were in.
This match was notable for being as much a battle against the elements as the opposing team.
The storm clouds gathered, the rain poured down and as the skies darkened, it became impossible to see the ball.
The players had to rely on their hearing rather than their sight!
The spectators did not fare  too well either.
One old stalwart who stuck with the whole match contracted such a severe cold that he died of exposure.
In 1887 special rules decreed that no member of the cricket club was allowed to bowl, and all bowling had to be underarm.
Right-handed batsmen were required to play left-handed and vice versa.
The more expert batsmen were only allowed to wield a broomstick the following year, while originality in the style and design of the ‘willow, was to be positively sought after 1891.
A game played for laughs rather than high scores has always been encouraged.
Rule two still warns that ‘excesses of skill and aptitude for the game of cricket will be penalized’.
Tom Brown, the bellman, publicly announced the 1888 match:
‘Take notice!
The grand old cricket match of England!
This day, tradesmen of Ilkley, White Hats versus Black Hats!
Pick shafts for bats and all men must play in top hats, or be fined a crown!’
Tall black or white hats (‘tiles’) have been worn for matches ever since.
Supper and entertainment followed the matches, and the speeches, recitations and songs were considered an important part of the proceedings.
One of the after-dinner speakers said the day had come to be regarded by tradesmen as the holiday of the year.
Supper and entertainment still take place after the match, with many of the diners dressing in Victorian fashions.
To induce greater efforts on the part of the players, prizes were introduced in 1891.
E W Cawley gave a silver cup for the captain of the winning team, and other prizes were donated by the owners of the Ilkley Free Press , Major Middleton and the committee, for prowess in certain aspects of the game.
A silver cup, purchased by subscription the following year, was to be competed for annually, the winning captain to hold it for a year.
The tradesmen had also the satisfaction of knowing that they had saved the cricket club, paying off its debts and placing it firmly on its feet again.
The matches ceased with the advent of the Second World War but in the 1970's, Richard Beckwith, a local photographer whose father had been connected with the event, thought it would be a good idea  to revive it.
His plans were thwarted for some time as no-one knew what had happened to the trophies.
After much diligent searching, they were finally unearthed in the attic of the Manor House Museum in a box thought to contain a sewing machine.
A new biennial series of matches was established on Sunday the 24th September 1978, with a fancy dress parade led by a brass band starting off the proceedings.
The Black Hats versus White Hats centenary match took place on May Day, Monday the 5th May 1980, as part of a ‘family fun day’, and it has remained a May Day event on alternate years since then.
The centenary match was a great success.
The two teams, with twenty men and women on each side, included the English cricketers Brian Close and Fred Trueman, television personalities, the Lord Mayor of Bradford and the editor of the Bradford Telegraph and Argus .
A fancy dress parade again preceded the match, and there was a funfair, sideshows and trade stands.
The Black Hats and White Hats committee chairman, Vincent Dobson, said:
‘Some may ask why should we be recalling the past and reliving an event which really belonged to the previous century?
Judging from the encouragement received and interest shown, there is enthusiastic support for the idea.
Perhaps we do not have to throw away the wealth of old traditions before we can enjoy the attractions of modern society and maybe new technology cannot be appreciated unless it is weighed against the security and apparent solidarity of the past.’
Unfortunately, the ‘enthusiastic support’ gradually declined.
Michael Brown, president of Ilkley and District Chamber of Trade and Commerce in 1986, told me it was difficult nowadays to get up a trade team as the number of small local traders has declined.
Many of the shops are branches of multiple stores and, though their managers sometimes take part, they obviously do not have the same interest in it as the traders who were born and bred in the town.
He had relegated the match to part of a bigger event as he thought people wanted more entertainment.
In the past they had been happy to sit and watch the match all afternoon (even if that meant dying from the cold!).
Now they watched a little and moved on to something else.
However, when the question of dropping the old title was brought up, many people protested strongly and were in favour of retaining Black Hats versus White Hats.
Over £3,000 was raised at the event in 1988, even though it was a damp and miserable day.
The money raised is now used principally to provide Ilkley with its Christmas lights, but local charities also benefit.
The match, the fair and the sideshows take place on East Holmes Field, with a grand parade and procession through the town to the site.
The chairman of the carnival committee, Mrs Bailey, said in her speech at the ‘supper and entertainment’ that the event had been a success, and hoped it had ‘laid the foundation for what may become an annual event’.
At the supper after the 1892 match, Mr J A Middlebrook proposed:
‘Success to the tradesmen's cricket match!
Little did those two cricketers — the veteran Bill Lister and his friend John Beanlands — think when they instituted the tradesmen's match that it would have assumed such proportions as it had.
It was to those two men that the annual event owed its origin, and it was therefore only fitting that in the drinking of the toast they should be coupled with it.’
Little did they think that it would still be going, if only just, well over 100 years later.
MAYOR MAKING
Ripon, York
The office of Mayor of Ripon came into being when James I granted a charter in 1604 declaring the town a ‘free borough of itself’.
The mayor had twelve aldermen and twenty-four assistants, plus a recorder, a clerk and two sergeants-at-mace, to help him ‘to make reasonable laws, statutes, constitutions, decrees and ordinances’.
The first mayor was Hugh Ripley, a merchant who owned the house at the corner of the market square which is now the tourist information centre.
Prior to this, the maintenance of law and order had been the concern of the wakeman, the chief of a body of aldermen, who were the appointed guardians of the people's rights and custodians of secular property.
The last holder of this office, whose origins are obscure, was the same Hugh Ripley.
The wakeman was elected annually from ‘his bretheren’ and if he ‘flytted from the towne except that God do visit it with pestilence’he had to forfeit twenty pounds.
In 1598 the wakeman and ‘his bretheren’ met to compile a set of regulations, the Towne Book , to prevent:
‘The many controversies about the election of the said officer [the wakeman]and about contempts made by persons who having been lawfully chosen and elected to the said office according to ancient custom and continual practice yet have utterly refused to undergo the said office or satisfy the ordinary fines accustomed and adjudged for contempts.’
One of the reasons why the elected wakeman might be tempted to shirk his duties was that, as he was responsible for the safety of the town during the night, if any burglaries then took place he had the costly business of compensating the victims.
This reluctance to take office is recalled during the annual mayor-making in the council chamber of the town hall.
It was, in fact, item three on my agenda: ‘The Proposer and Seconder to make the customary Search.’
I sat, along with visiting mayors and mayoresses, councillors, freemen of the city and distinguished guests, as the proceedings were opened with a prayer by the mayor's chaplain.
The mayor-elect was then proposed and seconded before the two councillors went off to search for him.
While this was taking place, the deputy mayor spoke about the tradition and said he was sure Councillor Roland Simpson, who was about to take up his second year of office, would soon be discovered.
This was obviously the cue for the appearance of the three councillors, but they didn't appear.
Had Councillor Simpson had enough after his hectic year of office when the city celebrated the granting of its first charter 1,100 years ago?
The deputy mayor said confidently, ‘While I am absolutely certain that he will be found, if he is not found, this will be setting a precedent’; since the mayoral office was instituted this is normally only a formality, with the mayor-elect waiting downstairs to be ‘found’.
Still no sign of anyone, people began to fidget and whisper, then suddenly they were back.
‘Mr deputy mayor I am pleased to say that we have been successful’, said the proposer.
Councillor Roland Simpson, Ripon's best-known taxi driver, then swore the oath of acceptance of the office, the oath of allegiance to the Queen, and signed the ancient parchment document.
The annual general meeting of the city council then continued, chaired by the new mayor.
At the end of the meeting the new councillors signed the Ancient Roll , containing the councillors' oath.
(Patrick Webb, clerk to the council, sergeant-at-mace and expert calligrapher, illuminates these ancient parchments, incorporating a different theme each year.)
There followed a procession through the town to the Spa Hotel for lunch and drinks on the city council.
Having been sworn in and signed in, the mayor is later ‘in-stall-ed’ in his own special stall in Ripon Cathedral by the dean.
This ceremony takes place at the same time as the annual celebration for the freedom of the city by 38 Regiment of the Royal Engineers.
A year passed before I was able to witness this second part of the mayor-making, so it was a different mayor I saw being installed.
The fully robed civic dignitaries walk in procession, led by the sergeant-at-mace, from the town hall in the market square to the  cathedral, where they are met by the dean.
When they are all seated, the Royal Engineers' standards are paraded and presented, and the service begins with a greeting and bidding prayer.
The mayor's stall is in the choir, so at the appropriate moment the civic party rise and are escorted from the nave to the choir — and out of sight of the members of the congregation.
The mayor is placed in his stall by the dean with these words, as set out in the order of service:
‘Except the Lord build the city: their
labour is but lost that build it.
Except the Lord keep the city: the
watchmen waketh but in vain.
James Simpson, Mayor of Ripon, it is my
duty and pleasure in this 1102nd year of
our Charter City to place you in the stall
assigned to you in this Cathedral Church
of St Peter and St Wilfrid.
Almighty and eternal God, to whom we
must give account: guide with your
spirit the Mayor of Ripon, that he may
faithfully serve this city and seek in
all his actions to enrich its common
life; through Jesus Christ our Lord.
Amen.’
The mayor replies:
‘Grant us Lord our God,
to you — a heart of flame;
to our people — a heart of love;
to ourselves — a heart of steel.
We ask this in Christ's name.
Amen.’
A prayer is said by all before three long blasts are blown on the horn by the hornblower.
According to tradition, the horn symbolised the granting of the charter to Ripon in AD 886.
The horn was also blown every night to ‘set the watch’, signifying that the city was now in the care of the wakeman.
As the custom of blowing the horn each night  still takes place, this topic will be covered more fully later in the book, together with another horn blowing tradition.
As the last notes lingered in the cathedral, the mayoral procession reformed and returned — accompanied by applause from the congregation — to their places in the nave.
The service continued and included readings by the commanding officer of 38 Regiment and the mayor, prayers led by the canon and an address by the dean, the Very Reverend C R Campling.
The dean in his address expressed his pleasure in installing the new mayor, especially as he had been asked to serve as his chaplain during the mayor's year of office.
The freedom of the city was the highest honour it could bestow, and this has been granted to the Royal Engineers in 1949; since then they had taken an active part in the life of the city.
He was proud that their freedom parade and service and the mayor's installation should be joined together in this way.
The service ended; civic dignitaries, clergy and choir took their places behind the Royal Engineers' standards ready to walk in procession to the town hall.
It is not recorded in what mischief the Lord Mayor of York used to indulge, but the Lady Mayoress had a three foot long staff of honour to keep him in order!
On Lord Mayor's Day, when the new Lord Mayor is elected, the staff is handed over by the father of the city council to the sheriff's lady to keep the sheriff himself in order.
However, she only keeps it for a few weeks before it is handed back to the new Lady Mayoress by the sheriff for the price of a kiss.
This little ceremony takes place at the first ‘at homes’ after the election, when the civic party meet the public at the Mansion House.
The staff itself is of snakewood, tipped with two inch deep silver ferrules.
One end is engraved with the city coat of arms, the other bears the inscription ex Dono Richardi Towne Civit Ebor Aldermanni January 15 Anno Dom 1716 ; that is, ‘the gift of Richard Towne, alderman of the city of York, January 15th 1726.’
(He was also Lord Mayor of the city in 1716.)
This staff replaced an earlier one ‘being decayed’, so the custom was already well established by this date.
Why or how it originated is not known, but the Lady Mayoress takes charge of it for the rest of the mayoral year, and no doubt a quick rap over the knuckles will soon curb any tendency the Lord Mayor might have to step out of line.
HOSPITAL SINGS
Holmefirth, Mapplewell and Staincross
Handel, hymns and hospitals do not at first appear to have very much in common, but the first two have helped maintain the latter, in at least two places, for 100 years.
1982 marked the centenary of Holmfirth Feast Sing.
Gerald Peach, sing secretary, said that, though it was not what it used to be, ‘it is a tradition we are anxious to maintain’.
Though the title ‘Feast Sing’ is still printed on the programme, the feast has disappeared and the sing has become attached to the Holmfirth Musical Festival.
It all started in 1882 when a number of local worthies, looking for ways of raising money to support Huddersfield Infirmary, decided to hold a ‘Musical Gathering’ on the Sunday of Feast Week.
Feasts are going to be cropping up from time to time as we move through the year, so it may be as well to explain that the word signifies, in Yorkshire, the yearly festival of the village or town.
It was generally held on or about the feast day of the patron saint to whom the church was dedicated.
Primarily a religious holiday, it has also been for hundreds of years a secular holiday, often with a travelling showmen's fair visiting the village at the time.
Feast Sunday in Holmfirth is the Sunday before Whitsuntide, and the sing is still held on this traditional day.
The ‘Musical Gathering’ in 1882 took place at 7am and again at 2.30pm on the cricket field.
It was a great success.
The Huddersfield Weekly Examiner stated that ‘more people visited the town on this day than on any previous Feast Sunday for many years…’
Huddersfield Infirmary benefited by a donation of £84.
The programme included about half-a-dozen hymns and a selection of choruses from the Messiah .
The programme in 1988 was basically the same, and I am sure audience and choirs stood then, as they do now, for the ‘Hallelujah’ chorus.
In 1883 the event raised £110.
Unfortunately, public interest then began to fall off and the sing was suspended from  1866 until 1894, except for a special event to raise funds for new public baths for Holmfirth in 1887.
This suspension explains why the centenary sing was actually the ninety-second annual event, and the one hundredth will be in 1990.
When the sing reappeared in 1895, the venue was the football field at 2.30pm, the 7am performance having been dropped.
A run of favourable weather over the next few years resulted in its financial success and firm re-establishment.
Donations totalling over £5,000 have been made, not only to the Huddersfield Infirmary, but to institutions such as Bradford's Eye and Ear Hospital, the Huddersfield Deaf and Dumb Institute, and the Holmfirth Nursing Association.
In 1900, Mr Marshall, whose fair came to Holmfirth for the feast, consented to donate the receipts from his gondolas between 7pm and 8pm on Feast Saturday.
The feast committee agreed to attend the fair during this time.
The sum of£3 8s 6d was raised in this way, and the practice continued for the next eighty years.
The year after the re-appearance of the sing it was held in Mr Burton's field, near the top of Victoria Street.
According to local history, this field at that time would have been the playing fields of Mr Burton's private school, which eventually became Victoria Park.
This is where, weather permitting, the sing still takes place.
(If wet in the parish church.)
It is a fine venue with wonderful views, so it is not surprising that at the turn of the century special trains were laid on to bring the visitors.
In 1946 the feast sing committee promoted the first Holmfirth musical competitions.
As the feast declined and the musical competitions rapidly developed, it was decided in 1949 that a new society, the Holmfirth Musical Festival, should be established with an elected committee and officials.
Since then, this committee has organised both the sing and the musical festival.
This brings the event almost full circle.
In the 1895 programme, ‘Musical Gathering’ was replaced with the words ‘Musical Festival’and though no competitions were then involved, it was billed as the ‘Holmfirth Feast Sunday Musical Festival’.
The Mapplewell and Staincross Hospital and Comforts Fund  celebrated the centenary of their hospital sing in 1986, the event having been continuous since its inception on the 31st July 1887.
This centenary event raised over £1,800 for Barnsley District General Hospital, with a further £650 for other charities.
A crowd of about 2,000 gathered on the Mapplewell Junior and Infant School playing fields to sing hymns, and, of course, Handel's ‘Hallelujah’ chorus — a programme that again differed little from their original one, or that of Holmfirth.
The festival was held outdoors for the first eighty years, but moved indoors after torrential rain caused the collapse of the stage as the congregation were singing The Heavens are Telling !
After the success of the centenary festival it was hoped to hold the sing outdoors again, and for the 101st event in 1987 the committee worked hard to set up the staging and prepare the venue; but a cloudburst just an hour before it was due to start necessitated a change of plan.
The indoor events had generally been held in the village hall but this had to be booked in advance, so the sudden change involved trying to push upwards of 500 dripping wet people into Greenside Church, a building designed for 300.
The proceedings eventually started, though there were still people outside trying to get inside.
In her address, the Matron of Barnsley District General Hospital and also the Chairman of the Mapplewell and Staincross Hospital and Comforts Fund Committee, told us how the money raised last year had been used.
As the fund entered its second century, it still played a vital role in the welfare of the patients.
The salaries of staff, the replacement of vital instruments and many large items had to be funded from the National Health Service funds, so that there was never enough left to buy the extra comforts that made all the difference to the welfare of the patients.
The amount raised at the centenary had enabled quite large items to be bought, for example a special bed constructed in such a way that the patient lies in a hammock above the base.
This was in constant use for emaciated patients who were just skin and bones and for whom a normal bed provided no comfort at all.
Smaller amounts of money were used in many ways to improve the well-being, especially, of long stay children or elderly people.
She  said how the old people's sitting room had been livened up when a few pictures of old Barnsley had been hung on the walls.
Instead of sitting lost in their own thoughts or sleeping, the patients had been stimulated and they now chatted to each other as they recalled the places, the people or the events of the past.
When the Barnsley Beckett Hospital first opened in 1867 it depended upon the benevolence of local businessmen, colliery owners and public subscription for its income.
The Mapplewell and Staincross Hospital Committee was formed in 1887 and the colliery owners and public of this area played a prominent part in maintaining the hospital; so much so that by 1935 the three bed hospital now had 153 beds and its income had increased from £300 to £18,000.
After the introduction of the National Health Service in 1948, the Mapplewell and Staincross Hospital Committee changed its title to the present one and the sing continued, providing the help that is still so important.
Feast Sunday was again the traditional date for the sing, but Mapplewell and Staincross Feast was the last Sunday in July.
Although the sing still takes place in July, it is not always on the last Sunday of the month.
Mr Marshall's fair used to come for the feast weekend and, in 1914, he again contributed to the effort by offering to play sacred music on his fairground organ after the Sunday church services, with a collection for the hospital funds.
The committee agreed to this, provided no other stall or show was allowed to open on that day.
Special trains were laid on in the early days, bringing musicians, singers and visitors.
For the last ten years the singers have included choirs from Mapplewell Junior School, Staincross Ladies Choir and, retaining the connection with miners, the North Gawber Male Voice Choir.
This local pit has now closed but the choir still flourishes.
In the centenary souvenir programme Mr Douglas Robinson, president of the sing committee, wrote:
‘The Mapplewell and Staincross Hospital Comforts Fund Musical Festival is a part of our community roots that has grown and flourished for one hundred years.
It reflects the devotion of a whole community in caring for others whilst enjoying a community spirit that is the ‘the Sing’.’
SADDLEWORTH WHIT WALK AND BAND CONTEST
Pentecost, the seventh Sunday after Easter, commemorates the descent of the Holy Spirit upon the Apostles and is generally known as Whitsunday.
A derivation of White Sunday, it refers to the white garments worn by the recently baptised Christians of the early Church.
It was also a popular time for processions of witness or walking days, when the members of churches and Sunday schools of all denominations would walk together through the streets, stopping at selected places along the route to sing hymns to bear witness to their Christian faith.
Meanwhile back at the Sunday school some kind of tea would have been prepared.
This could be anything from coffee and currant cake to a ‘sit-down knife and fork do’.
While the adults sat about and caught up with the local gossip, the children would round off the day with sports.
The custom originated in the first half of the nineteenth century and has largely died out, but at Saddleworth a very large procession takes place on the Friday after Whitsuntide.
As this is no longer a public holiday, many people arrange either to work on a Bank Holiday in order to have this day off or they take a day of their holiday allocation.
By whatever means, huge numbers of locals and those who have left the area contrive to be there — even coming from such places as Australia and America — to take part in the celebrations and be reunited with family and friends.
In the 1960's the date was changed to a Sunday to make it easier for people, but there was such an outcry that it soon reverted to the traditional Friday.
This lapse from tradition revitalised the proceedings which take place during the whole day.
The morning is given over to the religious aspect of celebrations, the afternoon belongs to the children, while the brass bands come into their own in the evening.
The school children have a holiday if half term does not coincide in order to take part in the processions.
After a short service in St Chad's  at Uppermill, the parish church of Saddleworth, they formed a joint procession with the Roman Catholic church, the Sacred Heart, behind their appropriate banners.
Whitsuntide was the traditional time for wearing new clothes and the little girls were all smart in their prettiest dresses, mostly white, with ribbons and flowers in their hair.
They carried between them hoops made into garlands, big baskets of flowers or small posies.
The vicar of St Chad's and the priest of the Sacred Heart walked behind the crucifix, carried aloft, and the clergy, choirs, Holme Silver Band, parents and friends followed them.
The colourful procession walked down the steep hill, through the streets of the new estates, stopping at a couple of places for a short selection of hymns, to the King George V Playing Fields in Uppermill.
Here they met processions from surrounding villages for a joint service with all the local denominations represented.
The streets were lined with people as the procession passed, the older folk sitting on stools outside their cottage doors to wave and greet them.
Dobcross Band played for the service, held in the open air under a brilliant blue sky.
A low-loading trailer had been fixed up as a platform for the clergy who led the service and the singing.
At the close of the service, the processions reformed behind their bands and banners (there were ten of them that day) and wound their way back to their own church or chapel for lunch and sports.
While we watched the sports taking place at Uppermill school, I asked the vicar, the Rev J Sykes, why in his opinion such traditions had continued to thrive.
It was the sense of identity to be felt in an isolated community, he thought.
It was not just a reason to indulge in nostalgia; though the tradition was basically the same as it had always been, except that in the past the people had walked further in the processions.
Nor was it an event frozen in time — it was a living event with the emphasis continually shifting.
In the evening there was an example of a shift in emphasis that was so pronounced as to cause that part of the day to become an event in its own right.
This was the band contest.
The local bands used to play for the morning processions, in the afternoon they played selections at the sports and in the evening they  would compete among themselves.
Now the big name bands such as Black Dyke Mills, British Aerospace, Fairey Engineering and Wingates travel long distances to take part in the contest.
The atmosphere in Uppermill had completely changed since the morning.
(Perhaps the fact that the pubs had been open all day had something to do with that.)
The whole place was thronged, with people lining the streets, beer glass in hand, or crowding round the roped-off area where the bands competed in the King George V Playing Fields.
In addition there was always one band playing and marching to the playing fields and another playing and marching away from there, while huge coaches carrying yet more bandsmen and women manoeuvred in the narrow streets into and out of parking spaces.
One of the organisers said that each of the surrounding villages has a committee who organise their own band competition and offer prizes.
Each band was identified only by a number, and they were marked by adjudicators sitting behind closed doors.
No-one knew how many bands would take part in each contest until it was all over.
About forty-seven bands had competed in Uppermill in 1984, but there were ninety-four bands touring the area.
I talked to members of Wingates Band, who said that there is no set plan — this could account for the apparent chaos — but the idea is to take part in as many of the competitions as possible.
The band had started at Lydgate at 5pm and had played at Scouthead and Delph, they thought, before arriving at Uppermill.
They had had to pass straight through some of the villages which were completely full and did not know where they would go next, but would stop at the first village in which they could park their coach.
This would continue until about 11 pm, when they would begin the long drive home.
Last year they had managed to take part in nine contests and achieved four first prizes, two second and one third.
The local bands have not been altogether ousted; some were taking part in the contests after playing and walking in a procession in the morning and playing at the sports in the afternoon.
Around Saddleworth at Whitsuntide, those Pennine hills are very definitely alive with ‘The Sound of Music’.
BRADFORD WHIT WALK
A very different kind of walking takes place between Bradford and Ilkley on Spring Bank Holiday Monday; this is the Bradford Whit Walk.
As the title implies it originally took place on Whit Monday, but when this ceased to be a Bank Holiday it moved to the new Bank Holiday.
‘Whit’ was dropped from the title but people failed to recognise it as the old Bradford Whit Walk, so the event reverted to the original name.
At the turn of the century there was a fashion for race walking, and sports meetings and galas would often include such an event in their programmes.
Early in 1903, as the result of a meeting in Bradford of local businessmen and benefactors, the Bradford County Walking Association was formed.
This was not a competitive body; its aims were to promote race walking in general and the Bradford Whit Walk in particular.
Ninety-two competitors took part in the first walk on Whit Monday the 1st June 1903, one of the first all-amateur walking events to be held in England.
The winner, Len Atkinson of Baildon, was presented with a silver cup donated by Jimmy Hammond of Hammond's Brewery who hoped the event would become an annual one.
His hopes were realised, for the walk did become an annual event and the Hammond Trophy is still presented to the winner.
The event has changed during the course of its history.
That first walk was open to those living or having businesses within six miles of Bradford, but in 1906 the walk was opened to all amateurs in the country and was considered to be the unofficial championship of England.
The route has also changed, for the first walks were from Bradford to York, the winner of the first race taking 7 hours, 7 minutes and 50 seconds to cover the thirty-nine and a half miles.
The route became circular in 1906, going to Bolton Abbey and back, and in 1915 it changed for the last time.
It remained a circular route but the distance was shortened to about thirty-two miles (fifty kilometres), virtually the same course as the present one.
The walkers leave John  Street in Bradford at 10am (the first race in 1903 started at 6.35am), then make their way to Ilkley via Shipley, Hollins Hill, Menston and Burley.
The return route is via Denton Park, Askwith, Otley, Apperley Bridge and Greengates to the finish at Peel Park.
Around six and a half hours are allowed in which to complete the race; a search party is sent after that!
Geoff Dowling, race secretary and one-time competitor (but unfortunately never winner), told me that five and a half hours was reasonable but the first-class walkers could be expected about four and a half hours after the start.
The race continued throughout the war years, though during the Second World War the distance was cut to fifteen miles.
The number of entrants was swelled by the servicemen who took part, ‘volunteered’ by their superior officers as a good way of keeping fit and in training, especially as some did it in their army boots.
The rules followed are laid down by the Race Walking Association and the International Athletics Federation.
Judges are allowed to disqualify any competitor not considered to be ‘walking’, but some walk so quickly that high-speed cameras are needed to make sure the walker is not in fact running.
The definition of walking, as given in the rules, is:
‘Walking is the progression of steps so taken that unbroken contact with the ground is maintained at each step.
The advancing foot of the walker must make contact with the ground before the rear foot leaves the ground.
During the period of each step in which a foot is on the ground, the leg must be straightened (not bent at the knee) at least for one moment, and in particular, the supporting leg must be straight in the vertically upright position.’
There are five scratch and five handicap prizes, so everyone has a chance.
In 1969 there were three generations of the Holmes family taking part, father, son and grandson.
Harry Holmes senior was competing for the last time, having raced thirty-seven times between 1933 and 1969.
In 1986, three Olympic athletes were in the best field ever assembled (according to Geoff Dowling), but they didn't win!
Roy Hankin of Sheffield won in 4 hours, 29 minutes and 31 seconds, 15 minutes faster than his time the previous year, beating Bradford's  Melvyn McCann into second place, but not breaking McCann's record time of 4 hours, 25 minutes and 53 seconds set in 1984.
Before the days of television, watching, if not walking, the Bradford Whit Walk was a day's entertainment for the whole family.
After seeing the competitors set off, there was a dash to Forster Square Station to catch the train to Esholt.
There they would line Hollins Hill as the walkers toiled up and cheer them on their way.
Back to the train for the spectators and on to Ilkley to see how the walkers were progressing.
After lunch, it was back to Bradford and Peel Park to congratulate the winners and encourage those who were flagging as the finish came into sight.
Then it was all the fun of the Whit Monday Fair.
The fair has itself moved to Spring Bank Holiday Monday, and though there are still large crowds, there are not the thousands for whom this was one of the highlights of the year.
It has been suggested that the course of the walk be changed yet again.
Under international rules, if a championship is to be held it has to be on a lap course.
This would involve completing fifteen circuits of a two mile circular course, and Geoff Dowling is completely against this.
Though himself a Lancastrian from Morecambe, he is interested in the whole tradition of the race and believes that walking round and round the same circuit would destroy the whole spirit of the race and is not to be contemplated.
J J Wagenheim (‘Waggy’), writing in the Telegraph and Argus in 1979, described the walk:
‘The fastest part is the fourteen miles to Ilkley, then there is a quiet stretch along the river towards Otley, before a three mile climb to the Dyneley Arms and on to Yeadon Moor, where there can be strong cross-winds.
Holding back downhill causes sore toes and you could yell with agony and the thought of the two to three miles uphill from Apperley Bridge to Undercliffe still to be tackled.
But all is forgotten on the last lap in Peel Park through the cheering lines of spectators to the finishing line.’
One can see that Geoff has a point.
THE ‘ANTIENT SCORTON SILVER ARROW’
‘How fit shooting is for all kinds of men: how honest a pastime for the mind; how wholesome an exercise for the body.’
Roger Ascham wrote these words in defence of archery in his book Toxophilus in 1545.
As the use of the bow as a weapon was declining, the bowmen of England were in danger of losing their skills.
That they did not was evident in 1988 as 112 gentlemen archers, over half of them using the traditional longbow, took aim at the annual tournament for the ‘Antient Scorton Silver Arrow’.
There were archers from all parts of the country, from the north and as far south as Hampshire.
A number of archers in the North Riding of Yorkshire and South Durham founded the Society of Archers in 1673, with the intention of meeting annually around Whitsuntide to shoot for an ‘Antient Silver Arrow’.
The first meeting of what is now the oldest body of archers in the United Kingdom was held at Scorton on the 14th May 1673.
I went to the 280th recorded meeting at Adel near Leeds in May 1988.
This was the 316th year of the society, but events such as wars with Napoleon, ‘Kaiser Bill’ and Hitler have occasionally prevented it from taking place.
In the three centuries of its existence there have been a number of changes, notably in the equipment used.
The traditional bow was a wooden longbow, but in 1948 there was a revolutionary innovation when the steel bow appeared at a Scorton shoot.
With its efficient sights, this became so popular that it soon almost ousted the longbow; in fact this was the last meeting at which the silver arrow was won by an archer using a longbow.
The archer who holds this distinction is Michael Leach, who was only twelve years old at the time.
He had gone to the meeting with his father and had a new lancewood bow and some arrows with him.
When he asked if he could take part, the gentlemen archers looked at him and at his bow and, thinking it doubtful he could hit anything at 100 yards, gave their permission if his father looked after him.
To their amazement, his arrow was the first to pierce the inner gold circle, winning him the silver arrow.
This was quite an achievement as there were many well-known archers at the meeting — the captain had arranged for the northern championship meeting to be held at the same venue on the three days prior to the Scorton shoot.
Michael also took away the distinction of being the youngest archer ever to win the contest from Ben Hird, who had won it aged nineteen in 1900.
Ben and his young friends had been told at the start of the meeting to behave themselves and not get in the way of the other archers, so they were not too pleased when he beat them at their own game.
I spoke to Michael at Adel and asked if he remembered how he felt that day forty years ago.
He said he certainly did!
He had been shooting since he was about five years old; there were few clubs or competitions around at the time but the Scorton was one of the leading ones.
He had felt greatly excited as he and his father got up at 5am to travel by bus and train from their home in Heywood, Lancashire to Ben Rhydding near Ilkley where the meeting was to take place.
He had continued to attend the meetings fairly regularly and still felt they were good fun, with everyone enjoying themselves enormously.
‘It is very ancient’, he said, ‘you feel you are participating in a tradition.’
Michael's win caused one of the rules to be changed.
In 1949 it was agreed that in future no person under the age of twenty-one would be allowed to enter.
This was not just sour grapes on the part of the ‘grown-ups’.
The winner of the arrow at the end of the meeting becomes captain of the ‘Antient Scorton Silver Arrow’ for the following year and this entails a great deal of responsibility.
With a lieutenant (who has gained this position by being the first archer to hit the red) to assist him and the clerk to the captains to advise, he has to arrange and run the next shoot.
This involves, among other things, choosing the date and venue, the printing and advertising, arranging for the supply of the targets, field layout, appointing a judge and scorers, making provision for luncheon and tea and chairing the meeting after lunch.
Quite a task for a twelve year old!
The meeting of 1950 agreed that future meetings should be held in  Yorkshire, and the earlier amendment of 1920 allowing it to take place in Lancashire (as there were so few archery clubs in the north) be rescinded.
It was also agreed at the meeting that, as the greater accuracy of the steel bows was enabling more archers to hit the nine inch diameter gold, an inner gold in the form of a three inch diameter black spot would be added, and the first arrow to pierce this would win the silver arrow.
The steel bow was replaced by the composite bow which is more effective, more powerful pound for pound, and lighter to carry.
Major Roger Crees, the present clerk to the captains, told me that in the early days of the composite bow — which is made up of two or more materials glued together — the glues were not to be relied upon.
It could be quite disconcerting for the archer whose bow disintegrated to find himself left with a handful of bits and pieces resembling a bundle of firewood.
Glues have improved since then, but the bows now coming to the fore are compound ones with wheels and pulleys and complex sights.
At present these are banned, as are crossbows, but will these eventually be admitted with the march of progress?
I think perhaps not.
I was constantly hearing that people were reacting to all this technology, expressing a wish to go back to basics with a simple bow, a look at the wind, an arrow loosed into the heavens and a hope that with luck it might hit the target.
Longbowmen claimed they were more relaxed and less competitive, not ‘pot-hunters’.
As more skill was required to shoot with a longbow, they were not so worried about high scores, being content if their arrows occasionally landed where they were aimed.
One archer had really gone back to basics; he had started making his own bows by means of trial and error and a book from the library.
Using traditional methods and traditional woods such as western yew, osageorange and degame, a bow can take fifty to sixty hours to make.
There seem to be more people with the same idea, as the number of bowyers listed in the appropriate journals is increasing each year.
Some of the archers thought that if the competition were restricted to longbows it would die out but, after a decrease when the steel bows  first appeared, the number of longbows at the Scorton shoot is steadily increasing.
Many of those who were using what are known as curly bows also shoot longbows.
Peter Davies, the 1988 winner of the silver arrow, was using a composite bow in order to have a better chance of winning, but next year he intended to shoot longbow for he thought this was really a longbow tournament.
He did not want to win it again because even though‘I feel great at the moment, I don't think it should be won more than once; the more people who win it, the better’.
If the winning shot ever comes from a longbow again, quite a few people thought it would mean the end of that meeting and adjournment to the pub to spend the rest of the day celebrating!
When the archers arrive on the field for the meeting, they first sign the record book to say they are going to take part and then pay the balance of the cost of the meeting, having already paid a deposit.
They then draw lots in the form of a scorecard, unseen, which has written on it a target number and position.
The captain and the lieutenant always shoot first and second position on the first target to have the opportunity of retaining their titles.
At 10am the lieutenant sounds his bugle to call the archers together.
Once assembled, they are welcomed by the captain and the judge for the day gives a short address.
This includes a reminder that any person caught swearing must be made to pay for it.
As it says in the original rules:
‘Forasmuch as the exercise of archery is lawful, laudable, healthful, and innocent and to that end that God's holy name may not be dishonoured by any of that society, it is agreed…that if any one of them shall that day curse or swear, in the hearing of any of the company…he shall forthwith pay down one shilling…to be distributed by the Captain, to the use of the poor of that place, or township where they shoot.’
Of course this is something of a joke nowadays and the clerk usually starts the ball rolling by reminding the archers they are now under rule seven, ‘so don't damn well forget it’, and duly pays his shilling.
By the end of the day the swear bag, as it is called, contained £25.35 for the poor of Adel.
The field is laid out with a row of targets at either end and a score tent on either side (they let the ladies do the scoring!).
At the first whistle the archers shoot two arrows and, when all have shot, the whistle blows and they go to check their scores and await the whistle to shoot back the other way.
This time on their way to the other end they call at the score tents, half to either side, and record their scores, on their honour as gentlemen not to cheat.
If they have an arrow in the gold they are paid two shillings (no decimalisation here), if they have a hit in the red, blue or black they receive one shilling, but if they have hit the outer white the bowman has to pay one shilling into the pool.
Those who have missed the target altogether just hope they can find their arrows.
The speed with which some of these flew over or past the big straw bosses, 100 yards away from the shooting line, is quite alarming.
There is a story that someone once shot a piece out of a glass of beer he had left behind the target, leaving the rest of the glass and the beer intact.
Some said he had been practising!
The shoot continues in this way for two hours before the company adjourn for luncheon, as rule eight states, ‘at some ordinary, appointed for them near the place of the shooting’.
The ‘ordinary’ on this day was Adel War Memorial Hall, where a three course lunch awaited.
In 1953, on the occasion of her coronation, a telegram conveying the loyal greetings of the assembled archers was sent to Queen Elizabeth.
This custom continued, the telegram being sent off on the morning of the shoot and the telegram of thanks being read out at lunch.
After the demise of the telegram, loyal greetings are sent with one white rose via a commercial flower delivery service, but the reply does not arrive in time for lunch any more.
After lunch, the clerk asks all those who have not this day shot with the captain to withdraw.
Anyone not having dined with the captain is not allowed to shoot in the afternoon.
The annual general meeting of the Society of Archers then takes place.
The minutes of the previous year's meeting are read and signed and any other matters dealt with.
The captain has the responsibility of having the report of the shoot, the names of the people who entered, minutes of their AGM and the prizewinners written up in the records.
This can be a costly business, as since 1892 these volumes have been illuminated and a calligrapher may now charge £75 to £100 for an entry.
The captain can interpret the records as he wishes as long as he maintains a certain standard.
The five volumes, written on handmade paper of which the society has maintained a supply, are beautiful, often incorporating family and club crests where appropriate.
The captain's ‘Let's go back to the butts, gentlemen’ is the signal to start a further two hours of shooting.
(The aim of some may now not be quite so steady; there is wine with lunch and the bar is open all morning!)
As the afternoon draws to a close, the judge calls ‘last end, worst white’.
This means it is time to loose the last two arrows and decide whether to aim for the middle of the target to boost your score, or to aim for the outside edge of the target and the chance of winning the Horn Spoon.
This trophy, whose origin is unknown but is thought to be contemporary with the arrow, was presented by the Society of Gentlemen Archers of Darlington in 1830.
A story has been passed down with the spoon to explain how it came to be repaired.
It was once won by an archer who had a large family of young children who were fascinated by the spoon, which has a silver chain with a hook at the end in the form of a swan's head and neck.
They persuaded their father to let them use it to eat their porridge and this became a habit with them.
When the time came for returning the spoon, he found that part of the soft horn bowl had worn away.
He arranged for it to be bound in silver and, to hide his embarrassment, had it inscribed Risum teneatis, amica —‘Restrain your laughter, friends’.
In the Darlington records, there is an entry which refers to the tipping with silver of a horn spoon, one ounce, seven shillings and sixpence, so it seems there may be some basis in fact for this story.
After these last arrows have been shot, everyone retires for tea and the presentation of the trophies by the captain's lady.
At tea I sat next to a gentleman in a wheelchair — there were two people shooting from wheelchairs that day.
They both told me how they enjoyed the sport, in which they could compete on equal terms with the able-bodied.
Neither had practised archery before becoming immobile; one of them had been taught the art at Pinderfields  Hospital at Wakefield and had gone on to become captain of his club.
The trophies were displayed on a prize cloth, designed and embroidered by Marjorie McCree and ladies of the church embroiderers' guild.
Pride of place was held by the ‘Antient Silver Arrow’ itself.
The arrow, which has been repaired in the centre at some time, is twenty-five and a quarter inches long and weighs seven ounces.
The design is quite plain, similar to that of an old wooden target arrow.
The Birmingham Assay Office reported in 1966 that the oldest part of the arrow, the main tube and point, could be c1600, while the flights and flight end tube are probably c1700.
It was possible that the whole of it could date from 1670, having been made from two different pieces of silver.
As to where it came from, no-one really knows, and as can be imagined legends abound.
According to Ben Hird (the nineteen year old winner of it in 1900) in his book about the arrow, the most likely story was that it was won by John Wastell at an archery tournament while he was at Cambridge in 1653–4 (it was not unusual for silver arrows to be given as prizes in such contests) and brought back to his family home at Scorton.
Later he fell in love and eloped with one of the housemaids, whom he married.
For this deed he was disinherited.
Henry Calverley, a friend of the family, asked for the arrow to use as a trophy and it was given to him on condition he solemnly promised not to reveal its origin.
Henry Calverley won the arrow at the first meeting at Scorton, but it was not held there again until 1754, so it may be that he was keeping this promise.
In the case containing the arrow is a silver chain mail bag, containing ten silver shillings, the traditional ransom paid to medieval archers who could not be trusted to return it.
Since coming into the possession of the Society of Archers, the arrow has been stolen, gilded, pawned, left on a park bench all night and lost when a captain had a mental illness and lost his reason.
The captain is now advised to store it in a bank, after it has been duly admired by friends and family, though I know one captain kept it under his bed, causing his mother a lot of  sleepless nights!
There are two prizes specifically for longbowmen.
The Ben Hird Sword  commemorates his seventy-two year association with the event, and is awarded for the greatest number of hits by a longbowman.
The Alain Holt Wooden Ladle is presented to the longbowman with the highest score.
These trophies, together with the Lieutenant's Silver Bugle, bought by subscription in 1834, complete the Scorton group of trophies.
A second set of trophies, the Thirsk Bowman's Insignia, was presented in 1884, after the death of Henry Peckett who had looked after them since the demise of that society.
Only archers born or resident in Yorkshire are eligible for these.
There are then further prizes of gold medals, the Phillips Cup and the proceeds of two sweepstakes.
Eddie Chattaway had been taking part in the tournament for over twenty years before he loosed his winning arrow in 1977.
He was more elated than when he had been shooting as an international for Great Britain: ‘It's like trying to get eight draws on the football pools — anybody can win.
It's great when you do.’
SUMMER
MYSTERY PLAYS
York, Wakefield Halifax, Worsborough
The term ‘mystery’ refers to the trade or métier (from the French mestier ) of the performers who were members of various guilds.
Comprised of master craftsmen, the medieval guilds had the exclusive rights of trading in the towns and provided aid and protection for their members.
They often occupied, with their apprentices and families, the same area in a town, worshipped together and dined together on important occasions.
(The Shambles in York, for instance, was the street of the butchers or fleshammels, and the Butchers Hall is still at number forty.)
The plays they performed enacted the events of the Bible, from Creation to Doomsday, divided into separate units known as pageants.
Each guild was responsible for one pageant, and this often reflected the trade of its members, for example the shipwrights performed the building of the ark.
Pageant-masters were elected with responsibility for commissioning the script, recruiting actors, providing costumes and preparing the wagons on which the play was performed.
Manpower was used to haul the wagons round the city, following an established route and stopping at certain points or stations, where audiences would be assembled to watch the performances.
At York, the first pageant proceeded to the first station at 4.30am, and it would be around midnight when the last play reached the twelfth and last station.
Many towns had play cycles and, of the four known to have survived, two belong to Yorkshire.
The York cycle is the oldest, dating from the late fourteenth century, and was performed annually until the late 1560's.
It consisted of forty-eight plays, involving over 300 speaking parts.
The mystery plays were originally known as the Corpus Christi Play; the use of the singular ‘play’ indicated they were intended to be seen as a whole, while Corpus Christi refers to the holy  day on which they were performed.
This is a movable feast, the Thursday after Trinity Sunday (itself the Sunday following Whitsunday), and falls at the end of May or in June.
While the plays served to glorify God and instruct the largely-illiterate population in the basics of the faith, the cycle was also intended to reflect the wealth and prestige of the guilds.
The York cycle was first revived during the Festival of Britain in 1951 and has since been performed every four years as part of York Festival.
Canon J S Purvis condensed the plays into a three hour drama and his text was adapted by Andrew Wickes for the 1988 production.
The performance takes place in the open air setting of the ruins of St Mary's Abbey.
The cast of 300 includes only one professional, who plays Christ.
In 1988 this part was taken by Victor Banerjee, a Hindu, who thought the performance of these plays today was an unconscious search for roots and stability.
In contrast to this static, theatrical production, during the last weekend of the 1988 York Festival the last four mystery plays were re-enacted as they would have been in the fifteenth century.
Four separate groups of players, from Copenhagen, Durham, York and Lancaster, trundled their double decker pageant wagons in procession through the streets, stopping at four appointed places to perform their plays.
The procession was led by the group from Copenhagen, the Unicorns, with The Death of the Virgin ; this was followed by Durham Medieval Players' The Assumption of the Virgin ; the Lords of Misrule from York with The Coronation of the Virgin ; and the final play in the York cycle,Doomsday , performed by Joculatores Lancastienses.
The Durham Players had found the base for their pageant wagon in a farmyard, to which it had to be returned.
They had already taken the play to Lancaster as well as performing it in Durham, and now had the assembly of the pageant down to a fine art, taking about two hours to mount the superstructure.
This looked extremely complicated, with two tier staging and various ‘devices’— for which the medieval craftsmen were famous — consisting of ropes and pulleys to operate bits of stage machinery.
Some of the plans for the designs of the  pageant wagons have survived, but not for the Assumption so much research had to be undertaken.
At the end of the weekend the whole lot would be dismantled and returned to Durham on a special trailer, ‘Heaven’ following behind on its own trailer.
The tremendous amount of timber that had been used to construct the set had been donated, as had carpets and materials for curtains.
Sponsorship is necessary in modern presentations to defray the huge costs of transport, building and painting the set and costumes.
(Contributions were taken from the medieval players, and fines collected for poor workmanship and the infringement of guild rules went towards financing the plays, and the more prosperous the guild the more elaborate their pageant.)
Six to eight men hauled the Durham wagon round the streets — they said it was easier to move than it looked, as once it was rolling it was not difficult until it had to be stopped!
A couple of the men who would pull the wagon walked the course, horse-racing style, to note tight corners and overhanging trees which might interfere with the smooth passage of ‘Heaven’ on the second deck of the wagon.
After seeing the York Mystery Plays at St Mary's Abbey, the Rev Kit Widdows of St Hilda's Church, Halifax, felt slightly disappointed.
He had enjoyed the performance but felt it had become so obviously a theatrical production that it was now a long way from what had taken place in the Middle Ages.
He was interested in the concept of the plays and thought he would like to bring them up to date, use original scripts and perform them on the move.
So this is what he set out to do and, in 1986, the Halifax Mystery Plays took to the road.
There are twenty-one Anglican churches in Halifax and about half-a-dozen denominations, so Kit Widdows invited them all to take part and about one third took up his invitation and produced a play.
The numbers were reduced to nine the following year, as it was generally felt that it would be better to hold them every other year and quite a few indicated they would be prepared to take part on a biennial basis.
Each church decided which Bible story it wished to portray, wrote a script, found a lorry and mounted the production on it.
The parish church is dedicated to St John the Baptist, whose feast  is the 24th June, and it was decided to hold the event on the nearest Saturday.
On the appointed day, the first pageant wagon drove to the first station at Sowerby Bridge.
After the performance, as the second lorry arrived, they moved on to King Cross and then the final station, Halifax Piece Hall.
Of the nine plays scheduled in 1987, two never turned up on the day, and one got lost between King Cross and the Piece Hall and the players abandoned hope and went home.
The start of the last play was delayed as ‘Jesus’ had elected to travel in his own car rather than on the lorry, and he became entangled in the mysteries of the town's traffic system.
It seemed another play was about to be abandoned but he finally arrived and leapt up to the platform to make a rather more dignified ‘Entry into Jerusalem’.
There was a great variety in the six plays performed, as there was in the medieval plays; some were pious and some funny, some incorporated music and dancing.
St Hilda's depicted the changing of the water into wine at the wedding feast, with costumes, scenery and audience participation — spectators were surprised to be handed paper cups holding the ‘miraculous’ wine.
Kit Widdows admitted to a little gentle crusading taking place here, being convinced that people would be more likely to be encouraged to come to church when they saw people enacting something that had a meaning for them and that they obviously enjoyed doing rather than being approached by someone knocking on their door.
He thought people still enjoyed the simple retelling of the key mysteries of the faith, stories they knew and loved, and seeing a hundred or so Christians joining together in such a project could only commend the Church.
There were thirty-two plays in the Wakefield cycle, or Towneley cycle as it was also known when it formed part of the library of Towneley Hall in Burnley.
This cycle was revived in 1980 and has appeared at varying intervals since then, with some of the plays being performed on pageant wagons outside the cathedral.
But for the 1988 centenary celebrations of the city of Wakefield, a new production was performed in the grounds of Pontefract Castle.
Graham Devlin, the professional director of an amateur cast, wanted to produce something very different from the production at St Mary's Abbey in  York.
To capture the essence of the event and recreate the feeling behind the original performances, he used singers, dancers, puppets and dramatic visual effects, and moved the action between a number of stages in and around the audience, drawing them in.
The two great strengths, he thought, were that the mystery plays were the beginning of drama in this country and that, although a modern audience would not have the universality of faith of a medieval one, the plays held the power of universal mythology, everyone knowing the stories being retold.
THE PEACE WELL AT DORE DECORATED IN THE TRADITIONAL DERBYSHIRE WAY (Page 41)
A VERY EARLY PHOTOGRAPH OF THE ILKLEY BLACK HATS AND WHITE HATS CRICKET TEAMS IN 1889 (Page 47)
THE 1926 CRICKET MATCH.
FRED PORITT BATTING AND GRENVILLE DINSDALE KEEPING WICKET (Page 47)
THE INSTALLATION OF THE MAYOR OF RIPON BY THE DEAN (Page 51)
THE LIEUTENANT SOUNDS HIS BUGLE TO ASSEMBLE THE ARCHERS WHO ARE TO SHOOT FOR THE ‘ANCIENT SILVER ARROW’(Page 65)
LONGBOWS AND CURLY BOWS IN ACTION AT THE SCORTON SHOOT (Page 65)
THE BELLERBY FEAST CLOWNS (Page 78)
The Wakefield cycle mixes seriousness and high comedy; the Wakefield Master, whose name was unknown, stamped his personality on the half-dozen plays he wrote, making them readily identifiable.
It is from these that Liverpool poet Adrian Henri, who reduced the original plays to two two hour shows divided roughly into the Old and New Testaments, took his main characters.
Though he used contemporary language, he based his script very closely on the original.
The three hour performance of the Worsborough Mystery Plays in the churchyard of St Mary's Church in Worsborough combines plays not only from York and Wakefield, but also borrows from the Chester cycle.
Performed every three years since 1977, the cast of 200 children and adults is drawn from the Barnsley area.
Visual effects feature largely in this community arts venture, and have included helium balloons and fireworks.
There is still plenty of interest in the performing of mystery plays, even though their original purpose in the Middle Ages of reinforcing the religious beliefs of audiences is now largely irrelevant.
Every production has its own approach, each trying to bring the mystery plays alive for a modern audience.
The comparatively recent event at Worsborough draws elements from other older traditions to create something new; the Rev Kit Widdows and his enthusiasts have gone all the way back to their origins, to the Bible and its stories; and in-between is the spectacle and grandeur of the York production.
BELLERBY FEAST
The feast was the highlight of the village year until the early twentieth century.
A church service followed by an afternoon and evening of sports, feasting and the entertaining of friends and relations would provide an enjoyable time for all ages.
With the advent of longer holidays taken at different times of the year and easier travel, people began to seek their entertainment further afield, but remnants of these past festivities remain around the county in various guises.
‘It would be a shame now to let it die.
You tend to lose the origins of it, but it's a shame to let it go altogether.
It keeps the village spirit and keeps the community together.’
This was the view expressed by Anne Smith about Bellerby Feast which, like so many other traditions, was tottering on the very brink of extinction in 1985 when it was pulled back and had new life breathed into it.
Anne had been born and brought up in Bellerby in North Yorkshire, a member of the Metcalfe family which has played a large part in keeping this tradition alive.
When she married she moved away, but comes back to the village with her husband and son for the annual feast — as does her sister and members of other families who have moved.
Feast day in Bellerby used to be the Wednesday after Whitsunday, but in 1933 it was moved to Whit Monday as people no longer had a holiday on this day.
It moved again when Whitsuntide itself was changed and joined other events in being transferred to the Spring Bank Holiday Monday.
A variety of clowns with painted faces, pointed hats and patches on their costumes emerged from the memorial hall about 10.15am on Spring Bank Holiday Monday in 1988.
Two of them carried a big straw basket between them, which they hoped to fill as they visited all the houses in the village.
The drummer gave a few bangs on his big drum, the accordionist struck up a lively tune and the procession moved off to the first house.
They hoped to collect money to be used  for the children's sports and fancy dress, cakes and biscuits and prizes for a tombola.
The villagers, who were expecting them, had their gifts ready and soon a small van was following slowly behind to transport their ever growing number.
The collectors eventually split ranks, one group going off to stop cars and coaches.
Not a few drivers were surprised to find themselves ‘held up’ by a group of clowns as they entered the village.
There were some who drove straight on, but most wound down their windows or allowed the clowns on their coaches, had a friendly word and came up with a contribution.
Around noon, people began to congregate at the Cross Tree on the green, where all the village children were the recipients of the sausage rolls, cakes and other goodies that had been collected.
Cheesecakes used to be made in quantity for the feast.
These were quite different from the modern creamy desserts served in restaurants today, and their other name of Yorkshire curd tart is a more apt description.
The ingredients were cheap and plentiful.
All the farmers had calving cows so beastings, milk from newly calved cows, was available to make the curds.
Dried fruit, eggs and sugar, and ‘a drop of rum to make it decent’ added Mary Clarke, were mixed with the curds to make the filling for the pastry case.
The landlord of the Cross Keys Inn appeared with bottles of pop and all had a jolly good ‘feast’.
‘This is what it is all about really’, said one of the clowns, handing me a bun just before he dashed across to the pub car park where they all lined up in order to be judged which of them was the best-dressed (he was, incidentally).
The prizewinner was presented with a cup, which had been given for the first time in 1987.
This was in memory of a local boy who had died from multiple sclerosis and it was hoped that the prize would encourage the young men to take part.
In the afternoon there were sports on the playing fields for the children, a children's fancy dress competition, welly-throwing greasy pole, side-stalls and a tombola.
Some of the money raised would provide a Christmas party and disco for the children; Anne remembered when it had provided a day out at Redcar.
Last year there had been a barbecue to round off the day, with the whole village joining in the fun, young and old enjoying themselves together.
‘It  was fantastic, a cracking day’, I was told.
One wet day, though, in 1985 Bellerby Feast had almost ceased to exist.
Only two or three clowns dressed up and nothing much took place.
The event had been going through a lean period and had degenerated into a glorified booze-up, but there were some who were interested in keeping it alive and they got together to decide if they were going to let it go or make an effort to put it on its feet again.
They decided to make the effort.
The format was changed slightly, to make it more of a gala day.
There used to be just the sports in the afternoon; Mary Clarke and Bill Scott remembered when the races were held on the roads through the village, in the days before there were so many motor cars.
Anne and her husband Alan, who was wearing a costume made by her grandmother which had also been worn by her father, told me how the village was changing.
As the older generations who had kept up the tradition passed away, there were not so many young people in the village to carry it on and they had left to find employment and housing in the towns.
The price of property in the village had risen as people from the towns bought up cottages as second homes and young couples could no longer afford them.
A large proportion of the clowns today were young men, like Alan, returning to the village for the day and wanting to preserve the tradition for their own children.
They had leaflets printed and pushed them through everybody's door to explain what was happening.
Two of the local clowns, Richard Clarke (Mary's son) and Ian Cross, who had lived in Bellerby all their lives, said this would have been unthinkable at one time — when they were children everybody knew everybody else, and what went on.
But it was now beginning to have the desired effect, as the newcomers started to participate.
Richard and Ian had both been involved with the revival of the Bellerby Sword Dance Play, in 1982 for the anniversary of the school and in 1983 for the Richard III celebrations in Middleham.
The mumming play, of which the pace-egg play is an Easter version, was performed originally at Christmas and I will be discussing survivals of this type of play later in the book.
Of particular interest here is the  fact that though the play itself died out, the characters from it continued to appear at the annual feast.
Anne remembered from her childhood (she was only in her very early thirties) when the clowns would enter the house via the door or even windows, with their brushes to sweep out, as she believed, the old luck and sweep in the new.
Mary Clarke and Bill Scott, members of an older generation, agreed that the clowns would sweep everybody's doorstep as they walked round the village.
Mary's father was the Bessy, the part her son had taken in the revival of the Bellerby play.
Besom Bessy was another character from this.
A besom is a particular kind of brush made from bundles of tough twigs such as heather stems tied together round a handle of, for instance, hazel.
Bessy's besom served the practical purpose of clearing a space for the performance and reducing the dust, but also carried suggestions of sweeping good or ill-luck.
The ‘she-male’ character of the Bessy is not merely a woman impersonated by a man, but denotes a combination of both male and female, a total unity encompassing the whole in primitive man's attempt to understand the universe.
Anne was right in saying that ‘you tend to lose the origin of it’; the origins are a long way from what remains, but it does not really matter.
Traditions do change and adapt through the ages, but what is left is just as important to the community which upholds it.
As I munched my bun, Richard said ‘you are involved now’.
It symbolised something more than just a pleasant snack.
For just a short time I had become a part of the village community on a day that ‘introduces everybody to everybody else’.
HEPWORTH FEAST
Hepworth Feast in south-west Yorkshire is held on the last Monday in June, but this does not comply with the general rule that the date of the village feast is dependent upon the date of its church's dedication.
The parish church, Holy Trinity, was not built until 1862 and the feast predates that by at least 200 years.
Local legend attributes its origins to commemoration of the village's deliverance from the Great Plague in 1665.
Tradition has it that the infliction was brought to the village in a parcel of clothing sent to a local family, the Beevers, one of whose members had died from the plague in London.
The unfortunate lady's dresses were sent to the family home in Foster Place, where a maid was tempted to try one on as she unpacked them — with fatal results.
Others who had been in contact with the maid also sickened and died, so the local residents determined to take what action they could to prevent it spreading.
A barricade was built at what is now Barracks Fold to seal off the infected area, and anyone crossing it was threatened with death.
Those on the infected side were threatened with death either way, it seems.
There is evidence to suppose that the village was indeed visited by the plague.
A number of human bones unearthed in 1821 by workmen digging the foundations of cottages in New Street suggests that the dead were buried where they died — as plague victims were — and not in the parochial churchyard.
This also explains why there is no record of the burials in the parish register.
The Rev J D M Jones in his History of Hepworth (1980) suggests the feast may be the remains of a pagan midsummer festival.
Perhaps both theories are true.
Rather than destroy heathen temples, Pope Gregory the Great in a letter to St Augustine of Canterbury in AD 601 advised that they should be converted into churches so the people could still go to the usual site of their worship, to worship the one God instead of many.
These festivals could be celebrated with feasting.
Hepworth villagers may have continued to congregate about  midsummer at some traditional place of worship.
(The name Hepworth is Anglo-Saxon so the settlement is an ancient one.)
Thanksgiving for deliverance from the plague could then have become attached to a festival already in existence.
No-one really knows how it began, but it nearly died in the 1940's.
Mr John Smith told how the attendance at meetings had dwindled to only one or two, and he had to threaten them with ‘Are you going to have a feast or not?’
The general consensus of opinion was in favour of keeping it.
A feast committee was formed, with himself being elected secretary, a position he still holds.
His wife works hard on the catering side of the feast.
Tradition, as they say, really does die hard, with yet another example of an event almost dying out before being revived and continuing with renewed vigour.
The day begins with a procession, mainly of schoolchildren who have a day's holiday, which leaves the junior and infant school about 2pm.
Led by Hepworth Band they march through the village to Scholes, with stops en route for the singing of hymns.
I caught up with them about 3.30pm in Jackson Bridge where they were finishing a hymn, and possibly a silent prayer, before they marched back up the steep winding hill to Hepworth where a free tea was waiting for them in the school.
Mr Smith said they used to have two bands, the present one and the Hepworth Iron Company Band, and it was marvellous when they joined forces for the evening sing.
They each led a procession, one from the church and one from the school, but with the demise of the iron company and its band these two joined together in one procession.
Walking through the village I met Councillor Raymond Kilner cleaning out the well.
The well is believed to date from the sixteenth century and still produces the pure water which the inhabitants had drunk in the days of the plague.
It stood them in good stead again in 1976 when drought caused many villages to be supplied with stand pipes.
The sound of an approaching band and people gathering outside the Butcher's Arms heralds the highlight of the feast, the united sing.
This starts about 6.30pm with a welcome from the vicar.
In his short  address the Rev J D M Jones referred to the feast as an expression of the sense of community in the village.
Mr Smith, the feast secretary, echoed these sentiments, as he told me how people who had left the village returned annually for the feast; there were people here today from as far away as Bournemouth.
The huge crowd of villagers and visitors sang a selection of hymns with great gusto for about half an hour before the band marched off down the road.
People began moving in the direction of the recreation ground where the final part of the day's proceedings were to take place.
Councillor Kilner was already busy on the field where the children's sports were to take place.
The inter-schools relay race between Hepworth and surrounding villages is enthusiastically supported, as the winners receive the Hepworth Industrial Society Ltd Centenary Trophy.
This co-operative society closed its doors in 1968, forced out of business by the large supermarkets.
The feast has certainly fared better, being on a sound financial footing.
‘It is something I am proud to have been associated with’, said its secretary.
KILBURN FEAST: MOCK ‘LORD MAYOR’ AND ‘LADY MAYORESS’
‘You tend to lose the origins of it’, was what Anne Smith said about Bellerby Feast, but the observation could apply equally to a number of events whose origins are lost in the ‘mists of time’.
Kilburn Feast is no exception; what remains today is a three or four day event, culminating in a procession through the village by a mock ‘Lord Mayor’ and ‘Lady Mayoress’.
(The election of mock ‘mayors’ was once very popular, designed to ridicule genuine mayor-making in neighbouring towns.)
The vicar, the Rev J H B Douglas, believes the feast originated as a pagan midsummer festival which was later christianised — a suggestion, if you remember, made by the Vicar of Hepworth with regard to their feast.
Again, like Hepworth, this could be another example of a later event being added to one already in existence.
Some elements of the event may be thought to suggest a very ancient origin.
Feast Sunday in Kilburn is the Sunday after the 6th July; the 5th July was Midsummer's Day before the change to the Gregorian Calendar in 1752.
The ‘Lady Mayoress’ is certainly no lady, but a young man dressed as a woman, complete with ample bosom; a soul-mate of Besom Bessy of Bellerby perhaps, another ‘she-male’figure.
This ‘lady’ is chosen by the ‘Lord Mayor’and ‘her’identity is kept a closely guarded secret until ‘she’appears, and it can be difficult to recognise ‘her’then as ‘she’wears both wig and heavy make-up.
Recognition results in loss of the luck brought by this ancient tradition, which also applies to other events, such as the pace-egg plays.
There was also the song Old Grimy , which is unfortunately no longer sung.
No-one knows who he was.
He may have been a character in Kilburn's past, but a folklorist, N A Hudleston, suggested he was Grim, otherwise the Norse god Odin.
As with the origins of many other events no definite conclusions can be drawn.
Kilburn had a charter dating from the reign of Charles II which was  thought to be in the possession of a family who had the local pub, but they — and it — have disappeared, much to the chagrin of the locals who have tried to trace it.
The charter was for the buying and selling of horses, and during the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries the feast was largely attended by gypsies engaged in horse dealing.
This gradually died out and the feast reverted to purely a village event.
The feast spread over four days for a number of years, but in 1987 it began with an open-air service on Feast Sunday at which the Bishop of Whitby gave the address.
Free strawberry teas at the vicarage followed.
The Monday is the traditional day for the quoits match between local teams.
Tuesday sees the children's sports, and the White Horse fun run.
(Kilburn's White Horse will be familiar to many people; carved out in 1857 on Roulston Scar overlooking the village, it is a well-known landmark.)
The feast ends with the ‘Lord Mayor's’ procession.
It is in the early evening when the ‘mayoral’ procession begins.
The ‘Lord Mayor’ and his ‘Lady’appear at the door of the Forrester's Arms and climb into the trap which is waiting at the door.
The vicar calls for silence for the ‘Lord Mayor’, who makes a short speech declaring he has been elected for a year and a day.
In 1987 the role of Lord Mayor was taken by Richard Horner, a local butcher, who had done it for a few years.
He seemed likely to be doing it for quite some time to come as, rather than actually having an election, it is more a case of finding someone willing to take on the job.
He usually chose a different person to be ‘Lady Mayoress’ each year.
A young man placed himself between the shafts of the trap and prepared to pull his passengers round the village, but not before the publican had been fined a barrel of beer for speaking at the same time as the ‘Lord Mayor’.
The barrel, which had already been brought from the cellar in readiness, was set up outside the pub and people helped themselves.
The ‘civic’ procession went on its way, the ‘Lord Mayor’stopping to fine the villagers en route.
The fines, donations of money, packets of crisps, biscuits and home-made cakes, were imposed for ludicrous offences: not having clipped the hedge, or having clipped the hedge; leaving a gate open; having, or not having, curtains across the  windows.
Meanwhile the ‘Lady Mayoress’ kept gathering up her skirts and hitching up her bosom as ‘she’jumped from the trap in order to dash up to the houses and implant a big kiss on the cheeks of the inhabitants.
Passing motorists were stopped and kissed or paid the penalty of a fine if they refused.
‘Her’ lipstick was constantly having to be renewed as more and more people found themselves with the impression of a pair of very red lips on their faces.
(Another small trap containing a small band of musicians didn't catch them up until they were on their way back!)
The money collected went to the feast fund, but the cakes and biscuits were passed around among the villagers gathered outside the pub.
Adding to the noise and jollity were a shooting gallery and coconut shy.
Together with a couple of swing boats, this was all that remained of the travelling showman's fair that used to appear at the feast.
Johnny Kirk, whose family had been connected with the ‘mayor-making’ over the years, said they did not want to make a big production of it or turn it into a tourist attraction; they wanted to keep it as it was, ‘a local event for local people’.
BLESSING THE BOATS AND BEATING THE BOUNDS
Whitby, Richmond, Spaunton
Rogation Sunday is the fifth after Easter, and the following three days are known as Rogationtide.
Rogation derives from the Latin rogare , to ask or beseech, and it was the custom at this time of year to seek God's blessing on the new spring crops, or in coastal areas upon the fisheries.
The blessing of the boats, which takes place at Whitby, was started in 1948 and is a much later version of the crop blessing tradition.
The event was originally held in September, was moved to July and now takes place either in June or July with the exact date varying from year to year.
George Storr told me that his father, John Robert Storr, organised it originally and he himself was now involved in the organisation.
His father had thought it would be a good idea to ask for the boats to be blessed at a time when Whitby Harbour was crowded with the big Scottish fleet which was following the herring as they moved south.
The first service was held in a year when the total number of boats fishing from Whitby that September had risen to 130.
There were Polish and Dutch boats as well as the Scottish, but they mostly packed their catch to take home.
It was possible at this time to cross the harbour by stepping from one boat to another, so closely were they moored.
Each evening the quayside would be crowded with holidaymakers who made a point of going to watch the long procession of over 100 boats, their lights twinkling as dusk began to fall, pass slowly and majestically down the harbour and out to sea.
The lights would become specks as the visitors walked back to hotels and boarding houses and the fishermen started their night's work.
In the morning the visitors would be on the quay to see them return, slip neatly into a mooring and begin the unloading and selling of the night's catch.
Some of the visitors, however, would do more than stand on the  harbourside to watch, they would put to sea with a crew for a night's fishing.
There was so much fish around at this time as the stocks had been left in peace during the Second World War, but this situation did not last.
By the mid-1950's the catch was diminishing, then the big Russian and Dutch factory ships moved in and began virtually vacuuming up the fish, taking the young as well as the adults.
Bans had to be introduced to give the fish stocks time to recover, and they are better now in the 1980's than they have been since the mid-1960's.
There is still a ban during the breeding season off the Yorkshire coast, at a time when the quantities would be economic for the locals to fish.
In 1980 the parochial church council decided to drop the blessing service because of lack of finance and support by the boat owners.
Both the Whitby Keelboat Society and the Whitby Coblemen's Association came forward with their support, and suggested the service would be better attended if it was held in July when more of the boats would be in port.
Fortunately it was saved, the fishermen giving a guarantee against financial loss, and the ceremony took place on the 27th July.
The simple service has not altered basically over the years.
There are hymns (led by the united choirs of the Anglican and Free Churches in recent years) and the lesson, address and blessing by the bishop, relayed across the harbour from the east to the crowds lining the quay on the west cliff.
After the service I saw a small fishing boat had just returned and was beginning to unload.
‘Where have you been today?’
I asked.
‘Out there’, he replied laconically, pointing to the vast North Sea.
I hoped the service we had just attended would ensure his continued safe landfalls from ‘out there’.
Beating the bounds, when the parishioners walked round the parish boundaries to ensure that everyone knew where they were in case of dispute, was associated with the Rogationtide crop blessing.
However, this custom has virtually died out, except where local ramblers use the parish boundaries as the route for a pleasant walk, often about Easter.
One vicar said there was no longer provision in the Church of England liturgy for such a service; the blessing was regarded as the  remains of a pre-Christian ritual, and with modern maps it was no longer necessary for the people to be shown the physical boundaries.
He dissociated the Church totally with any boundary walking that may still take place.
In some instances boundary beating, or boundary riding, is a civic custom originating from a charter.
This is the case at Richmond, where it is incorporated in the royal charters of Elizabeth I in 1576 and Charles II in 1668, but it is believed to be much older.
To prevent squabbles over the boundaries, which had been especially frequent between the borough and the neighbouring Aske estate, the purpose of the boundary riding was to define the exact line of demarcation.
(This is one event I have not seen personally, as it only takes place every seven years, the next being due in 1990.) the last perambulation took place in August 1983, with about 500 people taking part in the fourteen mile walk.
For the first time, certificates were awarded to all those whose completed the walk.
The mayor, banner-bearer, mace-bearer, halberdiers and councillors, wearing civic robes, covered the distance in eight hours with breaks for refreshments at Olliver Ducket and Deepdale Tree.
In a field near the latter, there were traditional games and sports for the children.
At the boundary riding on the 20th June 1884, young men aged above eighteen years raced for two sovereigns given by the mayor from the ancient beacon to Deepdale Tree.
Other races took place at various points.
After walking from 9am to 4pm all were invited to a dance at the Assembly Rooms, and the ‘enlivening sport was kept up to a late hour’, according to a newspaper report.
Green Bridge is the first of eighteen stopping points where the bellman and crier rings his bell before reading the ancient proclamation, couched in archaic language.
The wader lived up to his name by conveying the mayor on his back as he waded into the Swale at the point where the boundary runs down the middle of the river.
The pinder, whose job it was to round up stray animals and keep them in the pinfold, to be released on payment of a fine, was also known as the axeman.
He carried an axe in order to be able to smash down illegal obstacles, but there is no mention of him having to use it in 1983.
At some of the proclamation points the mayor scattered pennies.
The idea was to impress into the memory of the young people the exact location of the boundary.
(In 1844 oranges and gingerbread as well as money were distributed.)
The Royal Mint usually supplied coins whose dates correspond with those of the year of the boundary riding but in 1983 there was a lack of co-operation and, but for the intervention of the local MP Leon Brittain, no new coins would have been forthcoming.
As it was the £20 of coins, 2,000 in number, were dated 1982.
In some places the young people had the boundaries impressed upon their person as well as their memories, by being physically bumped against the ground or bent over stones and beaten.
Mr Leslie P Wenham completed the 1983 walk, and in the Richmond Review he wrote that he felt ‘privileged to be an inhabitant of a town such as Richmond’, and fortunate ‘to take part in a 400 year old tradition’.
On the 14th and 15th July 1986, a rather longer boundary walk took place in Spaunton when the new lord of the manor, Mr G Winn-Darley, walked the twenty-seven mile boundary of his estate.
Virtually unchanged since Norman times, the beating of the bounds takes place each time a new member of the family inherits the estate.
As the new lord was only nineteen years old when he inherited the title, it is unlikely the event will again take place for many years.
OXENHOPE STRAW RACE
The Oxenhope Straw Race has a long way to go before it reaches its centenary, but the aims of the people who organise it and take part are the same as those who in the nineteenth century began the hospital sings at Holmfirth and Mapplewell.
We may no longer need to raise money to build hospitals, but money is certainly needed to support and build hospices for the terminally ill and for those areas of health care that the hard-pressed resources of the National Health Service do not reach.
The Straw Race is a lot of hard work and a lot of fun, but Martin Jay, chairman of the race, thinks the best part is ‘giving the money away at the end, when all the hard work finally feels worthwhile’.
The race started life, in a similar way to the World Coal Carrying Championship, as a bet between the locals in the pub, but this race has not yet acquired world championship status.
The idea was to run round the local pubs, popping in for a pint on the way, carrying a bale of straw.
Ten teams took part in the first race in 1975, and they all enjoyed themselves so they thought they would do it again the following year.
The number of teams more than doubled as word spread round the pubs, and £120 was raised through sponsorship for charity.
The number of teams doubled again — as did the money raised — the third year it was held.
Andy Slater had organised and taken part in the race, but with its rapid growth it was getting out of hand and he decided to back out.
It then became a committee affair, with monthly meetings starting in February.
By June, meetings are held weekly as the race takes place in July, usually at the end of the Keighley holidays.
Then it is back to monthly meetings as the money begins to come in and ideas are put forward for the following year.
By November it has usually been decided where the money is to go and a presentation evening is arranged.
A few weeks' break, then it starts all over again.
CLOWNS COLLECTING GIFTS FORM THE BELLERBY VILLAGERS (Page 78)
BANNER-BEARERS LEAD THE FEAST PROCESSION UP THE LAST HILL TO HEPWORTH (Page 82)
HEPWORTH'S SIXTEENTH CENTURY WELL (Page 82)
KILBURN'S MOCK ‘LORD MAYOR’ AND ‘LADY MAYORESS’(Page 85)
AN EARLY PHOTOGRAPH OF BLESSING THE BOATS AT WHITBY (Page 88)
THE 1983 RICHMOND BOUNDARY WALK (Page 88)
THE MAYOR OF RICHMOND BEING CARRIED ACROSS THE RIVER SWALE (Page 88)
A CHINESE DRAGON COMPLETES THE OXENHOPE STRAW RACE.
THE BALE OF STRAW STILL SECURE ON ITS BACK, IS ON THE LEFT OF THE PICTURE (Page 92)
It is easy to see why it became beyond the control of one man.
In  1986, 375 teams consisting of two or more contestants (over 800 people in all) took part.
As well as the local towns and villages, they came from Bristol, Manchester, Birmingham, Liverpool, Scotland and Ireland.
There have been teams from abroad, probably having heard about it when they or their friends attended colleges and universities in Bradford or Leeds.
The first three teams leave the Waggon and Horses on the Keighley to Hebden Bridge road at 11.30am, followed every minute by another three.
One member of the team must drink a pint of beer at the start and consume another four on the way.
The first part of the race is the easiest, downhill to the Bay Horse at Oxenhope where a second pint is drunk and the bale of straw, weighing between forty and forty-five pounds, is picked up.
Then it is across the road to the social club for the third pint, before tackling the first of the long uphill stretches to the Lamb at Denholme and the fourth pint.
Checks are made at the pubs to see that the beer is actually drunk, as serious athletes have been known to let it spill down their vests to cool them off, for which they incur a two minute penalty.
Less serious runners drink as much as possible!
Less serious runners also compete wearing fancy dress.
Men totter on high heels, girls struggle with wigs and crinolines or move easily in grass skirts, teams of ‘doctors’ and ‘nurses’push ‘patients’in wheelchairs or on stretchers — the variety is endless.
There are animals and birds, a Chinese dragon with at least seven pairs of feet peeping from underneath it, sauce bottles and tanks firing water on the crowds of spectators.
The athletes, often fell-runners, who are out to win can cover the three miles in just over fifteen minutes.
Their strategy is to have one member of the team running continuously and carrying the bale, while the other drinks the beer.
As the hills get steeper and the runner is slowing down, the drinker catches up and they finish together.
Others prefer to split the drinking and carrying half and half.
If a team arrives at the finish without a bale or only some semblance of one, they are given a ten minute time penalty.
From the Lamb it is on and up again to the Shoulder of Mutton for the last pint, and then the long pull up to the finish at the Dog and Gun.
Some of the competitors may  take two hours to reach here.
Two local characters used to have a game of dominoes at each pub as well as a pint!
They also collected money in a bucket on their way.
Anne Jay, who checks in the contestants and hands them each a medal for completing the race, said the average age of those taking part is twenty to thirty-five years —‘then they come to their senses!’
She should know because she has competed three times, once dressed as a fairy who thumbed a lift from a passing coach full of male senior citizens, which really made their day.
‘It is great fun’ she said, ‘and the atmosphere at the finish is electric’.
It is certainly crowded.
Contestants who have finished relax with a drink or cheer on those struggling up the last stretch, some of them grasping frantically at disintegrating bales of straw.
If the straw is too short the bales come apart very easily, if it is longer the bales are more compact but heavier.
The bales that are still in one piece are piled on to a wagon as they are brought in.
The Dog and Gun is at a junction of narrow country roads which are not closed to traffic, so chaos often results.
Vintage buses are used to transport spectators — who can leave their cars in the special car parks in a nearby field — to various points along the route.
Over 7,000 people watched the race recently.
The population of Oxenhope doubles during the weekend of the race, with shops doing more trade than at Christmas.
The race is held on a Sunday, but people travel to the village on the Saturday or even the Friday.
The pubs had begun hiring marquees to contain their overflow and they put them to good use by putting on entertainment — a disco, a barn dance or jazz music — on the Friday and Saturday evenings.
The chairman, Martin Jay, told me they were always looking for new ideas to raise money but they want to keep it an event for the family, a rural event based on the race.
The results of the race used to be worked out in the Jay dining-room, with a lot of people doing a lot of mental arithmetic.
Now someone has written a computer programme for the race and the results are available by teatime.
All the information that could be needed is provided, including overall positions and the positions in the different categories, of which there are five.
The athletes have a class  to themselves and the overall winner is always from this section.
There are classes for men's, women's and mixed teams, and for fancy dress.
About seventy per cent of the entrants now wear fancy dress and this has stopped it, unlike the World Coal Carrying Championship, from becoming a serious sporting event.
I was told the fun was beginning to go out of it, but now it is back as the competition for best fancy dress is nearly as tough as the race itself.
As the race grows, so does the cost of organising it.
At first the local farmers provided any bales of straw they had left, but in recent years the bales have had to be bought and transported from Selby.
Martin said he and his helpers shifted the 400 or so bales about six times over the weekend.
Each bale has to be packed in plastic in case of rain and tied up so the runners can take hold of it.
All the costs of organisation are met from the entry fee of £5 per team, so all the money raised goes to charity.
(In 1986 this amounted to £10,500.)
The two main beneficiaries are the local Sue Ryder Home and the Keighley Adult Training Centre for the mentally handicapped, but £2,500 was donated in 1986 to help start a special child development unit at Airedale Hospital.
CLIPPING THE CHURCH
Gutseley, Tankersley
Clyppan was an Old English word meaning to clasp with the arms or to embrace, and this is what the parishioners of Guiseley and Tankersley do when they ‘clip’ their respective parish churches.
Both these events were started in the twentieth century, but the custom is a very ancient one.
It is another which may have been a christianised pagan ritual, evolved from dancing round a sacred site or stone on which a church was eventually built.
It was revived in Guiseley by Archdeacon James Francis Howson when he became rector in 1906.
Traditionally, clipping was a spring rite or took place on the patronal festival.
In Guiseley it was on the latter, the Feast of St Oswald in August, but both custom and festival are now held on the first Sunday in July due to the large number of families being away on holiday in August.
At one period in its history, it became part of the Sunday school Whit Sunday activities.
After the usual morning service but before the final blessing, the congregation leave the church and begin to walk round it until both ends of the procession are able to join up.
As they walk they sing a special ballad composed by the archdeacon's niece for the occasion.
The penultimate verse tells how St Oswald still watches over the parishioners:
‘Oswald's at rest, but his name lives for ever,
Soldier and martyr and hero and king;
Still over Guiseley his spirit is watching,
Sharing our worship and hearing us sing.’
Hands are joined as the people turn to face the church and, raising their hands, shout ‘God bless our church’ three times.
They then return to their places in church for the final blessing.
One lady remembered the processions to the Preaching Cross in Towngate, where there would be a short address before going back to the church.
At the time of the Domesday Survey, Guiseley was in the parish of Otley and a priest would come from there to preach at the cross.
The present cross was erected by Archbishop Howson, but fragments of the original may be seen inside the church.
The patronal festival of the parish church of St Peter of Tankersley should be the 29th June, but Tankersley Feast always took place during the second week of July.
Canon Archibald Douglas, who introduced clipping to St Peter's, suggested the discrepancy in the date was due to the fact that the parishioners of Tankersley chose to ignore the introduction of the Gregorian calendar, resulting in their celebrating the feast eleven days later than the rest of the country.
Canon Douglas began the custom at Tankersley in 1926, having become ‘well-acquainted’ with it in another parish, though he does not say which.
This may have been Painswick near Stroud, which has a long-standing tradition of clipping, as he was in Gloucestershire at one time.
At Tankersley, the custom has not been continuous since its introduction, nor has it always appeared on Feast Sunday or even on a Sunday at all.
It is known to have been held at some time ‘on a Thursday with only four people there’.
There were rather more than four people at the 1985 clipping ceremony, indeed the church was full.
The service was in the afternoon and included presentation of Fenn Bibles to children who had proved themselves well-versed in Biblical knowledge.
William Mason Fenn was rector from 1864 until 1866, and it was he who arranged for the fair at nearby Hoyland Common to be brought up to Rectory Field where the parishioners could enjoy the swings and donkey rides free.
The fair came during Tankersley Feast and travelled up to the church at the last weekend.
A few roundabouts still appear on Hoyland Common at the feast weekend.
After the presentation of the Bibles, the congregation formed a procession behind the choir and clergy and moved outside.
As at Guiseley, the people walked round the church until it was possible for all to join hands in a big circle.
There were a few moments silence before they turned their backs to the church and, still holding hands, sang:
‘We love the place O God
Wherein Thine honour dwells.
The joy of Thine abode
All earthly joy excels.’
The cornet players who accompany the singing did so from the roof of the church.
The final blessing was given at the MacNaughton Cross, erected on the grave of Henry Alex MacNaughton who succeeded William Fenn, and preceded Archibald Douglas, as rector.
The Rev Stanley Brinkman, the present incumbent, wrote in his short history of St Peter's that the event:
‘…is a sign that the parishioners have a great affection for their church, and an act of commitment to the service of Almighty God, to whose honour and glory St Peter's Church was built and maintained.’
SEAMER FAIR
A royal charter, read aloud by a villager on horseback, proclaims Seamer Fair to be open for business for the next seven days; but it is not, nor has it been for the last fifty years.
The fair gradually declined during the 1930's and ceased just before the Second World War; but it has continued to be proclaimed each St Swithin's Day, except when this falls on a Sunday and then the custom usually takes place on the following day.
At 11am the first proclamation is made under an ancient oak on the green; this is repeated at a further four traditional places in the village.
Reading the charter in 1985 was Parish Councillor Howard Stephenson.
He used to be the crier, but had recently taken over from Fred Harrison who had proclaimed the fair annually for the last thirty years.
The present halberdier, Alf Jackson, had accompanied him for those thirty years.
After the charter was read for the last time, the children, who had been joining the procession as it moved through the village, scrambled for new pennies thrown by the lord and lady of the manor.
The newly-minted coins can be difficult to obtain, but the lady of the manor has the advantage of working in a bank so can put in a special plea.
There is quite an art in scattering the pennies so that they do not hurt the children.
The lady of the manor was quite new to this, but the lord was more practised.
The secret, he said, was to throw them high into the trees so they dispersed as they fell.
In this way, the children became spread out instead of all clustering together with the coins descending on them like hailstones.
After dispensing coins, the lord next dispenses drinks at the local hostelry to all those involved in the event.
During the heyday of the fair it was the right of every villager to brew and sell his own beer, and he advertised the fact by hanging a branch or piece of greenery over his door.
Originally this was ivy, which was sacred to Bacchus, the Roman God of Wine.
It was from this custom that the saying ‘Good wine needs no bush’ originated.
A cottage in the village still has an  alehook in the wall where the branch was hung.
Andrew Green, the present lord of the manor, and his wife had driven up for the day from Essex.
He inherited the honorary title from his maternal grandfather, William Harold Pearson.
The manor has long since been broken up and sold off and Andrew now only holds small pieces of land, though these include some of the grass and trees where the proclamation is made.
No-one knows when exactly the custom of scrambling for pennies was first started, but Andrew hopes that both the scrambling and the proclamations will continue.
Though he no longer lives in the village, he is interested in its history and tradition and is happy to travel from Essex in order to carry out his duty.
Richard II granted the fair at Seamer to Henry de Percy, Earl of Northumberland, in 1383 but the charter reads ‘…in the sixth year of his reign in the year of our Lord one thousand, three hundred and thirty-seven’.
As Richard's reign did not begin until 1377, this is obviously wrong and the discrepancy is thought to have arisen when the charter was either copied incorrectly or misplaced and written from memory.
The fair is to be kept ‘…upon the fourth day of July, being St Martin's Day, and so to continue for the space of seven days…’, but the date changed to the 15th July when the Gregorian Calendar was adopted.
Feria , a holiday or feast, is the Latin from which fair derives.
The feast day of the saint to whom the church was dedicated, St Martin in this case, was a time when the church would be crowded with worshippers.
Weekly markets were often held in the churchyard where buyers and sellers could meet after church; it was natural, therefore, that the fair should be established at a time and place where many people were gathered.
The funfair we see today was only a small part of the original fairs where the main business was trading.
In the days before shops the local people would stock up with goods not available at the weekly market, while those wishing to sell were able to dispose of surplus goods and livestock since the guild monopoly of local trade was suspended for the duration of the fair, so all buying and selling became concentrated at the fairs.
CONFRONTATION IN THE MIDGLEY PACE-EGG PLAY (Page 14)
THE SPRING AT CRAGG VALE DECORATED WITH FLOWERS IN PREPARATION FOR SPAW SUNDAY (Page 41)
THE MIDGLEY PACE-EGG PLAY: ‘DEATH’, AND ‘REVIVAL’ BY THE DOCTOR (Page 14)
THE 38 REGIMENT ROYAL ENGINEERS HEAD THE PROCESSION FROM RIPON CATHEDRAL TO THE TOWN HALL AFTER THE MAYOR'S INSTALLATION CEREMONY (Page 51)
THE 1933 MAPPLEWELL AND STAINCROSS SING.
MR HERBERT SMITH, THE MAYOR OF BARNSLEY AND PRESIDENT OF THE NUM, ADDRESSES THE CONGREGATION, WITH THE CONDUCTOR BEN IBBERSON SEATED BESIDE HIM (Page 55)
THE CLERGY AND CONGREGATIONS OF ST CHAD'S AND THE CHURCH OF THE SACRED HEART LEAVE ST CHAD'S AT THE BEGINNING OF THE SADLEWORTH WHIT WALK (Page 59)
THE GRENOSIDE LONGSWORD DANCERS AT HANDSWORTH IN THEIR MILITARY COSTUMES (Page 165)
A PAGEANT WAGON USED FOR THE STAGING OF THE YORK MYSTERY PLAYS (Page 73)
A DOUBLE-DECKER PAGEANT WAGON BEING BUILT IN THE GROUNDS OF KING'S MANOR, YORK (Page 73)
THE WAKEFIELD MYSTERY PLAYS (Page 73)
‘WATER INTO WINE’ IN THE ST HILDA'S MYSTERY PLAYS AT HALIFAX (Page 73)
BARTLE PREPARES TO MEET HIS FATE (Page 119)
The king would often reward a family for service to him by the grant of a fair.
By levying tolls and taxes on the traders, the owner of the fair could make a handsome profit.
The lord of the manor of Seamer was entitled to receive ‘…
Pollage, Package, Stallage, and Standage’, but as the king's representative he had also to enforce the law and maintain the peace at the fair.
Until the late eighteenth century, fairs were an important system of trade, but with new methods of production and distribution their importance began to decline.
What we see today are mere shadows of their former selves and I shall be discussing later a number of these — Hull Fair which is now purely a funfair, the revived Masham Sheep Fair, the dying horse fairs at Lee Gap and Boroughbridge, and Yarm which is still proclaimed and has its high street occupied at one end by the showmen and the other by the gipsies.
Proclamation of the fair was necessary to make it known and enforce its holding on the specified date.
There were heavy penalties for anyone who continued to buy and sell outside the prescribed times.
There had been no buying or selling at Seamer for very many years, but in 1987 hundreds of gypsies arrived with the intention of reviving the horse trading which used to take place.
Parish councillors were forced into making a quick decision when the gypsies began to occupy the football field.
A meeting was arranged with the gypsies, who were allowed to stay until the 24th July, and it was agreed they would give substantial donations to the parish for damage caused to the trees and grass on the field.
The gypsies claimed the right to the fair under the charter and said they had obtained the permission of the lord of the manor.
Remembering, perhaps, clashes that had taken place in the past between the travellers and the locals, at the next meeting of the parish council it was suggested that advice be taken regarding the legal value of the charter and the legal position concerning trespass on council land.
The question of where they were to camp had been a matter of debate during the 1930's, so it seems it is not only the horse trading which is being revived.
In Yorkshire Gypsy Fairs by E Alan Jones, one elderly resident recalled ‘deep trouble’ between the villagers and the gypsies when  they were all more or less drunk.
He remembered his uncle rushing in to borrow his grandfather's gun, but the police fortunately intervened before a riot ensued.
Will an amicable agreement be reached, or will the villagers of Seamer decide to apply to the Home Secretary for their charter to be revoked?
The future of Seamer Fair depends on how these questions are eventually answered; it could become a thriving gypsy fair again or, if the charter is revoked, disappear totally.
KIRKBY HILL RACES
The title Kirkby Hill Races is something of a misnomer, as it refers not to a race but to an election.
There are six contestants, and two of them will be chosen to be wardens of the John Dakyn Trust and administer the trust's affairs for the next two years.
John Dakyn was rector of the parish of Kirkby Ravensworth, which comprises of a number of small villages, including Kirkby Hill, where the parish church is situated and where the election takes place.
In order to expiate his sins and make sure of his place in Heaven, in 1556 he founded the Hospital of St John the Baptist, an almshouse for the ‘support and relief of poor and indigent people’.
The first tenants were his sixty year old servant William Barthram, who was ailing and lame, and William Ramshaw, who was old and blind.
As the number of tenants of each sex was to be the same, Agnes Bolton and Margaret Tinkler were also chosen.
The present tenants of what is now known as John Dakyn House, renovated and restored and comprising six modern flats, have like the original tenants to have been born or lived in the parish for ten years, be of retirement age or invalids.
While no longer under oath to abide by the rules and pray every day for their benefactor, the present tenants no doubt are thankful for their rent and rate-free accommodation, their free central heating and laundry and, though the gentlemen no longer receive a new suit every two years nor the ladies a new frock, they do receive a visit from the wardens and the clerk at Christmas bearing a small monetary gift.
‘For the education or instruction of Boys and Young Persons’, John Dakyn also established a free school with Richard Cook, a priest, as the first schoolmaster.
He had to swear to obey the rules while diligently instructing the children and any others who may come to him ‘in grammar and other human doctrine’, but must not read to them ‘any corrupt or reprobate books’.
Books that were thought appropriate included Aesop's Fables , Cato and Virgil and the Ten Commandments in Latin.
Each morning as soon as he went into  school he was obliged to say, ‘with a distinct voice’, ‘Deus misereatur’ and ‘Kyrie eleison’together with other prayers.
Prayers were said again in the evening before school broke up.
In addition, the schoolmaster was obliged to say Mass each Sunday and holy day, and at least twice a week, at the altar of St John the Baptist in the parish church.
The Mass offered was to include prayers for the ‘happy state and safety’ of their Majesties Philip and Mary, of George and John Dakyn and other benefactors of John Dakyn and the hospital during their lives, and for the repose of their souls after death.
One of the benefactors for whose soul prayers were offered was William Knight, formerly Bishop of Bath and Wells, and it was from his goods entrusted to John Dakyn for disposal that the almshouse received its foundation.
The school closed in 1957 and the last schoolmaster, John James Jones, is commemorated by an oak pew for visiting vicars in the parish church donated by past scholars of the school.
There has not been a total severance with education, however, as the trust still allocates money to young people of the parish for further and higher education.
Prayers for the safety of John Dakyn were probably necessary, as he was caught up in the religious controversies of the age.
He was commissioned to oversee the burning of the martyr, Snell, at Richmond, and as a zealous Catholic he took part in the Pilgrimage of Grace.
The present Vicar of Kirkby Ravensworth, the Rev Peter Hulett, suggested — and it is just his opinion — that the dedication of the almshouse to St John may have been because John Dakyn felt himself lucky to have escaped the fate of that saint.
It is certainly true that over 200 pilgrims were executed including, as I mention in connection with West Witton Feast, the Abbot of Jervaulx, Adam Sedburgh.
Perhaps Dakyn was fortunate to die naturally within two weeks of Queen Mary.
When the Protestant Queen Elizabeth ascended the throne, these religious decrees were annulled.
The election of the two wardens takes place every two years, on or near the Feast of the Beheading of St John the Baptist in August, in the old school room.
The unusual, possibly unique, method of election was laid down in the statutes by John Dakyn.
Six of the  ‘gravest and most honest’ of the parishioners are chosen by the vicar and his churchwardens in order to go ‘into the pot’for election.
Their names, kept secret until election night, are written upon slips of paper which are wrapped in wax paper before being sealed in hot wax.
The six wax balls are then placed in an earthenware pot containing water, given a stir by the vicar, before he draws out two of them, ‘as chance shall offer them’.
These two balls are then cut open to reveal the names inside.
They are read out and the two new wardens step forward to take, in turn, the Bible and swear the traditional oath.
The six whose names have been put forward for election have to be informed before election night, as they have to agree to take on this responsible job and they must be there on the night to take the oath before the close of the meeting.
In 1988, Mr Ken Hutchinson, one of the churchwardens, said that this year they had put forward some of the younger men of the parish in order to keep interest in the tradition alive, though there was no lack of interest at present and the schoolroom was certainly packed full.
The four names which have not been drawn out of the pot are left inside, covered with water and with the lid firmly in place, for the next two years.
If one of the wardens should die during his term of office, and this has happened twice during the last twenty years, another of the names will be drawn out.
The pot is kept in an eighteenth century copy of the original chest in which it and related documents were kept.
The chest has three different padlocks and can only be opened when all three keyholders, the vicar and the two hospital wardens, are present.
Before the new names can go in the pot, the ones that have remained in it for the two years have to come out so, after a brief introduction by the chairman of the trustees and the vicar, the three keyholders leave the room to go next door to the church where the chest is kept.
The brown earthenware pot is carefully taken out, the chest is relocked and they make their way back to the schoolroom.
The vicar takes out the four balls and the waxman, Mr Tommy Temple, who has had the job since 1940, carefully cuts away the wax and the names are read out.
Mr Temple then prepares the new names.
He has already cut the wax into six portions, plus a couple of spares, and  flattened it out ready to enclose the paper scrolls.
He heats each portion in a bowl of hot water kept topped up from a boiling kettle before making the wax balls, the names tightly sealed inside.
The wardens originally received twenty shillings for their work plus expenses; now they only receive a small allowance towards their expenses, which is paid after they have served their two year term.
The work, which is interesting but time-consuming, involves maintaining the almshouse, or the Dakyn Flats as it is now more popularly known, and other properties owned by the trust and from which rents are collected.
The trust also draws rent from lands it owns near Richmond.
The whole ceremony took under an hour but left quite an impression on me.
I felt that I had stepped back in time to share in the 400 year old ceremony in this charming village.
THE ST WILFRID'S FEAST PROCESSION AT RIPON
In AD 686, as St Wilfrid walked back to Ripon from exile in Rome, he fell ill and had to rest.
For four days he seemed barely alive, but on the fifth he sat up and opened his eyes, ‘seeing a vast procession with people singing and making all kinds of commotion’.
His strength grew gradually and he was able to complete his journey, reflecting on his vision which he regarded as a promise of restoration and peace.
St Wilfrid's Feast Procession, which commemorates the saint's return, provides ‘all kinds of commotion’.
‘St Wildrid’, riding a white horse, leads a procession which includes gaily-decorated floats, Ripon City Band, a Scottish pipe band and morris dancers.
In medieval times an effigy of the saint was met and escorted into the town by crowds of people, but this was frowned upon at the time of the Reformation and the effigy was replaced by a man dressed in white robes.
The procession, which takes place on the Saturday before the first Monday in August, leaves the town hall at 2pm and arrives at the cathedral some two hours later.
The stone church built by St Wilfrid in the seventh century enlarged the small monastery of which he was the second abbot.
(The original crypt, one of the most ancient surviving Christian structures, lies beneath the present church and is open to visitors.)
On arrival at the west door of the cathedral, ‘St Wilfrid’ is welcomed by the dean and chapter, the mayor and mayoress and the city council, and is conducted to his seat by the dean.
A short service of thanksgiving for the saint and his good works is followed by the presentation of prizes for the floats by ‘St Wilfrid’.
Ken Davill, who has a patisserie in Ripon, makes Wilfrid pies for about five weeks around the time of the feast.
There is a saying in Yorkshire that ‘An apple pie without cheese, is like a kiss without a squeeze’, and a slice of Wensleydale cheese is often offered in place of the usual cream.
The custom of eating cheese with apple pie may  have originated from these traditional pies, made from a very old recipe and which have slices of cheese actually cooked in them.
To make one, a pie dish lined with shortcrust pastry is filled with sliced cooking apples sprinkled with demerara sugar and topped with slices of cheese.
A shortcrust pastry lid is placed on top before the pie is baked in a hot oven until golden brown.
Probably honey was used originally to sweeten the apples instead of sugar.
The economics department at Ripon Grammar School have set up a small business producing items connected with the history of the city.
These include a flan dish featuring the apple pie recipe and a chopping board decorated with an illustration of the Ripon Hornblower and the recipe for Wilfra tarts.
The latter are small individual tarts which the housewives of Ripon baked and placed just inside their front doors during Feast Week so that visitors could help themselves.
These tarts again have a shortcrust pastry base, but the filling consists of butter, ground almonds, sugar and the grated rind of a lemon, together with breadcrumbs which have been soaked in hot milk, mixed together with beaten egg.
It is not known when the first procession was held, but it almost died out in the middle of this century.
It was saved in 1962 when a group of enthusiasts, led by Dean Hughes, formed a committee to organise the event.
‘I wonder what St Wilfrid would make of it all’, wrote the 1984 committee chairman in the feast programme.
That we shall never know, but the procession and service mark the start of two weeks of celebrations in his name.
EGTON BRIDGE OLD GOOSEBERRY SHOW
The Egton Bridge Old Gooseberry Society was established in 1800 and can still boast some 120 members.
The majority are from the surrounding small towns and villages, but some exhibitors come from as far afield as Lincolnshire.
Exhibitors must be members of the society and pay £1 for the privilege, which includes receiving a copy of the show register.
The register contains the list of entries along with their weights, so it is a useful guide to an exhibitor's own progress over the years and that of his or her rivals.
Of the nine shows still in existence, Egton Bridge is the only one left in Yorkshire — the others are all in Cheshire.
Cheshire, Lancashire and the Midlands are where the passion for gooseberries first began, with the first gooseberry clubs being formed in the Manchester area in the 1740's.
One hundred years later there were 722 varieties of gooseberries and 171 gooseberry shows at which to exhibit them.
The decline in the number of growers and shows coincided with the growth of power-driven looms.
This may not at first seem obvious, but there is a connection.
The early weavers had cottages with a loom inside and a garden outside, and in the gardens they liked to grow flowers and fruit, especially ‘guzgogs’, as they are called.
With the advent of mechanisation and the rise of the mills, the weavers had to leave their cottages — and gardens — to seek employment in the towns and accommodation in houses which opened directly onto the street.
Only a handful of shows survived the First World War, during which many of the old varieties of berries became extinct.
One reason why the Egton Bridge Show not only survived but is, in fact, growing is that being an isolated rural area, well away from any big industrial towns, there was not a mass exodus in the nineteenth century.
Another is that as gooseberry growing is one of those traditions which are passed down from generation to generation, and fathers were still able to pass their bushes on to their sons.
As Mr E Preston, chairman of the Egton Bridge Old Gooseberry Society said, ‘Once it is in your blood, it just keeps going’.
With the increase in the number of people having their own transport, those who have left the area are able to return for the show.
Of course the type of soil in the area plays an important part in good gooseberry growing, and the good heavy loam of Egton Bridge is ideal as it retains vital moisture.
The show is held in the Roman Catholic Junior School on the first Tuesday in August, a fixed date having been chosen so everyone always knows when they should aim to have their berries ready.
If it is a hot year this date could be a bit late, if it is a backward year it could be a bit early, but it is a good average date.
Berries are brought to the hall between 10am and 2pm on the day of the show.
Some exhibitors will bring a tray containing about forty berries which have to be classified by colour and weighed.
Initial selection in such cases is by the eye of an experienced judge who will pick out only those he knows have a fair weight.
Other exhibitors will present only their heaviest berries, about fourteen on a plate.
After weighing for the heaviest berry — duly recorded in the ledger by the recorder — any prizewinning berry is removed before they are weighed for the heaviest twelve awards and then again selected for the heaviest six.
The weighing, recording and allocation of prizes goes on until about 4pm, when the winning berries go on display until 7.30pm.
The Stape Silver Band entertain visitors during the early evening before the prize-giving takes place at 7pm.
The president of the society, ninety-five year old Mr T W Ventress, was unable to leave the Whitby nursing home where he now lives to visit the 1987 show which I attended.
Until 1984 he had been a regular exhibitor for forty years, and in 1952 he gained a show record for the heaviest white with a transparent weighing 30 drams 8 grains, a record that still stands.
‘It is a good year this year’, said Mr J Spenceley, ‘one of the best’.
Sure enough before very long a show record was broken.
I asked him if he thought he would win any prizes; he thought he would be lucky if he did.
In fact he won three, but lost the record he had held since 1979 for the heaviest twin berries.
Twin berries are two berries on the same stem, and his champion yellow firbobs had weighed 44 drams  8 grains.
Mr Bernard Harland became the new record holder in 1987, with a weight of 48 drams 25 grains for his twin firbobs.
Two other records were broken that day; for the heaviest six, and for a plate of four colours.
(Gooseberries are not only the familiar green, there are also yellow, red and white varieties.)
There are some thirty prizes altogether and two members of the committee have a shopping spree in Whitby to buy them.
There are also a number of trophies which are held for one year; the Willis Graham Cup is awarded for the champion berry in the show, judged solely by weight.
Appearance counts for nought, the only stipulation being that the berry is whole.
The 1987 champion berry, a woodpecker, weighed in at 28 drams 4 grains; not a record breaker this time.
A good gooseberry will weigh between one and a half and two ounces and is the size of a golf ball.
Traditionally gooseberry shows use jewellers' troy weights, but in 1937 the Egton Bridge Society invested in a new oil-damped balance and switched to avoirdupois weights.
There are 27.34 grains in one dram, 16 drams to one ounce and 16 ounces to one avoirdupois pound.
I had watched Mr Spenceley judging, so was surprised he was also a competitor; but as judging is purely on weight and the weighing is done under supervision, this cannot lead to any malpractice.
To grow good berries it is necessary to start off with good trees of the right variety.
Mr Preston had recently cleared out his old trees and planted new young ones.
These were now about two years old, so he hoped he might be amongst the prize winners in the next five years.
He had won in the maiden class, for those who have yet to win a prize, in 1975, but he had not been successful since moving into the growers' section.
The secret of success lies in the feeding of the berries; how much, what with and when?
When and how much to feed is important, as the berries will burst if they are overfed and become too ripe, but for a berry to weigh heavy it must be nearly ripe, full of liquid instead of seeds.
‘What with?’ can elicit some peculiar recipes.
Mr Preston favours sheep droppings matured in a barrel and diluted to the colour of weak tea!
What with that and the dried blood, his wife refuses to eat them, so berries for  eating are grown separately.
The Egton Bridge Old Gooseberry Show looks certain to continue as the number of exhibitors grows; and Mr Preston, at least, is planning for the future.
Maybe more shows will be revived, or started, as there is a trend away from mass-produced, chemically-fertilised food towards organically grown produce.
It is becoming fashionable again to grow fruit and vegetables in the back garden.
BURNSALL FEAST SPORTS AND FELL RACE
The parish church of Burnsall is dedicated to St Wilfrid, and the highlight of St Wilfrid's Feast in this Dales village is a fell race.
The feast, which takes place in August, was celebrated in pre-Elizabethan times though its precise origin is unknown.
Halliwell Sutcliffe wrote at the end of the nineteenth century that folk came from all the surrounding villages to enjoy the swingboats and coconut shys, and to join the dancing on the village green.
In the evening, dancing continued in a room over the stables of Fell House.
Five competitors took part in the old fell race, he wrote, but only three completed it.
He described it as the ‘old’ fell race but it was started a few hundred years after the feast originated.
Various dates ranging from 1850 to 1870 have been suggested for its inauguration, but the first newspaper report, in the Craven Herald , was in 1882.
It is certainly one of the oldest and most popular of the Yorkshire fell races.
How it started is also a matter for conjecture, but Thomas ‘Weston’ Young, a notorious local character, was the first man to run the course.
A group of villagers had spent the evening in the Red Lion, and after closing time Young did the run in the nude, some reports say as the result of a bet.
This was not quite as outrageous as it might seem at first.
Naked running was not unknown in the Dales and Pennines, where the locals would strip down to their shoes before leaping down the hills and fells.
A runner unable to clear e wall at a single bound was considered unlikely to have a chance of winning which seems reasonable when you think about it!
When the fell race became a regular part of Burnsall Feast Sports, the runners not only wore clothes but also their hobnailed working boots.
Being unsuitably clothed and improperly trained often resulted in their having to be carried off the fell and revived on the village green.
Present-day runners, whether amateur or professional, are more suitably attired in vest and shorts and well-trained.
The weather was not kind to the competitors in 1987, being very  wet and stormy.
The ‘Classic Fell Race’ was started at 5pm by Eric Halsall, well-known for his television appearances in One Man and his Dog , a programme about sheepdog trials.
This was an appropriate choice as part of the route follows the shepherd's track, a narrow zigzag path climbing the steep part of the fell.
The first part of the route is marked by flags and leads to a gate in the wall at 1,000 feet.
At this point the runners in the junior race, which takes place just before the main race, turn round.
The seniors continue to the nine foot high cairn, 1,345 feet above sea level and 316 feet below the actual summit.
They can be seen running along the skyline before rounding the cairn and beginning the precipitous descent.
The first runner to reach the top is not necessarily going to hold his lead on the descent.
In fact this happened in 1987.
The leader was overtaken in the reckless dash straight down the fell, and eventually finished in second place.
Traditionally, a fell race is run between fixed points at the top and bottom of a fell, with the runner choosing his own route.
In 1979, however, with the number of entries rapidly increasing (there were over 200 in 1987) it was felt it would be safer to have a circular fixed route.
Previously a runner could choose to make the 900 foot ascent on the same direct route as the descent.
At one stage of the race there were runners on every part of the route, the continuous line winding its way over the fell like a colourful, sinuous snake, disappearing from time to time in the swirling mists.
There were no records broken that day, the winner taking fourteen minutes twenty seconds to cover the course, over a minute slower than the previous year's winner.
This was not surprising as, after the race, the route of the descent was marked by one giant skid mark down the face of the fell.
Professional championships being held in Switzerland on the same weekend had narrowed the field, but perhaps caused a more local feeling to be retained.
The race includes a ladies' race, the first lady taking about five minutes longer to cover the distance.
There are two prizes for veterans, that is over forty years of age.
A ‘veteran’ fifty year old man had first run up and down Burnsall Fell in the junior race forty years ago.
Though the fell race is now the main event, there were other events taking place throughout the day, including a flower festival at St Wilfrid's Church.
There was a cycle road race and a ten mile road walking race, fly-casting and clay-pigeon shooting competitions.
There were the traditional children's sports and a number of sideshows; no coconut shys, but an egg-throwing game which, traditionally, must have belonged to Easter celebrations.
The fair was represented by a solitary roundabout.
The Lofthouse and Middlesmoor Prize Band played a selection of music; a note in the feast programme remarked on the fact that the band comes from the upper end of Nidderdale, from which dale hailed the Netherdale Singers, who were paid five shillings — according to the church accounts — for appearing at Burnsall Feast in 1740.
The crowd joined together in a hymn before a blessing was given by the rector.
The prizegiving, which followed immediately, closed Burnsall's Feast of St Wilfrid.
I wonder what the saint would have made of it?
HORSE FAIRS
Boroughbridge, Lee Gap
While the gypsies are trying to revive the horse trading at Seamer, Boroughbridge Horse Fair is in danger of dying out completely.
The selling of horses was conducted here on an organised basis by a firm of auctioneers from Harrogate, but the auctioneer had only one horse to sell in 1987.
The townspeople are hoping the fair will quietly fade away and die because of the usual clashes between the locals and the travellers.
As horse trading is the only remaining aspect of the fair, the next year or two may see either its demise or revival.
The fair was known as Barnaby Fair as it was held on the old Feast of St Barnabas on the 22nd June; more recently it has been held on the Tuesday nearest this date.
Lemon curd tarts known as Barnaby tarts were baked for the fair, and the charter of 1622 allowed householders to brew their own ale as at Seamer.
In the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries the fair — for cattle, sheep and hardware as well as horses — attracted people from all over the country.
According to J S Fletcher in A Book about Yorkshire , small vessels known as Barnaby boats brought people to the town by way of the River Ure from Hull, Selby and York.
Prospective buyers could see the horses put through their paces down a street that still bears the name Horsefair.
Horsefield in West Ardsley, near Wakefield, refers to Lee Gap Horse Fair which takes place on two days, the 24th August and the 17th September, known as the ‘former’ and ‘latter Lee’.
Henry 1 granted the charter for the fairs to the Augustinian canons at Nostell Priory in 1100.
The original site at Baghill Green is now a housing development, but a plaque by the front gate of one of the new houses commemorates the site and inauguration of the fairs, which are now held across the road.
At the Dissolution of the Monasteries, Nostell Priory was granted to Dr Leigh and the fair held by the canons at their church at Woodkirk, otherwise known as West Ardsley, became known as Lee Gap Fair.
Fairs and fights seem always to go hand in hand.
The Wakefield Court Rolls for 1315 describe three complaints brought against John de Heton, who seems to have run amok, assaulting a man and a woman and overturning a stall, causing the owner damages and injuries totalling a loss of forty shillings.
In 1656 the inhabitants of West Ardsley petitioned the justices of the West Riding, requesting the fair to be abolished as it was a nuisance and Wakefield Market now met their needs.
Obviously it was not abolished, and there were further reports of revelling and  drunkenness , not to mention bloodshed and loss of life.
Mr J A Rawson, who I met at the ‘latter Lee’ in 1985, remembered when the fair was on the Baghill site.
He had been coming regularly for almost sixty years, and was only fourteen when he bought his first pony there for £4.10s.
He recalled once buying a foal and taking it home on the bus!
He had spent his working life down the local pit and drove a pit pony when he first went underground.
In order not to miss the fair, he would work the night shift and so have the day tree.
In the past a Welsh dealer had brought ponies and kept them on the moors at Hartshead to fatten them up for a few weeks prior to the fair, and Mr Rawson had often helped to drive them from there to Lee Gap.
A Welsh dealer had been at the fair last year but had not returned this year, much to the disappointment of many of the visitors.
Forty or fifty years ago, Irish traders also came to the fair bringing crates of geese and pullets, and the locals would buy a goose from them to fatten up for Christmas.
There is no licence for the sale of alcohol at today's fairs, in an attempt to curb the drinking which was such a feature in the past.
Mr Rawson remembered the drinking and the fighting, but also the big chromium-plated gypsy caravans with their displays of Crown Derby china and their owners sitting on the steps, ‘as if they were showing off their homes and vying to outdo each other’.
These are no longer there either, but the edges of the field were lined with horse boxes, vans and trailers.
Horses for sale were tethered at the sides of them and tack, leather and ironwork were displayed on the tail-gates which were turned into makeshift stalls.
Some of the traps and carts were  decorated with delicately painted designs.
I saw little actually changing hands, apart from a pedigree pup and a painting.
Men huddled together in groups, deep in earnest conversations; it was here the real trading was done.
At various intervals a shout would go up, a path would be cleared down the middle of the field and a horse would come galloping through the crowd, its bareback rider putting it through its paces.
Buyers and sellers all appeared to know each other, and there were shouts of encouragement or criticism as horse and rider sped by.
Two minutes later and warning shouts would proclaim the presence of a huge shire horse being trotted, its owner running furiously alongside.
Things would quieten down for a little while and the huddles be reformed, but before long there was the crack of a whip and a pony and trap would dash down the field.
Anyone wanting further excitement could watch a man swallow and regurgitate a seven foot long chain!
In the afternoon he escaped from a series of bonds and chains, accompanied by a good line in patter.
He was known to most of the crowd, having appeared at the famous Appleby Horse Fair as well as Lee Fair for many years.
The business of the day was decidedly the buying and selling of horses; four small swing-boats and a couple of slot machines were the only concession to entertainment, apart from the escapologist of course.
The horse fair, which has been held annually since its inception, appeared to be in no immediate danger of ending its almost 900 year run.
WEST WITTON FEAST: BURNING BARTLE
Fairs and feasts have survived the centuries in an amazing variety of ways, some of which I have already written about, but at West Witton in Wensleydale there survives one of the strangest and most interesting events I have come across.
Burning Bartle is not an especially spectacular event, but one which the local people are determined to keep going.
The question of who Bartle was has given rise to a number of theories and, as with most traditions, fact and fiction, legend and folklore have become inextricably intertwined.
I went to see the event in August 1984.
As darkness fell there was hardly a soul about, but just before 9pm it seemed the whole village poured out into the street, and there appeared two men carrying shoulder-high the most grotesque straw figure of a man, its eyes glowing in the darkness from torch bulbs hidden in its head.
They marched down the road, stopping outside every public house — where they were handed drinks by the landlord — and outside cottages whose inhabitants were awaiting them on their doorsteps.
They roused the occupants of some houses by knocking on the door and holding Bartle up to the windows to be seen by those inside.
Whenever Bartle stopped, the third man in the group, the caller, chanted the following verse:
‘At Penhill Crags he tore his rags,
At Hunter's Thorn he blew his horn,
At Capplebank Stee he brak his knee,
At Grassgill Beck he brak his neck,
At Waddam's End he couldn't fend,
At Grassgill End he made his end.
Shout, lads, shout.’
All joined in a final ‘Hooray’.
The villagers who were faced with this fearsome figure while the verses were being repeated looked upon  it, not with revulsion as might be expected, but with affection — even awe.
When the procession, which had now picked up a large following, reached Grassgill End the effigy was placed on a small stone area at the roadside, its clothes were drenched with paraffin and it was set alight.
As it began to burn furiously, singing broke out; no traditional songs, just a selection of the popular ones of the day.
What had been the point of it all?
Originally, the feast took place on August 24th, St Bartholomew's Day, the saint to whom the parish church is dedicated.
It was moved to the Saturday nearest that date for convenience.
Feast events include a village show, and an open and junior fell race, but the events of the evening are the most important.
Edmund Bogg, writing at the beginning of this century when the feast lasted several days, learnt from the vicar that the origins of ‘burning owd Bartle’ were lost in the mists of time, but the figure represented St Bartholomew.
It seems strange the parishioners would wish to burn their patron saint, but another theory suggests the effigy was originally a plaster statue taken from the church to avoid destruction after the Reformation.
The villagers and their plaster statue were pursued across Penhill, the statue being damaged on the way and burnt at Grassgill End where it was finally captured.
The effigy may be that of the saint then, but another theory suggests that the figure is much older, originating in a pagan spirit associated with fertility and the harvest.
This would explain the display to householders; by bringing the figure to their door, the bearers were bringing the luck associated with it.
This part of the event is taken very seriously, and the atmosphere was far from frivolous, building up quite a feeling of tension as the crowd grew.
Mircea Eliade, in Patterns in Comparative Religion , remarks on the endless variety of agricultural rites and beliefs involving recognition of a force manifested in the harvest.
This force may be expressed in a person, ‘old man’, ‘old woman’ or other names being given to the mythical figure supposedly dwelling in the last sheaf of wheat.
There are numerous harvest customs throughout this country and abroad, and some involve burning the straw effigy of such a figure.
So Bartle may have been a corn spirit, christianised to become St Bartholomew whose day falls at the right time of year, or even a former village priest as has been suggested.
The locals say they believe he was a swine thief, but it all seemed a bit serious to represent merely the chase and capture of a robber who stole pigs belonging to the monks of Jervaulx Abbey.
The manor of Witton was leased to Jervaulx and one August night, so the story goes, the villagers lay in wait for the thief.
He was pursued, as described in the rhyme, until caught at Grassgill End where he was burned at the stake.
This story is predated by a legend about a giant who kept pigs on Penhill before the founding of the abbey at Jervaulx in 1156.
The wicked giant, a descendant of the Norse god Thor, discovered one day that one of his boars had been killed.
Swearing vengeance on the villagers, he called them together to discover who had fired the fatal arrow.
Being met with silence he bade every father, together with his youngest son, to return the following day when the children would be killed unless someone spoke up.
This torture would be carried out every week until someone admitted to killing the boar.
A hermit, the Seer of Carperby, stepped forward and warned the giant that if he carried out his threats he would never again enter his castle alive.
The giant ignored the warning and the villagers climbed the fell next day as commanded.
Enraged by finding his path barred by his swine dead in rows of nine, the giant confronted the crowd, but the hermit pointed behind him to where his castle was on fire.
When he saw this he was further enraged and started towards the seer with an axe.
But then he saw a servant he had that day badly mutilated, also pointing.
Looking up, he saw the astral form of Gunda, a shepherdess he had attempted to seduce and then killed, with Wolfhead, the faithful boarhound he had also killed in a fury.
He started to walk backwards as together they advanced until he fell over a precipice, the hound at his throat.
The whole of this fascinating legend can be read in The Hand of Glory by R Fairfax-Blakeborough, unfortunately now rather difficult to obtain.
All we can conclude from these stories is that swine were once kept on Penhill!
There is yet another story of hide and seek on these hills, but there  is historical evidence for this one which dates from the autumn of 1536.
The Pilgrims of Grace, who planned to march to London to compel Henry VIII to spare the monasteries, went to Jervaulx to ask the abbot to join them.
The abbot, Adam Sedbergh, not wanting to be associated with the insurrection and foreseeing its outcome, escaped from the abbey and hid amongst the crags on Witton Fell for several days.
The monks revealed his hiding place when the rebels threatened to burn the monastery.
When the abbot was found, he was forced to join them or face execution.
He rode with them to London but the end result was the same: the monastery was ransacked and destroyed, and Adam Sedbergh was executed at Tyburn in 1537.
Mrs Harker, an old resident of the village and a member of the feast committee, told me that the tradition of burning Bartle has been handed down orally from one generation to the next.
Her brother-in-law, Alan Harker senior, has been one of the makers and main carrier for many years.
Deprived nowadays of their railway and most of the buses, the village school closed and the loss of even the village postman, the villagers are determined the feast will survive.
Mrs Harker says it is hard trying to keep these traditions going.
(West Witton is another village where many of the houses are now second homes only for people outside the area.)
The locals, however, love their feast and take it seriously.
As Mrs Harker declared:
‘What a glorious tradition to keep going!
We will never let it die out whilst we have children to pass it on to.’
SEMERWATER SERVICE
On Sunday afternoons the Vicar of Askrigg used to pass Semerwater on his way to take evensong in his other parish of Stalling Busk, and he often thought how pleasant it would be to hold an open air service on the shores of the lake.
As vicar, the Rev W H Dale Chapman owned a piece of land which went down to the lake but, when he began to plan such a service, the idea came to him to follow the example of Christ and preach from a boat.
As the spot was popular with August Bank holidaymakers, he chose the Sunday nearest to the holiday for the first service.
He required some music to accompany the hymns, and Miss Catherine Metcalfe of Bainbridge obliged with her accordion.
He borrowed some benches from the old school room at Stalling Busk for the congregation to sit on, engaged the Rector of Spennithorne to give an address, and finally put his plans into action in August 1956.
The event was a success.
The parish church council at Askrigg chartered a bus to bring their congregation, which was swelled by an outing of the Nelson and Colne Motor Club from Lancashire.
The latter, who had helped clear a space and set up the seating, had so enjoyed it they said that if the vicar would make it an annual event he could count on their support, they would organise their outing to coincide with it.
Miss Metcalfe and her accordion had hardly been adequate to cope with a congregation of some 200 people, so the following year a portable harmonium, played by the Stalling Busk church organist Miss E Leyland, accompanied the singing.
The crowds were so large that, by the third year, Hawes Silver Band were engaged to play.
This event was unfortunately spoiled by torrential rain and the service was cut short.
Flash floods are not unknown on the lake, and the road as well as the shore disappear under water.
This fact may have helped fuel a legend that a whole village, except for one cottage, was drowned when cursed by a poor old man, an angel or a saint in disguise:
‘Semerwater rise, Semerwater sink,
And swallow all the town save this little house
Where they gave me meat and drink.’
The story tells how the beggar was rejected by all except an old couple who gave him food and shelter for the night, and the punishment he wrought upon the villagers.
The story may have a basis in fact; it is possible there was a prehistoric dwelling here that is now swallowed up in the mud at the bottom of the lake.
The Carlow Stone on the shore is supposed to have been hurled at the selfish inhabitants of the village by a giant.
The boulder is a relic of the Ice Age, stranded by a melting glacier, but the legend again suggests there was a settlement here in the past.
It was a very hot and sunny day in 1987 when I went to Semerwater for the open air service, and Yorkshire's largest natural lake was a hive of activity.
Canoeists and swimmers took their chance amongst speedboats towing water skiers and wind surfers bowling along, their multicoloured sails reflected in the deep blue of the water.
There is a charge for the use of the lake (which is private property) and car parking.
As the Vicar of Askrigg and Stalling Busk, the Rev Clive Malpass, was carried pick-a-back to the boat just offshore, these activities ceased and people came off or out of the water to join spectators on the shore.
The services of the Hawes Silver Band are still employed to accompany the hymns and they played a march while a collection was taken for St Matthew's Church and Swaledale Fell Rescue Team.
The Rev C Malpass gave a short address, which he always bases on the story of Christ addressing the multitude from the boat or a similar theme.
A few simple prayers, followed by a blessing, completed the short service.
The vicar was carried back to the shore to partake of a well-earned drink.
Later in the afternoon the clouds rolled in and the lake took on a bleak and sombre appearance.
Did I hear the faint chime of church bells coming from the drowned village?
It would not take a lot of imagination to believe some of these old tales in such conditions.
TWO SAUCE BOTTLES LEAVING THE LAMB AT DENHOLME, THE FOURTH PUB IN THE STRAW RACE (Page 92)
CLIPPING ST PETER'S CHURCH, TANKERSLEY.
THE MUSICIANS CAN BE SEEN ON THE ROOF (Page 96)
CLIPPING ST OSWALD'S CHURCH, GUISELEY (Page 96)
THE KIRKBY HILL RACE.
THE REMOVAL OF THE POT CONTAINING THE WAX BALLS BY THE VICAR AND THE TWO RETIRING WARDENS (Page 103)
WAXMAN, TOMMY TEMPLE, MAKING THE WAX BALLS WHICH HIDE THE NEW CANDIDATES’ NAMES (Page 103)
THE WEIGHING OF THE GOOSEBERRIES AT THE EGTON BRIDGE OLD GOOSEBERRY SHOW (Page 109)
AN ENTHUSIASTIC START TO THE BURNSALL FELL RACE (Page 113)
THE REV CLIVE MALPASS CONDUCTS THE SEMERWATER SERVICE (Page 123)
AUTUMN
DENBY DALE PIE
On the 3rd September 1988, along with 100,000 other people, I went to Denby Dale to see the ninth mammoth pie to be baked there.
The pie was made to celebrate the bicentenary of the first pie, which was baked in 1788 to celebrate the return to sanity of George Ill.
It did more for Denby Dale than for George III as he soon went into a decline, but the tradition then started is still going strong, with the pies getting bigger in size every time.
The details regarding the first pie in 1788 are few, but it was served and eaten by the villagers in Cliffe Stile Field.
Whether this was in fact the first is not really known, nor is it known how or why the tradition started, but Mr Hector Buckley (in whose barn the 1964 pie was made and which had to be partially demolished to get the pie out) has a theory about this.
A big pie was not something that could be made in a field and cooked on a bonfire, it would require skill and expertise in the use of large ovens and these were available as they were used by the local manufacturers of earthenware pipes:
‘I honestly think that pies followed pipemaking, so whatever date you put on a beehive kiln to bake pipes, I think the big pies would follow that.’
The second Denby Dale Pie was the ‘victory pie’ of 1815, celebrating the defeat of Napoleon at Waterloo.
Baked in a kiln at the old corn mill, the filling was made from mutton and fowl.
The pies outgrew the kilns and by 1846, when a pie was made to commemorate the repeal of the Corn Laws, it had to be baked in a bakery at Cuck Stool.
This contained a variety of animals — fowl and sixty-three unspecified small birds — but before it could be served the platform supporting it gave way and the pie slipped to the ground.
Present-day health officials would have been horrified as the 15,000 strong crowd  fell upon the pieces that had been flung to the winds and ate them.
There was a rumour that it was all a Tory plot to ruin the Liberals' celebration of the success of their MP's in bringing about the repeal.
The pie baked to celebrate Queen Victoria's golden jubilee in 1887 was another health hazard.
It was so bad that it had to be buried in quick lime in Toby Wood; special ‘funeral’ cards were printed for the occasion.
The stench of decomposing material was so great when the pie was cut that people were endangered as they fell on top of each other in their haste to get away.
The professional London chef who had supervised the cooking was found to have left the area in a hurry on the previous evening.
But all was not lost as the ladies of Denby Dale had a ‘resurrection pie’ ready within a week.
The sixth pie in 1896 was baked to celebrate the jubilee of the repeal of the Corn Laws, a pretty flimsy excuse but as Mr John Netherwood explained, ‘When people have felt like baking a pie, they have made one and found the excuse afterwards’.
The excuse for the 1928 ‘infirmary pie’ was to raise £1,000 to endow in perpetuity a bed at Huddersfield Royal Infirmary, but to many people it was really a somewhat belated celebration of the end of the 1914–18 war.
(Postwar austerity was blamed for the delay and the same reason caused the projected 1953 ‘coronation pie’ to be abandoned.)
John Netherwood remembered seeing the 1928 pie paraded through the streets, chased by a great pack of dogs!
This pie had nearly gone bad and four barrowloads of meat had to be quietly carted away, a well-kept secret recently revealed.
The 1964 pie celebrated four royal births, even though the pie was conceived before the babies.
It was known originally, however, as the ‘Darby and Joan pie’ as Mrs Kitson thought that the pensioners of Denby Dale should have their own community centre, but the village hall which was acquired from the proceeds of the 1964 pie — known appropriately as Pie Hall — benefits the whole community as it is in regular use by a variety of organisations.
The eighteen foot long pie dish now contains a raised flower bed in front of the hall.
The urge to bake another pie began to take hold in the village towards the end of 1985.
When I talked to members of the 1964 pie  committee in 1986 it was still not certain if and when this pie would appear, but appear it did as the l988 ‘bicentenary pie’.
They all said they would not be involved again, though they would support it and wished the new committee luck.
It was a lot of hard work and a lot of fun, but once in a lifetime was enough, as they themselves had been told by those who had made the 1928 pie.
Hector Buckley was told he would make many lifelong friends and some enemies, and found this to be true; but he was involved again in 1988.
As a director of Hildale Farms Dairies, his offer of sponsorship had been accepted and they organised the purchase of the 3,000 kilos of prime English beef.
Wearing his other hat of H Buckley and Sons, he was responsible for the 3,000 kilos of potatoes and 700 kilos of onions, some of which had been grown by the pupils of Scissett Middle School as part of their rural studies.
Alice Pell — who for two years said she ate, slept and breathed the 1964 pie and had been up half the night cooking it — was there happily serving up the 1988 one.
The two main problems of pie making on this scale are finance and public health.
In terms of hard cash the 1964 pie would have cost £250,000 but in fact there was never more than £1,000 in the bank, the sponsorship being in the form of services and goods rather than money.
It was decided to bring in Leeds-based Moss International to promote and find sponsors for the 1988 pie, ‘pie ‘88’ as it came to be known.
The Denby Dale Pie Trust was registered as a charity and ‘pie ‘88’ was on its way.
A technical committee was formed to organise the cooking, parading and serving of the pie, the latter by a total of I 70 people from forty serving points.
Each process had to undergo careful scrutiny by the Environmental Health Department, and the cooks had to pass medical tests.
Public health officials did all in their power to stop the 1964 pie going ahead; there was a typhoid epidemic in Aberdeen in the 1960's and it was found that the last serious epidemic before that had been in Denby Dale in the 1930's, and the infection can linger for many years.
The pie committee saw all their stipulations were met but attempts to stop it were made until almost the last minute.
One of the precautions was that everybody however remotely connected with the  pie had to have their excreta tested, and this fact led to the pinstriped officials from Westminster who turned up on the night before pie day being turned away.
A blunt-speaking Yorkshireman was guarding the door of the barn where the pie was cooking when these men from the ministry approached and demanded admission.
‘'As ta 'ad thy shit tested?’, he asked.
They said ‘What!’
‘If thy' asn't 'ad thy shit tested I've got a paper 'ere that sez tha can't come in.’
There was no answer to that, so they got back in their cars and drove away!
Two other big problems facing the organisers are crowd and traffic control.
The 1964 committee devised a system of entrances and exits to the serving points, and people went up one aisle and down the next to avoid confusion.
This worked very well, but in 1988 people were pushing in from the sides instead of joining the queues, and tempers were becoming frayed and the situation somewhat dangerous as people trampled over the numerous electricity cables and water pipes.
In 1964 the traffic similarly did not pose quite such a problem as in 1988, the car parking round the district proving quite adequate, especially as the expected crowds did not turn up on the day.
As John Netherwood, who was in charge of publicity and sponsorship in 1964, said: ‘To get sponsors you have to tell everybody that it is going to be the biggest event that ever was, otherwise they won't put their money in.’
What they did not foresee was that people got the impression they were going to be crushed or trampled underfoot and, though the 30,000 portions of pie were eaten, many people opted to stay away.
This was definitely not the case in 1988.
A free park and ride scheme had been organised, which was very good in theory, but so many people were parking and riding that the many coaches could barely pass each other on the narrow roads thronged with thousands of people.
The fears of those who had stayed away in 1964 were in danger of being realised in 1988.
The pie parade, which included about fifty floats which had started from the neighbouring village of Scissett, arrived late at the pie field, having been stuck on various sections of the route, including the entrance to the field itself.
Pie day had dawned bright and clear but tons of straw and cinders had to be hastily brought in as vehicles and  people sank in the mud caused by the torrential rain of the past few days.
The Bishop of Pontefract gave the pie a blessing before John Hinchcliffe, chairman of the 1964 pie committee, made the ceremonial first cut in the pastry.
The canopy, covering and crust were removed and the temperature of the filling checked.
For the pie to remain fit to eat, the critical temperature of sixty-three degrees Celsius had to be maintained.
The pastry crust that had topped the pie during its parade through the village was not eaten for hygienic reasons, so 50,000 squares of puff pastry had been baked separately and these were reheated — not too successfully — in a mobile oven in the huge open-sided marquee into which the pie, on its trailer, eventually came to rest.
Then at last a cheer went up as the first portions of the ‘bicentenary pie’ were served to the 50,000 people who presented their £1 tickets.
Two days of celebrations were planned for the visitors — some from as far away as Canada and Australia — including a funfair, helicopter rides, fireworks and dancing and numerous side stalls.
It is as well that there is an interval of twenty-five years or so between the baking of these pies — I imagine it will take the Denby Dalers this amount of time to recover.