

Jewson League
Hadleigh 4
Sudbury Wanderers 3
SUDBURY Wanderers' promotion hopes received a set back last night when they came off second best in a seven goal thriller at Hadleigh.
The first-half saw Hadleigh on top and they deservedly led 3–1 at the interval.
However, in second-half Wanderers raised their game and at the end of the day they just failed to get a point.
Own goal
An own goal by Harvey following a centre from Davis put Hadleigh in front.
A left footed shot by Keys increased the lead before Fenwick reduced the deficit by converting Pratt's cross.
Sixty seconds before the interval, Smith restored Hadleigh's lead in a goalmouth scramble after a succession of shots had been charged down to set up a thrilling second-half.
A foul by goalkeeper Laws on Irvine enabled Fenwick to reduce the deficit from the resultant penalty kick.
Then Irvine broke through from the halfway line to make the score 3–3.
Hadleigh's winner came eight minutes before the end when Keys set up the chance for Smith to score his second with a shot on the run.
In the Premier Division, Newmarket travelled to Cambridgeshire and defeated local rivals Histon 4–1.
STANSTED Airport suffered a major blow last night with confirmation that its trans-Atlantic service is to be axed next month.
American Airlines, which began the daily flights to Chicago less than a year ago, and an airport spokesman accused the Government of being partly to blame for the decision.
The Texas-based airline warned two weeks ago that it might pull out of Stansted due to mounting losses and delays in the granting of licences to open up routes from Stansted to other U.S. cities.
During a visit to Essex last week, Transport Secretary John MacGregor was lobbied on the issue by Stansted marketing manager Colin Hobbs and officials from other airlines operating from the airport.
Yesterday, however, American announced that the Stansted–Chicago service will end with the last flight on May 31 — putting the jobs of 50 ground staff at risk.
Losses
Mr Hobbs said the loss of the Chicago service was a ‘real blow’ for Stansted, although it accounted for less than two per cent of the airport's traffic.
The airline had opened the route on the basis that it would be the first of many, but the British Government had failed to grant any more licenses.
‘American would be back very rapidly if Stansted was given a much fairer opportunity to operate new routes,’ added Mr Hobbs.
American Airlines vice-president Hans Mirka said the route had lost ten million dollars so far and this could no longer be sustained.
‘The lack of authority to build up a network of trans-Atlantic routes from Stansted was another factor in this decision,’ said Mr Mirka.
‘It is always difficult to make a success of a one-route operation and we received no encouragement from the British government that any liberalisation of the rules governing the U.S. destinations we could serve from Stansted was forthcoming.’
Continued on Page Four
From Page One
Airline says it will quit Stansted
Former hack brews up an angelic lifestyle
WITHIN five minutes of first speaking to him, Mike Ripley assumed the status of role model in the eyes of this humble hack.
His CV reads like the script for a journalist's dream sequence — frustrated writer trains with provincial newspaper before landing a job in the brewing industry and breaking through as an author.
Mike's day job is with the Brewery Society's PR department, a post the West Bergholt-based crime writer earned through sterling work as the editor of Brewing Review .
So the former UEA student and Essex University press officer spends his time wandering around pubs, talking about their history and sampling their contents — generally working to promote the good old British pint.
‘It's pretty tough work,’ he wearily confessed, ‘but somebody has to do it.’
The biggest shock is he wants to give it up.
Born in Huddersfield, Mike, 40, spent the early part of his career wandering between journalism and PR, always promising himself one day he would sit down and write that book.
But the inspiration finally came in an unlikely form.
‘We needed the money,’ he said rather unromantically.
‘In 1987 my wife said: ‘I'm pregnant’ and that was that.
It certainly concentrated the mind.’
Mike's inspiration has been redoubled in the six years since that announcement; Beth, five, has been joined by Felicity, 18 months.
Plans to give up the daily commuter drag have been put on ice.
So Carlton's proposals to televise the first four books in Mike's Angel series next year may be welcome.
The comedy-thrillers concern the misadventures of one Fitzroy Maclean Angel.
He is, in his creator's words, ‘an absolute drop-out who never really dropped in’.
Angel tools around London in a black cab, getting into scrapes and surviving by his first rule of life: ‘It's better to be lucky than good’.
Mike has no wish to emulate his anti-hero's lifestyle.
‘The idea is to give up the day job and retreat to darkest Suffolk,’ he said wistfully.
But what about the ale?
‘Oh yes, it has to be within easy distance of a pub serving Adnam's or Greene King — that's a prime requisite.’
Firms to exhibit in Belgium
A CHILLBOX manufacturer, clockmaker and umbrella maker are among a group of business people taking their wares to Belgium.
Helped by Essex County Council, 14 Essex companies will be exhibiting and selling their goods at the Britain in Town show in Antwerp.
Exhibition space, stand design and trade support has been supplied by the county council to help smaller companies to trade in Europe.
Run by the UK embassy and guaranteed to attract thousands of visitors the show is from April 23 to 25.
County council vice-chairman Lilian Greenfield said: ‘This is a first-class opportunity for Essex companies to show how good they are and to boost sales and hopefully jobs in the county.
We had a tremendous response to our offer to exhibit free in Belgium.’
MUST FILLER FOR ESSEX Autoprint premises
We have been asked to make it clear that the joint Essex County Council/Essex TEC scheme to create an enterprise centre at the site of a former school near Parkeston Quay (reported in the EADT yesterday) does not affect the company Autoprint, which will continue to trade from its premises at School House, Hamilton Street.
Governor delivers upbeat forecast to Commons committee
Bank boss signals end of slump
Robin Leigh-Pemberton
BANK of England Governor Robin Leigh-Pemberton yesterday declared the recession ‘in all probability’ was over.
Mr Leigh-Pemberton, who caused Opposition furore for his forecast the economy was recovering in September 1991, appeared to be more confident of his ground.
He told a Common select committee: ‘It is not possible to be certain the recession is over, but there seem to be enough indications to say in all probability it is.’
He pointed to growth forecasts of more than 1 per cent this year, higher retail sales, stronger exports, growing business confidence and stronger activity in the housing market.
The Governor also used these ‘encouraging trends’ to dampen prospects for another interest rate cut.
He was speaking during a wide-ranging cross-examination by the Treasury and Civil Service select committee.
Firefighters trapped by pump after bridge fails
A FIREFIGHTER who had to be airlifted to hospital after crashing through a footbridge into an isolated stream yesterday spoke of his ordeal.
Father-of-two David Bootman, 34, said he and colleague Kevin Mitchell, 21, were trapped, under a 250lb pump they had been carrying, after the bridge collapsed.
The part-time firemen, part of a four-man crew from Mildenhall, had planned to use water from beneath the bridge to damp down a blaze in an isolated copse near Eriswell.
Nurseryman Mr Bootman, now recovering at his Grosvenor House Court home, Mildenhall, said it was first feared his legs were broken but they were in fact just badly bruised.
No warning
‘I am a little bit sore.
There was no warning at all when the bridge went.
There was just a crack.’
He said he and Mr Mitchell, who suffered a cut head and injured leg, came off worst in the accident.
The pump ‘pinned us there for a few seconds before the other lads got it off’.
Mr Bootman and Mr Mitchell were taken to Addenbrooke's Hospital, Cambridge, by RAF helicopter but were released after treatment.
Their colleagues, Graham Abrey, 35, of Grosvenor House Court, Mildenhall, and Geoffrey Grant, 36, of Hereward Avenue, Mildenhall, both suffered minor injuries.
District may receive extra MP
NORTH EAST Essex looks likely to receive an extra MP following a review of constituencies by the Boundary Commission.
The survey, which had been scheduled for the summer, has started two months early and is expected to bear fruit by mid-June.
Although the Boundary Commission is unwilling to pre-empt the results of its county-wide review, it is understood that the focus will be on Colchester where both constituencies have far more than the ideal average of 69,000 voters.
Options include splitting the town and surrounding countryside three ways or reuniting the urban wards under one MP and creating two new constituencies elsewhere.
The commission's recommendations could profoundly affect the political map of the area.
It is thought, for example, that a single Colchester constituency would present a better prospect for the Liberal Democrats.
However, Lib Dem borough councillor Bob Russell emphasised the ‘common sense’ reasons for having a single Colchester MP.
‘I only hope that the present stupidity whereby parts of urban Colchester are in the same constituency as the yachting resort of Burnham-on-Crouch is finished with,’ he said.
‘The political fallout, while all very interesting to politicians, must be secondary to getting the best representation for the people of Colchester.’
Local MP Bernard Jenkin was equally unwilling to second-guess the Boundary Commission but said: ‘I can assure you there will be three solid Tory seats in the area instead of two.’
Chelmsford, where sitting MP Simon Burns has at least 13,000 too many voters, is also set for a boundary shake-up but creation of a new constituency seems unlikely.
‘Whatever they do will personally sadden me because I do not want to see my constituency chopped up,’ he said.
‘I have emotional ties to it exactly as it is regardless of the extra voters.’
Education boss's nosh-up takes biscuit
By Andrea Smith
LAST night Ian Abbey, the chairman of Essex County Council's education committee, expected to have 80 people to dinner — at the poll tax-payers' expense.
The occasion was ‘to commemorate the long and successful partnership’ between the education authority and colleges in the county.
Principals of colleges, their governors and education committee members and officers were invited.
The reason was that at midnight, five-and-a-half hours after the evening's entertainment was due to begin, further education, tertiary and sixth form colleges left county council control.
In future, they will bid for money from a new Further Education Funding Council which will deal directly with the 500 colleges in England and Wales.
The motive behind the shake-up has been to improve post-16 education.
The Government is desperate to stem the high drop-out rates from college courses and create a workforce that will make Britain more competitive.
But the re-organisation means the boot is now on the other foot as far as money is concerned.
The county council will have to ask colleges to bid for money on its behalf to pay for the vocational adult education courses it runs.
This covers most adult courses leading to an exam such as GCSE or City and Guilds.
It seems to me that whatever else was on the menu at County Hall last night, the dinner was principally a buttering-up exercise and one that ill-befits a county which struggled to make savings in the education budget earlier this year.
Weather puts crew to ultimate sea test
COLCHESTER sailor Richard Merriweather has told of the trials of the deep after completing the third leg of a round-the-world yacht race.
He has reached Cape Town, South Africa, and the end of the penultimate leg of the British Steel Challenge aboard the yacht Commercial Union Assurance but recent bad weather has made the race drama into a crisis.
Richard said: ‘The fierce weather we encountered on the third leg has tested us to our very limits.
In treacherous sea conditions we have had to place complete trust in our fellow crew members.
‘We have all discovered reserves of physical strength and courage which we never realised we had before.
‘The hardest part of the ‘Challenge’ was standing at the wheel in the cockpit after only four hours' sleep, feeling like you were being bombarded by cannons firing icy water.
It was like playing It's A Knockout every day for a month — demanding both stamina and a sense of humour.’
Mark Manwaring
KILLER: Sadistic Benjamin Laing, jailed for 25 years
VICTIMS: Bank clerk Alison Manwaring (top) and her father Matthew, brutally killed by Laing
Arts centre gets £40,000 for improvements
ARTS centre staff are celebrating after hearing they will receive a £40,000 boost to improve facilities at their home in a former church.
Colchester Arts Centre, based in St Mary's Church, applied last year for a grant from the Foundation for Sports and the Arts to upgrade the town centre venue.
Centre director Anthony Roberts learned yesterday the bid had been successful.
‘The plan is to use that money as a launching pad for further funds that could eventually result in major building work,’ he said.
This would probably include improvements to seating, staging, toilets and dressing rooms.
St Mary's is, to some extent, a victim of its own success.
The varied menu of attractions at the centre means quick changes have to be made to convert it from jazz venue to theatre to dance hall.
However, modernisation will help to expand the programme further, including film shows, shadow puppetry and matinees — presently impracticable.
Triumph for junior chamber
Business set to cash in as town hosts conference
MORE than £250,000 worth of business could be brought into the tourism and leisure industry in Ipswich next year after the town's junior chamber of commerce won a bid to host a major national conference.
The five-day British Junior Chamber National Conference will be held at Ipswich Corn Exchange in September next year.
It will attract up to 800 delegates from Britain and abroad.
The Ipswich Junior Chamber won the bid, despite stiff competition from cities such as Birmingham and Belfast.
Junior Chamber President Mark Bygraves said the town's good communications links with the UK and Europe had contributed to the town winning the bid.
‘I am delighted Ipswich Junior Chamber's bid to host the national conference in Ipswich was successful, particularly as 1994 heralds the 65th anniversary of the chamber.
Ipswich is fast developing as a business and leisure capital and perfectly suited to represent the British Junior Chamber next year.’
Sheila Baguley, chair of Ipswich Borough Council's leisure committee, said: ‘The success of this bid will be the talking point of all business in the town by 1994, and it will put Ipswich in the forefront of economic development.’
She said the bid could bring up to £250,000 worth of business to hotels, restaurants, sports and other leisure facilities.
The Ipswich Junior Chamber was founded in 1929 and is the fourth oldest in the country.
It is primarily a training organisation providing courses and seminars to develop skills such as management and communications.
Membership is limited to the under-40s.
Anyone wanting information on membership or sponsorship should call Mark Bygraves on 0473 553622 in working hours.
Table tennis
Wood aiming for his sixth Clacton men's singles title
THERE will be two days of action-packed sport at Clacton Leisure Centre this weekend for the Clacton Table Tennis League closed championships, sponsored by Paul Newbould, Planning and Design Services.
Play on both Saturday and Sunday will start at 10 am, continuing to about 6 pm.
The finals will take place from 1.30 pm on Sunday.
Some 80 local table tennis players will be competing for 13 main titles.
In the Men's Singles, Derek Wood will be intent on taking his sixth title in 10 years, with the main opposition coming from Peter Burrows and Iain Vine.
In the Ladies' Singles, Jenny Binns is defending the title she won for the first time last year.
In the final, she is seeded to meet Jenny Higgins, the 1991 champion.
In the League, Thorpe A finally relinquished their grip on Division One status after being whitewashed by St Andrews A and beaten 8–2 by Windsor Buzzards, despite a couple of good wins from Dave Austin.
In Division Two, Windsor Hawks ended their season on a high note, defeating Jaywick A 6–4, and then overcoming Brotherhood D 8–2.
Gary Cattermole remained unbeaten in the latter match, although it was close — defeating Jim Laxton 21–16 in the third, Ron Covall 21–17 in the third and Joe Murray 21–19 in the third.
Thorpe B are already relegated, but they played well to hold Jaywick A to a draw, Tony Bull taking a maximum three, and Robin Rush chipping in with a good win over Doug Green.
In Division Three, the two bottom teams met, with Post Office B winning 8–2 over Jaywick B, who are thus guaranteed the wooden spoon position.
Dennis Young was unbeaten for Post Office.
Mistley B in Division Four confirmed the title with a 10–0 win against Red Triangle.
Jaywick E had a 7–3 victory over Windsor Phoenix, Isabel Barton and Tracey Harrison sharing an excellent doubles win in this match.
There were a couple of good wins for Bert Harrington in Jaywick D's 7–3 against Post Office C, whose points came from Alan Rolfe and two from Phil Lambert.
In the second semi-final of the Knock-Out Handicap Cup, St Andrews A of Division One made it through to the final at the expense of Division Four side Brotherhood I.
The Brotherhood trio of Woolnough, James and Otto put up brave resistance, with five of the matches going close in three, but the Saints' team eventually won 5–1.
In the final, St Andrews now meet Walton B, also of Division One.
The final takes place at Brotherhood Hall on Tuesday, April 6, starting at 7.30 pm.
Clacton Juniors celebrated their fifth straight win in Division Three of the Essex Inter-league (Junior Section).
The Clacton side of Jim Dove, Gary Ridgeon, Daniel Burrell and Emma Cartwright beat Braintree B 6–3 and thus take the Division Three title.
Not so good luck for the Veterans A side in Division One of the Veterans' Section, who went down 7–2 to Romford A. Derek Wood and Dave Binns took a point apiece for Clacton.
Table and results — Page 51.
Table tennis
Clacton League.
Division One: Windsor Buzzards 8, Thorpe A 2; St Andrews A 10, Thorpe A 0.
Division Two: Jaywick A 5, Thorpe B 5; Windsor Hawks 6, Jaywick A 4; Brotherhood D 2, Windsor Hawks 8.
Division Three: Jaywick B 2, Post Office B 8.
Division Four: Red Triangle 0, Mistley B 10; Jaywick D 4, Red Triangle 6; Mistley A 2, Brotherhood I 8; Jaywick E 2, Green Lodge C 8; Windsor Phoenix 3, Jaywick E 7; Post Office C 3, Jaywick D 7.
Knock-Out Handicap Cup semi-final: St Andrews A 5, Brotherhood I 1.
Inter-League Veterans Division One: Romford A 7, Clacton A 2 (Wood, Binns, Cartwright).
Junior Division Three: Braintree B 3, Clacton 6 (Dove, Burrell, Ridgeon, Cartwright).
PLUS TABLES
‘MUSICA internationale’ was the theme taken by a schools music festival.
Pupils from 16 Colchester schools went to the University of Essex to take part in the 43rd annual Colchester Schools' Music Festival.
More than 400 children performed songs and other music items from around the world to parents on Monday and Tuesday night.
Organiser Sally Leung from Montgomery County Infants said: ‘It is a music festival but also fun.
It is enjoyment of coming together to sing.’
Each school was asked to send a choir of 20 children and some schools were allowed to send an extra 20 people.
Some of the schools sent different pupils each night so that more could take part.
Hockey
Joanne rules the roost
THE COLNE High School under-15 hockey squad, from Brightlingsea, won the Essex Schools title at Shrub End, Colchester, after beating Southend High in the final.
Goalkeeper Joanne Rule was the heroine, making five penalty flick stops after a 0–0 draw to give her captain Gemma Beeston the chance to net the winner.
The side qualified unbeaten through the top quality round-robin leagues and beat St John Payne, of Chelmsford, in the semi-final to set up their first Championship success.
Colne School, Brightlingsea, the Essex Schools under-15 champions.
Back row, from left: Davinia Carrington, Leigh Bryan, Thea Ruffell, Shelley Beeston, Laura Davis, Helen Redgewell.
Front, Shirley Buchanan (coach), Angela Cook, Louise Dolby, Gemma Beeston, Joanne Rule, Emma Skinner, Jane Caryer (coach).
Picture: NICKY LEWIN
Axle works hit
More job losses at Leyland DAF plants
RECEIVERS controlling the British arm of the collapsed truck and van company Leyland DAF announced a further 349 job cuts yesterday.
The new cuts — 273 at the truck plants in Leyland, Lancs, and 76 at the Albion Axle plant in Glasgow — take the total number of redundancies since the company collapsed earlier this year to almost 2,300.
Joint administrative receiver Murdoch McKillop said cuts were part of a scaling down of production to meet reduced demand.
No trial for three police officers in drugs allegations
THREE police officers facing allegations of possession of drugs will not be prosecuted in a criminal court, it emerged yesterday.
The constables, two male and one female, all uniformed and stationed in Ipswich, have been told they will not face a criminal prosecution by the Crown Prosecution Service.
However, sources say it is more than possible they will face an internal disciplinary hearing which could carry a penalty as severe as dismissal from the force.
It is understood none of the three have been informed there is to be disciplinary hearing but a file is in the hands of Deputy Chief Constable Michael Argent who is in charge of force discipline.
Allegation
The three were arrested allegedly in possession of what was believed to be cannabis on December 15.
They were immediately suspended on full pay pending a full inquiry.
A file on the alleged offences was compiled by the Suffolk force's internal discipline department and sent to a special section of the CPS in London which deals with allegations against English police officers.
The CPS has returned the file and said it does not intend to prosecute the officers, who have not been named by police chiefs.
If a disciplinary hearing is to take place, it is likely to occur very soon, a source said.
Police disciplinary hearings are similar to criminal court hearings in that the same rules of evidence and burden of proof, ie beyond reasonable doubt, are used.
Reverse strap out
Veteran of two wars will meet Queen
A FOUNDING member of the Royal Air Force from Essex will today be meeting the Queen to celebrate the service's 75th anniversary.
Harry Durrant, 92, is one of only 24 veterans from throughout Britain who has been invited to RAF Marham in Norfolk.
He will meet Her Majesty and other members of the Royal Family, including Prince Phillip and the Queen Mother, following a spectacular fly-past.
Mr Durrant, who lives in Kingsway, Dovercourt, said he was ‘excited, but nervous’ about meeting the Queen.
A Leading aircraftsman, he joined the RAF when it was formed in 1918 after transferring from the Royal Flying Corps.
Invitation
He saw service in both world wars, having been called back to the RAF reserve when the Second World War broke out and stayed in until 1947.
Mr Durrant will be escorted at today's celebrations by his friend, John Hart.
Mr Hart and his wife, Ruth, managed to get Mr Durrant invited after hearing about the planned celebrations.
‘We telephoned the RAF and said we have got a friend who was in the RFC, who transferred to the RAF.
They then sent him an invitation,’ Mrs Hart said.
A spokeswoman for RAF Marham said Mr Durrant was the only veteran from Essex to be invited and one of only handful from across Britain.
‘They are the old and bold from the absolute beginning of the RAF,’ she said.
‘The problem is that many of them have now passed on.’
Esther libel damages cut
A JURY'S award of £250,000 libel damages to That's Life presenter Esther Rantzen was cut to £110,000 yesterday by the Court of Appeal.
Judges ruled that the original figure was excessive.
Miss Rantzen, 52, won the damages from The People newspaper in December 1991 after it accused her of keeping quiet about an alleged sex pervert.
The TV star and founder of ChildLine said the article alleged she protected teacher Alex Standish because of help he had given her team in exposing child abuse at Crookham Court boys' school in Thatcham, near Newbury, Berks.
Lord Justice Neill said a substantial award was justified and the High Court jury was entitled to conclude that the publication of the article and its aftermath were a ‘terrible ordeal’ for Miss Rantzen.
‘But, as has been pointed out, Miss Rantzen still has an extremely successful career as a TV presenter.
‘We have therefore been driven to the conclusion that the court has power to, and should, intervene,’ he said.
‘Judged by any objective standards of reasonable compensation or necessity or proportionality, the award of £250,000 was excessive.’
Miss Rantzen was ordered to pay a third of the newspaper's appeal costs — which have yet to be calculated.
EC deal brightens farming prospects
FARM policy reforms agreed by EC members leave farming industry prospects brighter than they have been for years, Agriculture Minister John Gummer told the Commons last night.
Opening a debate on the Common Agricultural Policy he said: ‘The uncertainty which has hung over the farming industry has been lessened by the…
CAP reform.
This does provide a framework for the development of a competitive agricultural industry for the rest of this century.
And it does give farmers the stability they need to plan ahead.
We have laid the pattern for the coming decade.’
Mr Gummer, MP for Suffolk Coastal, said: ‘By cutting prices and reducing the role of intervention, the agreement would bring farming nearer to the market and encourage farmers to pay greater attention to consumers’ demands.
‘It will reduce the resource costs of consumers of agricultural support in the Community.
Overall the costs imposed by the CAP on the consumer and taxpayer will be lower.’
Mr Gummer said last year had seen an 11 per cent recovery in farm incomes, there were encouraging signs for the future and farmers could be cautiously optimistic about the year ahead.
Mr Gummer unveiled a series of measures to cut costs at slaughterhouses.
He said in a Commons written reply that there has been mounting concern over the costs of veterinary supervision, with hourly fees reaching £40.
He announced the results of a survey of 400 vets working in 600 slaughterhouses which found the average hourly rate was £25.70.
This will act as a yardstick by which industry and local authorities could check they were getting value for money, he said.
A spokeswoman for his department said it would effectively act as a cap on costs.
Mr Gummer also announced strict upper price limits for slaughterhouse hygiene inspectors of £40 for up to four livestock units, and £6.30 per livestock unit thereafter.
A livestock unit means one horse or cow, three pigs or deer, and seven sheep or goats, the spokeswoman said.
A third measure will allow small slaughterhouses to use larger slaughterhouses to provide their veterinary supervision.
Midnight strikes and further education loses its Cinderella
AT the stroke of midnight more than 500 further education, tertiary and sixth form colleges left local authority control and became state-funded corporations.
In line with the 1992 Further and Higher Education Act, colleges will now be responsible for managing their own budgets and the Government will hold the purse strings, funding them directly through a national FE Funding Council.Once considered the Cinderella of education, further education is now being promoted as the fairy godmother with the ability to improve post-16 education and training, stem the drop-out and failure rates and make Britain economically competitive once more.
Resources
The Government is looking to increase student numbers by 25 per cent over the next three years.
But with many colleges already concerned at lack of accommodation and teaching space, insufficient resources and the prospect of funding by results, will it achieve its aims?
Will independence bring more opportunities for adults and mature students, a wider range of vocational courses and a higher staying-on rate or will it mean more competition, cuts in expensive courses and no overall structure to educational provision from 11–19?
At a celebration dinner last night to mark the achievements of the century-long partnership between Essex County Council and Essex colleges, LEA chairman Ian Abbey toasted the future.He would have liked to see the LEA retain a greater input in further education, he said, but he wished the colleges to go forward in a spirit of goodwill.
‘There is a sadness but change is the very essence of life.
This has been decreed and it is a wonderful opportunity for them.’
Lawyer in talks with cult leader
The FBI said it has ceased negotiations for the time being with Texas cult leader David Koresh, holed up with his followers in a fortified compound, to allow him to talk with his lawyer.
Houston lawyer Dick DeGuerin will try again to persuade Koresh to surrender, FBI spokesman Bob Ricks said.
A number of adults and children, members of a breakaway Seventh-day Adventist cult, have left the compound since the siege began and 95 people still remain, many of them Britons and Australians.
Angling club notes
Suffolk County AAA
SUFFOLK County AAA's saltwater meeting saw the odd codling caught at Dunwich.
Anglers will anticipate a few more as well as flounders in this Sunday's teams-of-eight final match which incorporates the annual Collen Pairs Trophy.
Pegs are limited on the day so in order to guarantee to fish this popular event please confirm attendance with Dave Gunson on Ipswich 716530.
Fishing is from 9 am until 2 pm with the draw at 7.30 am in the beach car park.
Pegging will feature four sections, two either side of the car park.
The weigh-in will be on the car park with the presentation at the Dunwich Ship Inn.
West Suffolk
NOW that longer days are with us, Larkwood trout fishery at West Stow has returned to summer regime.
Comprising two lakes, each of about three acres and generally from 12 to 18 feet deep, the fishery is set attractively on the edge of the Breckland forests and adjacent to the River Lark.
Fishing starts at 9 am each day and last casts are made half an hour after sunset.
Day tickets cost £10 for a four-fish limit and half-day charges are £7 for two fish.
Concessionary tickets are also available for OAPs on weekdays at £7.50 and these carry a three-fish limit.
Most trout fishing tackle accessories are available from the well-appointed lodge which is stilted out over the lake beside the car park and rearing ponds.
Tackle can also be hired.
Returns in recent weeks have been impressive and will improve as the weather warms.
Even now trout are being taken from the upper layers of the water and on more than one evening fish have surprisingly been caught on dry flies.
Two rainbows of over 3lb were taken last Saturday; one of 3lb 12oz falling to a 13-year-old boy.
Advance bookings can be made on Culford 728612.
Clacton SAC
CLACTON Sea Angling Club were soundly beaten by Felixstoe Sea Angling Club at Minsmere at the weekend when Steve Drewery led the home team to victory with a beautiful bass weighing just under 3lb 14 oz to win the Inter-Club Trophy.
In second place was G Messenger with a codling and a school bass for a total of 3lb 8oz and running into third place was K Messenger (10oz.)
Top junior was D Wright with an 8oz pout.
The 14 Felixstowe club members averaged 14 oz per man over the two legs to the average of four and half oz for the six Clacton members to take the cup.
Clacton's top angler was Vic Claydon with 8oz, just enough to win the Conbac Cup.
Runner-up was a tie between father and son, George and Jamie Lord, each with a small rockling.
Results: S Drewery (FSAS) one fish, 3lb 12oz; G Messenger (FSAS), two fish, 3lb 8oz; K Messenger (FSAS), three fish, 10oz.
The next Felixstowe Sea Angling Society match is on Tuesday (7pm to 11).
Clacton SAC secretary Mick Wenham will be running the Junior Open Fishing Festival at Clacton on Sunday April 18.
Fishing is from 10am to 2pm and open to any junior up to the age of 15.
Entry is free and there is £100 up for grabs with the overall winner receiving the Roy Tongue Cup.
The winner in the age group up to 11 will take the Bill Marples Cup and the 12-to-15 age group winner will take the Ron Gibbings Cup.
To book your peg telephone Mick Wenham on (0440) 712794 (home) or (0440) 702972 (work).
This week's match is at St Osyth where fishing is from 10am to 3pm and the stewards are Andy Murray and Tony Harrington.
Colchester SAC
COLCHESTER Sea Angling Club, at their new Brightlingsea venue, fished one of the best river championships so far.
Flounders were plentiful, with many undersize fish caught on the ebb tide.
First place went to Ray Warriner, second to Willy Duncan and third to Chris Mills.
Stowmarket & District SAC
ANDY Jones lifted the Winter League Trophy after finishing third in the final match fished at Pakefield.
On a calm sunny day plenty of undersized fish were caught all day.
It was particularly frustrating for Bob Bridges who went into the last match on level points with Jones and caught over 40 fish — but still failed to weigh-in.
New member Peter Lambert won the match and pool with three good dabs.
Pakefield results: 1 Peter Lambert; 2 Eddie English; 3 Andy Jones; 4 Carl Jones.
The first match of the Summer League is on April 10 at Orford Island (9 am to 4 pm).
Meet at Boyton Marsh 8.15 am sharp for ferrying to the island in the club boats.
Anybody who is interested in joining the club for the Summer League should contact the club secretary, Steve Parsons, tel 0449 677052.
The Winter League final positions (top 20): 1 Andy Jones 17 pts; 2 Bob Bridges 24; 3 Eddie English 36; 4 Nigel Birch 38; 5 Andy Foster 46; 6 Bob Jackson 47; 7 Mick Daffern 55; 8 Dinky Chambers 57; 9 Terry Arbon 62; 10 Rob Brewster 72; 11 Paul Sparkes 75; 12 Carl Jones 75; 13 Peter Lambert 86; 14 Graham Smith 90; 15 Steve Parsons 95; 16 Richard Greaves 97; 17 Dave Foster 101; 18 Nigel Brady 103; 19 Nick Stutch 111; 20 Tracy Lambert 111.
Flood wall brings fear of overflow effect on the coast
RESIDENTS of St Osyth are living in fear the opening of the new Wivenhoe flood barrier will have disastrous consequences for their homes.
The parish council is very worried when the controversial barrier opens later this year problems in the village, already vulnerable to flooding, will increase as the water turned away from the shut gates will have nowhere else to go.
However, the National Rivers Authority, which met councillors this week, stressed there would be no danger as the build-up of water near St Osyth and Point Clear would be minimal when the barriers closed.
The £14 million project across the River Colne, near Colchester, was approved despite objections from local residents and councillors.
The NRA claims the scheme is the most cost effective way to protect low-lying land.
Council chairman Phyll Hendy said Point Clear had been isolated from St Osyth several times already this year when the causeway between the two settlements had flooded.
She was worried the water, if unable to flow up the Colne to Colchester, will be forced to find its level in St Osyth.
Unconvinced
‘This year we have already been told the reason we have had three surges higher than anticipated was because of the bath-tub effect from closing the Thames barrier,’ she said.
‘I do hope the NRA are right about the Wivenhoe barrier, but I am still concerned.’
Fellow councillor Tony Quilter was also unconvinced.
‘If you put that barrier up in Wivenhoe to stop the water going into Colchester then it must leave Brightlingsea and St Osyth vulnerable.’
Gary Cockett, the NRA's assistant district engineer for North Essex, said every time there was a high tide the Hythe at Colchester flooded because the sea wall was too low.
The barrier would solve that, he said, with a reflected wave of about an inch expected.
‘That quantity of water will be dissipated over the rest of the water mass — Brightlingsea, St Osyth and the rest of the North Sea back to Sweden,’ he said.
St Oysth parish council is also worried about the effectiveness of the flood warning system should sea walls breach in a high tide.
This happened with fatal consequences in 1953 when the Lee Wick wall collapsed sending water shooting over the marshes to Jaywick.
Early warning
Mr Cockett said warning of high tides were available 36 hours ahead.
‘The walls are in very good condition, certainly the frontline defences at Clacton are of a standard equivalent to the Thames.’
Mr Cockett also allayed fears that areas of St Osyth, originally marshland, had been earmarked for a sea reclamation project.
Forces support group is helping pensioners
Sir,— The Chancellor's proposal to add VAT to domestic fuel bills has once again set alarm bells ringing for pensioners and others on low incomes.
It has been claimed that some will have to choose between keeping warm and having enough to eat.
As the 50th anniversary of the ending of World War II approaches, an increasing percentage of pensioners will have seen service in the Forces, or are the widows of ex-servicemen.
For them, there does not have to be the agonising choice of warmth or food, because SSAFA, the Soldiers', Sailors' and Airmen's Families Association, exists to provide help for service and ex-service people, their widows, families and dependents in any crisis.
No matter how brief the service was, or how long ago, SSAFA's trained and experienced volunteers are on hand with prompt, friendly advice and practical help.
They have been doing this in Suffolk for almost 110 years, comforting the sick and lonely, and relieving the worries of the anxious and elderly.
Whatever the problem, financial or otherwise, SSAFA will take it on, in absolute confidence, obtaining specialist assistance when necessary.
No-one is beyond the reach of a local SSAFA member and contact numbers are in the telephone directories.
But providing these services is expensive, in terms of cash and human resources, and we need new members as well as donations.
Through your columns, we appeal to readers for their support in the work we do.
Further information can be obtained by calling 0394 460666.
ROY FOX, Suffolk branch Secretary, SSAFA and Forces Help Society.
Thatched Cottage, Old Church Road, Lower Ufford, Woodbridge.
Plea for death penalty
THE brother of Alison Manwaring yesterday called for a referendum on the death penalty after the killer of his sister and father was jailed for life.
Mark Manwaring said Benjamin Laing was serving a minimum of only 25 years after depriving Alison of 60 years of life and their father Matthew of 20.
He said words were inadequate to describe what he felt about Laing and warned that when he came out of prison ‘people will be waiting for him and justice will be done properly’.
He called for a referendum on the death penalty, accusing politicians of paying lip service to law and order.
‘They say things they think will keep us happy until the next tragedy,’ he told a news conference.
Producing a list of 132 people he said had been murdered in Britain since the beginning of the year, Mr Manwaring blamed the increase in crime on ‘no bloody deterrent’.
He criticised the system which allowed Laing to use the full disclosure of police documents to change his story four times.
Sitting next to Alison's fiance, Gordon Healis, Mr Manwaring said: ‘The streets have got to be given back to the police and the decent people of this country.’
He added: ‘My dad was 62.
He had worked hard all his life and had served his country for four years and was looking forward to retirement in the home he had worked for all his days.
My sister Alison was 24 and had her whole life ahead of her.’
Sherry for first resident
A BOTTLE of sherry and flowers were presented to the first resident of a new nursing home which opened this week.
Braintree man George Brown,left , was first through the doors of the £1.1 million Halstead Lodge nursing home.
Developed by Colchester-based Haven Healthcare, the 30-bed private nursing home is equipped with all mod-cons, including a nurse call alarm.
The services of a hairdresser, chiropodist, dentist, optician and physiotherapist, as well as the usual medical services, are available to the residents.
Heart swap man plans summer wedding
A POPULAR Ipswich sportsman is back home and planning his summer wedding — thanks to a life-saving heart transplant.
Former footballer Ivan Hender and his fiancee Sue Blackman have just arrived home, six weeks after the vital operation at Papworth Hospital.
Now, the happy couple have decided to marry at the Ipswich Register Office on August 14.
Ivan says he feels great —‘I'm contented and happy.’
Virus
Ivan, 53, of Cromer Road, underwent a four-hour operation at Papworth near Cambridge in February, after doctors diagnosed a virus affecting his heart, which made him very ill.
Ivan said Sue, whom he met two years ago, had spent almost every hour with him during and since the operation.
‘It is incredible what she has done.
I don't know what I would have done without her,’ he added.
Ivan also praised the team at Papworth Hospital.
He said he felt no pain, apart from injections which he has never been fond of, and when he came round from the operation the first thing he asked for was the Ipswich football scores and a drink.
Before his illness, Ivan played football, cricket and bowls, and was very well-known among the Ipswich sporting circle.
Business failure
Building firm almost certain to be wound up
HOPES of selling an ailing building firm as a going concern are almost non existent, one of the joint administrative receivers said yesterday.
Martin Page of KPMG Peat Marwick said it was likely that R E Gobbitt and Sons of Worlingworth would be wound up after completing existing commitments.
It has been placed in receivership after failing to ride out a long economic recession which has hit the building industry very hard.
The firm currently provides work for 13 people, four of them self-employed.
It is the second Worlingworth firm to face closure within a few weeks.
Sixty people have already lost their jobs at the Norfolk Smokehouses food processing plant.
Electricity user left in the dark
Sir,— I believe to the majority of people the addition of VAT to domestic fuel bills will be as welcome as a large hole in a lifeboat would be.
I am however more bemused by the forecast made by Eastern Electricity that, and I quote: ‘This would add 50p to the average household bill’.
If a surcharge of 8 per cent made to a sum of money adds 50p to that sum, then the initial amount is only £6.25 ie £6.25 plus 8pc equals £6.75.
It would be much appreciated if Mr John Devaney, managing director of Eastern Electricity explained in detail what the figure of 50p really relates to.
JI HOWARD Upper Street, Witnesham.
PM willing to testify on Iraqi arms
THE Prime Minister and former defence minister Alan Clark yesterday both signalled their willingness to testify before Lord Justice Scott's inquiry into the arms for Iraq ‘scandal’.
But Lady Thatcher, who is flying back to Britain from the United States, is apparently unaware yet that she will also be invited to give evidence about the affair which, according to one MP, ‘went right to the heart of Government’ when she was in power.
‘She should have no hiding place from the scrutiny of Lord Justice Scott's inquiry,’ said Menzies Campbell, the Liberal Democrat defence spokesman.
The judge outlined at a London news conference how he will conduct his inquiry which centres on Matrix Churchill, the Coventry-based machine-tool company which allegedly supplied parts for Iraq's so-called supergun.
Three former executives of the company were acquitted at the Old Bailey in November of illegally trying to export arms-making equipment to Iraq amid accusations that Government ministers encouraged manufacturers to emphasise the peaceful uses of their products when seeking export licences.
Labour accused senior ministers, including the Prime Minister, of being aware that the arms embargo against Iraq was being breached.
Labour also claimed that ministers, hiding behind ‘public interest immunity certificates’, were prepared to let the three men be tried.