

Editorials
How many doctors does Britain need by 2010?
More than the Medical Manpower Standing Advisory Committee thinks
In the early 1980s fear of increasing medical unemployment led the BMA's representative body to pass several motions calling for a reduction in medical schools' intake.
This fear was based on the apparent disparity between the number graduating from medical schools and the number of career posts becoming available each year.
The substantial proportion of newly qualified doctors (18–25%) who never practise or who leave medicine within a few years was, however, ignored.
Although the BMA's anxieties were not supported by a study carried out by the Department of Health's Advisory Committee on Medical Manpower Planning and published in 1985, the association's policy did not change.
In 1989 the same committee suggested that a possible slight shortage of doctors might occur by the first decade of the twenty first century.
It saw no need for immediate action but recommended that the matter should be kept under review.
The Medical Manpower Standing Advisory Committee was set up in July 1991 to fulfil this role and has just produced its first report (p???).
Unlike its predecessor, the standing committee will continue working but has already felt able to recommend a small increase in the target number of places at medical schools.
The size of the increase, amounting to 5.7% or 240 places, seems to have been determined purely on the basis of the amount of spare capacity in the medical schools, which could be used at no capital cost.
The committee has also recommended an increase in the proportion of overseas students from 5.0% to 7.5%, which implies that barely half of the extra places will be available to local applicants.
These are extremely cautious recommendations, redeemed only by the hope of a more robust analysis in future.
The committee has considered the numerous recent developments and trends in the provision of health care but has felt unable to judge the likely impact of most of them.
Instead, it has chosen to develop ‘projections of demand based on the likely availability of resources rather than on detailed assessments of specialty needs.’
This approach was partly dictated by the committee's terms of reference, which required it to take ‘account of resource assumptions and other guidance which the Secretary of State…may give,’ and by the fact that its secretariat was provided by the Department of Health's Medical Manpower Executive.
The report makes a fair attempt to assess the future demand for medical staff within these constraints but shies away from estimating the number of doctors required to provide both an acceptable service to patients and acceptable working conditions for doctors themselves.
The committee took evidence from a wide variety of sources and assessed it rigorously.
It has accepted that progressive aging of the population necessitates a parallel increase in numbers of doctors.
It is less persuaded of a trend to earlier retirement but has assumed an average fall in the retirement age of two years by 2010.
It recommends an increase in the number of part time training posts and allows for a resulting modest fall in the average number of whole time equivalents that doctors work.
It also assumes a drop out rate somewhat higher than that used by its predecessor and, unlike that body, expects growth in the number of general practitioners to continue after 2000 rather than tail off.
Conveniently, the increase in demand resulting from all of these factors can be accommodated within the historically determined resource assumptions accepted by the committee.
Issues that the committee considered inconclusively included the impact of medical advances on the demand for medical time; possible changes in skill mix; the consequences on staffing of the interaction between purchasers and providers and of patients' charters; the need to reduce hours of work (only junior doctors are mentioned); possible changes to the career structure; and the increasing managerial and educational demands on consultants.
Reliable data on the staffing consequences of these factors do not exist, and the committee recommends that research should be undertaken to quantify them, especially the effects of changing skill mix, the cost implications of employing more doctors, and the extent to which doctors are abandoning medical careers.
It is questionable, however, whether the effects of these and many other factors can be precisely quantified, and the committee may find itself obliged to exercise its judgment less cautiously in future years.
Arguments in favour of a more substantial increase in the supply of medical staff come from several sources.
It has long been recognised that the ratio of doctors to population in the United Kingdom, at 1 to 562, is the second lowest in western Europe, where the average is 1 to 338.
The consequences of this disparity are not completely offset by the greater efficiency of the NHS.
Medical immigration from the European Community and elsewhere, which has previously made up any shortage of local graduates, is stable and unlikely to increase.
A detailed study of medical staffing in Europe carried out by the Permanent Working Group of European Junior Hospital Doctors has shown that the substantial medical unemployment that exists in some parts of Europe is  likely to decline sharply after 2000 and that many countries, and Europe as a whole, will face a shortage of doctors before 2010.
This projection, based on modest assumptions of growth in demand, does not fully take into account reductions in working hours or demands resulting from technological advances.
There is little doubt among practising doctors, both in hospital medicine and in general practice, that the demands and pressures on them are increasing rapidly.
Consultants' caseloads are mounting inexorably and technical complexity is increasing while junior support declines, both proportionately and in terms of doctor hours.
At the same time, managerial demands multiply and educational bodies are insisting on a greater educational input as a condition of continued approval of posts.
Medical advances almost invariably increase the demands on doctors' time, and it is this increased intensity of working that has made the long hours of many doctors intolerable.
Despite hopes that some tasks inappropriate to junior doctors can be delegated to other groups of staff the new deal on juniors' hours risks worsening the situation by increasing the intensity of work still further, notwithstanding the shorter working week.
Meanwhile general practitioners, facing increased demands, have voted to explore alternatives to their current responsibility for 24 hour cover.
The extent of the frustration and demoralisation among junior doctors, both male and female, has been documented by Allen.
The conditions under which NHS doctors work are increasingly unhealthy and debilitating, and increasing numbers in all grades and specialties are seeking ways out.
The undoubted job satisfaction of medical practice has insulated the NHS to a considerable degree from the expectation in society at large of increased leisure time, but this is changing.
The steering committee itself states the need for better working practices, observing that ‘if these changes do not take place, disenchantment will grow,…leading to increased drop out rates’ with ‘the potential for staff shortages.’
Disappointingly, the committee has so far felt able to recommend only a tiny step towards establishing acceptable levels of medical staffing in the NHS.
The battle to achieve these is perhaps the most important one facing Britain's doctors during the 1990s.
Failure is likely to have serious consequences, both for patients and for the medical workforce.
On not achieving a balance
JPAC may be worsening the problems it was set up to solve
Achieving a Balance (1986) was meant to correct the severe bottlenecks in hospital careers by balancing the number of career registrar and senior registrar posts with realistic projections of how many consultant posts would exist.
The intention — set out in Plan for Action — was to increase consultant numbers by 2.8% a year while keeping constant the number of senior registrars and reducing modestly the number of career registrars.
Surplus junior posts were to be converted to consultant posts, with additional service work being met by the new staff grade and a small increase in the number of senior house officers.
The changes were meant to be implemented by 1998, by which time juniors would spend an average of 6.5 years in the combined registrar and senior registrar grades.
The Joint Planning Advisory Committee (JPAC) was given the task of setting and reviewing quotas for all specialties.
What progress, if any, has been made?
The chances of achieving the goals of a balanced career structure and shorter training by 1998 seem slight, and JPAC is mainly to blame.
Instead of keeping numbers of senior registrars constant, JPAC's quotas will see them rising by more than half to over 5100, while career registrar quotas are more than 40% over target at almost 4700.
These figures could be justified only if consultant expansion had substantially exceeded the 2.8% a year on which the numbers in Plan for Action were calculated.
The average annual consultant expansion in Britain from 1987 to 1990 (the most recent available figures) has been only 2.6%.
Although the funded consultant posts for junior doctors' hours will help, these have been concentrated in a few specialties, and the recession has provoked concerns that the rate of consultant expansion may even fall.
The reasons why JPAC's quotas differ so greatly from what was intended are twofold.
Firstly, Plan for Action assumed that it would be necessary to start with about 11% more career registrars than were needed to fill the expected consultant posts, whereas JPAC routinely accepts advice from specialty staffing representatives to calculate up to 50% more posts (for example, in general medicine and obstetrics and gynaecology).
Secondly, JPAC has assumed that the number of consultant posts will consistently increase by over 4% a year.
This is despite Plan for Action's estimate of 2.8% and the Department of Health's commitment to an expansion of only 2% a year.
To produce 6.5 years of specialty training with an 11% wastage rate on JPAC's current quotas would actually require a consistent rate of expansion of almost 5%.
There are further problems.
Quotas for career registrars were issued two years late, and those for research registrars have yet to be issued.
Out of 14 specific recommendations made in Plan for Action only those regarding the ‘pump priming’ consultants and the introduction of the staff grade have been entirely implemented.
Early retirement and careers counselling have been partially implemented, but the 10 other recommendations have not been implemented at all or have been reversed.
Numbers of senior house officers have risen by 14% in three years — far more than was intended — and, by not substantially reducing the number of registrars, JPAC has failed to keep to its terms of reference.
As it takes several years for the effects of changing the number of trainees to become obvious the failure to implement Achieving a Balance is only now becoming evident.
Worst hit are trainees in thoracic medicine.
Despite a review  in 1989, by the end of 1991 half of all senior registrars were accredited, one third of them having been in the grade for over six years.
A freeze on recruitment of senior registrars was imposed for at least two years, thus ruining the career prospects of dozens of registrars trained in the specialty.
As medical staffing budgets are finite any increase in the number of career registrars and senior registrars uses up money that would otherwise be available for expanding the number of consultants.
Also, given a finite pool of doctors, increasing the numbers of consultants requires shorter, better training and reductions in numbers of the juniors.
Achieving a Balance has not failed — it has not yet been tried.
JPAC may even be worsening the problems of staffing that it was established to solve.
What is needed is the urgent introduction of single tier training schemes of shortened duration with wastage rates of around 10%.
The numbers in these training schemes must be balanced with realistic estimates of the growth in the numbers of consultants, which should be increased and funded centrally by government.
The grim alternative is that in a few years many more specialties will be in the position of thoracic medicine and more junior doctors will spend even longer in the training grades.
Liver failure induced by paracetamol
Avoidable deaths still occur
About 160 people in England and Wales die each year from liver failure after an overdose of paracetamol, although this official figure may underestimate the true annual mortality as many cases of liver failure may not be attributed to a suicidal overdose to alleviate bereaved relatives' distress.
Why is the mortality from this commonly used analgesic so high 25 years after hepatotoxicity was first observed?
Much has been learnt since then about how paracetamol damages the liver.
In therapeutic doses (up to 4 g a day) paracetamol undergoes glucuronidation and sulphation in the liver with only a small amount being metabolised by cytochromes to the toxic metabolite N -acetyl- p -benzoquinone imine, which is inactivated by hepatic glutathione.
In overdose the production of N -acetyl- p -benzoquinone imine overwhelms cellular glutathione, leading to widespread cellular damage, principally due to covalent binding of the toxic metabolite to thiol groups on cysteine residues of intracellular proteins (for example, in mitochondria).
Thiol oxidation, lipid peroxidation, and activation of hepatic macrophages also occur.
Susceptibility to the toxic effects of paracetamol taken in overdose differs between people, which may explain why some patients survive having taken large amounts of paracetamol while others die having taken only a few tablets more than the eight tablets (4 g) a day recommended by the manufacturers.
The best described causes of this enhanced susceptibility are chronic ingestion of alcohol and anticonvulsant drugs, but genetic factors may also play a part.
Although an increased susceptibility to hepatotoxicity may be contributory, the main reason for the continuing high mortality from paracetamol overdose is that many patients still present to medical care too late after ingestion for an antidote to be given according to standard guidelines.
Intravenous acetylcysteine remains the antidote of choice in Britain for patients presenting to medical care early enough; oral methionine, another precursor of hepatic glutathione, is probably inferior to acetylcysteine as vomiting is common after overdose and metabolism to glutathione may be impaired by increasing liver dysfunction.
Until recently acetylcysteine was not recommended for use more than 15 hours after overdose, but there is now evidence that it can safely be given to patients up to 24 hours after ingestion and perhaps even later than this.
Acetylcysteine also seems to improve survival in established fulminant hepatic failure, perhaps by reversing some of the adverse haemodynamic changes that occur at that time.
Patients at increased risk of hepatotoxicity (particularly those taking anticonvulsants) who present after taking an overdose of paracetamol should be considered for treatment with acetylcysteine even if the blood paracetamol concentration is below that at which treatment is usually started; the standard treatment line; the exact threshold at which acetylcysteine should be given in such cases is, however, unknown.
In a patient presenting late or after a particularly large overdose recognition of the onset of liver failure is crucial.
Although the prothrombin time remains the best and most readily available measure of liver function in such cases, arterial acidosis (pH <7.30) and renal failure also indicate an adverse prognosis.
If liver function is deteriorating hypoglycaemia should be avoided, prophylaxis against gastric bleeding started, and central venous pressure maintained with colloid.
Careful monitoring for the development of respiratory failure and cerebral oedema is also important.
If pronounced coagulopathy, acidosis, or encephalopathy develops transfer to a specialist centre should be considered so that intensive care directed at the liver can be given and the patient considered for liver transplantation.
Despite such intensive care, including the use of ‘late’ acetylcysteine and intracranial pressure monitoring (which helps in the early detection of intracranial hypertension), the mortality of patients with paracetamol induced fulminant hepatic failure in specialist centres continues to be over 40% — deaths are mainly due to cerebral oedema, hypotension, and overwhelming sepsis.
Orthotopic liver transplantation has now been performed in several cases, but its widespread use is likely to be restricted by the problems of postoperative sepsis, perioperative cerebral oedema, psychological assessment, and availability of donors.
Progress in reducing the number of deaths from paracetamol overdose may come only from preventing rather than treating fulminant hepatic failure.
Increased public awareness of the dangers of exceeding the recommended dose of paracetamol might help, although this could paradoxically encourage more people to take an overdose.
It should, however, reduce the likelihood of an accidental overdose being taken from severe pain and increase the chance that if a patient's family knows of the overdose they will encourage him or her to seek prompt medical advice.
The pharmaceutical industry is in a pivotal position to address the problem of the continuing high mortality from paracetamol overdose as the addition of an antidote, such as methionine, to all available preparations might prevent every death that currently occurs.
At present paracetamol-methionine combinations are costly, little publicised, and rarely prescribed.
Adding methionine to all preparations of paracetamol might increase prices and therefore reduce sales.
Another solution might be to develop non-hepatotoxic derivatives of paracetamol.
It will indeed be tragic if the mortality from paracetamol overdose over the next quarter of a century proves to be as high as that of the last.
Endometriosis
Should not be treated just because it's there
Endometriosis is a fascinating example of how a new diagnostic technique has transformed the understanding of a disease.
Because the laparoscope has enabled easy, safe, detailed, and repeatable visualisation of the pelvis we now know that endometriosis has various manifestations and may even be present in otherwise normal peritoneum.
Recent reports have argued that the presence of ectopic endometrium may be physiological and should be considered to be pathological only if associated with symptoms or signs of progression and tissue damage.
Endometriotic implants probably evolve from active to inactive disease, and these stages are recognisable visually.
Histological techniques can show whether an endometriotic deposit is active and infiltrating the surrounding tissue or is superficial and inactive.
The pathogenesis of the disease has always been controversial, but considerable circumstantial evidence exists to support the suggestion that it is due to implantation of endometrium that has been refluxed down the fallopian tube at menstruation.
It is logical to hypothesise that the implantation of refluxed endometrium will be more likely to occur with increased exposure to menstruation: women now experience over 450 menstruations during their reproductive lifetime rather than the 30 to 50 that would be expected without contraception and with long periods of lactation.
Changes in social habits, which increase exposure of the pelvis to menstruum, and a new diagnostic technique may therefore have combined to create an increase in the incidence of endometriosis.
The true prevalence of the visual finding of endometriosis cannot be determined at present because such studies require random operative intervention and are therefore unethical.
Vessey et al report an increasing incidence with age, which peaks at about 6 per 1000 woman years between 40 and 44 (p 182).
They also show a protective effect of pregnancy and current use of the contraceptive pill.
These data agree with those of Mahmood and Templeton and support the hypothesis that the incidence of the disease is related to exposure to menstruation.
While an individual endometriotic implant may change with time, no evidence exists that the disease will inevitably disappear.
In the three studies that have reported the natural course of the disease in placebo arms of trials of medical treatment the disease progressed in about half the patients.
In the other half the disease either remained the same, improved, or disappeared.
Increased disease was not necessarily symptomatic; predicting in which patients the disease would get worse was not possible.
Endometriosis should therefore not be treated simply because it is there.
This is further supported by evidence that medical treatment works only temporarily, with the disease recurring once stimulation by ovarian steroids returns.
Endometriosis is more common in subfertile women and women with pelvic pain, and logically these should be the two main indications for treatment.
Unfortunately, none of the published randomised trials have shown that medical treatment improves fertility.
No justification therefore exists for treating subfertile women with contraceptive drugs, and the endometriosis should be considered to be coincidental unless it has caused tubal and ovarian damage that requires repair.
There are no randomised studies of the efficacy of surgical ablation of endometriosis either at laparotomy or at laparoscopy on future fertility.
Until this efficacy has been shown surgery cannot be recommended.
Currently, therefore, the only clear recommendation for treatment is in symptomatic patients.
Classically, endometriosis is associated with cyclical pelvic pain and dyspareunia.
Signs include the presence of a pelvic mass, tenderness, and nodules on the uterosacral ligaments.
The diagnosis should be verified laparoscopically before treatment is begun.
Considerable degeneration of the endometriosis occurs after two months of medical treatment, and symptoms should therefore diminish.
Uncontrolled evidence suggests that laparoscopic ablation of endometriotic implants improves symptoms.
Successful surgical and medical treatments are both followed by an appreciable rate of recurrence.
Because the denominator for the visual diagnosis of endometriosis has changed recently, the true incidence and prevalence of the disease are unknown.
Pain is the main indication for treatment, and the disease should be regarded as chronic and relapsing rather than as an acute phenomenon treatable by a single medical or surgical intervention.
Maintaining the treatment of mentally ill people in the community
Some compulsion is necessary, but for supervision, not treatment
Neglected social issues often attract the serious attention of the public and the government only as a result of a tragic and dramatic incident.
The case of the mentally ill young man who climbed into an enclosure at London Zoo on 31 December and was mauled by a lion is the most recent example.
The Secretary of State, Virginia Bottomley, at once committed herself to finding an urgent solution to the problem of maintaining the treatment of discharged patients suffering from chronic mental illness, who can all too easily be missed by current community psychiatric services.
This matter has preoccupied mental health workers for many years.
The Royal Commission on Mental Illness and Mental Deficiency introduced the concept of guardianship, and the Mental Health Act 1959 gave the guardian wide powers of control.
In effect, these were the same as the general powers of a parent over a child of less than 14 years.
Such guardianship was seen as a way of protecting vulnerable people from exploitation, ill treatment, or neglect.
The use of guardianship was never widely taken up, however, and in 1978 a total of 138 people were subject to it, of whom only 37 were mentally ill.
The powers of control were considered too extensive and paternalistic.
Alternative approaches were subsequently proposed.
In 1977 the British Association of Social Workers suggested community care orders.
A white paper considered a changed form of guardianship, and ultimately the Mental Health Act 1983 incorporated a revised guardianship order with severely limited powers of control.
Experience during the past nine years indicates that in its new form guardianship has not gained popularity, and many social workers consider both that it is unenforceable and that it may be an unethical constraint on individual freedom.
Until 1985 many psychiatrists ensured the supervision in the community of patients who were known to default from treatment by granting them leave of absence.
Detained under a section of the Mental Health Act in the first place, these patients had responded to treatment in hospital, and their leave was subject to a requirement that treatment should be continued outside hospital.
Just before the section expired the patient would be readmitted, the detention order would be renewed, and the patient would again be given leave.
This practice ended when it was declared unlawful by judicial review in 1985 (R v Hallstrom ex parte W), although under Scots law it continues with monitoring by the Mental Welfare Commission for Scotland.
There have since been a series of proposals to re-establish some form of compulsory treatment in the community from the Mental Health Act Commission (in 1986 and again in 1988), the Royal College of Psychiatrists (1987), and the British Medical Association (1989).
None of these proposals found sufficient support to press the case forward, and at its conference in York in 1991 the Mental Health Act Commission voted against any specific recommendation.
In other jurisdictions community treatment orders have been introduced with varying degrees of success.
Except for MIND most of the voluntary groups, such as the National Schizophrenia Fellowship and SANE, have expressed more positive enthusiasm for some measure of control, concerned that community care is too often an unfulfilled ideal that can become an impossible burden on relatives.
The reluctance of all these campaigning bodies to reach a conclusion, however, has reflected a lack of consensus among their members, particularly for the proposal to enforce treatment in the community when the patient refuses consent.
The suggestion for a community treatment order was rejected by some, on the grounds that it would infringe civil liberties, there was insufficient research to justify this extra measure, the existing legislation provided a sufficient framework to give the necessary powers to deal with the problem, and changing the law might divert attention from the real need to provide resources to support an acceptable programme of community care.
A working group of the Royal College of Psychiatrists has been taking a fresh look at the problem, and its report was endorsed by the college this week.
It agrees that compulsory treatment in the community is unacceptable, but accepts that the ‘revolving door’ patient who regularly defaults from treatment presents a genuine problem of management.
The report recommends a new order, applicable only to patients with a history of non-compliance, which would provide for compulsory supervision of the patient in the community.
Should the patient cease to accept treatment voluntarily and  reject supervision, resulting in deterioration of his mental state, he or she could be recalled to hospital.
Such intervention would prevent further deterioration, allow treatment to be re-established, and promote the patient's return to the community.
Such a measure means accepting that compulsory powers are necessary to ensure that this circumscribed group of detained patients are encouraged to maintain their continued care in the community, rather than to be frequently detained in hospital or to become a casualty in the community.
Nevertheless, its introduction must be accompanied by improved organisation of clinical services in the community, including better deployment of community psychiatric nurses to care for patients with severe long term psychiatric illness and the provision of essential resources.
Respite care
Should be made less difficult
The importance of caring for carers is gradually being recognised.
Anyone in any doubt of the need for providing such support will find a gruelling account of the problems faced by carers of elderly people in Margaret Forster's novel,Have The men Had Enough?
There are not only humanitarian but also financial reasons for caring for carers.
In Britain in 1986 an estimated 1.3 million carers kept dependants out of institutions, providing some £7.3 billion worth of informal care.
If only one in 10 of those people cared for at home had instead to be looked after in residential institutions the additional public cost would exceed £1 billion a year.
Yet despite the value of their work, carers' needs are often overlooked, and they do not constitute a very active pressure group — perhaps because so much of their energy goes into caring.
Could respite care help?
Respite care takes several forms: the challenge is to match these forms with needs.
Admitting someone to hospital for respite care permits review of their problems — medical or otherwise — and drug regimens.
Intensive courses of treatment, such as physiotherapy, can be arranged.
Nevertheless, hospitals provide only a small proportion of respite care — perhaps as little as 7%.
This may be appropriate, not only because hospital beds are usually expensive but also because most people prefer to be looked after in the community.
The new Community Care Act should prompt a fresh look at services for carers and those they look after.
It states that ‘A key responsibility of statutory service providers should be to do all they can to assist and support carers.’
Authorities need to be well informed about who their local carers are, what their particular needs and preferences are, and how they would like their needs met.
For example, do they want home based respite care or would they prefer a separate facility for respite care and, if so, what form or forms should this take?
Particular attention needs to be given to the preferences of different racial, cultural, and religious groups.
Do authorities know how many carers belonging to ethnic minorities they have in their district, how many require respite facilities, and how they fare compared with other carers?
Checking such consumer needs should result in resources being used better.
Setting up services that carers don't want is obviously wasteful.
Obtaining this information locally is important but takes skill.
The Community Care Act may have negative as well as positive consequences.
These include possible reductions in care in the community owing to inadequate funding and the knock on effects on hospitals, which may face even greater difficulties in returning elderly people to the community than at present.
Such pressure on places in both the acute and community sectors might in turn lead to a squeeze on the provision of respite care.
Already evidence exists of underprovision of respite care: one recent study reported that a quarter of carers had not had a holiday for more than five years, and another found that 40% of carers could not take a break when they wanted.
Any possibility of further reductions in respite care should be strenuously resisted.
The humanitarian reasons for safeguarding this provision should be sufficient in themselves.
Coupled with the financial implications if carers decided they could no longer shoulder this burden the case for supporting respite care becomes overwhelming.
Correction
The patient's charter and the triage nurse
An editorial error resulted in the wrong reference being given at the end of the first sentence of the second paragraph of this editorial by Tom Keighlty and Jan Maycock (28 November 1992, p 1310).
The correct reference should have been reference 3.
Papers
Double blind clinical and laboratory study of hypoglycaemia with human and porcine insulin in diabetic patients reporting hypoglycaemia unawareness after transferring to human insulin
Abstract
Objectives —
To compare awareness of hypoglycaemia and physiological responses to hypoglycaemia with human and porcine insulin in diabetic patients who reported loss of hypoglycaemia awareness after transferring to human insulin.
Design —
Double blind randomised crossover study of clinical experience and physiological responses during slow fall hypoglycaemic clamping with porcine and human insulin.
Setting —
Clinical investigation unit of teaching hospital recruiting from diabetes clinics of five teaching hospitals and one district general hospital.
Subjects —
17 patients with insulin dependent diabetes mellitus of more than five years' duration who had reported altered hypoglycaemia awareness within three months of transferring to human insulin.
Main outcome measures —
Glycaemic control and frequency of hypoglycaemic episodes during two months' treatment with each insulin.
Glucose thresholds for physiological and symptomatic responses during clamping.
Results —
Glycaemic control did not change with either insulin. 136 hypoglycaemic episodes (eight severe) were reported with human insulin and 149 (nine severe) with porcine insulin (95% confidence interval -4 to 2.5, p=0.63).
20 episodes of biochemical hypoglycaemia occurred with human insulin versus 18 with porcine insulin (-0.8 to 1, p=0.78).
During controlled hypoglycaemia the mean adrenaline response was 138 nmol/l/240 min for both insulins; neurohormonal responses were triggered at 3.0 (SE 0.2) versus 3.1 (0.2) mmol/l of glucose for adrenaline and 2.5 (0.1) versus 2.5 (0.1) mmol/l for subjective awareness.
Conclusions —
These data suggest that human insulin per se does not affect the presentation of hypoglycaemia or the neurohumoral, symptomatic, and cognitive function responses to hypoglycaemia in insulin dependent diabetic patients with a history of hypoglycaemia unawareness.
Introduction
There has been considerable public concern about reduced hypoglycaemia awareness in patients taking human insulin.
Impaired awareness of warning symptoms in patients transferred from animal insulins has been reported, risking increased frequency of severe hypoglycaemia.
Although most studies have reported that the incidence of severe hypoglycaemia is not affected by introducing human insulin, the Swiss group which first described problems with human insulin has published two further studies which seem to support their initial contention.
The mechanisms underlying loss of awareness of hypoglycaemia have been extensively investigated.
Impairment of neurohumoral responses to experimentally induced hypoglycaemia has been shown in two groups of patients — those with a history of recurrent severe hypoglycaemia and those receiving intensified insulin therapy.
Most comparisons between human and animal insulins have been based on responses to acute hypoglycaemia, often in non-diabetic subjects, and have found little or no difference between responses with the different species of insulins.
A recent study on patients who were selected because of changes in warning symptoms associated with the change of insulin species found no differences between responses to hypoglycaemia induced by porcine or human insulin.
This report was criticised because of the small number of patients studied and because patients had not been stabilised on each insulin before acute hypoglycaemia was induced.
We conducted a crossover double blind study in a larger sample of patients with altered perception of hypoglycaemia after changing to human insulin.
Patients were established on porcine and human insulin before experimental hypoglycaemia was induced.
Subjects and methods
We recruited subjects from the diabetes clinics of five teaching hospitals and one district general hospital.
The clinic physicians were asked to refer any patient with insulin dependent diabetes mellitus who had experienced either severe hypoglycaemia without warning or who relied on others to detect their hypoglycaemia after transferring to human insulin.
We contacted patients for a preliminary interview to assess their history, and if they met the study criteria they were invited to join the study.
Patients had to have had insulin treated diabetes mellitus for more than five years and a history of altered awareness of hypoglycaemia within three months of transferring to human insulin.
Patients with ischaemic heart disease, epilepsy or non-hypoglycaemia related seizure disorder, uncontrolled hypertension, or unstable proliferative retinopathy, and those taking drugs that might interfere with autonomic or cognitive function or their ability to complete the study were excluded.
We used the threshold glucose concentration for counterregulation as the main parameter to calculate sample size.
The intrapatient standard deviation for this parameter was assumed to be 0.6 mmol/l.
To detect a difference of 0.6 mmol/l 17 patients would be required for 80% power at the 5% significance level.
Thirty two patients volunteered for the study, of whom eight were unsuitable for study (because of untreated hypothyroidism, erratic diet and exercise, depression, a renal transplant, taking anticoagulants, taking benzodiazepines (two), insufficient time).
Two additional patients seen by the recruiting centre  refused to participate because they had restarted treatment with animal insulin and would not take human insulin again.
Of the 24 patients who fulfilled the entry criteria, six were unable to comply with the exigencies of the protocol and did not complete the run in period and one patient was later found to be misusing drugs and her data were not included in the analysis.
Thus 17 (five women) patients completed the study.
The mean (SD) age of the study group was 36 (11) years) and mean duration of diabetes 18 (7.9) years.
Six patients had asymptomatic autonomic neuropathy with a R-R interval variation of less than 10 beats per minute without postural hypotension and four had background retinopathy.
Two patients were taking antihypertensive drugs (one captopril and frusemide and the other methyldopa), one of whom had impaired renal function and had required laser therapy for retinopathy.
Each subject was studied for six months.
Throughout the study subjects were asked to complete at least one seven point home blood glucose monitoring profile a week and to collect a series of capillary blood samples simultaneously with the home monitoring profile at least once a fortnight.
Subjects were asked to complete a simple questionnaire every time they experienced hypoglycaemia.
The questionnaire used the term ‘mild’ to describe all self treated episodes and ‘severe’to describe all episodes where help was needed from a second person.
Data were recorded at clinic visits every two weeks, at which time blood was taken for measurement of fructosamine concentrations.
Insulin doses were not altered throughout the study except to ensure (on the basis of the home blood glucose test results) that glycaemic control was not altered or to avoid unacceptable hypoglycaemia (mainly during the run in phase).
The first two months was a run in phase during which patients remained on their usual insulin.
After this, subjects were allocated to treatment with each insulin species (pyr human insulin (human Actrapid and Protaphane, Novo Nordisk, Copenhagen, Denmark) or porcine insulin (Actrapid and Insulatard, Novo Nordisk), for two months in random order.
Randomisation was blocked so that the two possible sequences (pork/human, human/pork) were evenly distributed among subjects.
Investigators and subjects were blinded to insulin type and the insulins were given in random order.
At enrolment and at the end of each treatment period, subjects and their closest relative or friend completed a questionnaire about symptoms and signs during hypoglycaemia.
At the end of each treatment period each subject's responses to hypoglycaemia were formally tested by a slow fall hypoglycaemic clamp with soluble insulin of the species the subject was currently taking.
The slow fall clamp technique has been described previously.
In brief, subjects were admitted to the metabolic unit on the evening before study and overnight glucose control was achieved by monitored intravenous insulin infusion.
Subjects fasted from midnight and in the morning a primed continuous intravenous infusion of soluble insulin (in a 4% solution of the subject's blood in 0.9% saline) was started, with a maintenance rate of 1.5 mU/kg/min.
Blood glucose concentration was held at 5 mmol/l for 40 minutes by simultaneous infusion of 20% glucose (Baxter Health Care, Thetford, Norfolk) and then reduced stepwise over the next 220 minutes to a low of 2 mmol/l; then the concentration was restored to 5 mmol/l and held there until 260 minutes.
Arterialised venous blood (from a retrograde distal intravenous cannula with a hot air box to warm the hand) was sampled throughout for glucose, insulin, and counterregulatory hormones.
Subjective awareness was assessed by a questionnaire listing 52 symptoms (including dummies unrelated to hypoglycaemia) which the patient ranked on a linear analogue scale from 0 (none) to 6 (very severe).
Symptom scores were calculated from the questionnaires as the increase over the baseline score for autonomic symptoms (sweating, heart pounding, warmness, anxiety, tingling, and trembling), neuroglycopenic symptoms (inability to concentrate, confusion, drowsiness, tiredness, dizziness, weakness, blurred vision, and irritability), and total symptoms (autonomic plus neuroglycopenic score).
Cerebral function was tested by measuring four choice reaction times twice at each glucose plateau.
Reaction times were recorded five times at euglycaemia before starting to eliminate a learning effect.
The study was approved by the ethics committee of the United Medical and Dental Schools of Guy's and St Thomas's Hospitals.
Written informed consent was obtained from each patient before enrolment.
measurements and calculations
Plasma glucose (during clinical monitoring) and blood glucose (during the clamps) concentrations were measured by a glucose oxidase method (Yellow Springs glucose analyser, Yellow Springs Instrument, Ohio, United States).
Catecholamine concentrations were measured by high pressure liquid chromatography, and cortisol, glucagon, growth hormone, and free insulin concentrations by radioimmunoassays.
Paired studies were measured in the same assay runs.
Intra-assay variation for any assay was less than 10%.
Demographic data are presented as mean (SD); elsewhere data are quoted as mean (SE) unless otherwise stated.
Observations during two months' treatment with porcine insulin were compared with observations during treatment with human insulin, by the paired Student's t test.
This test was also used to compare total hormonal responses to human and porcine insulin in the clamp studies.
During clamps a significant rise in plasma hormone concentration was defined as a concentration greater than the mean of the five baseline (euglycaemic) values plus two standard deviations in two or more consecutive samples.
For symptom scores a significant increase was defined as a rise in score of two points or more over the score at euglycaemia, again for two or more consecutive readings.
A significant deterioration in cognitive function was defined as two or more consecutive increments of 5% or more in the mean time taken for a correct response and of 2% or more in the error rate with the last of the five euglycaemic test scores used as baseline.
The glucose concentration at the time of onset of a significant change in each parameter was identified for each subject and data were compared by paired Student's t test or Wilcoxon signed rank tests, as appropriate.
When a subject did not show a significant change during the clamp test, a glucose concentration of 2 mmol/l was assigned for statistical comparisons of glucose thresholds.
Data were analysed with the statistical program SPSS, version 4.0 (SPSS, Chicago, Illinois, United States).
p Values less than 0.05 were considered significant.
Results
clinical period
The mean (SE) fructosamine concentration was the same (2.8 (0.1) mmol/l) after two months' treatment with human and porcine insulin.
The mean insulin dose was 51(5) U/day for both insulins.
Subjects reported 153 episodes of hypoglycaemia during the run in phase (taking their usual insulin), 136 hypoglycaemic episodes (8 (1.8) per patient) while taking human  insulin, and 149 episodes (8.8 (2.2)) while taking porcine insulin (95% confidence interval -4 to 2.5; p=0.63); 10, eight, and nine episodes respectively were severe.
The seven point 24 hour blood glucose profiles showed 25 (1.4 (0.3) per patient) episodes of biochemical hypoglycaemia (blood glucose <2.8 mmol/l) during the run in period, 20 (1.2 (0.3)) with human insulin, and 18 (1.1 (0.2)) with porcine insulin (-0.8 to 1; p=0.78).
As doses were not adjusted when changing insulin species we also examined the frequency of hypoglycaemic episodes in the first two weeks after each conversion.
This showed 46 episodes (2.7 (0.6) per patient), of which 41 were mild, on transferring to human insulin versus 29 episodes (1.7 (0.6)), of which 26 were mild, on transferring to porcine insulin (-0.1 to 2; p=0.08).
No significant differences were found in the frequency of hypoglycaemia during the last six weeks of each treatment period (90 (5.3 (1.4) per patient) with human insulin v 120 (7.1 (1.9)) with porcine insulin (-4.5 to 1.2; p=0.22)).
After two months' treatment with human insulin five subjects described increased symptoms during clinical hypoglycaemia (three autonomic, one neuroglycopenic, and one both) while two reported reduced symptoms.
Five reported increased symptoms while taking porcine insuline (three autonomic, one neuroglycopenic, and one both).
There were no significant differences between the total, autonomic, and neuroglycopenic scores reported by subjects to be important to them at the beginning of a hypoglycaemic attack or later during its progression.
Table I shows the scores for all symptoms included in the end of treatment questionnaire.
Nor did the questionnaires completed by patients' relatives show any differences in the signs of hypoglycaemia with either insulin (median (range) score for signs at onset of hypoglycaemia 34 (4–48) for human insulin v 32.5 (5–45) for porcine; 95% confidence interval -5 to 15,Z =0.3, p=0.79).
Nine patients correctly identified the species of insulin they were receiving, six were wrong, and two did not know.
The data on the nine subjects who correctly identified each insulin were analysed separately but the results were not different from those of the whole group.
clamp studies
The steady state plasma concentration of free insulin during the clamps was 67 (9) mU/l with human insulin and 62 (5) mU/l with porcine insulin (p=0.56).
There were no significant differences between the blood glucose profiles in the two studies (fig 1 (top)).
The adrenaline responses (fig 1 (bottom)) were similar for the two insulins (area under the curve 138 (25) nmol/l/ 240 min (human)v 138 (21) nmol/l/240 min (porcine); 95% confidence interval -51 to 51; p=0.9).
The glucose concentration at which the adrenaline rose significantly was 3.0 (0.2) mmol/l (human)v 3.1 (0.2) mmol/l (porcine); 95% confidence interval -0.6 to 0.4, p=0.66).
There were no significant differences between the two insulins in responses or glucose thresholds for release of the other counterregulatory hormones (table II).
Subjective awareness (a positive answer to the question ‘Do you feel low?’) occurred at a lower blood glucose concentration than the initial adrenaline response but the threshold was identical for the two insulins (2.5 (0.1) mmol/l).
There were no significant differences in the glucose thresholds for a two point increase in symptom scores (table I).
Median (range) symptom scores at the lowest glucose concentration were similar for the two insulins (total score: human 8 (0–21)v porcine 6 (0–31)(95% confidence interval -4 to 3,Z =0.54, p=0.59); autonomic score: 3 (0–9)v 3 (0–10),(-2 to 2,Z =-0.25, p=0.79); and neuroglycopenic score: 2 (0–16)v 5 (0–21),(-3.5 to 2,Z =-0.47, p=0.63)).
Performance on the four choice reaction time deteriorated with hypoglycaemia and improved again  as euglycaemia was restored with both insulins.
The glucose concentration at which noticeable slowing first occurred was 2.8 (0.2) for human insulin and 2.7 (0.1) mmol/l for porcine insulin (95% confidence interval -0.3 to 0.2; p=0.58).
Loss of accuracy was demonstrable at a blood glucose concentration of 2.7 (0.2) mmol/l with human insulin and 2.6 (0.1) mmol/l with porcine insulin (-0.3 to 0.5, p=0.52).
A trend towards earlier deterioration in performance with porcine insulin (fig 2) was not significant.
Discussion
The possibility that transferring to human insulin adversely affects the incidence and presentation of hypoglycaemia has been extensively aired in the lay press and has given rise to much public concern.
Legal action has been threatened.
Clinic surveys in Scotland, America, and Germany have failed to confirm an association but have been criticised for flaws in study design.
There have been few controlled prospective studies of the effect of transferring to human insulin on the clinical presentation of hypoglycaemia.
We found no change in the frequency of mild or severe hypoglycaemia during random double blind conversion to human insulin without change in glycaemic control which suggests that no causal relation exists.
It is unlikely that the (insignificantly) lower incidence of hypoglycaemia with human insulin in our study was due to loss of awareness and therefore reduced detection of hypoglycaemia because the incidence of severe and biochemical hypoglycaemic episodes did not differ for the two insulin species on routine monitoring.
Attempts to avoid altered glycaemic control, which is a confounding variable, during the study might have masked a tendency for increased hypoglycaemia with human insulin, but since insulin doses did not change throughout the study this is also unlikely.
A type 2 statistical error is possible in a clinical study of 17 patients, but our observations were very precise and carefully validated and agree with the results of a recent much larger study from Australia.
Our data therefore do not support the hypothesis that transferring to human insulin by itself alters the frequency or experience of hypoglycaemia.
clamp studies
During formal testing we found no differences in the hormonal responses to hypoglycaemia or the subjective awareness or type of symptoms experienced during hypoglycaemia with the two human species.
Neither the size of the responses nor the glucose concentration at which they began during stepped slow fall hypoglycaemia was different.
These findings agree with those of several published studies that did not precede the clamp study with two months' treatment with the study insulin as we did.
Responses to hypoglycaemia in a laboratory setting have been reported to be different in patients taking human and animal insulin.
But many of the studies have been on non-diabetic subjects and the hypoglycaemic stimulus was not always identical.
One study found an earlier increase in latency of the P300 wave (an electrophysiological measurement thought to relate to cortical function) during controlled hypoglycaemia with porcine insulin.
The authors suggested that the earlier (albeit transient) change in cerebral function with porcine insulin might be responsible for earlier triggering of counterregulatory and symptomatic responses to hypoglycaemia.
We found a small tendency for an earlier deterioration in cognitive function, with loss of speed and accuracy of the four choice reaction during the controlled hypoglycaemia induced by porcine insulin but this did not achieve significance.
The lack of difference in either hormonal or symptomatic responses suggests that an earlier change in cerebral function with porcine insulin is not associated with earlier warning during hypoglycaemia and may be deleterious.
Responses to controlled hypoglycaemia induced in a laboratory setting cannot be directly applied to the clinical situation.
However, there is good precedent for using such methods to investigate the mechanisms underlying altered responsiveness and particularly loss of awareness of hypoglycaemia.
Controlled experimental hypoglycaemia induced by a clamp technique similar to that which we used clearly showed delayed and diminished hormonal and symptomatic responses to hypoglycaemia in diabetic patients receiving intensified insulin therapy — a situation in which loss of awareness of hypoglycaemia and increased risk of severe hypoglycaemia is well described.
Similarly, laboratory testing has identified defective counterregulation in other patients with hypoglycaemia unawareness.
The advantages of such testing include its precision with relatively small numbers of subjects.
Furthermore, the guarantee of identical hypoglycaemic stimuli in all circumstances allows direct comparison of the results.
conclusions
This study was designed to investigate the possibility that transferring to human insulin has a direct effect on the perception and experience of hypoglycaemia.
It cannot rule out a difference in the pharmacokinetics of insulins from different species.
The evidence suggests that human insulin is a faster and shorter acting insulin and caution should be exercised in transferring patients from animal insulins.
Overnight control can be difficult with intermediate acting human insulins.
Even so, we would expect that any systematic difference between the two insulins which was causally associated with loss of awareness of hypoglycaemia would have been detected in our study design.
Our subjects had experienced a change in their hypoglycaemic experience, which they had attributed to their use of human insulin, although most of them were still using it.
An irreversible alteration of hypoglycaemia response might have occurred, but this would not be compatible with reports of reversal of hypoglycaemia unawareness on return to animal insulin.
If human insulin does not cause a problem with hypoglycaemia awareness, what does?
Most of our subjects had long duration disease and their diabetes was tightly controlled — both factors known to interfere with hypoglycaemia awareness.
This is also true of the patients in the Swiss clinic where doctors continue to describe problems with recognition of hypoglycaemia.
The lack of change in metabolic control during our study may explain the stability of the hypoglycaemic experience of our subjects throughout.
It remains possible that a few patients are susceptible to a change in insulin species, and obviously patients who are unhappy with human insulin should not remain on it.
But our results argue against any systematic adverse effect of human insulin.
Umbilical cord clamping and preterm infants: a randomised trial
Abstract
Objective —
To investigate the clinical effects of regulating umbilical cord clamping in preterm infants.
Design —
A prospective randomised study.
Setting —
The Queen Mother's Hospital, Glasgow.
Subjects —
36 vaginally delivered infants over 27 and under 33 weeks' gestation.
Intervention —
Holding the infant 20 cm below the introitus for 30 seconds before clamping the umbilical cord (‘regulated’ group, 17 patients), or conventional management (‘random’group, 19 patients).
Main outcome measures —
Initial packed cell volume, peak serum bilirubin concentrations, red cell transfusion requirements, and respiratory impairment (assessed by ventilatory requirements, arterial-alveolar oxygen tension ratio over the first day in ventilated infants, and duration of dependence on supplemental oxygen).
Results —
There were statistically significant differences between the two groups in mean initial packed cell volume (regulated group 0.564, random group 0.509) and median red cell transfusion requirements (regulated group zero, random group 23 ml/kg).
13 infants from each group underwent mechanical ventilation and showed significant differences in mean minimum arterial-alveolar oxygen tension ratio on the first day (regulated group 0.42, random group 0.22) and in median duration of dependence on supplemental oxygen (regulated group three days, random group 10 days).
Differences in final outcome measures such as duration of supplemental oxygen dependence and red cell transfusion requirements were mediated primarily through arterial-alveolar oxygen tension ratio and also packed cell volume.
Conclusions —
This intervention at preterm deliveries produces clinical and economic benefits.
Introduction
Despite historical controversy the umbilical cord is generally clamped immediately, particularly after preterm delivery.
There is greater awareness of the problems of excessive placental transfusion (hyperbilirubinaemia, polycythaemia and hypervolaemia) than of the hazards of hypovolaemia, but claims of reduced preterm mortality with delayed umbilical cord ligation have been made for years.
We report the clinical effects of a 30 second delay in cord clamping, holding the preterm infant in a position facilitating placental transfusion.
Patients and methods
Vaginally delivered infants over 27 and below 33 weeks' gestation were randomised immediately before delivery by means of sealed envelopes to either a ‘regulated’ group or a ‘random’group.
In the regulated group the attendant was asked to hold the infant 20 cm below the introitus for 30 seconds before clamping the umbilical cord.
In the random group management was at the attendant's discretion.
An observer recorded the infant's position relative to the introitus and the interval from delivery of the buttocks (or of the head at assisted breech delivery) to cord clamping.
Infants with haemolytic disease or with major congenital malformations were excluded from analysis.
Seventeen infants were enrolled in the regulated group and 19 in the random group.
Table I shows their characteristics.
All but one (regulated group) were above the 10th centile for weight.
There was a chance excess of boys in the regulated group.
All infants in the regulated group had their cords clamped between 25 and 35 seconds after delivery; positioning 20 cm below the introitus was possible in all but two cases.
The median interval to cord clamping in the random group was 10 seconds, and clamping was within 20 seconds in all but one case (25 seconds).
Only one infant in the random group was held below the introitus.
Outcome measures recorded included Apgar scores, initial packed cell volume, peak serum bilirubin concentrations recorded, red cell transfusions required and respiratory impairment assessed by ventilatory requirements, arterial-alveolar oxygen tension ratio over the first day in ventilated infants, and duration of dependence on supplemental oxygen.
Packed cell volume was measured in the first arterial or venous blood sample obtained, usually when establishing arterial access.
It was not logistically feasible to standardise the sampling time; in 23 of the 36 cases this was between 45 and 120 minutes after birth.
The distribution of sampling times in both groups was comparable.
The arterial-alveolar oxygen tension ratio was calculated with each arterial blood gas analysis over the first day.
Unit policy was consistent over the study period.
Infants under 30 weeks' gestation were electively ventilated from birth.
The study was terminated when exogenous surfactant was introduced because this influenced our respiratory outcome measures.
Statistical methods — Sample sizes of 15 to 20 in each group were targeted to detect a reduction in median number of transfusions from two to one per infant and an increase in the mean of median arterial-alveolar oxygen tension ratios on day 1 from 0.3 to 0.5 with a power of 80% and a significance level of 5%.
Where normality for each group separately was found to be appropriate by using probability plots a two sample t test was used to compare the mean values of each variable of interest between the regulated and random groups.
In cases where the assumption of equal variances was found to be unreasonable an approximate version of the two sample t test was adopted.
When normality for either group was not reasonable the corresponding test used was the Mann-Whitney, although this assumed that the shapes of the two underlying distributions (for regulated and random) were identical but possibly shifted in terms of the median.
To investigate relations between sets of  possible explanatory factors and each outcome variable a stepwise multiple linear regression analysis was used.
At each step variables were available for inclusion or exclusion as appropriate.
Checks on the final model included residual plots, probability plots of residuals, and formal tests of equality of slopes for the two groups where appropriate.
Results
There were no significant differences between the groups in Apgar scores, admission temperature, or blood pressure stability on the first day.
Two infants in the regulated group and three in the random group did not develop the respiratory distress syndrome; one of these (random group) had been ventilated electively.
Thirteen infants in each group were ventilated; table II shows their characteristics.
Table III shows overall results, and table IV results for the 26 ventilated infants.
Mean and standard deviation of normally distributed results are shown; otherwise median and range are given.
Seven of 13 ventilated infants in the random group required multiple red cell transfusions compared with one of 13 in the regulated group (p=0.03; Fisher's exact test).
For those not requiring red cell transfusion there was no difference in packed cell volume between the groups at 1 month.
Ten of 13 ventilated infants in the random group received fractions of inspired oxygen of 0.6 or more compared with two of 13 in the regulated group (p<0.01; χ&sup2; test).
Median and minimum arterial-alveolar oxygen tension ratios for ventilated infants on the first day were significantly lower in the random group.
The difference in duration of ventilation was not significant but median duration of supplemental oxygen dependence was shorter for infants in the regulated group; this reached statistical significance for infants who had been ventilated.
Three infants in the random group developed chronic lung disease.
Maximum serum bilirubin concentrations recorded were comparable, but one infant in the random group received an exchange transfusion for hyperbilirubinaemia.
Hospital discharge age was similar for the two groups.
There were no neonatal deaths.
One infant in the random group later died unexpectedly at home.
Table V shows results of stepwise multiple linear regression analysis of outcome variables from the ventilated infants.
Primary explanatory factors considered were birth weight, gestational age, gender, and treatment group.
Treatment group was the most important determinant of the outcome measures considered; these included three ‘first day’ measures which may themselves be useful predictors of subsequent outcome — that is, median and minimum arterial-alveolar oxygen tension ratios and packed cell volume.
Stepwise regression was therefore repeated adding these to the set of possible explanatory factors, as shown in table VI.
Median arterial-alveolar oxygen tension ratio was more important in predicting respiratory outcome whereas minimum arterial-alveolar oxygen tension ratio emerged as the most important predictor for peak serum bilirubin concentration and number of red cell transfusions.
First day packed cell volume also emerged as a predictor of transfusion requirements.
The effect of treatment group on final outcome measures appears to be mediated largely through its effect on arterial-alveolar  oxygen tension ratio and to some extent packed cell volume.
Discussion
Immediate umbilical cord clamping deprives neonates of a significant volume of blood.
Although this has no obvious effect on healthy term infants, it may compromise sick and preterm patients.
The significant difference in mean packed cell volume between our groups suggests that ‘regulated’ cord clamping enhanced placental transfusion.
No infant developed polycythaemia or suffered adverse effects on Apgar scores or temperature.
Our inability to standardise the timing of the initial packed cell volume is unfortunate as large changes in plasma volume occur in the first few hours of life.
Red cell volume would be a more objective indicator of placental transfusion.
However, the significant difference in packed cell volume between the groups remained when only those samples obtained within the first two hours were compared and also when only those obtained from the third hour onwards were compared.
The immediate haemodynamic effect of interrupting blood flow to the low resistance placental circulation while the umbilical arteries are pulsating is an abrupt rise in systemic arterial pressure with possible deleterious effects.
Hofmeyr et al demonstrated this pressure surge in a term infant and postulated that it contributes to the development of periventricular and intraventricular haemorrhage in preterm infants.
They showed a reduction in incidence of such haemorrhages in vaginally delivered infants of less than 35 weeks' gestation with a one minute delay in cord clamping.
In our groups there was no significant difference in the incidence of periventricular and intraventricular haemorrhages.
Two cases of posthaemorrhagic ventricular dilatation arose, both in the random group.
The lower transfusion requirements in the regulated group reflected milder illness with less investigational blood loss but may also have related to a greater initial endowment of red cells and their precursors.
We have shown that haemoglobin concentrations over 150 g/l in the first week tend to protect infants from red cell transfusion.
Clapp et al have shown that cord blood between 25 and 31 weeks' gestation is particularly rich in haemopoietic stem cells.
Thus placental transfusion may be important in constitution of the preterm infant's bone marrow.
Associations have been shown between low packed cell volume or red cell volume, or both, and the respiratory distress syndrome.
Although the correlation between packed cell volume and red cell volume in sick patients is not close, the higher packed cell volume in our regulated group probably reflected an enhanced red cell volume.
We have shown that red cell volume predicts outcome in preterm infants.
Several studies have suggested that delaying cord clamping protects against the respiratory distress syndrome, although others have failed to confirm or even refuted this.
Varying definitions both of respiratory distress and of the terms ‘early’ and ‘delayed’confound comparison of these studies.
Although the incidence of the respiratory distress syndrome was similar in our groups there were significant differences in variables reflecting disease severity.
Fewer infants in the regulated group required high inspired oxygen concentrations, their median supplemental oxygen dependence time was shorter, and their first day arterial-alveolar oxygen tension ratios were more favourable.
The excess of boys in this group makes these differences more remarkable.
Jäykkä described the importance of capillary erection in lung expansion at birth.
Maintaining the fetoplacental circulation intact until respiration is established allows drawing of blood from the placental ‘reservoir,’ facilitating pulmonary capillary filling and achieving better lung perfusion.
We did not time onset of respiration relative to cord clamping but many infants in the regulated group were already crying.
This was less likely in infants in the random group, half of whom underwent cord clamping within 10 seconds of delivery.
More effective lung perfusion and expansion may have contributed to the more favourable arterial-alveolar oxygen tension ratios in the regulated group.
The arterial-alveolar oxygen tension ratio is a useful prognostic indicator.
Tarnow-Mordi et al found the mean arterial-alveolar oxygen tension ratio more closely associated with death than the worst arterial-alveolar oxygen tension ratio.
This accords with our finding that median arterial-alveolar oxygen tension ratio predicts respiratory outcome better than the minimum ratio.
The former may reflect severity of lung disease, the latter exacerbations of intrapulmonary shunting such as occur with hypovolaemia.
In our study the minimum arterial-alveolar oxygen tension ratio was a predictor of transfusion requirements and of hyperbilirubinaemia.
It correlated inversely with peak serum bilirubin concentrations (r =0.61; p=0.001), as did the initial packed cell volume in ventilated infants (r =0.40; p=0.044).
Improved splanchnic and hepatic perfusion may result from enhanced blood volume.
However, long (one and five minute) delays in cord clamping progressively increase the severity of neonatal jaundice in premature infants.
We found no significant difference in peak recorded serum bilirubin concentrations between the groups.
In summary, a 30 second delay in cord clamping with the infant held 20 cm below the introitus gives a higher initial packed cell volume and higher arterial-alveolar oxygen tension ratios (implying less right to left shunting of deoxygenated blood at cardiac or pulmonary level) on the first day.
These independent intermediary outcome variables are both associated with improved final outcome.
This improvement in outcome implies economic as well as clinical benefit.
For example, the reduced need for red cell transfusions in the regulated group saved expenditure and patient exposure to transfusion hazards.
Had exogenous surfactant been available during the study eight of the 13 ventilated infants in the random group would have qualified for ‘rescue’ treatment by entry criteria for recent multicentre trials compared with only two of the 13 ventilated infants in the regulated group (p<0.02; χ&sup2; test) with obvious financial implications.
Reviews in the early 1980s called for reactivation of research to establish the optimal positioning of the newborn infant and the optimal time for umbilical cord clamping at preterm deliveries.
Different cord clamping practices at vaginal delivery and at caesarean section still need to be evaluated in terms of effect on blood and red cell volumes and on physiological adaptations to extrauterine life in preterm infants.
This should provide a simple, non-invasive means of reducing the costly morbidity associated with preterm birth.
Comparison of reduction in microalbuminuria by enalapril and hydrochlorothiazide in normotensive patients with insulin dependent diabetes
Abstract
Objective —
To compare the effects of sodium depletion and of angiotensin I converting enzyme inhibition on microalbuminuria in insulin dependent diabetes.
Design —
Randomised, double blind, double dummy parallel study of normotensive diabetic patients with persistent microalbuminuria (30–300 mg/24 h) treated with enalapril or hydrochlorothiazide for one year after a three month, single blind placebo period.
Setting —
Diabetic clinic in a tertiary referral centre.
Patients —
10 diabetic patients with low microalbuminuria (30–99 mg/24 h) and 11 with high microalbuminuria (100–300 mg/24 h).
Interventions —
11 subjects (six with low microalbuminuria, five with high microalbuminuria) were given enalapril 20 mg plus placebo hydrochlorothiazide once daily and 10 (four with low microalbuminuria, six with high microalbuminuria) hydrochlorothiazide 25 mg plus placebo enalapril once daily.
Main outcome measures —
Monthly assessment of urinary albumin excretion and mean arterial pressure; plasma active renin and aldosterone concentrations and renal function studies at 0, 6, and 12 months.
Results —
Median urinary albumin excretion decreased from 59 (range 37–260) to 38 (14–146) mg/24 h with enalapril and from 111 (33–282) to 109 (33–262) mg/24 h with hydrochlorothiazide (analysis of variance, p=0.0436).
During the last three months of treatment with enalapril five patients had persistent normoalbuminuria (2–3 times below 30 mg/24 h), five low microalbuminuria, and one high microalbuminuria; in the hydrochlorothiazide group one had normoalbuminuria, three low microalbuminuria, and six high microalbuminuria (χ test=6.7; p=0.03).
Mean arterial pressure did not differ before (98 (SD 7) with enalapril v 97 (9) mm Hg with hydrochloro-thiazide) or during treatment (88 (7) with enalapril v 90 (7) mm Hg with hydrochlorothiazide (analysis of variance, p=0.5263)).
Glomerular filtration rate did not vary.
The aldosterone to active renin ratio was decreased by angiotensin I converting enzyme inhibition and increased by sodium depletion, showing treatment efficacy.
Conclusion —
Angiotensin I converting enzyme inhibition by enalapril effectively reduces microalbuminuria in normotensive diabetic patients whereas hydrochlorothiazide is not effective.
Changes in blood pressure and activity of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system may contribute to these different effects.
Introduction
Diabetic nephropathy kills many patients with insulin dependent diabetes.
Data on experimental animals show that it may be the long term consequence of glomerular haemodynamic abnormalities induced by long term hyperglycaemia.
Although systemic blood pressure remains normal, glomerular capillary hydraulic pressure becomes raised because of the imbalance between vasodilatation of the vessels before  the glomerulus and vasoconstriction of those after the glomerulus.
Results in studies of diabetic patients are consistent with this hypothesis.
Persistent microalbuminuria — that is, urinary albumin excretion between normal values and values giving positive results with test strips — predicts diabetic nephropathy and is an early sign of kidney disease.
Intervention trials were performed in normotensive patients with insulin-dependent diabetes and microalbuminuria.
Strict glycaemic control by using portable insulin pumps can arrest progression towards diabetic nephropathy, but this method's safety must be considered in the long term.
A low protein diet is also effective, but compliance with such a regimen may be a problem.
Lastly, we and others have reported that long term treatment with angiotensin I converting enzyme inhibitors can normalise urinary albumin excretion in normotensive diabetic patients with microalbuminuria and prevent diabetic nephropathy.
The decrease in microalbuminuria observed with angiotensin I converting enzyme inhibitors in normotensive diabetic patients could be the result of inhibition of the renin–angiotensin system's effects on blood pressure or its effect on intraglomerular haemodynamics, or both.
It is important to delineate these drugs' mechanisms of action in decreasing urinary albumin excretion in diabetic patients because classic antihypertensive drugs reduce both the rate of progression of diabetic nephropathy and microalbuminuria in normotensive diabetic patients in the short term.
Therefore, intervention with hypotensive drugs other than angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitors should be considered.
In a recent report no difference was found between the effects of perindopril and nifedipine on patients' microalbuminuria and blood pressure over one year.
To discover whether blockade of the renin-angiotensin system by angiotensin I converting enzyme inhibitors contributes to reducing microalbuminuria in normotensive diabetic patients independently of the fall in blood pressure, we compared enalapril's effects on urinary albumin excretion with those of another antihypertensive drug, hydrochlorothiazide, which, unlike enalapril, decreases blood pressure by sodium depletion while stimulating the renin-angiotensin system.
Hydrochlorothiazide is a longstanding antihypertensive drug used as first line treatment in essential hypertension and has also been used safely in normotensive subjects with idiopathic hypercalciuria.
Subclinical sodium retention may be an important feature in insulin treated patients who have diabetic glomerulopathy, even if the renin-angiotensin system activity seems to be normal in such patients.
If sodium retention has an important role in the development of diabetic renal disease a diuretic drug should reduce blood pressure and protect renal function.
The primary objective of our study was to compare the changes in microalbuminuria resulting from long term sodium depletion induced by hydrochlorotiazide with those resulting from inhibition of the renin-angiotensin system.
Patients and methods
patients
Patients were selected from a group of 496 patients with insulin dependent diabetes who attended our clinic regularly, according to the following criteria: they were aged 18–60, had insulin dependent diabetes mellitus of at least five years' duration, had a stable body mass index not exceeding 30 kg/m, a glycated haemoglobin concentration of less than 10%, were not hypertensive (supine blood pressure less than 160/95 mm Hg and no antihypertensive treatment), had persistent microalbuminuria — that is, urinary albumin excretion between 30 and 300 mg/24 h at least twice during the previous six months — were not pregnant or wanting to be pregnant, and had no chronic disease other than diabetes.
Thirty four patients fulfilled these criteria; of these, 25 gave informed written consent to participate in the study.
The protocol was approved by the local ethics committee.
All patients gave themselves two or more insulin injections daily.
Some women took progesterone derivatives as contraception (cases 1, 4, 9, 10, 19, and 23; see table I).
No other long term treatment was otherwise taken.
study design
After a run in period of three months taking placebo given in a single blind fashion the patients were randomised into two groups by blocks of four using a computer generated random number list.
This trial was a parallel, double blind, double placebo trial for one year comparing 20 mg enalapril plus placebo hydrochlorothiazide (enalapril group) with placebo enalapril plus 25 mg hydrochlorothiazide (hydrochlorothiazide group).
Tablets were taken every morning.
The doses of 20 mg enalapril and 25 mg hydrochlorothiazide were chosen because they had a similar hypotensive effect in a previous short term pilot study we conducted in diabetic patients with similar characteristics.
The goal of treatment was to lower diastolic blood pressure below 85 mm Hg.
If diastolic blood pressure rose over 85 mm Hg after the first three months of active treatment investigators were allowed to double the number of tablets — that is, two tablets of 20 mg enalapril plus two tablets of placebo hydrochlorothiazide, or two tablets of placebo enalapril plus two tablets of 25 mg hydrochlorothiazide.
This occurred in cases 2 (enalapril group) and 20 (hydrochlorothiazide group)(see table I).
Patients with diastolic blood pressure above 85 mm Hg after six months of active treatment were excluded from the study.
This occurred in case 20.
Tablets were provided by Merck, Sharp, and Dohme and were kept with the randomisation schedule in the hospital pharmacy.
Tablets were provided to the patients on each visit.
Unused tablets were counted, allowing compliance with treatment to be estimated at greater than 90% in all patients.
At the end of the treatment period the subjects with a persistently normal urinary albumin excretion (less than 30 mg/24 h) were left untreated and followed up regularly for this variable.
Those with urinary albumin excretion above 30 mg/24 h were assigned to 20 mg enalapril per day in an open fashion.
Blood pressure, 24 hour urinary excretion of albumin, sodium, and urea, weight, and insulin doses were recorded every month from the beginning of the run in period to the end of the treatment period.
Glycated haemoglobin and plasma electrolyte concentrations were checked every two months.
Serum angiotensin I converting enzyme activity and plasma concentrations of renin, aldosterone, lipids, and electrolytes were measured at each renal function study — that is at time 0 and after 6 and 12 months of treatment.
The patients were instructed to follow a constant isocaloric diet (mean 9098 (SD 1574) J/day) composed of 50% carbohydrate, 35% lipid, and 15% protein without any restriction of sodium intake.
The same investigator (MH) managed all patients throughout the study.
measurements
Urinary albumin excretion was measured monthly in 24 hour urine samples by nephelometry (sensitivity of the assay 0.2 mg/l; intra-assay and interassay variability 4% and 5% respectively).
Variability in 24 hour urinary albumin excretion within and between subjects was 35% and 66% respectively.
After log transformation of urinary albumin excretion the variabilities were 8% and 14% respectively.
We classified each participant as having persistently normal urinary albumin excretion, persistently low microalbuminuria, high microalbuminuria, or macroalbuminuria if at least two of three successive measurements were, respectively, below 30 mg/24 h, between 30 and 99 mg/24 h, between 100 and 300 mg/24 h, or above 300 mg/24 h.
The systolic, diastolic, and mean arterial pressures were recorded as described previously with an automatic device (Dinamap, Critikon, Florida; cuff size 23–13 cm/13 cm) every three minutes for 30 minutes between 0900 and 1100 while the patient was supine, and the mean of these 10 values was recorded.
The variability in mean arterial pressure within and between subjects was 4% and 6% respectively.
The mean arterial pressure recorded with this device correlated highly with values calculated from mean blood pressure obtained with a mercury sphygmomanometer in the same conditions (r =0.72; p<0.0001).
On the day of the renal function study blood samples were taken from fasted patients who had spent the night supine; serum converting enzyme activity and plasma concentrations of total and active renin and aldosterone were determined.
The placebo (time=0) or active treatment (time=6 and 12 months) tablets were then taken after these samplings.
Patients were not given their morning insulin.
A diuresis of 10–15 ml/min was induced by progressive water loading, and glomerular filtration rate and effective renal plasma flow were derived, respectively, from the mean clearances of iodothalamate labelled with iodine-125 and hippurate labelled with iodine-131 over six successive 20 minute periods, as published previously (median variabilities within subjects and between periods 9% and 12% respectively).
The filtration fraction was calculated by dividing glomerular filtration rate by effective renal plasma flow, and total renal resistances by dividing the mean arterial pressure (obtained by an automatic device during tracer infusion) by effective plasma flow.
Plasma glucose concentrations were recorded as the mean of six determinations by a glucose oxidase method in each sample.
Serum albumin concentration was measured by nephelometry, and fractional albumin clearance was calculated by dividing urinary albumin clearance by glomerular filtration rate.
Serum angiotensin I converting enzyme activity was measured by Lieberman's method, as modified by Neels et al , plasma total and active renin values by immunoradiometry, and plasma aldosterone concentration by radioimmunoassay.
Plasma prorenin concentration was calculated by subtracting active from total renin.
Glycated haemoglobin was measured by a high performance liquid chromatography method.
Plasma concentrations of apolipoproteins A1 and B were obtained by nephelometry.
Plasma total cholesterol (high density lipoprotein cholesterol after phosphotungstate precipitation), triglyceride, creatinine, potassium, chloride, and uric acid concentrations and plasma and urinary concentrations of urea and sodium were measured by conventional methods.
statistical analysis
Data were stored on an Apple Macintosh II microcomputer and analysed through commercially available statistical software (Statview II, Abacus concepts).
Results are presented as means (SD), or medians (ranges) when the distributions were skewed (diabetes duration, urinary albumin excretion, fractional albumin clearance, plasma total and active renin, prorenin, and aldosterone concentrations, and the ratio of active renin to aldosterone concentration).
The variables with a skewed distribution were therefore log transformed for statistical calculation.
To analyse changes in urinary albumin and sodium excretion and mean arterial pressure we meaned the values (log transformed for urinary albumin excretion) recorded during the placebo period and during the last three months of follow up.
Unpaired t tests were performed to compare two groups.
A two way repeated measures analysis of variance was used to evaluate the effects of treatment, of time, and of their interaction on selected variables.
When a significant interaction was found between treatment type and time for a given variable, a one way repeated analysis of variance was performed within each treatment group.
Correlation coefficients were calculated using the Spearman's non-parametric coefficient.
Comparison of two observed distributions was performed with a χ&sup2; test.
The pretrial statistical assumption was that enalapril would be as effective in reducing urinary albumin excretion as was found in a previous one year, placebo controlled study and that hydrochlorothiazide would not be different from a placebo in such patients.
The calculated minimal sample size was eight subjects in each group, with an alpha risk of 0.05 and a beta risk of  0.10.
As four subjects were excluded from the study after six months of active treatment (see results), we used two methods of analysis.
The first was an intention to treat analysis in which the values at the last visit of three pivotal outcome measures — that is, urinary albumin and sodium excretion and mean arterial pressure — obtained from all included subjects during the last three months of their follow up were carried forward.
The second was an analysis of treatment given to the 21 subjects who completed the study.
Results
Thirteen patients were included in the enalapril group and 12 in the hydrochlorothiazide group.
Tables I and II show their clinical characteristics.
The two groups were strictly similar for all variables, especially for initial blood pressure and urinary albumin excretion.
Two patients from each group were excluded from the study after six months of active treatment.
In the enalapril group two patients (cases 9 and 10)(both initially with low microalbuminuria) decided to withdraw from the trial because they wished to become pregnant (at withdrawal both displayed persistent normoalbuminuria, which persisted after stopping experimental treatment).
In the hydrochlorothiazide group one patient (case 20)(initially with high microalbuminuria) developed high blood pressure not controlled after six months of treatment (he still had high microalbuminuria at this time), and he was therefore excluded according to the protocol.
Another (case 21) lost 10 kg in weight because of severe depression and was therefore withdrawn from the study.
He was initially classified as having low microalbuminuria and remained so at withdrawal.
With the intention to treat analysis, mean urinary albumin excretion was 62 (38–260) mg/24 h in the enalapril group during placebo v 112 (33–283) mg/24 h in the hydrochlorothiazide group (p=0.3546).
It declined to 29 (11–146) mg/24 h with enalapril but was 109 (12–267) mg/24 h with hydrochlorothiazide during the last three months of follow up(p=0.0087).
Mean arterial pressure was similar between groups during placebo (97 (8) mm Hg in enalapril group v 97 (8) mm Hg in hydrochlorothiazide group; p=0.996) and also at the end of follow up(89 (8) mm Hg in enalapril group v 93 (10) mm Hg in hydrochlorothiazide group; p=0.2613).
Urinary sodium excretion was comparable between groups during placebo (164 (59) mmol/24 h in enalapril group v 158 (62) mmol/24 h in hydrochlorothiazide group; p=0.8092), but higher with hydrochlorothiazide than enalapril at end of follow up(142 (56) mmol/24 h v 197 (73) mmol/24 h; p=0.0469).
The following analysis by treatment was performed on the 11 patients in the enalapril group and the 10 in the hydrochlorothiazide group who completed the study.
The groups remained comparable (tables I and II).
Figure 1 shows the individual changes in urinary albumin excretion with time and treatment.
During the placebo period urinary albumin excretion was similar in the two groups (analysis of variance, p=0.324) but significantly lower during treatment with enalapril than with hydrochlorothiazide (analysis of variance, treatment type effect, p=0.0436).
During the placebo period five patients in the enalapril group displayed persistent high microalbuminuria and the six others low microalbuminuria, compared with six patients with high microalbuminuria and four with low microalbuminuria in the hydrochlorothiazide group (χ&sup2; =1.9; p>0.3).
During the last three months of treatment five patients taking enalapril displayed a persistent normoalbuminuria, five a low microalbuminuria, and one a high microalbuminuria, whereas in the hydrochlorothiazide group one patient had persistent normoalbuminuria, three low microalbuminuria, and six high microalbuminuria (χ&sup2; =6.7; p=0.03).
With enalapril urinary albumin excretion declined from 59 (37–260) mg/24 h during placebo to 38 (14–146) mg/24 h during the last three months of study, while it varied from 111 (33–282) to 109 (33–262) mg/ 24 h with hydrochlorothiazide.
Thus, the median difference in urinary albumin excretion reduction was -57 mg/24 h (95% confidence interval 15 to 114) in favour of enalapril.
Urinary albumin excretion was reduced by 20% (-50 to 10) with enalapril at the end of follow up v 2% (-36 to 32) with hydrochlorothiazide (p=0.0176).
Mean arterial pressure was not different between the two groups during the placebo period 98 (7) mm Hg in enalapril group v 97 (9) mm Hg in hydrochlorothiazide group; p=0.9004) or during the whole treatment  period (88 (7) mm Hg in the enalapril group and 90 (7) mm Hg in the hydrochlorothiazide group; p=0.5263)(fig 2).
The mean intergroups difference in mean arterial pressure was -1 mm Hg (7 to -9) during the last three months of follow up.
Baseline values were comparable between groups for the urinary excretions of urea (p=0.3785) and sodium (p=0.8454), for glycated haemoglobin concentration (p=0.7299), and for weight (p=0.8524).
During the treatment period groups remained comparable for urinary urea excretion (p=0.7526), for glycated haemoglobin concentration (p=0.4447), and for weight (p=0.8524), but urinary sodium excretion was slightly higher with hydrochlorothiazide than enalapril (analysis of variance, treatment type effect, p=0.0809)(fig 2).
Table III shows renal function in the two groups at times 0, 6, and 12 months.
No significant alteration of glomerular filtration rate, effective renal plasma flow, total renal resistances, or filtration fraction was observed between or within the groups.
Conversely, fractional albumin clearance fell with both treatments from 0 to 6 months (although not significantly) but then rose to pretreatment values after 12 months with hydrochlorothiazide, whereas it fell further with enalapril (one way analysis of variance of the treatment-time interaction for enalapril group, p=0.022).
Plasma glucose concentrations did not differ between the two groups.
The rate of progression of urinary albumin excretion from the placebo period to the last three months of follow up was positively related to the difference between filtration fractions at time 0 and time 12 months (r '=0.50, p=0.026 for all patients;r '=0.48 for enalapril group;r '=0.54 for hydrochlorothiazide group)(fig 3, right panel).
However, the rate of progression of urinary albumin excretion was not correlated to the progression of mean arterial pressure recorded at the corresponding times (r '=-0.23, p=0.302 for all patients;r '=-0.24 for enalapril group;r '=-0.20 for hydrochlorothiazide group)(fig 3, left panel).
Urinary albumin excretion progression was not related to changes in urinary sodium and urea excretion, glycated haemoglobin concentration, or weight, but it was related to the sum of urinary sodium excretion during the whole treatment period (r '=0.44, p=0.05 for all patients;r '=0.39 for enalapril group;r '=0.36 for hydrochlorothiazide group).
At baseline plasma prorenin was higher and the ratio of active renin to prorenin concentration lower in the subjects included in the study than in 22 controls of comparable age (426 (449) ng/l v 207 (75) ng/l (p=0.04) and 0.040 (0.046)v 0.126 (0.047) respectively,(p=0.0012)).
Plasma prorenin concentrations were related to the degree of retinopathy before active treatment (r '=0.51, p=0.026; n=21).
Serum angiotensin I converting enzyme activity was reduced by enalapril but did not change with hydrochlorothiazide.
Plasma active and total renin and prorenin concentrations rose with both types of treatment but the ratio of active renin to prorenin concentration was  higher with enalapril than hydrochlorothiazide.
Plasma aldosterone concentration was increased by hydrochlorothiazide but did not change significantly with enalapril.
The ratio of aldosterone to active renin concentration was decreased by enalapril but increased by hydrochlorothiazide (table IV).
Plasma uric acid concentration rose with hydrochlorothiazide but not enalapril (table IV).
Plasma concentrations of electrolytes and creatinine, lipid variables, and daily insulin doses remained steady throughout the study (not shown).
No clinical side effect was observed throughout the study.
Discussion
Effective renin-angiotensin system blockade with enalapril, shown by the fall in serum angiotensin I converting enzyme activity and the rise in plasma active renin concentration without changes in plasma aldosterone concentration, significantly reduced the microalbuminuria of normotensive diabetic patients within one year of treatment.
Conversely, the sodium depletion induced by a low dose of hydrochlorothiazide, shown by the rise in plasma uric acid, active renin, and aldosterone concentrations, did not reduce microalbuminuria after one year's treatment.
Our study design explains how we could detect a significant difference in urinary albumin excretion between two treatments in a small number of subjects for a short period of time: monthly measurements over 12 months increased the precision and consequently the power of our trial.
Biased measurements were avoided by appropriate blinding and automated blood pressure measurements.
Serum angiotensin I converting enzyme activity and monitoring of plasma renin and aldosterone concentrations suggests that patients were compliant with their assigned treatments.
The Melbourne Diabetic Nephropathy Study Group did not find a difference in urinary albumin excretion between nifedipine and perindopril in a one year randomised study including 53 patients with type 1 or type 2 diabetes with or without hypertension.
However, this study was open and only two urine collections were used to assess albumin excretion at baseline and after 12 months.
Mathiesen et al found a difference in urinary albumin excretion between captopril and no antihypertensive treatment by measuring blood pressure and urinary albumin excretion every four months in 44 patients similar to ours, but this was true only after four years of follow up.
This result could be explained by the absence of a fall in blood pressure between as well as within groups.
Also, baseline urinary sodium excretion was higher in the patients studied by Mathiesen et al than it was in our current and previous patients.
Sodium intake may modulate both the hypotensive and the renal responses to angiotensin I converting enzyme inhibitors.
Our finding of an association between urinary albumin and sodium excretion may explain why angiotensin I converting enzyme inhibition seemed more effective in reducing microalbuminuria in our studies than in theirs.
Confounding variables which may have affected urinary albumin excretion were similar within and between our two groups — that is, glycaemic control, weight, and protein intake (as reflected by urinary urea excretion).
Mean arterial pressure was the most important variable to adjust for between the two groups.
During this trial, five of the 11 patients taking enalapril were normoalbuminuric after one year of treatment, while mean arterial pressure decreased by 10 mm Hg.
These results are almost identical with those obtained during a previous trial comparing the same drug, used at the same dose over the same time period, with placebo.
In our current study the reduction in microalbuminuria was observed only with enalapril, even though blood pressure was lowered in hydrochlorothiazide treated patients.
However, our study cannot exclude that enalapril and hydrochlorothiazide had different hypotensive effects, because to detect a difference of 5 mm Hg between the two groups, with 90% power, would have required 191 patients in each group.
Hydrochlorothiazide's ineffectiveness in reducing microalbuminuria could be explained by two possibilities.
Firstly, the hypotensive effect of this drug may not have been of sufficient size to reduce microalbuminuria.
Secondly, the activation of the renin-angiotensin system (the physiological consequence of sodium depletion) may have had opposite intrarenal effects to those of angiotensin I converting enzyme inhibition, and therefore microalbuminuria was not reduced, even though blood pressure was reduced by hydrochlorothiazide treatment.
Our observations that the drop in urinary albumin excretion correlated with the changes in filtration fraction but not with the drop in blood pressure are consistent with the second possibility.
This result agrees with those reported by Anderson et al in rats with streptozotocin induced diabetes: hypotension induced by captopril was more effective than that induced by a classic triple treatment to prevent a rise in urinary albumin excretion.
The relation between decreased urinary albumin excretion and changes in filtration fraction is consistent with the hypotheses of a predominant role of glomerular haemodynamic alterations in producing microalbuminuria in insulin dependent diabetes and also of the decisive role of the reduction in intraglomerular capillary pressure mediated by angiotensin I converting inhibitors in the antialbuminuric effects of these compounds.
Angiotensin II has been shown to increase glomerular capillary hydraulic pressure.
At baseline, the renin component characteristics in the studied  subjects were consistent with those depicted in other studies: active renin concentration was normal, but prorenin concentration was raised according to retinopathy.
Prorenin concentration increased proportionally less than active renin concentration with enalapril than with hydrochlorthiazide, which suggests that juxtaglomerular cell stimulation with enalapril was ineffective.
Plasma aldosterone concentration decreased compared with active renin concentration with enalapril but increased with hydrochlorothiazide.
A possible short term reduction of microalbuminuria due to hydrochlorothiazide's hypotensive effect may have been progressively counterbalanced by the effective renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system stimulation provoked by the same drug.
The precise mechanism of enalapril's antialbuminuric effects is not elucidated by the present study.
The predominant role of intraglomerular capillary pressure reduction is supported by the correlation between changes in urinary albumin excretion and in filtration fraction, but filtration fraction did not vary, a finding consistent with previous reports.
Angiotensin I converting enzyme inhibitors may act in reducing glomerular basement membrane pore size.
Reference hypotensive drug choice may be critical when comparing other hypotensive drugs with angiotensin I converting enzyme inhibitors in reducing microalbuminuria in normotensive diabetic subjects.
Metoprolol was the first drug shown to be effective for this purpose, but the role of reduced renin secretion induced by this β blocker was not delineated.
In advanced diabetic nephropathy Björk et al reported that enalapril reduced proteinuria more effectively than metoprolol, while the hypotensive effect of both drugs was similar.
β Blockers may be less effective than angiotensin I converting enzyme inhibitors in reducing microalbuminuria because they are less effective in reducing angiotensin II production.
Studies comparing calcium antagonists with angiotensin I converting enzyme inhibitors are controversial.
In the short term captopril reduced microalbuminuria more effectively than nifedipine in subjects with incipient diabetic nephropathy.
The Melbourne Diabetic Nephropathy Study Group found no difference over one year between perindopril and nifedipine in reducing microalbuminuria and blood pressure.
However, a β type error cannot be excluded in this study because the prestudy assumption was that microalbuminuria progression was exclusively pressure dependent.
Calcium antagonists can modify renal haemodynamics; consequently, trials comparing angiotensin I converting enzyme inhibitors with calcium antagonists should be based on differences in their renal effects estimated from previous trials in insulin dependent diabetic subjects.
Finally, different antihypertensive drugs' appropriateness for the impaired renal function of diabetic subjects should be determined by their differences concerning clinically relevant end points — for example, difference in the rate of deterioration in the glomerular filtration rate.
We showed that enalapril prevented such deterioration in normotensive diabetics with microalbuminuria compared with placebo.
Here, no difference was observed between enalapril and hydrochlorothiazide on the glomerular filtration rate; however this study's design (conceptualised exclusively for studying microalbuminuria) does not allow such a difference to be ruled out.
In previous long term trials with glycaemic control intervention the change in microalbuminuria was an accurate reflection of the change in glomerular filtration rate.
If microalbuminuria is an appropriate surrogate end point that could replace glomerular filtration rate changes in clinical trials, one can anticipate that enalapril will protect glomerular filtration rate better than hydrochlorothiazide in the long term.
In this connection Björk et al reported that enalapril protected glomerular filtration rate more effectively than metoprolol in diabetic nephropathy after four years of follow up.
Normotensive diabetic subjects with microalbuminuria may exhibit a reduced glomerular filtration rate and hypertension secondary to glomerular disease very rapidly in the absence of intervention.
There-fore, it is timely to compare angiotensin I converting enzyme inhibitors with other antihypertensive drugs on glomerular filtration rate in a representative sample of normotensive patients with insulin dependent diabetes and persistent microalbuminuria.
Epidemiology of endometriosis in women attending family planning clinics
Abstract
Objective —
To describe the epidemiology of endometriosis in women attending family planning clinics with special reference to contraceptive methods.
Design —
Non-randomised cohort study with follow up of subjects for up to 23 years.
Disease was measured by first hospital admission rates since endometriosis can be diagnosed with accuracy only at laparotomy or laparoscopy.
Setting —
17 family planning centres in England and Scotland.
Subjects —
17032 married white women aged 25–39 years at entry during 1968–74 who were taking oral contraceptives or using an intrauterine device or diaphragm.
About 99% of the women approached agreed to participate and annual loss to follow up was about 0.3%.
Main outcome measures —
Diagnosis of endometriosis, age, parity, and history of contraceptive use.
Results —
Endometriosis was significantly related to age, peaking at ages 40–44 (χ for heterogeneity= 30.9, p<0.001).
Endometriosis was not linked to duration of taking oral contraceptives.
Nevertheless, the risk of endometriosis was low in women currently taking oral contraceptives (relative risk 0.4; 95% confidence interval 0.2 to 0.7), but higher in women who had formerly taken them (1.8; 1.0 to 3.1 in women who had stopped 25–48 months previously) compared with women who had never taken the pill.
A similar pattern was seen for use of intrauterine devices (relative risk 0.4 (0.2 to 0.7) in current users and 1.4 (0.4 to 3.2) in users 49–72 months previously compared with never users).
No association was found between endometriosis and use of the diaphragm.
Conclusions —
Oral contraceptives seem to temporarily suppress endometriosis.
Endometriosis may be diagnosed late in women using intrauterine devices as pain and bleeding occur with both.
Introduction
Endometriosis is a condition in which there is functioning endometrial tissue outside the uterine cavity.
The disease process is usually limited to the pelvis and clinical manifestations include pain, menstrual disorders, infertility, and pelvic masses.
Diagnosis by clinical methods is unreliable and confirmation is required by laparoscopy or laparotomy.
In view of the lack of epidemiological information about endometriosis, we decided to analyse the available data in the Oxford Family Planning Association contraceptive study.
Subjects and methods
The methods used in the Oxford Family Planning Association study have been described in detail elsewhere.
In brief, 17032 women were recruited at 17 large family planning clinics in England and Scotland during 1968–74.
To be eligible for the study women had to be white, British, married, aged 25–39 years, and to have been taking oral contraceptives for at least five months, or using a diaphragm or intrauterine device for at least five months without previous exposure to oral contraceptives.
About 99% of those approached consented to participate in the study and follow up is still continuing.
At return visits to the clinic women are questioned by a doctor or a nurse and the information recorded on a special form, including details of pregnancies and their outcome, changes in contraceptive practices, and reasons for referral to hospital.
Women who stop attending the clinic are sent a postal version of the questionnaire and, if this is not returned, are interviewed over the telephone or at a home visit.
Each hospital admission is followed up by writing to the consultant concerned to obtain a copy of the discharge summary.
The work in each clinic is coordinated by a part time research assistant, and follow up has been maintained with an annual loss because of withdrawal of cooperation or loss of contact of only about 0.3%.
Only women who have never taken the pill and those who have taken it for eight or more years are followed up beyond the age of 45.
The study collects detailed morbidity information only about illnesses requiring referral to hospital.
This was not a limitation in this analysis because endo-metriosis has to be diagnosed by laparoscopy or laparotomy.
The numbers of cases per 1000 woman years of observation in the various groups were compared.
Rates of first diagnosis for endometriosis within these groups were standardised by the indirect method.
Results.
Up to the end of 1990, 313 women had had endometriosis diagnosed at laparoscopy (41) or laparotomy (272).
Endometriosis was the principal diagnosis in 142 women and an additional diagnosis in 171.
We decided to focus on the women with endometriosis as the principal diagnosis since this group would be least influenced by selection bias.
For example, uterine fibromyomata was the principal diagnosis in almost half (47%) of the women in whom endometriosis was an additional diagnosis.
We also omitted the four women who were infertile as a result of endometriosis because we were specially interested in the influence of birth control methods on endometriosis.
Although the results presented here are limited to 138 women, analyses conducted on the total of 313 women gave similar results (not shown).
Table I shows the effect of age on risk of endometriosis.
Endometriosis rates increased sharply from age group 25–29 to 40–44 and then began to fall.
Parity was not significantly related to endometriosis (table II).
However, if the four women with infertility were included, all of whom were nulliparous, the negative linear trend became significant at the 2% level.
Social class, cigarette smoking, and obesity were unrelated to endometriosis (data not shown).
Table III shows the assosciation between the interval since last pregnancy and endometriosis.
Although the numbers are small, there were similar rates of endometriosis in the never pregnant and in the unknown category, low rates in pregnant women and in the 48 months following pregnancy, and then higher rates once again in the remaining groups.
The trend was, however, not significant.
The date of last pregnancy was not known in some women because the dates of spontaneous and induced abortions and of ectopic pregnancies were not recorded before entry to the study.
Total duration of taking oral contraceptives was not related to the risk of endometriosis (table IV).
Women who were currently taking the pill or who had stopped taking it in the last 12 months had a significantly lower rate of endometriosis than those who had stopped for longer periods.
We combined current users and those who had stopped within 12 months for analysis in case some women had been directed to stop the pill before elective surgery.
Rates of endometriosis were higher in those who had stopped taking the pill for over 12 months than in those who had never taken it.
We therefore examined the reasons for stopping oral contraceptives among these women.
Of the 80 women concerned, 28 stopped because of sterilisation, 12 because of headache, seven because of weight gain, five because they were anxious about side effects, four because of their age, four because they were planning pregnancy, and the remaining 20 for a variety of reasons.
Only one woman had stopped oral contra-ceptives to await an operation.
We found no relation between endometriosis and total duration of use of intrauterine devices, but current users and recent users had a lower rate of endometriosis than non-users (table V).
Women who had used intrauterine devices in the past had a slightly increased rate of endometriosis over never users.
The reasons for removal of intrauterine devices were bleeding or pain in nine women, sterilisation in five, planning pregnancy in three, unplanned pregnancy in two, and other reasons in three.
The apparent proective effect of current and recent use of intrauterine devices was not limited to any particular type of device (data not shown).
Table VI shows that duration since last use of the diaphragm had no effect on rates of endometriosis.
Total length of use was also unrelated (data not shown).
Discussion
Any study of endometriosis is potentially biased because operative intervention (laparoscopy or laparotomy) is necessary to diagnose the condition, and selective factors may determine who has surgery.
Despite this problem we found only the well known associations between endometriosis and age and parity.
There was no association with social class or cigarette smoking as has been suggested elsewhere.
Our data might have been less affected by bias than those in other studies because we considered only women in whom the primary diagnosis was endometriosis.
We were surprised that only four women with endometriosis had infertility.
Discharge summaries and contraceptive histories confirmed this number.
The explanation may be that older women who had often completed their families were recruited to the study.
Alternatively, endometriosis may be an uncommon cause of infertility.
Our results suggest that endometriosis is less of a problem during pregnancy and the subsequent four years than it is at other times, although the finding was not significant.
Total duration of oral contraceptive use was unimportant, but a very low rate of endometriosis was found among women currently or recently taking the pill compared with women who had never taken it or had stopped for over 12 months.
Reasons for stopping the pill seemed unremarkable.
We suggest that endometriosis is suppressed during current and recent pill use but that the disease subsequently emerges after the pill is stopped.
This would give a pattern of low rates in current and recent takers followed by somewhat higher rates in former takers.
A similar pattern of disease was noted in the Royal College of General Practitioners study (rate/1000 woman years 0.58 in non-takers, 0.29 in current takers, and 0.8 in former takers) and in the Walnut Creek study (rates 0.97, 0.60, and 1.38, respectively).
Several other studies have found evidence suggesting that oral contraceptives protect against endometriosis.
intrauterine devices
The results for intrauterine devices showed the same pattern as those for the pill, although smaller numbers reduce the significance.
Other studies have shown intrauterine devices to have either no effect or a deleterious effect on endometriosis.
It seems unlikely that an intrauterine device would suppress the symptoms of endometriosis, and we suspect that many women with a device who develop the clinical features of endometriosis (pain, bleeding, palpable pelvic masses) are treated by removal of the device rather than by laparoscopy or laparotomy.
The symptoms of some women would improve after removal of the device whatever the underlying condition and it might be months or years later that recurrence of the symptoms would lead to diagnosis of endometriosis.
Nine out of 22 former users of intrauterine devices had had them removed because of bleeding or pain.
If all these subjects had had endometriosis at the time of removal the rate in current and recent users would rise to 0.42 per 1000 woman years (from 0.22) and the relative risk would be non-significant at 0.7 (from 0.4).
In conclusion, we suspect that neither oral contraceptives nor intrauterine devices have any long term effect on the risk of endometriosis.
Oral contraceptives may mask the symptoms of the disease but it emerges after the preparations are stopped.
With regard to intrauterine devices we suggest that in some women developing endometriosis while using them the disease goes unrecognised and they are treated by removal of the device.
As with oral contraceptives, the disease then emerges in former users.
Prevalence of toxoplasma IgG among pregnant women in west London according to country of birth and ethnic group
Infection with Toxoplasma gondii can be acquired from soil contaminated by cats' faeces and by consumption of undercooked meat and unpasteurised goats' milk.
Toxoplasma cysts are killed by freezing or by heating above 45°C.
Maternal infection can result in fetal infection and damage and is estimated to occur in 0–1–0–5% of pregnancies in the United Kingdom.
The seroprevalence of toxoplasma IgG is known to vary among countries, but differences according to country of birth and ethnic group have not previously been investigated in a single population based study.
Patients, methods, and results
Serum samples were collected from 6749 unselected women receiving antenatal care at two hospitals in west London during 1980–6.
Maternal details recorded included country of birth and ethnic status.
Women born in the Republic of Ireland or Northern Ireland were recorded as born in Ireland.
British born Asian women were excluded, there being too few to analyse separately.
Serum was analysed for toxoplasma IgG (Toxo-captia assay, Mercia Diagnostics, Guildford, Surrey).
Titres >12 IU/ml were regarded as positive results.
Differences in the seroprevalence of toxoplasma IgG between groups stratified by age were tested by Mantel-Haenszel's χ&sup2; method with one degree of freedom.
Altogether, 1267 (18.8%) women were seropositive, of whom 731 (57.7%) had been born outside Britain (table).
Seroprevalence differed significantly between women in the same ethnic group born in different countries — for example, between black women born in Britain (12.2%) and those born in Africa (45.9%)(χ&sup2; = 44.9, p<0.001) and the Caribbean (33.1%)(χ&sup2; =27.2, p<0.001); between white women born in Ireland (31.1%) and those born in Britain (13.3%)(χ&sup2; =86.6, p<0.001); and between Asian women born in India and Sri Lanka (7.6%) and those born in Pakistan and Bangladesh (21.8%)(χ&sup2; =18.0, p<0.001).
Seroprevalence was similar in black and white British born women (12.2% and 13.3% respectively; χ&sup2; =1.1, p>0.25).
In these women it increased with age from 9.0% (32/357) in women aged <20 to 26.3% (81/308) in women aged >-35.
Comment
The substantial differences in seroprevalence of toxoplasma IgG between women born in different countries suggest that women from countries with high prevalence of toxoplasmosis were infected before immigration to Britain.
National dietary characteristics may partly explain the variations.
For example, many of the predominantly Hindu women from India would have been vegetarian whereas Muslim women from Pakistan and Bangladesh would have eaten meat and may have been infected while preparing raw meat.
In southern and eastern Europe uncooked meat, as dried or cured spiced sausage, is commonly eaten and may be a route of infection.
Consumption of partially cooked meat and cheese made from unpasteurised goats' milk is common in France.
The high seroprevalence of toxoplasma IgG among women born in Ireland compared with British born women may reflect differences in the consumption of undercooked meat or unpasteurised milk or in the use of freezers over the past 30–40 years.
There are, however, no data to support such speculation.
Reduction in the seroprevalence of toxoplasma IgG has been observed in France, Austria, Sweden, and Britain.
In Stockholm seroprevalence fell during 1969–87, coincident with increased consumption of frozen meat.
In Britain consumption of meat has remained static over the past 20 years but ownership of freezers and the freezing of meat have increased dramatically.
Previous British estimates of seroprevalence in women of childbearing age have range from 22% in England to 14–25% in Scotland.
A report from south Yorkshire shows a decline in seroprevalence over the past 20 years with only 9.0% of women aged 16–40 being seropositive in 1988–90.
If antenatal screening was introduced to prevent congenital infection 87–91% of susceptible women born in Britain would require repeated serological testing throughout pregnancy.
Differences in seroprevalence among countries point to the potential importance of eating habits.
More detailed research is needed to determine the principal sources of infection in Britain, but health education may be an alternative to antenatal screening in reducing maternal infection.
General Practice
Use of mobile screening unit for diabetic retinopathy in rural and urban areas
Abstract
Objectives —
To compare the effectiveness of a mobile screening unit with a non-mydriatic polaroid camera in detecting diabetic retinopathy in rural and urban areas.
To estimate the cost of the service.
Design —
Prospective data collection over two years of screening for diabetic retinopathy throughout Tayside.
Setting —
Tayside region, population 390 000, area 7770 km.
Subjects —
961 patients in rural areas and 1225 in urban areas who presented for screening.
Main outcome measures —
Presence of diabetic retinopathy, need for laser photocoagulation, age, duration of diabetes, and diabetic treatment.
Results —
Compared with diabetic patients in urban areas, those in rural areas were less likely to attend a hospital based diabetic clinic (46% (442)v 86% (1054), p<0.001); less likely to be receiving insulin (260 (27%)v 416 (34%), p<0.001 and also after correction for differences in age distribution); more likely to have advanced (maculopathy or proliferative retinopathy) diabetic retinopathy (13% (122)v 7% (89), p<0.001); and more likely to require urgent laser photocoagulation for previously unrecognised retinopathy (1.4% (13)v 0.5% (6), p<0.02).
The screening programme cost £10 per patient screened and £1000 per patient requiring laser treatment.
Conclusion —
The mobile diabetic eye screening programme detected a greater prevalence of advanced retinopathy in diabetic patients living in rural areas.
Patients in rural areas were also more likely to need urgent laser photocoagulation.
Present screening procedures seem to be less effective in rural areas and rural patients may benefit more from mobile screening units than urban patients.
Introduction
Non-mydriatic fundal photography is useful for detecting retinopathy in patients with diabetes and has been shown to be effective in identifying previously unrecognised retinopathy when used in the community.
Eleven mobile eye screening units are now in operation throughout the United Kingdom.
Although useful for an initial screening programme, their continued use needs to be evaluated.
Some patients with diabetes, especially those in rural areas, are unable or unwilling to attend a hospital diabetic clinic for retinal screening.
General practitioners, however, may not be confident in the use of an ophthalmoscope since they rarely need to use one.
A mobile eye screening unit could help overcome this problem, and fundholding general practitioners may be willing to pay for this service.
Subjects and methods
A mobile eye screening unit has been operating in Tayside since 1990.
Fundi of diabetic patients are photographed with a Canon non-mydriatic polaroid camera (CR4–45NM).
The population density throughout Tayside varies from the densely populated cities of Dundee and Perth to the scattered populations in rural Perthshire and Angus.
The total population is 390000 and about 3.5% (7000) of the urban population are Asian.
We identified the postcode areas of patients and categorised them into three groups — namely, urban, rural, or mixed.
The presence and severity of retinopathy was compared between patients living in rural and urban areas.
Age, duration of diabetes, type of diabetic care (hospital based or community based) and treatment were also recorded.
Patients living in mixed postcode areas were not included in this study.
Retinal photographs were taken by a trained ophthalmic photographer and photographs were classified into five groups (no abnormality, background changes, maculopathy or proliferative retinopathy, other eye disease, and cataracts, or unreadable) by specialists in diabetes in conjunction with consultant ophthalmologists when required.
Only 4% of photographs were unreadable.
The cost of the service was estimated based on screening 1800 patients a year and includes the salary of an ophthalmic photographer, purchasing and processing film, and the servicing and running costs of the van and camera.
Results were analysed by Student's t test and χ&sup2; test.
The Mantel-Haenzel statistic was also used.
A deprivation score was used to compare the relative deprivation or affluence of rural and urban areas.
The deprivation score was derived from a combination of four variables (car ownership, social class, male unemployment, and overcrowding).
Results
A total of 2984 patients were photographed, of whom 1225 lived in urban areas, 961 in rural areas, and 798 in mixed areas.
This represented 1.1% of the rural population and 0.6% of the urban population.
The prevalence of diabetic background retinopathy was the same in rural and urban patients (14%, table I), but the prevalence of advanced retinopathy (proliferative retinopathy or maculopathy) was greater among rural patients than urban patients (13% (122)v 7% (89), p<0.001).
Many of these patients were known to have advanced retinopathy, but some new cases were detected.
The prevalence of other eye disease was similar in the two groups (table I).
The rate of new referrals to the eye clinic with suspected advanced retinopathy was similar in rural and urban areas (4.8% (44)v 4.5% (55)) but more rural patients than urban patients required urgent laser photocoagulation (1.4% (13)v 0.5% (6), p<0.02).
Ninety nine (86%) patients referred to the ophthalmology clinic had advanced retinopathy confirmed, and those who did not receive laser photocoagulation underwent frequent continuing ophthalmic assessment.
Table II shows that there were no differences in duration of diabetes between the two groups.
Correction for the small differences in age between the two groups with the Mantel-Haenzel statistic did not affect the results (difference in prevalence of advanced retinopathy p<0.001; differences in rate of laser photocoagulation for previously unrecognised retinopathy p=0.02).
Fewer rural patients than urban patients were receiving insulin (27% (260)v 34% (416), p<0.01; table III).
If the null hypothesis is assumed correct — that is, there is no difference in the prevalence of previously unknown advanced retinopathy among rural and urban diabetic patients — the expected number of patients with retinopathy and requiring laser photocoagulation can be calculated from each group.
Tables IV and V show the comparison of observed and expected numbers among the rural and urban patients.
The observed differences in the prevalence of retinopathy and need for laser treatment between these two groups remained significant.
Urban areas were less affluent than rural areas as assessed by the deprivation score (rural areas -2.07, urban areas 0.44).
Patients in urban areas were more likely to attend a hospital clinic (86% (1054)v 46% (442), p<0.001).
The screening programme in Tayside cost £10 per patient screened, which is equivalent to £350 per patient with previously unrecognised sight threatening changes.
This represents a cost of £1000 per patient receiving laser treatment.
Discussion
Our screening programme covered 0.77% of the total population of Tayside.
The estimated prevalence of known diabetes is 1.0–1.2%, suggesting that 64–77% of the diabetic population have been screened.
The proportion of the population screened was higher in rural areas (1.1%) than in urban areas (0.6%) and this may be because urban diabetic patients were more likely to attend a hospital diabetic clinic.
The greater affluence of rural patients may explain the better pick up rate in rural areas, but compensating for socioeconomic and ethnic differences between rural and urban areas (which were small) would be expected to increase the differences in retinopathy observed.
A higher proportion of patients with diabetes in rural areas had advanced retinopathy identified by the screening unit compared with urban patients.
Rural patients were also more likely to require urgent laser photocoagulation for unrecognised retinopathy.
These differences were not attributable to differences in age or duration of diabetes.
There are several possibilities to explain this.
Firstly, rural patients had more retinopathy or their retinopathy went unrecognised more often.
Rural patients tend to be referred later and the risks of this can be amplified if there are problems in the ‘referral chain’ to the ophthalmology clinic.
More urban patients attended a hospital based diabetic clinic and this may be one reason why such patients had less unrecognised retinopathy, although hospital attendance is not always welcomed or thought necessary by patients.
Secondly, a greater percentage of the population in the rural areas was screened and if the prevalence of diabetes was similar in each area the screening programme may have missed more patients with advanced retinopathy in urban areas.
This is, however, unlikely as there were a similar number of patients in each group with background retinopathy.
Moreover, the duration of diabetes and the age distribution for both groups were broadly similar suggesting that no participation bias had occurred.
Significantly fewer patients in rural areas were receiving insulin, which may also have influenced the development of advanced retinopathy, even though insulin treatment does not necessarily reflect better diabetic control.
This difference in prescribing between rural and urban areas was found almost exclusively in patients not attending a hospital diabetic clinic.
Urban general practitioners have more direct contact with the hospital clinic, which may have a secondary effect on their management decisions even for patients whom they do not send to the hospital clinic.
Diabetic shared care schemes and diabetic liaison nurses help facilitate the dispersal of information from the central hospital clinic to general practitioners and families caring for patients with diabetes.
There is a demand for these services, and these facilities are possibly less developed in rural areas.
General practitioners have also found intensive courses in diabetes helpful in keeping them up to date and improving their clinical skills.
The salary of the ophthalmic photographer, depreciation of the van and camera, running and servicing costs for the van, and the cost of the film and its processing were all accounted for in the calculation of the cost of the service.
At £10 per patient screened the service is cheaper than all the alternatives.
The costs of transporting patients to the hospital and hospital running costs are not applicable to the mobile eye unit.
The cost of £1000 for the identification of each patient that required laser photocoagulation is relatively low.
Costs could be reduced further by screening more patients per unit time, and we estimate that it should be possible to screen 2500 patients a year once the screening programme is established (our costs are based on screening 1800 per year).
In conclusion, mobile diabetic eye screening units seem to be particularly effective at identifying previously unrecognised retinopathy in rural areas, at a relatively low cost.
The Future of FHSAs
Developing a research and development strategy for primary care
This is the third in a series of articles on the future of family health services authorities
‘Research is vital to improve standards of patient care.
It increases knowledge and fosters a critical attitude to existing patterns of care and treatment,’ reported the royal commission on the NHS in 1979.
The report went on to comment on the absence of objective criteria for setting health priorities and to emphasise the need for health service research to be multidisciplinary.
Innovation has, however, been largely driven by hospital consultants and scientists with specialist interests in diseases and treatment.
Research priorities have reflected this, to the neglect of evaluation of current practice.
Three recent significant changes have created a great opportunity to focus research on the health needs of the population.
The first is the creation in 1990 of the purchaser and provider split in the NHS, which gave commissioning authorities (district health authorities and family health services authorities) powers and responsibilities to develop health care strategies and purchasing plans that maintain good health and maximise health gain.
The second is the development of medical audit, which encourages practitioners critically to examine current practice.
The third is the establishment of a research and development strategy for the NHS in 1991 under the direction of Professor Michael Peckham.
Its prime objective is ‘to see that R&D becomes an integral part of health care so that clinicians, managers and other staff find it natural to rely on the results of research in their day to day decision making and longer term strategic planning.’
The strategy is currently being developed by regional health authorities, which have the responsibility to plan a coherent programme.
To be successful the regional plan will need to encompass research and development at the grass roots level in communities and primary care settings.
This is an enormous challenge for family health services authorities, which should, together with the regional health authority, develop a local strategy for research and development activity in primary care and establish targets for appropriate spending.
Resources
Most patients are managed in primary care but the vast majority of research publications derive from hospitals.
In South East Thames Regional Health Authority about 0.96% of the NHS spend is on research and development, of which only 0.03% is recorded as for primary care.
Correcting this imbalance should be a priority for family health services authorities.
The financial resources proposed by the secretary of state to support the strategy are intended to move over a 5 year period from 0.8% of the total NHS budget to a target of 1.5%.
On a pro rata basis this might make £92.7 million available to primary and community care.
Only 15% of health research is currently funded by the Department of Health or NHS, the bulk being funded by pharmaceutical companies and medical  equipment companies.
Family health services authorities must aim to attract the bulk of the target spend on family health services from NHS funds.
What should family health services authorities do?
Family health services authorities should have already identified a lead officer for research and development.
This may be the medical adviser, whose background as a partner in general practice is particularly useful in three ways.
Firstly, he or she will have an understanding of primary care, especially clinical presentations in general practice.
Secondly, the medical adviser will appreciate the variety of ways of delivering care within a practice and can ensure that research into processes of delivery of care is not neglected.
Thirdly, medical advisers tend to be pragmatic and able to address the key consideration in developing health service research, which is whether or not organisational factors pose immutable barriers to implementing the research findings.
The multidisciplinary nature of primary health care must be appreciated and appropriate research developed to include, for example, community dental practitioners, optometrists, community nurses, pharmacists, physiotherapists, and health educationalists.
Family health services authorities should establish a multidisciplinary primary care research strategy group, drawing where possible on local academic departments of general practice and public health and with district and regional public health medicine representatives.
This would permit an accurate assessment of current purchaser and provider research and development activity, interest, expertise, and capacity and develop a framework for maintaining this.
Commissioning authorities should outline their current commissioning priorities and highlight the research needs of their health strategies and primary care developments.
In particular, family health services authorities should consider which skills they require ‘in house’ and which they need to ‘buy in’.
At present it seems that they will wish to lead their own purchasing of intelligence and perform research analysis; they should develop sufficient statistical and epidemiological skills to conduct surveys and evaluate small projects on service developments and contractual monitoring, and have the expertise to commission larger pieces of work.
Exciting possibilities exist for collaboration with academic departments of general practice and other primary care disciplines, such as attachments, exchanges, joint research posts, and the joint formation of independent service research units, fostering research and development on multidisciplinary teamwork.
Research strategy for commissioning
It is the responsibility of fundholding general practices to decide priorities for research in the context of the population's needs and the contracts set with each provider.
Current patterns of service need to be critically assessed and feasibility or pilot studies implemented to inform new strategies.
Our multiethnic area has the highest rate of termination of pregnancy, and a literature search showed that we needed to commission research to identify AfroCaribbeans' perceptions of family planning.
Family health service authorities should ensure that their arguments are backed up with research evidence when negotiating contracts with regional health authorities and in discussions with the Department of Health.
Some of the general practitioner contract's requirements, such as check ups every three years and deprivation payments, either ignore the findings of research or have no supporting evidence.
The new agenda of the Health of the Nation may result in commissioning authorities adopting inappropriate or unattainable local objectives unless research evidence is applied.
Purchasers have a responsibility to ensure that research is commissioned to evaluate properly the effects of the NHS changes.
With third wave fundholders preparing to manage their own budgets, there is the opportunity to record baseline data or survey patients' perceptions in order to monitor trends or compare experience before and after fundholding.
The new health promotion package in the revised general practitioner contract clearly should be evaluated.
Opit and Holland classify NHS development research into three categories (box).
They further describe research as covering quality, distribution, accessibility, outcome, and effectiveness, as applied to professional health care (self care or public health activity).
quality
Berwick et al , in their work on quality assurance activities, emphasised two principles: that the key to better quality care is striving for continuous improvement rather than identifying bad apples, and that most flaws come from processes, not people.
Only one in 12 instances of poor quality can be ascribed to insufficient effort by the practitioner.
Research is needed to improve understanding of health care as a system and overcome functional barriers to delivering high quality care.
distribution and accessibility
The substitution of services between primary and secondary care is a high priority on national and local management agendas.
Proper evaluation of changes is crucial if decisions are to be related to patients' needs.
A study has been commissioned into domiciliary care compared with hospital care in stroke patients, to be undertaken by the department of public health at the United Medical and Dental School.
Two proposals led by my family health services authority are to establish a new pattern of audiological services in primary care for elderly patients operating from general practice rather than ear, nose, and throat departments, and to reach a consensus on the range of conditions that can be cost effectively, appropriately, and equitably treated in general practice by physiotherapists.
outcomes
It is important to develop outcome measures as tools for quality assessment.
A significant trend is taking place from measuring practitioners' competence and activity to measuring health outcomes in populations.
Research in health outcomes is in its infancy in primary care, but there is an emerging consensus that measures could be developed for the common chronic diseases of asthma, diabetes, and hypertension.
There is also a strong case for making the collection of minimum data sets a requirement for general practitioners.
effectiveness
About 20% of care is consistently shown to be inappropriate and only about 15% of medical interventions are based on solid scientific evidence.
Light claims the NHS comes out badly on the Cochrane test for effectiveness; it is worse than most systems in not treating patients in the most effective place and preventing only what is preventable and poor on openly evaluating effectiveness against non-established alternatives and minimising ill timed interventions.
Population screening for cervical cancer is a candidate.
dissemination of knowledge
Knowledge is an important determinant of an effective and high quality service.
Family health service authorities should identify important areas where current knowledge provides an inadequate rationale for the accepted practice and commission research to elucidate it.
Examples are treating otitis media with antibiotics and treatments for lower back pain.
Also, much practice is based on what was learnt from teaching and vocational training subsequently modified by experience, but does not necessarily reflect current knowledge in all areas — for example, many continue to give repeated routine examination in shared antenatal care.
Family health services authorities should foster good practice by disseminating information.
For example, the recent articles on minor surgery in general practice could be circulated to those on or applying to go on the minor surgery list.
An editorial recently went so far as to say that more important than establishing a framework for research and development was doing something about the failure to disseminate and apply existing knowledge.
The author went on to recommend this function should be added to the management agenda and a lead officer given responsibility to establish mechanisms for developing it.
There is potential for expanding the role of medical advisers in this way.
Some services may be effectively provided in general practice rather than hospitals.
Research evidence is required before new patterns can be set up
Primary care needs assessment
The measurement of need in primary care is problematic because there are difficulties in relating patients' needs.
Morrell has usefully classified the diverse needs of a population in general practice (box).
General practitioners find themselves already required to divulge cervical smear and immunisation status to family health services authorities and district health authorities, which run the screening programme's recall systems.
The new proposals for managing chronic disease and preventing coronary heart disease in the general practitioner's contract's revisions of health promotion payments will also require recording, aggregation, and communication of morbidity data.
While good information is critical for needs assessment, general practice is currently poorly resourced or motivated to provide it, and current guidelines on confidentiality are unclear.
General practice research
The disciplines involved in the primary care sector, the problems and services which are the subject of research and development, and the research methods and specialist resources required to support the primary care sector all vary significantly compared with the secondary sector.
There are considerable difficulties in mounting randomised controlled trials in general practice.
Difficult decisions will need to be made to ensure that commissioned research is sufficiently responsive to the needs of purchasing authorities but at the same time of sufficient scientific rigour to attract good quality academic researchers.
General practice research is a minority activity.
It is not necessary for career progression, is highly complex, can be isolating, is difficult to apply, has a fragmented structure with poor communications between workers, and is undersupported.
There may be a need to consider changes to the general practitioner's contract to encourage research, such as relaxing the regulations of hours committed to patient services and creating a practice development allowance to encourage practices to work with commissioning authorities to adopt and evaluate health gain strategies.
Research ethics
There are considerable grounds for concern about the current handling of ethical issues in general practice research.
The King's Fund report highlighted the conflicts arising from pharmaceutical companies paying general practitioners to conduct post-marketing surveillance of drugs without this stage being vetted by a research ethics committee.
The development of research into prescribing involves general practitioners, pharmacists, and nurses and  requires detailed guidelines to ensure that patients' privacy is protected and that their needs are not subordinated by commercial or individual financial interests.
Despite Department of Health guidelines family health services authorities do not insist general practitioners apply to their research ethics committee for approval, nor do they monitor research by independent contractors.
Health authorities are advised that introduction of new screening programmes requires ethical research committee consent.
My family health services authority is making plans to establish its own primary health care research ethics committee.
Ensuring that patients participating in drug trials give fully informed consent will need careful handling.
Also as the membership and functions of the primary health care team grow and sectoral barriers are broken down, rights of access to patient information are being demanded.
Ensuring informed patient consent to release of information to third parties is obtained is important for service research.
Conclusion
Primary health care is at a crossroads.
Never has so much been expected of general medical practitioners and practice staff; general practitioners are being pressed to do audit, participate in commissioning, become fundholders, do research, improve consumer responsiveness, and develop new skills in the transfer of services from secondary to primary care and development of community care.
It could lead to the dilution and fragmentation of the strengths and skills of the primary health care team.
A cool appraisal of the appropriateness, feasibility, and effectiveness of changing roles and patterns of service in primary care is required.
This will mean harnessing the experience and aspirations of primary health care workers, the epidemiological skills of public health medicine, the expertise and disciplines of academic departments of general practice, the knowledge of social scientists and health economists, the evaluative and facilitative skills of medical advisers, the managerial expertise of family health services authority officers, and the needs and wants of the consumer.
Undoubtedly the freeing of research funds for health service research creates an opportunity for purchasers and providers to collaborate to maximise the benefit to primary care research, which has traditionally been underfinanced.
At the same time, much good practice has developed that needs better dissemination and application.
Family health services authorities are in a pivotal position to develop a research and development strategy which ensures that commissioning decisions are based on best available knowledge, that primary health care workers are adequately resourced, skilled, and motivated to participate in the research and development of the services they provide, and that evaluation of current and new patterns of care becomes routine.
Types of problems in a general practice population
Acute symptomatic disease needing medical care
Acute symptomatic disease not needing medical care
Acute symptomatic illness not explained by disease
Acute symptoms not perceived as illness
Chronic disease needing continuing care
Chronic symptomatic disorders amenable to medical care but with low expressed need as attributed to aging
Adults with pre-symptomatic disease
Children with developmental abnormality
Vulnerable patients who require medical supervision owing to their psychosocial or physical needs
Summary
General practice research has been a minority activity and underfunded in the past
The creation of the purchaser and provider split, the introduction of medical audit, and the new research and development strategy for the NHS provide an opportunity to focus research on the health needs of the population
FHSAs, with the regional health authority, should develop a local strategy for research and development and appoint a lead officer, who may be the medical adviser
When negotiating contracts FHSAs need to back up their arguments with research evidence
NHS development research should cover quality, distribution, accessibility, outcome, and effectiveness
FHSAs should play a part in disseminating knowledge in the interests of achieving an effective and high quality service
GPs should be encouraged to participate in research by relaxing the regulations of compulsory hours of patient service and by creating a practice development allowance
Education & Debate
For Debate
Is the death rate from asthma exaggerated?
Although the death rate from asthma in England and Wales is reported to be about 2000 a year, clinical experience suggests that it is much rarer.
Doctors in West Cumbria health district could recall only seven cases in 14 years.
Examination of case notes of patients officially recorded as dying of asthma showed that many were aged over 60 and cigarette smokers.
An alternative cause of death was evident in over half the patients.
If the picture is representative of that in the whole of Britain the reported mortality from asthma may be much too high.
The rate of death from asthma seems to be increasing despite advances in treatment.
The number of deaths from asthma in England and Wales is widely reported to be about 2000 a year.
This figure is derived from national mortality statistics taken from death certificates and equates to about four asthma deaths per 100000 population per year.
In a comparatively small health district such as West Cumbria (137000 population) five to six deaths from asthma would be expected each year.
In the 14 years since 1978, during which I have been the only consultant physician in respiratory medicine in West Cumbria, there should, according to the above statistics, have been at least 70 deaths from asthma and yet I know of very few, having personal knowledge of only three.
I questioned physician colleagues, local paediatricians, long serving nursing staff on medical wards and in the accident and emergency department, pathologists, and the coroner and found two further possible cases.
I also approached all general practitioners in West Cumbria.
Most of them knew of no patient who had died of asthma during the past five or more years, but three possible cases were referred to, one of which was already accounted for.
In addition, 20 of the worst asthmatic patients in the district, who had been identified mainly between 1978 and 1982 and had been offered the option of self admission, were all alive in 1992.
Asthma statistics
I decided to look at the local statistics for asthma deaths in West Cumbria from the public health department for the years 1980 to 1989.
These showed an average annual mortality of four deaths per year for the 10 years as a whole.
This was considerably more than the anecdotal evidence and clinical experience had suggested (less than one death per year), although slightly lower than the national figure.
Asthma is usually thought of as a disease of young people, yet most of the patients had been aged over 55 at the time of death, a significant number being elderly (figure).
The statistics for the whole of England and Wales also showed a preponderance of deaths in older age groups.
I retrieved the case notes for as many patients as possible who had been registered locally as having died of asthma during 1980–9 (21 case notes out of 40 in total).
I assessed six factors which I thought would help determine whether patients had actually had asthma and whether their death had been caused by asthma.
The six factors were history suggestive of asthma (for example, episodic wheezing), objective evidence of reversible airways obstruction (for example , peak expiratory flow charts), age at death (over or under 60 years), smoking history, postmortem evidence of asthma (mucus plugging, overinflated lungs), and the degree of likelihood that death was caused by asthma based on clinical factors or postmortem examination or both.
As this was a retrospective study retrieval of notes was difficult, especially for the earlier years, and information from case notes was patchy.
But all the patients studied had asthma written in the first part of the death certificate and had been entered into the local statistics as asthma deaths.
Only six out of 21 case notes contained objective evidence of asthma and 12 contained clear evidence of an alternative cause of death (myocardial infarcation (7), epileptic fit (1), lung cancer (1), lobar pneumonia (1), chronic obstructive airways disease/emphysema (2)).
Nineteen of the subjects were aged over 60 and  14 had smoked cigarettes.
Five patients had had a postmortem examination but only one showed evidence of asthma.
Conclusions
The actual death rate from asthma in West Cumbria seems to be much lower than mortality statistics suggest.
Many older patients who probably neither had asthma nor died of asthma may be being entered into the statistics for asthma mortality because of inappropriate use of the word asthma on death certificates, diagnostic transfer, or coding changes.
Concern has been expressed over the accuracy of death certificates in general, and certification of death from asthma in particular , but my study suggests that the inaccuracy may be much greater than previously realised.
If the experience in other districts is similar to that in West Cumbria, a mortality from asthma of 2000 asthma deaths a year nationally is probably much too high.
Perhaps all deaths recorded as due to asthma should be analysed by an independent panel of experts to ensure that the national statistics are correct.
Education and training of preregistration house officers: the consultants' viewpoint
Abstract
Objective —
To determine the opinions, attitudes, and requirements of consultants responsible for preregistration house officers in the light of the General Medical Council's Recommendations on General Clinical Training.
Design —
A questionnaire was piloted asking 28 questions under the headings professional details, present training arrangements, effectiveness of current training, and perceived help required for implementing the recommendations.
Setting —
Two teaching hospitals and nine district general hospitals in the Yorkshire region.
Subjects —
33 consultants (19 physicians, 14 surgeons) responded to an hour long interview.
Results —
The traditional teaching ward round, with clinical meetings, was the main educational provision for house officers.
Under a quarter of respondents provided specific teaching, which rarely exceeded 30 minutes weekly.
Many delegated teaching to other junior or non-medical staff.
Few consultants assessed the effectiveness of teaching, and feedback to juniors was rudimentary.
There was strong support for the apprenticeship system and concern that it should not be downgraded.
Appointing educational supervisors and introducing a structured educational programme were approved theoretically.
Pressure on consultants to work faster, participate in audit and management, and accept financial responsibility for their clinical work, coupled with the reduction in junior doctors' hours, were considered to militate against educational developments.
Many respondents felt frustrated and powerless.
They would welcome an increased educational role but considered there must be conceptual, contractual, and financial changes.
Conclusions —
Fundamental changes are required by both consultants and management before the preregistration year can have proper educational value.
Training in educational methods for consultants and a structured curriculum and formative assessment for trainees require recognition and financial support.
Introduction
In January 1992 the General Medical Council issued revised recommendations on general clinical training.
These state, ‘The goodwill of consultants and of principals in general practice to be appointed as educational supervisors is essential if house officers’ expectations are to be fulfilled.
This will be forthcoming only if there is full discussion between the universities and all concerned with the pre-registration year, and a realisation by all of the importance of the year to the young doctor.’
This paper results from initiating that discussion in the Yorkshire health region.
The concept of a nominated personal educational supervisor for each preregistration house officer is an innovation in the recommendations.
Currently in a six month appointment a house officer may be attached to one team of consultants for three months and then change to a second team.
There is therefore a danger that no one consultant will take specific responsibility for the house officer throughout the whole six months.
The recommendations state, ‘The educational supervisor should help with both professional and personal development and be aware of the PRHO's individual needs…provide feedback on their clinical progress…and should personally undertake, and not delegate their tutorial functions.’
Present survey
The new recommendations were circulated to all consultants concerned in training preregistration house officers in the region.
Through conversation, it was soon realised that although consultants welcomed the concept of the educational supervisor theoretically, they did not all wish to be burdened with this increased responsibility.
Consequently, to test this viewpoint three educationalists and two consultants helped prepare a questionnaire asking 28 questions under four headings: professional details of the consultants; their present arrangements for training preregistration house officers; their assessment of the effectiveness of this training; and their view of the help required for  implementing the new recommendations.
The questionnaire was piloted, then revised, and a final version agreed.
Forty consultants (20 physicians, 20 surgeons) were asked to participate in an hour long interview at a mutually convenient time during June 1992.
Two replied that they would not be available in June and alternatives were contacted.
Four other consultants did not reply even after a second letter and phone calls to their secretaries.
Of the 36 who agreed to participate, three eventually could not find the time.
Data from 33 interviews (19 physicians, 14 surgeons) were therefore available for analysis.
Consultants are expected to teach, yet few receive training in educational methods and principles
Results
professional details
Of the 33 respondents, four were aged under 40, 18 were between 40 and 50, and 11 were over 50.
Nine worked in the Leeds teaching hospitals (General Infirmary and St James's University Hospital) and the other 24 in hospitals in Bradford, Halifax, Harrogate, Huddersfield, Hull, Otley, Seacroft, Wakefield, and York.
On average the consultants were responsible for 22 inpatient beds (range 12 to 40).
Sixteen of them had a house officer for a full six months.
Sixteen changed house officers after three months and one changed every two months.
During the preceding two years the consultants had trained a total of 227 preregistration house officers.
Subsequent analysis of the responses to the questionnaire showed no significant difference between teaching hospital and non-teaching hospital consultants, nor was there any discernible difference in responses with the respondent's age.
present training arrangements
Fifteen consultants sent introductory information in advance to new house officers, giving details of their duties and training programme.
All hospitals held induction courses but few of the consultants were personally involved.
Teaching ward rounds were the standard method of instruction and 27 consultants said their house officers also attended regular clinical meetings.
However, teaching was for all levels of junior doctors together.
Only eight consultants held one to one teaching or tutorials for their house officers and most consultants estimated their total teaching time to be less than 30 minutes a week.
Twenty four respondents stated that they delegated some of the responsibility for house officer teaching to other junior medical staff and to ward sisters.
All but one of the consultants said they provided feedback on the house officer's progress, although one admitted it was little more than ‘five minutes at the end to say thank you.’
The apprenticeship experience was seen by almost all of the consultants as the most powerful contribution to house officer training.
Being caught up within the clinical culture, learning by immersion, and absorbing the practice and principles of the firm may seem to leave the educational process to chance but all respondents pleaded that any changes in the preregistration year should not depreciate or downgrade the contribution of apprenticeship to the training process.
effectiveness of current training
In response to the question ‘How do you currently assess the effectiveness of your teaching?’ 23 consultants said they did not.
Only five actively sought feedback from their house officers.
Others relied on informal feedback such as, ‘many of our house officers want to return here to work as senior house officers.’
When asked ‘Would you like more feedback about the effectiveness of your teaching?’ 25 replied that they would.
‘What do you find difficult about your teaching role?’ produced an almost unanimous response: lack of time on the part of either the consultant or the house officer, or both.
Pressures of work and increasingly other competing commitments were squeezing out time for teaching.
When asked, ‘Should all consultants retain their teaching role or should some specialise and be specifically trained as educationalists?’ 27 said all should be trainers; five of the 27, however, thought that there should also be specialised consultant trainers.
Only six respondents were in favour of training being restricted to those who had been trained to provide it.
help required to implement new recommendations
Time, training, and funding were the dominant themes in most responses.
The recommendations state, ‘Time should be provided for education, by means of hospital based programmes relevant to this stage of the doctors’ training and also time allowed for private study.’
A typical response was, Pressure is being applied to consultants to increase their workload, be involved in management, accept financial responsibility, and give time for audit.
Concurrently juniors' working hours are being reduced.
If both consultants and house officers are to give dedicated time to education, then less clinical work will be achieved and waiting lists will grow longer.
The implications of such a change must be recognised by management and by the public.
Eighteen of the 33 respondents said they would welcome training in educational methods and principles.
Nineteen said they would appreciate occasional seminars at which they could meet other house officer trainers.
One senior consultant stated that taking this hour to reflect on his role as a teacher and trainer was a unique experience in his career.
‘The goodwill of consultants appointed as educational supervisors is essential…’
Although it is accepted their goodwill is necessary, respondents expect that there will be financial implications of implementing the recommendations.
These may be modest but they must be recognised.
Discussion and conclusions
After this series of hour long consultant interviews the interviewers were left with three dominant impressions.
Firstly, there was wide agreement that house officer training is unsatisfactory.
Consultants generally did not see the preregistration year as an educational  process.
Hence to give the title ‘educational supervisor’ to a consultant will have little effect unless there is a profound change in the way in which consultants and hospital managers view the role of the house officer.
Dedicated time for training, education, and study will be difficult to find in an environment where consultants feel they are being subjected to increasing pressure and juniors' hours are being reduced but the clinical workload is increasing.
Secondly, consultants receive no training in educational methods.
Most would welcome it and would also appreciate an opportunity to meet with other trainers.
This will require funding.
Thirdly, there is a feeling of frustration and powerlessness among consultants.
At a time of increasing demands for clinical work, audit, management, and financial responsibility the GMC seems to be imposing a further requirement for the preparation, provision, and assessment of structured education and involvement in the professional and personal development of house officers.
The GMC's appeal for the goodwill of consultants to underwrite the improvements in house officer training, which are envisaged in its 1992 recommendations on general clinical training, comes at a time when this commodity is losing ground under pressure from other competing demands.
The appointment of clinical supervisors and the introduction of structured education and training will be effective only if there are profound conceptual changes in the understanding of the purpose of the preregistration year, if there are contractual agreements to enable the educational supervisor to fulfil the role, and if there is financial provision for the training of trainers and regular formative assessment of the trainees.
Medical Education
The preregistration year
This is the seventh in a series of articles examining the problems in medical education and their possible solutions
In Britain basic medical education ends with a year as a preregistration house officer in approved hospital posts that provide the general clinical experience required before full registration with the General Medical Council.
In theory the preregistration year is an integral part of basic medical education, which is reflected in the fact that the universities have statutory responsibility for this year.
But this is also the first time that a young doctor takes on daily clinical responsibility for patients' care, and in reality the service element provided by preregistration house officers underpins the medical care provided in many of our hospitals.
The long hours worked by preregistration house officers, the high service commitment, and the low rating given to the educational aspects of the job have led to numerous criticisms of this part of medical education.
Many reports have drawn attention to high levels of dissatisfaction among junior doctors.
One survey, conducted in 1986, found that nearly half of the doctors who had graduated in 1981 regretted their choice of career.
A recent report by the BMA has confirmed that stress and disillusionment are common among young doctors, and various reports have pinpointed the preregistration year as a time of considerable unhappiness, up to half of preregistration house officers suffering from clinical depression during the year.
A common criticism levelled at the preregistration year concerns the long hours of work.
Despite recent government initiatives most preregistration house officers still work over 72 hours a week.
What causes most distress, however, is not the total number of hours but the inappropriate work expected of junior doctors during this time.
Recent studies have confirmed that large parts of a house officer's week are spent on routine tasks like taking blood, filling in forms, arranging beds for routine and emergency admissions, and filing laboratory reports.
The GMC has acknowledged these criticisms in its most recent set of guidelines on what the preregistration year should provide.
Universities are supposed to ensure that all posts approved by them for general clinical experience meet the GMC's recommendations.
In this article I shall look at what has been proposed by the GMC, whether this can or should be implemented, what the interested parties think about the recommendations, and whether there are any other ways of ensuring that newly qualified doctors are not put off their careers completely before they have properly begun.
What the GMC recommends
In the introduction to its latest guidelines the GMC states that the preregistration year should be ‘an enjoyable and profitable experience’ and calls on the universities to ‘exercise greater control than hitherto over the duties undertaken…, the supervision of house officers, the general education provided and the monitoring of house officers’progress.’
The document sets out various skills that should be mastered during the year and also states that time should be set aside for education, including protected time within the working week for private study.
House officers should have named educational supervisors, usually their consultants, who ensure that the educational objectives of the year are met and help with any personal problems that may arise.
The educational supervisor is supposed to ensure that the house officer is not ‘overwhelmed by clinical commitments, overburdened by responsibilities inappropriate to the experience acquired, or undertaking an excessive on-call commitment.’
The supervisor is meant to undertake, and not delegate, various tutorial functions, including the induction of the new house officer, regular monitoring of progress and assessment of competence, encouraging participation in educational activities, and giving careers advice.
Can it be done?
These may all be worthy aims, but they are so far removed from the reality of most house officers' experiences as to be laughable.
How is a consultant physician or surgeon in a busy hospital supposed to  find time for the formal educational supervision suggested, much less the pastoral aspects?
Who is going to train consultants in the necessary counselling and facilitating skills?
Who will provide the cover for house officers attending their education sessions?
Is it realistic to expect junior house officers to admit to their consultants that they are overburdened when their career progression depends on getting a good reference?
Unless some of these problems can be overcome the GMC's recommendations will be impossible to implement.
A recent survey of 33 consultant staff in Yorkshire found little enthusiasm for the GMC's proposals.
Although almost all of them enjoyed supervising house officers, they admitted that there was little formal teaching (as opposed to learning by apprenticeship) and that they had not been trained to provide such teaching.
They also thought that pressures from other commitments meant that it would be impossible to provide the sort of supervision recommended or free the house officers to take advantage of the scheme.
A typical comment was, ‘Will somebody tell me who is going to do the work?’
The preregistration year should be enjoyable and profitable experience.
But does it come up to scratch for educational value?
What about a two year preregistration period?
Recently a new proposal for improving the lot of preregistration house officers has been suggested by the Council of Deans of United Kingdom Medical Schools and Faculties.
Under this proposal the preregistration period would be extended to two years with first and second year house officers working in pairs, sharing the on call commitment, and providing cover for each other to attend specially structured education programmes.
So that the training is not unduly prolonged the deans suggest that the undergraduate course could be shortened to compensate for the extra time spent as a house officer.
Like the GMC's recommendations the deans' suggestion may seem superficially attractive, but it too lacks any semblance of realism about how it might be implemented.
No detailed proposals about how the education programmes might be set up are suggested, although the deans concede that they would require ‘careful thought’ and ‘ingenious timetabling.’
The additional burden that this would place on other staff is casually dismissed as ‘to some extent…offset by a smaller number of clinical medical students.’
The NHS is assumed to benefit financially from reduced extra duty payments and reduced medicolegal costs as junior doctors would be ‘better supervised and less exhausted.’
This assumption of improved supervision is put forward as a great strength of the proposals, but in fact what is being suggested is that the first year house officers would receive supervision from second year staff who are not yet fully registered.
There is no discussion about who should provide the improved supervision to the second year staff.
Junior doctor abuse
A recent report from the South Western district based on in depth interviews with 12 preregistration house officers and the staff who had supervised them during their house jobs identified many of the problems with our present system.
The report confirmed that house officers spend much of their time on inappropriate tasks — either those that are beyond their competence and for which they cannot hope to provide optimum care (like providing the main source of symptom control to inpatients, the sole medical cover to surgical patients, and explaining complicated procedures to patients and relatives) and others that could be done just as well by non-medical staff (like filing reports, taking routine blood samples, and arranging beds).
Lack of Education
There was hardly any educational element of the job, and most of the consultants interviewed admitted that they had not read the GMC's recommendations on this.
Those who were familiar with them thought that they were unworkable, given the huge volume of other responsibilities on consultant staff, their lack of training in educational methods, and the absence of support services in most hospitals.
Many of the house officers were working long hours without proper medical supervision.
They were very isolated from other members of the team because they were essentially ward based, while the more senior staff spent much of their time in outpatient clinics and operating theatres — often in different hospitals.
In fact, much of the day to day supervision and emotional support of house officers was provided by the senior nurses on the wards where they worked, yet this role of the nursing staff receives no official recognition.
A combination of long hours, isolation, inappropriate work, and poor working conditions adds up to what Dr Sue Dowling (one of the authors of the report) describes as ‘a syndrome of junior doctor abuse.’
Stopping tinkering
Dr Dowling thinks that it is time that we stopped ‘tinkering at the edges of the problem’ of the preregistration year and totally rethought our responses to it.
She suggests that there are two elements of the job — the educational and the service — and that neither has been properly thought out.
She suggests that the educational infrastructure does not exist at all in our present system but could be provided.
The universities could coordinate distance learning packages for their graduates in various hospitals, although this would have funding and manpower implications.
Total rethink
The service elements of the job fall into two categories — those that are routine and mundane and do not need a doctor to carry them out, and those that are essentially the front line services for health delivery in our hospitals.
People who challenge the assumption that much of what a house officer does could be done just as well by someone without a medical qualification may be surprised to learn that in Taunton and Cheltenham nurse practitioners are already  working as house officers on two surgical firms (box).
Dr Dowling suggests that front line medical services should not be provided by the most junior member of the team working without adequate supervision.
She points out that in specialties where the quality of the front line services is a matter of life and death — such as intensive care medicine or accident and emergency work — they are not provided by preregistration staff.
But she challenges the assumption that services like postoperative pain control or the provision of medical cover to surgical patients should be seen as less important.
She believes that if patients and the purchasers who obtain medical care for them began to demand a better quality of front line service, then hospital managers would very quickly do something to improve the tasks undertaken by and supervision given to preregistration house officers.
Implementing change
One of the great problems in achieving any change in the preregistration experience is that no one seems to have the power and the will to do much about it.
Although the GMC issues recommendations about what the year should provide, it does not have any means of enforcing these.
The legal responsibility for the house officer year rests with the universities, which have shown few signs of willingness to rock the existing boat.
(One notable exception is the University of London, which recently issued guidelines on what was acceptable in a house officer's post and warned that jobs failing to come up to standard would not be recognised.)
The people with most interest in changing things are the house officers themselves, but individually they are in a very weak position because they all depend on references from their consultants for registration and career progression.
Collectively, however, they have considerable power.
Recently the junior staff at Southmead Hospital in Bristol found themselves in bitter dispute with the hospital management over the terms and conditions of their employment.
By chance there were several mature graduates at the hospital, including one who was about to emigrate.
These doctors, unlike so many preregistration house officers, were not prepared to be walked over, and a campaign of industrial action — including the threat that future students might boycott the jobs at Southmead — led quickly to remedial action.
Dr Dowling believes that part of the reason why house officers are often so impotent in hospital politics is that they are essentially migrant labour — rarely in one place for more than six months.
Managers do not really see them as part of the assets of the unit.
She believes that junior doctors could be empowered by longer contracts and proposes that house jobs should be arranged in one year (or even 18 month) blocks within single or closely linked units, so that the doctors felt and were recognised as an important part of the service provided.
A scheme like this is now planned for Southmead Hospital.
Empowering the house officer
The first step in empowering house officers so that change can happen is to ensure that they know what they are entitled to expect from the job.
Few house officers have any idea of the contents of the GMC's recommendations on general clinical experience.
The GMC should ensure that all final year medical students understand what they can reasonably expect.
Ideally there should be a central record of all approved house jobs, detailing the extent to which they meet the recommendations.
Such a ‘good house jobs guide’ is proposed in one recent report and could be produced by the GMC or the BMA.
House officers also need to know what to do if their job falls far short of the recommended standards.
It is unreasonable to expect them to tackle problems through their consultants, although if they had independent supervisors this might be possible.
A better way might be for house officers to take collective action through their trade union representatives, and the BMA should take the lead in providing this service.
Managers need to appreciate that house officers are a vital part of the service they provide and an asset that should be protected.
Attaching doctors to single hospitals for both of their house jobs might be one way of making them a more obvious part of the system.
Surgical nurse practitioner Lou Jacobs has been a nurse for 17 years and has over 12 years' experience in intensive care units.
She has been working as a nurse practitioner on a general surgical firm at the Taunton and Somerset NHS Trust since August.
In previous years her job has been filled by a preregistration house officer.
Her duties differ from a preregistration house officer's only in line with the legal restrictions on nursing staff.
She is not allowed to make diagnoses, initiate drug treatment, or certify death.
She clerks patients, organises and attends ward rounds, requests investigations, draws up theatre lists, liaises with anaesthetic and nursing staff and general practitioners, helps in theatre, and does all of the other tasks undertaken by the medical house officers on the other firms at the hospital.
Ms Jacobs finds the job stimulating and admits to being surprised by how hard house officers are expected to work.
She suspects that she may get rather more exposure to outpatient clinics and theatre sessions than her medical colleagues because they get bogged down on the wards with tasks that she is not allowed to do.
She regards these sessions away from the routine work as some of the most interesting aspects of the job and does not think that the mundane elements of a house officer's post could be ‘dumped’ on another person without some such perks to ‘relieve the boredom.’
London after Tomlinson
Other cities, same problems
This is the ninth article in our series looking at the issues highlighted by the Tomlinson report into London's health care and medical research and education
London's health care problems, particularly underfunding, are mirrored in other major cities in the United Kingdom and abroad.
None has found the perfect solution, but the debates on the Tomlinson report provide an opportunity to review how to manage the three major areas of service provision, medical education, and research in London.
Mr Robert Maxwell suggests that some aspects of the successful ambulatory care initiative in New York could be adapted by the capital's primary care providers while the secondary services might learn from the rationalisation of specialist services in Paris.
Whatever people's views are about specific recommendations in the Tomlinson report there is no doubt that London inherits great medical resources and intractable problems in health care provision and in health.
Something has to be done about the imbalances in the city's health services in order to provide better value for Londoners as quickly as possible and to lay the foundations for future development.
Medical care will continue to develop at a dazzling rate and London has the chance to be in the forefront of international medicine once again.
But this will happen only if it gets its act together in the three areas of service provision, education, and research.
The problems are formidable and they interlock in ways that make them more difficult to tackle.
So it is reassuring to recognise that London is not alone.
Parallels can readily be found in other large cities of the United Kingdom, such as Belfast, Birmingham, Glasgow, Liverpool, Manchester, and Newcastle upon Tyne.
London's problems are certainly similar in kind, even if they have an added dimension simply because London is the country's capital.
On the other hand, London inherits relatively more resources — human and material — with which to tackle them, and it also has the dubious advantage of commanding the attention that goes with being the seat of national government.
Even more compelling are some of the overseas parallels, such as Boston, Chicago, New York, Paris, and Sydney.
What these cities shared was fast growth and great prosperity in the second half of the nineteenth century, leading to extremes of poverty and wealth and the establishment of a large number of hospitals, either as a result of private philanthropy or of government intervention.
All these cities have continued as centres of wealth, but they also show varying signs of relative decline in terms of economic activity and of population movements.
London's main health problems (box) apply equally to New York and Paris.
Their populations are broadly comparable (table).
New York has substantially worse infant and neonatal mortality than London or Paris and some signs of worse problems of social deprivation.
On these indicators London falls between the other two cities.
All three cities are multicultural and multiethnic, though this is hard to capture in the statistics and the mix varies from city to city.
New York's voluntary hospitals can match patients to funding
Like London, New York has inherited a large number of hospitals, including some of the country's most prestigious medical centres and medical schools.
Competition among them has been intense in the past decade as a result of the switch to reimbursement based on diagnostic related groups rather than historic costs, a difficult regulatory environment aimed at reducing short stay hospital capacity and at cost containment, and a much tougher climate for research funding.
More than 10% of the city's hospital beds closed in the 1980s, including more than 20% of the beds in the municipal hospitals.
Despite the squeeze on hospital budgets, health professionals visiting from the United Kingdom are likely to be struck more strongly in the leading New York voluntary hospitals by the relatively lavish level at which they are equipped than by their shortage of money, perhaps because they can shape the patient population that they actually serve to match the funding available.
This impression of relative prosperity  would be even more the case in physicians' private offices, but these are unevenly distributed and are largely absent from the poorest parts of the city.
Much as we may complain about standards of some general practice in London — and rightly so — there is at least some system to seek to achieve geographic coverage by primary care doctors.
This is not the case in the United States.
To a British observer the most scandalous feature of health care in America is the position of the poor and near poor.
On the whole the poorest citizens are covered by Medicaid; the group just above them, numbering some 35 million Americans, are not covered by Medicaid but have no effective alternative in terms of private health insurance.
In New York, as in other cities such as Boston, Chicago, and Los Angeles, the poor have historically relied on the public hospitals, largely financed and administered by city or county government, for their health care.
There has been, and continues to be, a sharp contrast between the municipal and voluntary hospitals in terms of the populations that they serve and how these clients are paid for.
While the medical care, in a technical sense, is generally excellent in the municipal hospitals, all of which are affiliated to major teaching centres to try to ensure high standards, these institutions are like the NHS only more so.
Budgets are tight and subject to sudden change, and inessentials, such as maintenance, are cut to the bone.
If people think that any London accident and emergency department is stressed let them try Bellevue in New York.
In 1970 New York City handed over the management of its clinics and hospitals (accounting for about 20% of all general care discharges at that time) to a new Health and Hospitals Corporation, with the purpose of freeing the management of the system from city bureaucracy, and enhancing its ability to raise revenue from Medicaid, Medicare, and private health insurance.
The corporation has had a chequered history since then.
Its difficulties have partly stemmed from cuts in Medicaid, but also from political interference.
The aspiration to distance the management of a massive public service of this kind from politics has simply proved unrealistic.
Too many jobs are at stake, and the safety net service that the municipal hospitals provide, without financial triage to determine whether the patient can pay, is too important for politicians to stay out of the kitchen.
Managers of the system have had a continuing battle for the funding and managerial autonomy required to run it, and the corporation's survival has at times been in serious doubt.
Success of ambulatory initiative
Nevertheless, there have been successes, particularly in the 1980s with a major initiative to enhance the quality and effectiveness of the ambulatory — that is, non-inpatient — care provided by the municipal hospitals and clinics.
The municipal system has always been even more important proportionally in outpatient, emergency, and primary care services than it is in terms of inpatient activity.
Remember that, in the poorest neighbourhoods of New York, private medical practice barely functions, so there is virtually no first contact care unless the public system provides it.
With only about 20% of the city's beds, the Health and Hospitals Corporation in the early 1980s provided over half of all organised outpatient visits and 40% of all emergency care in the city.
The goals of its ambulatory care initiative were to improve access — for example, by maximising the hours when clinics were open and linking them closely to back up services in the hospitals, increasing the comprehensiveness of care on offer, improving continuity (by linking regular attenders to an identified primary care team), and making the management of the clinics more autonomous and more accountable.
A recently published account of this initiative suggests, using quite tough performance measures, a considerable measure of success for this initiative, which surely ought to have lessons for the NHS in London after Tomlinson.
More long stay beds in Paris
Like London and New York, Paris inherits a heavy concentration of hospitals, hospital beds, and hospital staff.
It also has more than its share of France's doctors, whether hospital based or office based.
In terms of bed numbers it has substantially more relative to population than either London or New York, but like them has been closing short stay beds steadily since the mid-1970s.
In part, this has been balanced by increases in long stay beds of which — unlike London — Paris has a large and growing number.
The core of Paris's hospital system is the Assistance Publique, with 26 short stay hospitals containing some 20 000 beds, more than 20 other facilities (medium and long stay), and a home care programme.
It has 43% of the city's short stay beds; the other 57% being in private hospitals, two thirds of which are run for profit and one third not.
The Assistance Publique originates from the middle ages and was, until around 1960, essentially an organisation to provide health and social care of all kinds for the poor of Paris — including, for example, provision for abandoned children and material assistance to those in need.
What has happened since 1960 has turned this ancient social welfare institution into the country's leading tertiary hospital referral, teaching, and medical research system.
Because public investment in major new equipment has been concentrated in France in the public hospitals, and because specialists in these hospitals are full time, it is the public hospitals that provide the setting for major medical care in France.
The largest of them are also the country's teaching hospitals, affiliated to the faculties of medicine in the universities.
Thus in Paris all medical education and virtually all clinical research conducted by the Faculty of Medicine of the University of Paris take place in the Assistance Publique hospitals.
In no sense are these hospitals now seen as second rate.
While they still have a special mission to serve the poor, they are the preferred setting for major medical care for the whole population.
High technology in the public hospitals
This transformation would not have been possible  without the framework established by the government to concentrate high technology medicine and medical education in the public hospitals.
Equally, however, it has been driven from within the organisation by reducing beds, shutting old hospitals, or transforming them into nursing homes, and concentrating high technology investment in a small number of centres, well equipped and well staffed.
Ten years ago Assistance Publique established a technology assessment process for the whole system, which assesses the cost effectiveness of new innovations before they are introduced and helps to rationalise their introduction within the system.
While the history of Assistance Publique in the past 25 years is a most impressive one, with positive lessons for London about rationalisation of specialist services, it has its dangers as well as its successes.
Overcentralisation is a continuing threat in any large public system of this kind.
Moreover the story is basically one of the dynamics of medical specialisation — London's story of hidden (and not so hidden) subspecialties is even more apparent in Paris.
Assistance Publique's responsibility as the community hospital system for the poor of Paris is constantly in danger of being overwhelmed by its newer role as the country's leading provider of tertiary referral services.
Like so much else about Paris and New York, that sounds only too familiar in London.
Box 1
No perfect model has been found
Overall what stands out from intercity comparisons such as these is that firstly, London's difficulties are echoed elsewhere, which is comforting since it is generally easier to put up with a problem if you know that others share it.
Secondly, no city yet has a perfect model to copy.
Thirdly, there are examples of real progress being made — for example, the ambulatory care initiative by the Health and Hospitals Corporation in New York, and the national development of specialist services in the Assistance Publique system in Paris.
London's health care problems
Exceptional poverty and deprivation alongside affluence.
Among the poorest and most deprived groups are the homeless, refugees, people without jobs, and elderly people living in social isolation.
In most of these groups the black and ethnic minorities are disproportionately represented
A shortage of affordable housing of reasonable quality
Large numbers of commuters (on weekdays) and of tourists (seasonally)
Relatively weak primary and community based health and social care, and a deficiency of nursing homes and residential care for the elderly
Heavy reliance on hospital accident and emergency departments and on short stay hospitals to make good deficiencies in primary and community based health and social care
Strong trends towards specialisation within hospital medical and surgical departments, leading towards excellent treatment for some conditions and a relative neglect of others.
To some degree the bias is systematically away from uninteresting conditions requiring care rather than cure, towards ones that are treatable or are interesting in research terms
Fragmentation of specialist units, with heavy duplication of specialist services among hospitals, variable standards, and some service and research activities that fall below threshold levels for likely high performance
Inadequate funding to maintain, let alone to develop, the existing range of public hospital services.