

Literacy in Theory
THE ‘AUTONOMOUS’ MODEL: I LITERACY AND RATIONALITY
I shall attempt to establish the general outlines of what I term the ‘autonomous’ model of literacy by examining in detail the work of some writers who have explicitly addressed themselves to questions of literacy and its cognitive consequences.
Highlighting its features in this way will, I hope, enable us to recognise them more easily when they occur in embedded form in other writers.
Angela Hildyard and David Olson have put forward a ‘strong’ version of the ‘autonomous’model in a recent article.
They begin by challenging the current opinion that all peoples share basic functions of the mind such as logical and abstract abilities.
They find this view ‘alarming’ since ‘if it is indeed the case that intellectual resources of Savage and Modern minds are essentially equivalent [then]what legitimises the extraordinary efforts and resources that go into compulsory schooling?’(1978, p. 4).
There are a number of sociological and political answers to this question, such as the contention that compulsory schooling serves a variety of social functions, including those of social control, transfer of dominant values etc.
In the language of some recent approaches, ‘compulsory schooling’ asserts the ‘hegemony’of a ruling class (cf.
Dale et al.1976; Graff, 1979).
I will examine such contentions below.
They entail quite different assumptions about the nature of literacy than those put forward by Hildyard and Olson.
Their answer to the question they pose is to say that education systems are to be justified on the grounds that they develop ‘intellectual competence that would otherwise go largely undeveloped’(1978, p. 4).
They conjecture that literacy plays a central part in this process.
The qualities which they attribute to literacy thus take on the more general significance of justifying the vast expense on western education systems.
Seen in this perspective, the claims already have political and ideological significance — they are not as neutral or detached as internal presentation of the argument would appear to suggest.
The ‘autonomous’ model is, then, constructed for a specific political purpose.
This is apparent in their claim that differences in intellectual performances of modern and traditional societies are ‘sufficiently deep and of sufficient significance to warrant, at least in a literate society, the continued emphasis on schooling and the acquisition of literacy’(ibid. p. 5).
They attempt to justify the claim and the assumptions that underlie it, by ‘advancing some conjectures and some evidence regarding the ways in  which language and thought change under the impact of the specialised forms of written text’(ibid.).
Their central conjecture is that there are functions of language that are significantly affected by the mastery of a writing system, particularly its logical functions.
Written forms, they argue, enable the user to differentiate such functions in a way less possible in oral language.
They distinguish between the function of language as imparting meaning, ‘making statements which can be assigned a set of truth conditions’(ibid.), and its function of regulating and maintaining social or interpersonal relations between people.
Most utterances, they claim, serve both functions but written forms facilitate the differentiation and separation of the functions.
It thus becomes possible, through writing, to specialise language, to use it to serve a specific function rather than conflating different functions.
Writing has the effect of distancing the speaker from the hearer; what is said need not be suited to the requirements of the listener because the listener is absent.
Consequently the interpersonal or social functions of the language can be more or less held constant.
The logical functions of language are given free rein.
The invention of writing and particularly the attempt to create autonomous text has resulted in a realignment of the two primary functions of language.
Oral language is always directed to a particular individual usually with some intended effect such as influencing his views, maintaining a certain relationship or controlling his actions.
It can be constantly modified according to its effect and thus the social function dominates the logical.
Written language, on the other hand, makes such interpersonal functions less critical; it can be conducted over time and space and is less subject to immediate feed-back.
It thus comes to serve the logical function rather than the interpersonal one.
It develops the ‘ability to operate within the boundaries of sentence meaning, on the meaning expressly represented in the sentence per se , and thereby to operate within the boundaries of an explicitly presented problem’(ibid. pp. 8–9).
It follows from these conjectures that members of literate societies have the possibility of developing logical functions, of specialising in the ‘truth functions’ of language, and of extracting themselves from the embeddedness of everyday social life.
As Hildyard and Olson put it: ‘the authority of rhetorical conditions are collapsed onto the truth conditions so that if a statement is true to the facts or to the text itself, that is sufficient condition for its being interpersonally appropriate’(ibid. p. 9).
To support these conjectures they cite cross-cultural research into cognitive difference, in particular Patricia Greenfield's study of the differences between schooled and unschooled children amongst the Wolof of Senegal (1972).
Greenfield argues that the significant differences that are revealed by her tests on schooled and unschooled groups derive from fundamental differences between oral and written language.
She maintains that  ‘speakers of an oral language rely more on context for the communication of their verbal messages’(1972, p. 169), and this has implications for cognitive processes.
Her hypothesis is ‘that context-dependent speech is tied up with context-dependent thought, which in turn is the opposite of abstract thought’(ibid.).
She glosses ‘abstraction’ in a sense close to the literal one: a separation from.
Abstraction is, therefore, ‘the mental separation of an element from the situation or context in which it is embedded’(ibid.).
Oral speech depends on context to communicate meaning; it is therefore egocentric and takes for granted a common point of view as though no others were possible.
This quality derives from the fact that oral speech involves face-to-face contact and also that oral languages are less widespread than written languages and so are shared by smaller groups.
Written language is also more widespread across cultural groups, and its users do not share a common frame of reference.
She pursues the consequences of these differences for educational modes and for cognitive operations.
Education in oral language is context-based and imitative.
Kpelle education, for instance, is largely non-verbal, the child learning by imitation.
She infers from this: ‘thus, in the appropriate real-life situation he learns concrete activities, not abstract generalisations’(ibid. p. 170).
Even where words are used, this form of education ‘avoids the classificatory and analytic isolating functions which words have in Western culture’(ibid.).
I shall return to these quite unwarranted inferences later.
Schools in ‘technical societies’, she continues, develop reading and writing which, unlike oral education systems, emphasise ‘telling out of context rather than showing in context’(ibid.).
School is isolated from life and ‘the pupil must therefore acquire abstract habits of thought if he is to follow the teacher's oral lessons’(ibid. p. 171).
Indeed, written language in itself entails higher levels of abstraction because ‘while the spoken word stands for something, the written word stands for something that stands for something’(ibid.).
Tests on working class black people are then cited as evidence that in oral contexts education is by demonstration and is ‘totally dependent on the concrete physical situation’(ibid.).
This has grave consequences for their children who ‘do not learn as much from their mothers as do their middle-class counterparts’(ibid.).
Moreover these children are deprived intellectually by such an upbringing: ‘Thus, a context-dependent teaching style on the part of the mothers is associated with a lesser development of an ability to form conceptual and linguistic abstractions on the part of the children’(ibid. p. 172).
One vital consequence was highlighted by Bernstein in his tests of working-class children in England.
Much of Greenfield's paper derives from the theoretical foundations laid by Bernstein and she is surprised how closely the ‘verbal deprivation’ he identifies in working-class English youths corresponds to that which she found amongst the  Wolof.
He argued (1971) that the working-class spoke in ‘restricted code’ which entailed a failure ‘to perceive the informational needs of the listener as being different from their own’(Greenfield, 1972, p. 172).
Greenfield picks up as most pertinent to her own argument his attempt to trace ‘this failure to a lack of conscious differentiation of self from others’ and his prediction that this will be ‘reflected in the structure of communication, as, for example, in failing to make one's point of view known’(ibid.).
Greenfield's comparable studies and conclusions are related to her research into different groups of Wolof children in Senegal, namely: ‘rural unschooled’, ‘bush schooled’ and those who attended westernised schools in the cosmopolitan capital, Dakar.
She provided tests for three different age groups in each set, corresponding to six- and seven-year-olds, eight-and nine-year-olds and eleven-to thirteen-year-olds.
In tests designed to examine ‘concept formation’ she asked children to put together those pictures or objects in an array that were most alike, and then to explain the reasons for their choice.
Unschooled children gave answers that lead Greenfield to frighteningly large conclusions:
It seemed that the unschooled Wolof children lacked Western self-consciousness; they did not distinguish between their own thought or statement about something and the thing itself.
The concept of a personal point of view was also absent to a greater degree than in Western culture, for the unschooled children could group a given set of objects or pictures according to only one attribute, although there were several other possible bases for classifications.
The Wolof school children, in contrast, did not differ essentially from Western children in this respect.
It appeared that school was giving both urban and rural children something akin to Western self-consciousness for they could answer questions implying a personal point of view; and as they advanced in school they became increasingly capable of categorising the same stimuli according to different criteria or ‘points of view’.
(Greenfield, 1972, p. 173.)
She cites Bernstein and others as testing for uses of the form ‘I think’.
She infers that using such forms means ‘absence of cognitive flexibility’ and quotes the studies by Bereiter and others (Osborn, 1967) of lower-class children who, it is argued, ‘cannot conceive of a single object having two attributes’(ibid.).
These findings, she claims, parallel her own amongst the Wolof: ‘Thus the absence of self consciousness and the resulting presence of an ego-centrically unified perspective seem to be associated with an inability to shift perspective in concept formation problems’(ibid.).
Her tests for the relation between grammatical structure and context formation similarly show the unschooled Wolof children in a poor light.
Asked to select all the objects in an array that shared a particular attribute and to name the attribute, these children could provide an answer but the grammatical form revealed, according to Greenfield, inferior cognitive facility.
Thus, if they said of a group of red objects simply ‘red’, their answer is taken to be unsatisfactory because ‘we are not told what is red’.
Its communication value is ‘more dependent on the situational context’.
Saying ‘this’ or ‘they’‘red’is better practice because it entails use of pronouns which ‘symbolise what concrete objects belong to the category’.
The ‘superordinate grouping’ has been ‘explained by linguistic predication’.
‘Schooled children did this more often than unschooled and so were less context-bound’(ibid. p. 174).
Further refinements proposed by Greenfield include an analysis of the significance of grammatical forms for cognitive facility.
In Wolof language it is possible to say either ‘this is round’ or ‘this — round’.
Greenfield found that the particular form used corresponded to the degree of what she calls ‘abstractness’.
‘A superordinate grouping in which it is explicitly stated that all members share a single attribute was, however, much more likely when linguistic predicates were formed as complete sentences with copula [‘they are round’]than as incomplete sentences without.
For a schooled child the probability was increased threefold; for an unschooled child, it was increased sixfold’(ibid.).
Similarly, schooled children were more likely to say ‘they — round’ than to itemise each member of the array ‘this — round; this — round’etc.
Greenfield takes this to be further evidence of the greater degree of abstraction being learnt in schools.
She links such abstraction explicitly with the fact that schools teach literacy:
The results led to the hypothesis that school is operating on grouping operations at least partly through the training embodied in the written language.
Writing is practice in the use of linguistic contexts as independent of immediate reference.
Thus the embedding of a label in a total sentence structure (complete linguistic predication) indicates that it is less tied to its situational context and more related to its linguistic context.
The implications of this fact for manipulability are great; linguistic context can be turned upside down more easily than real ones.
Once thought is freed from the concrete situation the way is clear for symbolic manipulation and for Piaget's stage of formal operation in which the real becomes a sub-set of the possible.
(ibid. p. 175.)
Greenfield's appeal, here, to literacy as the source of significant cognitive differences is crucial.
It demonstrates, I would argue, the ideological use to which conceptions of literacy are being put in current academic practice.
The appeal to literacy as the basis for mental differences is apparent  in her claim that the superior cognitive operations of schooled children amongst the Wolof were ‘learnt through the training embodied in written language’(ibid.).
The reference to literacy in this context is what induced Hildyard and Olson to quote Greenfield in their own work in order to support their conjectures about the consequence of literacy for such aspects of thought as ‘abstractness’, ‘logic’ and ‘embeddedness’.
Furthermore, its application to class differences has been recognised by many commentators, most notably in the work of Basil Bernstein (1971) on whom Greenfield leans heavily.
Stubbs, for instance, notes that ‘Bernstein's distinction between restricted and elaborated codes’ has often ‘been related to distinctions between spoken and written languages respectively (Milroy 1973; Cook-Gumperz 1977; Lunzer and Harison 1979)’(Stubbs, 1980, p. 111).
This trend represents, I would argue, a shift in traditional representations of the differences in thinking between members of different cultures.
Writers concerned to establish a ‘great divide’ between the thinking processes of different social groups have classically described them in such terms as logical/pre-logical, primitive/modern and concrete/scientific.
I would argue that the introduction of literate/pre-literate as the criterion for making such a division has given the tradition a new lease of life just as it was wilting under the powerful challenge of recent work in social anthropology, linguistics and philosophy.
I would maintain that claims for the cognitive consequences of literacy must take account of this challenge.
They cannot simply side-step it by claiming that the appeal to literacy has altered the nature of the ‘great divide’ theory.
In order to sustain the argument that I am putting forward here, it is important to establish what were the major arguments levelled by anthropologists and others against the ‘great divide’ theory.
We can then proceed to apply them to the work on literacy that we have been examining.
The major challenge has been to question the evidence on the basis of which the distinction ‘logical/pre-logical’ was made.
Analysis has been brought forward to show that what was taken as proof of a lack of logical processes amongst ‘primitive’ peoples was often simply misunderstanding by ill-informed European commentators of the meaning of what was being said and done.
They were ill-informed in the sense that the conceptual basis for understanding such meaning was not carefully theorised, as well as in the more obvious sense that the travellers often simply did not know the language and did not spend enough time living in a particular society.
A powerful challenge to such approaches was made as long ago as the 1930s by Professor E. E. Evans-Pritchard who lived with and studied the Azande of Central Africa, a technologically simple society whom Europeans therefore tended to assume were intellectually simple as well.
He argued, however, that their views on witchcraft were not, in fact, irrational, illogical or ‘mystical’ as European conceptions commonly supposed them to be.
Once one had accepted the initial premise of statements about witchcraft, the processes of thought could be shown to be the same as those entailed in scientific thought.
Other writers have enlarged on these insights, comparing the mechanisms for establishing proof in scientific practice with those of the Azande for establishing the nature of witchcraft.
Michael Polanyi, for instance, argued that the way in which a proposition is protected, through such mechanisms as ‘nucleated suppression’ etc., is exactly the same in both cases (1965).
Differences in the content of thought, such as concern with witchcraft or with physics, should not blind us to similarities in the fundamental processes of thought.
Robin Horton, in a widely cited article on African systems of thought (1967), likewise attempted to break down the elements of scientific thinking in order to demonstrate that so-called ‘primitive’ peoples such as the Azande did in fact make use of the same elements of thought, although applied to different content.
He argued that it is too simplistic, and indeed ethnocentric, to dismiss such peoples as irrational and unscientific.
Too often all that is at fault is the observer's understanding of what other people's statements and actions mean.
Evans-Pritchard and others have also pointed out that the divisions between scientific and non-scientific thinking as such, if they can indeed be reliably established, do not necessarily correlate with different social groups.
Members of supposedly ‘primitive’ societies clearly engage in scientific practices, such as empirical testing of hypotheses, when they plant seeds, the successful growth of which is vital for their survival.
Lévi-Strauss has shown, further, that the classification of the natural world amongst South American Indian tribes is as complex and as interesting as those of the academic biologist, at an intellectual as well as a utilitarian level (1966).
Conversely, in many contexts in western ‘scientific’ society, it is clear that what some writers have labelled ‘non-scientific’thought is as evident as in non-western societies.
This has been investigated in close detail by such social anthropologists as Edmund Leach, who attempted to describe the ‘expressive’ and symbolic aspects of thinking in industrial and non-industrial society alike (1954, 1976).
Wedding rituals in either case are a classic example of how the statements made by participants in a particular context should not be taken literally or at face value but must be interpreted as standing for something else, rich in ambiguity and figures of speech.
The extent to which it would be mistaken to take our own rituals literally provides a standard from which to assess our understanding of the rituals and statements of other cultures.
Too often what has been taken as ‘illogical’ or ‘mystical’is, in reality, pregnant with symbolic meaning which the observer has failed to appreciate through attempting to interpret it literally.
The anthropological evidence, then, suggests that there is scientific and non-scientific thought in all societies and within all individuals.
Observers have simply failed to remark the scientific nature of much of the thinking of so-called ‘primitive’ peoples and have perhaps overstated the ‘scientific’nature of thinking in their own societies.
The recognition of these misunderstandings, and of the amount of dead wood that has to be cleared away before a reliable account of cognitive operations and differences can be provided, is also apparent in recent work by sociolinguists.
This work complements that of the anthropologists in the sense that it uses a cross-cultural perspective to study the thinking processes of different social groups within the researcher's own society.
Labov (1973), studying negro youths in the New York ghetto, discovered, as did anthropologists studying other cultures, that representations of cognitive ‘deprivation’ were founded upon misunderstanding of the real meanings of such people's statements and actions, and upon ethnocentric assumptions about the ways in which logic can be recognised.
On investigation, the speech of supposedly retarded New York ghetto youths turned out to have all of the qualities generally associated with logical thought — facility with complex propositions, meaningful sequence, rule recognition, syllogistic reasoning etc.
Forms of speech which had been labelled ‘ungrammatical’, and taken as evidence of cognitive deprivation, are shown by Labov to be simply forms of dialect with no fundamental consequences for cognitive performance.
Leaving out the copula (to be), using double negative, interchanging subjective and objective pronouns (he and him) can all be shown to be rule governed and consistent dialect practices, not evidence for an inability to express logical relations as Greenfield and some of the writers she cites had claimed (1972, p. 173).
Noting the similarity between such claims, and those by early travellers regarding the ‘illogicality’ of the thought of ‘primitive peoples’, Labov writes: ‘When linguists hear Negro children saying ‘He crazy’or ‘Her my friend’, they do not hear a primitive language’(1973, p. 61).
Rather, they recognise that such ‘nonstandard dialects are highly structured systems’ and that ‘the adult or child who uses these rules must have formed at some level of psychological organisation clear concepts of ‘tense marker’, ‘verb phrase’, ‘rule ordering’, ‘sentence embedding’, ‘pronoun’and many other grammatical categories which are essential parts of any logical system’(ibid. p. 45).
I shall examine below (Chapter 3) what recent writers have said about the relationship between such language uses and literacy.
For the moment it is sufficient to establish the fact that to speak a language at all is to employ abstraction and logic.
One reason for the previous misrepresentation of the logical abilities of such social groups is that the tests carried out to assess such abilities were  unreliable both in method and in conception.
The test situation itself was often authoritarian and unfamiliar, discouraging response, and leading to bright children being labelled unresponsive and subnormal.
Labov, by simply altering the test situation, such as by creating informality or having two youths to one researcher etc., came up with far ‘better’ results for clever youths who had been labelled ESN (educationally subnormal) by the conventional system.
He further demonstrates that what is being tested is often the social conventions of a dominant class, rather than universal logic.
The convention most often mistaken for logic is explicitness, which, he shows, is not the same thing at all.
In relation to a repetition test, he argues that the negro children who failed because they did not repeat the teacher's utterance in the same form were really being failed for a different attitude to surface detail.
‘They do not need a new logic; they need practice in paying attention to the explicit form of any utterance rather than its meaning.
Careful attention to surface features is a temporary skill needed for language learning — and neglected thereafter by competent speakers’(ibid. p. 51).
Such attention to surface forms is also, of course, necessary for the researcher; one aspect of the form of English I am using now, and of that used by Labov, Greenfield and Olson, is its attempt at explicitness.
Labov recognises that certain forms of standard English may well have developed such explicitness further than some dialect forms.
He argues, however, that this is quite different from logic.
‘The logic of standard English cannot be distinguished from the logic of any other dialect of English by any test that we can find’(Labov, 1973, p. 52).
Most anthropologists and linguists would add that this is true also of comparisons between different languages: ‘there is nothing in the vernacular which will interfere with the development of logical thought’(ibid.).
In the light of Labov's researches it is apparent that Bernstein's famous experiments, which have deeply influenced such writers as Greenfield and Olson, in fact test mainly for explicitness, although they assume this to be ‘cognitive flexibility’ and logic.
For example, when Bernstein showed working-class children a sequence of pictures and asked them to tell the story contained there, they began so to speak from inside it: ‘he kicks the ball through the window then the woman chases them’ etc. (1971).
Middle-class children, on the other hand, drew explicit attention to the test conditions: ‘this is a picture; in the picture a boy is depicted as kicking a ball through a window…’(ibid.).
To Bernstein this demonstrates not simply the convention of explicitness which the middle-class child has learnt and has recognised as appropriate for this context, but the development of ‘elaborated code’ with all its associations of abstraction, logic etc.
One might remark that the working-class child considered it redundant to constantly refer to the presence of a picture since he knew that the  researcher was present and could see it for himself.
There was no need to say ‘a’ ball, ‘a’window, since the researcher was looking at them too and so they were, in common to both viewers, ‘the’ball, ‘the’window, Were researcher and student both watching an actual event in which someone kicked a ball through a window; the use of ‘the’would be obvious and the ‘frame’as it were would not need to be drawn.
Learning to frame written material, particularly in test conditions, is a convention of our education system.
It can be shown to have uses and it may well be advantageous for working-class children to learn it for certain purposes.
Its use for examination purposes is clearly a rather restricted justification, although it may account for much of the labelling of ‘failure’ which the working-class child experiences.
Its uses for other social purposes, however, would need to be specified and justified in relation to the context.
Moreover, it is only one convention amongst many.
The conventions of working-class speech also have their uses, and one could provide an argument for some of these being taught to middle-class children.
perhaps some of the middle-class verbosity found by Labov could be eradicated in this way.
What is clear from this, though, is that what we are talking about are conventions, and it is obvious that conventions derive their meaning from social contexts.
What some researchers have done is to shift the significance of their findings away from such socially precise conditions, and to claim a kind of extra-social status for their own conventions by associating them with supposedly general logical qualities.
Greenfield in testing Wolof children is really testing for such conventions, although she describes her results in general cognitive terms as though they represented general mental qualities.
In doing so she is reviving the ‘great divide’ theory that has been so discredited by social anthropologists and sociolinguists.
Any researcher who still poses the problem of cognitive difference across cultural groups must confront this literature and take account of these arguments.
Although Hildyard and Olson do cite this literature in their article, they do not confront the arguments it raises but simply respond to them with ‘alarm’.
If these arguments are true, they ask, then ‘what legitimizes the extraordinary efforts and resources that go into compulsory schooling?’(1979, p. 5).
Finding no answers, partly because they do not spend much time looking for them, they assume that it cannot be true; the differences must be ‘sufficiently deep and of sufficient significance to warrant, at least in a literate society, the continued emphasis on schooling and the acquisition of literacy’(ibid.).
This is the political and ideological basis of their analysis of literacy which, by a sleight of hand, is presented as the ‘neutral’, ‘objective’ findings of the scientist, appropriately couched in the technical language of their academic discipline.
They and others who employ what I term the ‘autonomous’ model of  literacy appear, then, to believe that this model insulates them from the arguments I have been discussing.
The supposedly technical and neutral nature of the ‘autonomous’ model of literacy which they employ appears to absolve them from the charge that they are making ideological claims about cultural difference.
They can argue, whether implicitly or explicitly, that this new version of the ‘great divide’ the division between literate and non-literate — does not discriminate between cultures but simply between technologies.
Since technologies are ‘neutral’, then no aspersions are being cast on individual members of cultures which happen to lack a particular technology and are thus taken to lack certain intellectual advantages.
Where Lévy-Bruhl's (1926; cf. also Evans-Pritchard, 1970) version of the ‘great divide’ theory claimed differences in cognitive development between members of different cultures, those appealing to literacy simply claim differences in cognitive development .
The suggestion is no longer that a culture has acquired such technological skills as literacy because it is intellectually superior, as earlier racist theories had argued.
Rather, it is claimed that a culture is intellectually superior because it has acquired that technology.
Although this may sound appealing, it is not, I contend, tenable.
The argument must still confront the anthropological and linguistic evidence for intellectual development as well as capacity in different cultures.
It cannot side-step this challenge by claiming to be neutral and value-free because of its appeal to the technology of literacy.
This technology is, in fact, ideologically charged; any version of literacy practice has been constructed out of specific social conditions and in relation to specific political and economic structures, as I hope to demonstrate below.
A statement about cognitive difference based on assessment of the nature of literacy is as socially-embedded and open to challenge as are statements about cognitive differences based on race, ethnicity and class.
If we can establish that literacy practice involved a socially variable set of conventions (as I hope this book will make a contribution to doing), then claims for its consequences will not so easily be disguised as universal truths.
Such claims will be shown to rest, instead, on faith in the value, indeed superiority, of particular conventions.
The faith of Greenfield, Hildyard and Olson in the consequences of the particular literacy practices which they describe will appear as faith in the particular social conventions within which such practice became established.
The claim that unschooled Wolof children have not developed the ‘logical functions’ of language will appear then as no more than a statement that the conventions in which their thinking is expressed are different from those of the researcher herself.
Greenfield tries to claim more than this, as do Hildyard and Olson.
They attempt to maintain that their own conventions are superior.
However, they do not do so directly, as  earlier writers in the ‘great divide’ tradition did.
Instead they do so indirectly, by appealing to the supposed intrinsic and culture-free nature of literacy.
If they can establish that literacy in itself constructs superior logical functions, then it will follow that those without it have inferior logical functions.
The assertion is supposedly absolved of its racist and ethnocentric connotations by the neutrality of literacy.
‘Scientific’ tests for cognition can be conducted not on social groups and individuals as such, with all the political implications that involves, but on a newly constructed, asocial category of ‘literates’and ‘non-literates’, as though the culture they belonged to were incidental.
The implications of the findings can then be claimed to follow directly from scientific experiments conducted in an open-minded way with no prior assumptions.
The fact that the Wolof turn out to be less ‘logical’ when in their own environment than when in contact with European influences just happens to follow from the tests, whatever we might want to believe.
The ‘great divide’ has been re-established, by the appeal to literacy, apparently on a ‘scientific’basis and apparently without the offensive appeals to inherent cultural and intellectual superiority that discredited its early phases.
If, however, we do apply anthropological and linguistic perspectives to this recent work on the consequences of literacy, as I claim we must despite its claim to protection from them, then that work in fact turns out to be as biased as that of the earlier phases.
If we strip it of the insulation apparently provided by its appeal to the technology of literacy, we will expose the same ethnocentric claims and uncritical faith in the observer's own ways of thinking.
When Greenfield claims that oral speech is context-dependent, the anthropological evidence would challenge her to demonstrate what speech, whether oral or written, was not.
If she is simply referring to degrees of context-dependency, then she must establish a scale on which such things can be measured.
She must also show the relationships of such a scale to the claims for detachment made within particular cultural conventions.
Merina orators in Madagascar, for instance, make claims for detachment similar to those of westernised educators in Senegal (Bloch, 1976).
Greenfield's scale must be capable of distinguishing such local claims from ‘true’ evidence of detachment.
The example, however, demonstrates the conceptual problems in devising such a scale since ‘detachment’ and ‘context-dependency’are themselves culturally-loaded terms.
Greenfield attempts to avoid this by claiming to test for ‘abstractness’.
When, however, we examine her definitions and her evidence we find that the differences she discovers in performance skills are no more than differences in explicitness, of the kind noted by Labov.
She defines abstraction, for instance, as ‘a separation from’ or ‘the mental separation of an element from the situation or context in which it is embedded’(1972, p. 169).
When she applies this to her test situations, however, she tends to interpret it in the narrow sense of explicitness rather than with reference to the higher orders of logic to which abstractness usually refers and which the general weight of her argument implies.
If, in fact, we apply the higher order definition to the evidence she adduces from Wolof schoolchildren we will find that it applies to schooled and unschooled alike.
When unschooled children group the members of an array according to some such criterion as ‘red’ or ‘round’, they reveal exactly the higher processes of ‘abstraction’even if their language use stops short of explicitness.
Indeed, Labov's work and that of other linguists argues that any user of language is of necessity involved in abstraction in its higher order sense.
The simple fact of referring to something not present is already a separation from the immediate context, while the concepts and terms employed in any language involve degrees of such separation.
The word ‘red’ separates the colour of an object from its form.
The word ‘round’ separates form from function etc.
Furthermore, the grammatical structure and the rules it entails are, as Labov points out, ‘essential parts of any logical system’(1973, p. 45).
In observing such rules, as they clearly do since otherwise they would not communicate, unschooled Wolof children are demonstrating a use of logic, and of abstraction.
The differences between schooled and unschooled children that Greenfield's material suggests are at a less universal and profound level than her descriptions imply.
On the least culture-bound scale for determining cognitive operations, that of ‘degree of abstractness’, the anthropologist and the linguist would tend, then, to argue that all societies and social groups share common capacities.
Further, most would argue that all peoples have evidenced certain basic developments of these capacities, notably with regard to language facility and abstract thought.
Where differences can be found in language use and mental skills, they are more appropriately described as cultural conventions than seen as evidence for profound disjunctures in mental development between members of different groups.
The differences between schooled and unschooled Wolof children are more appropriately described as differences in conventional uses of explicitness than as differences in ‘abstraction’.
The reasons for such different conventions must then be sought in the social context.
Unschooled children, if the evidence does demonstrate that they are being less explicit, may in fact be taking it for granted that the questioner can see what is being referred to so that there is no apparent need to be explicit.
Schooled children, on the other hand, may have been taught that in formal school situations such assumptions must be suspended, however strange that may appear to be.
They have learnt the convention of adopting a ‘detached’ role, of not indicating their own presence in a situation and of not acknowledging what they know about others.
Such  conventions are common in English education where students are taught to use impersonal and passive forms rather than the first person.
But these conventions do not tell us anything about the student's facility with abstraction nor about his or her logical performance.
They might, in some cases, indicate a facility of explicitness, but even here we have to be careful since what is or is not explicit is always relative.
The schooled children may be aptly described as speaking explicitly when they say ‘they are red’ but they are not being as explicit about what they are doing as Greenfield, for instance, is attempting to be.
She is trying to make explicit what lies hidden at another level, one which the participants, whether schooled or unschooled, are not drawing attention to themselves: the cognitive level.
Similarly, I, as an anthropologist, am attempting to draw attention to another level at which Greenfield is not being explicit: namely, the fact that what schooled children are doing has been learnt as a convention within a school system.
I am attempting to make explicit what is for the participants a shared and implicit agreement on the structure within which the practice is taking place.
I can argue that Greenfield does not make this explicit because she is taking for granted conventions that she herself has learnt in the western education system and which she expects her readers to share.
She addresses herself in this article not to the schoolchildren whom she describes but to an audience of fellow academics.
So she does not feel the need to make these ‘academic’ conventions explicit.
Knowledge of when to make a convention explicit is culturally learnt, and use varies according to context.
Unschooled Wolof children know when to make certain things explicit in their own culture; it would appear that they are not triggered off to do so by Greenfield's questions.
Not having been trained in school formalities, there is no reason why they should associate her test questions with the need to make explicit answers, or why they should pretend that the questioner is not there as the ‘detached’ answer requires.
Schooled children, on the other hand, had learnt these conventions and this is why their answers accord with them.
Greenfield herself provides some evidence that the test situation was not entirely culture-free although she does not allow this to restrict her from making large inferences from the results.
When the Wolof children were asked to put together the pictures or objects in an array that were most alike and to give their reasons, the question was at first put in the form ‘Why do you say (or think) that these are alike?’.
American and European children had been known to respond well enough to this form of words and schooled Wolof children did so too.
But the unschooled children met ‘this type of question with uncomprehending silence’.
The testers might have got a clue from this that such a question was entirely artificial, constructed out of test situations and irrelevant to children who did not go to school and so were not used to being exposed to such tests.
Instead the researchers changed the form of the question and asked not ‘Why do you say (or think) that these are alike?’ but ‘Why are these alike?’
The children then answered the questions.
But their initial difficulty is recorded as a ‘lack of western self-consciousness; they did not distinguish between their own thought or statement about something and the thing in itself (p. 173).
This is a somewhat exaggerated inference to draw from such narrowly based data.
To infer that because Wolof children were not familiar with western school practices they were therefore unable to distinguish between their thought and its object unjustifiably inflates the significance of the western school and its practices.
If we really wanted to find out whether the unwesternised Wolof were capable of expressing different points of view, we could do worse than to look for instance at their political activities and see whether, in factional disputes, the lobbying that takes place indicates such an awareness.
To rest the whole so-called ‘cognitive skill’ of ‘variable points of view’on a single convention is greatly misleading.
Moreover, an explicit claim to multiple points of view tells us nothing about the actual practice of using them.
School children who have learnt to express insights explicitly in terms of various points of view do not necessarily, in practice, make much political, intellectual or other use of such variety.
Conversely, indigenous politicians, who do not make explicit reference to the individual actor as having multiple points of view, may nevertheless in practice make considerable use of those multiple points of view that are implicit in the existence of different political factions.
The concept of the individual actor is itself a political construction, highly charged and central to much western political practice; it can be used, for instance, to give the impression that ‘choice’ is being exercised when analysis of the deeper political and economic structures would indicate that there is no real choice.
The expression of individual choice and of multiple points of view is, in that sense, ‘ideological’, since it disguises the true situation behind an appearance of reality.
It leads participants to put up with exploitation, for instance, with lack of real choice and an inability, despite exercising different points of view, to alter the real political and economic situation.
If we recognise the possibility of such an argument in relation to the concept ‘multiple points of view’, then we must recognise that the ability to exercise multiple points of view is not very fully tested by Greenfield's school tests.
Conversely, the school tests for explicitness do not tell us very much about the exercise of multiple points of view.
Moreover, particular examples of the use or non-use of multiple points of view are not necessarily indicators of cognitive deprivation.
I might argue that a particular capitalist economist is so embedded in the political and economic structure of the society that employs him that he fails to represent adequately the challenge levelled by ‘political economy’ to the perspective he purveys, and thus fails to take into account multiple points  of view.
Whether I would be justified in couching this political criticism in terms of cognitive deprivation — that he lacks ‘cognitive flexibility’ or ‘cannot distinguish between his own thought about something (e.g. capitalism) and the thing itself (Greenfield, p. 173)— seems to me doubtful.
It might strengthen my case to appeal to apparently neutral, non-political standards but I do not suppose that I would be saying anything useful about the nature of cognition.
If I were to write of Milton Friedman: ‘the absence of self-consciousness and the resulting presence of an egocentrically unified perspective seem to be associated with an inability to shift perspective in concept formation problems’, I do not suppose that many psychologists would accept such an application of the language of psychology.
It might be argued that, even if such a statement were true of certain of Friedman's works, it would not necessarily reveal anything about the man himself and also that the appeal to cognition was irrelevant.
It would have been more appropriate to limit oneself to making political comment and to exploring the limitations of the ideas and concepts that  underlie a capitalist system rather than directing the criticism towards the cognitive capacity or development of particular groups or individuals.
The flaw, to which I should address myself, if there is one, lies in the ideas not in the individual mind.
The same is true, I would argue, of the ideas and concepts of the unschooled Wolof.
If they do not express the concept of multiple points of view in a way familiar to those schooled in western ways, we might be justified in exposing the limitations of their expressions and of the thought system within which they operate, but this would not tell us anything about the individuals or groups themselves as thinkers.
Moreover, the Wolof may retort that they do have ways of expressing multiple points of view and that we should attempt to understand these before dismissing them en bloc .
They may, indeed, wish to defend the particular concepts and ideas they hold, as Friedman might wish to defend his, and to point out the limitations of their critic's own conventions, such as the conventions for ‘self consciousness’ developed by western schooling.
In such intellectual dispute and discourse, the claim by one side that the other lacks cognitive skills appears as part of the political process of debate.
In a society that legitimises its forms of truth by appeal to ‘science’ and ‘objectivity’, a person's case will certainly appear stronger if she or he can demonstrate that the other side is ‘context-bound’and limited in their deployment of such logical abilities as ‘abstraction’.
One does not get the impression, however, that Greenfield recognises this polemical and ideological aspect of her description of unschooled thinking.
Instead it is presented as though it really were neutral, detached and scientific, and that the description reliably tells us of Wolof mental states rather than of Wolof cultural conventions.
That the ideological purpose of such work is to justify and defend western educational practice is, indeed, made explicit in the article by Hildyard and Olson (1978) as we have seen.
In Greenfield, however, it remains implicit although it is not too difficult to uncover.
In comparing oral and literate societies in terms of their education systems, for instance, she represents oral systems as decidedly inferior.
They are not only context-based, they are also imitative and that has severe cognitive consequences.
Kpelle children, she asserts, do their learning in the appropriate real-life situation and thus they learn ‘concrete activities, not abstract generalisations’(p. 170).
The leap in the argument here reveals an underlying interest akin to that expressed more explicitly by Hildyard and Olson: namely, in justifying the large and expensive western education systems that teach children away from the real-life situation.
There is, in fact, no justification for Greenfield's inference here.
Learning a practice in the situation where that practice is conducted must involve some abstraction if the practice itself does.
It is impossible, for instance, to fully imitate the practice of making political speeches that analyse, summarise and comment upon a social situation without also developing the abstract skills that such practice entails.
Anthropologists have produced considerable evidence of such analytical and abstract speech-making in oral cultures, as they have of other practices that involve such abilities (Bloch, 1975).
Indeed, much ‘practical’ scientific learning in a western education system takes place in a laboratory where students imitate, learn concrete activities and at the same time are assumed to be developing logical and abstracting abilities.
Greenfield further claims that where Kpelle ‘concrete’ education is also verbal, it is still inferior to western verbal education: ‘It avoids the classificatory and analytic isolating functions which words have in Western culture’(p. 170).
The consequences of such a claim are enormous.
Does Greenfield really believe that oral societies lack these functions of language?
Linguists and anthropologists alike have carefully documented the complex classification systems apparent in non-literate societies and have recognised the presence of abstraction in both.
Pulgrum, for instance, writes:
If communication takes place acoustically or optically (through speech or writing) then this is due to the faculty of abstraction of the auditory and visual centres of the brain, that is, the ability of the brain to recognise the class in a specimen of the class, regardless of the individual features of the specimen.
This intellectual process is of greatest linguistic and epistemological importance, because thanks to it human beings can devise and use common nouns, which are class names and not merely proper names for  each individual of a species of beings or class of things.
Phoneme and grapheme are precisely such class abstractions.
In the absence of classes of phones or phonemes valid for all members of a linguistic community, all oral communication would cease, for every individual could talk intelligibly only to himself, because he could meaningfully use, actively and passively, only one set of phones, namely his own.
Even animals can do better than that.
(Pulgrum. 1951, p. 16.)
The very use of language, then, whether oral or literate involves classification, abstraction and the selection by specific criteria of elements from a largely undifferentiated universe.
Greenfield, on the other hand, would appear to be arguing that only graphemes and not phonemes involve class abstractions.
This would imply, according to Pulgrum's argument, not only that the Wolof could not communicate with Greenfield but also that they could not communicate with each other.
Lévi-Strauss, amongst others, has provided ethnographic validation for Pulgrum's position.
In detailed descriptions of ‘oral’ cultures he has shown how such systems of classification work in practice.
Classification, he shows, involves selection and isolation of elements whose meaning derives from their being part of a system rather than from any intrinsic significance.
Thus, a member of another culture can never know without exploring that system, what criteria have been used to link elements in a set.
The Ojibwa Indians of Parry Island, for instance, number the eagle and squirrel among their ‘totems’.
Lévi-Strauss explains the connection: ‘Fortunately a native text explains that these animals are included as symbols of the trees they each inhabit; hemlock trees and cedar trees respectively.
The interest which the Ojibwa have in squirrels is therefore really an interest in a kind of tree’(1966, p. 60).
Like phonemes themselves, words only have significance in relation to other words and as part of a total system of classification.
To suggest that some oral forms of education involve a use of words that lack ‘classificatory and analytic isolating functions’, as Greenfield does, is meaningless.
To claim that such functions are peculiar only to western cultural uses of words is plain ethnocentrism easily refuted by the evidence available.
Lévi-Strauss' reference to the Ojibwa use of squirrels as symbols for trees also highlights another aspect of Greenfield's case.
She argues that writing provides ‘practice in using linguistic context as independent of immediate reference.
Thus the embodying of a label in a total sentence structure…indicates that it is less tied to its situational context and more related to its linguistic context’(1972, p. 175).
She is thinking here, specifically, of the way in which schooled Wolof children in her tests described the sets they selected in terms of‘complete linguistic predication’, using  such terms as ‘they are round’ rather than ‘they — round’.
This completeness and therefore detachment, she claims, facilitates manipulability: ‘linguistic contexts can be turned upside down more easily than real ones.
Once thought is freed from the concrete situation the way is clear for symbolic manipulation and for Piaget's stage of formal operation in which the real becomes a sub-set of the possible’(ibid. p. 172).
It would appear from her article that she believes that the unschooled Wolof have not passed through this stage.
Lévi-Strauss' example is drawn from a society which, like the unwesternised Wolof, is oral.
Yet he demonstrates that symbolic manipulation is a complex part of their linguistic and social practice.
Squirrels are not treated literally as ‘things’ in the outer world but as, firstly, parts of sets defined by such criteria as ‘those that live in trees’and, secondly, ‘available for symbolic manipulation’since they can be taken to stand for the very trees they live in.
Other peoples, however, use the same apparent elements for different purposes.
Amongst the Fang of the Gabon, for instance, pregnant women are forbidden to eat squirrels due to quite other considerations:
Squirrels shelter in the holes of trees and a future mother who ate their flesh would run the risk of the foetus copying a squirrel and refusing to leave the uterus.
The same reasoning could equally well apply to weasels and badgers, who live in burrows, but the Hopi follow a quite different line of thought; they hold that the meat of these animals is favourable to child-rearing because of their habit of working their way through the ground and ‘getting out’ at some other place when they are chased into a hole.
They therefore help the baby to ‘come out quickly’.
(Lévi-Strauss, 1966, p.61.)
Nor should these statements necessarily be taken literally: the animals are interesting and people adopt attitudes to them not because of any beliefs in the direct material effect of squirrels on child-birth but because of their usefulness in helping people to make intellectual and symbolic discriminations — they are ‘good to think’.
Given the vast symbolic and metaphorical potential of the natural world, it is obvious, says Lévi-Strauss, that the same characteristics could be given different meaning and that different characteristics could be selected to make up a set.
But: ‘Arbitrary as it seems when only its individual terms are considered, the system becomes coherent when it is seen as a whole set’(ibid.).
In this sense the elements of a people's ‘real’ universe can be ‘turned upside down’as easily as those of its linguistic universe, since their apprehension of both stem from the same fundamental principles of thought and meaning construction.
These principles involve the attribution of meaning through placing elements in relation to each other.
The  characteristics of both the phonemes and of the things in the natural world that are selected for specific purposes are arbitrary in themselves but they become meaningful when contrasted with others to form a set.
Linguistic contexts are not, as Greenfield supposes, more easily ‘turned upside down’ than ‘real ones’.
The ‘real’ is a sub-set of the possible for all language users.
All peoples manipulate elements of linguistic and ‘real’ systems in ways that involve symbolic and logical operations.
The unschooled, oral Wolof do not, then, lack the abilities of abstraction, symbolisation and formal logic that schooled, literate children are claimed to have.
The differences between the two groups cannot be couched in such grandiose terms.
There is not a ‘great divide’ between them as Greenfield would have us believe.
Her data provides us, in fact, with evidence of very little comparative value.
What we do learn, however, from the article and the use of it by Hildyard and Olson is something of the ideological nature of recent claims for the consequences of literacy.
These claims are made in the context of attempts to justify expenditure on western education systems and to represent the ideals of the writers' own culture as ‘universal’.
In this sense the claims for literacy can be described as ‘ideological’.
They are part of an armoury of concepts, conventions and practices that give meaning to and protect the writer's own social formation and specifically their own place within it.
What Greenfield and others are privileging and providing ideological support for is, in fact, their own academic establishment, their own work practice within it, their own values and rules.
Moreover, although what they are testing other people for are their own conventions, their own work does not necessarily provide evidence of them in practice.
The conventions are, in fact, ideals.
Much academic language is, in practice, obscure and verbose.
Labov's work to redeem, as it were, underprivileged speech also entailed a revealing critique of more privileged forms.
He compared the speech of a negro ghetto youth with that of a middle-class, educated man in terms of their underlying coherence and clarity rather than their surface form.
He found that the ESN youth Larry was arguing cogently and pithily, once the dialect conventions of his speech were recognised, while the middle-class speaker circled around his subject, waffled and got side-tracked (1973, p. 53).
Work by Rosen (1972) in England, which challenges some of Bernstein's claims regarding working-class thought, also provides an analysis of middle-class speech that shows it to be less than clear, precise or detached.
The same is true of much written academic language, despite the claims of Olson and Greenfield to the contrary.
Indeed, much of their own writing is embedded, context-laden and ethnocentric, as the current argument attempts to demonstrate.
They represent the classic disproof of their own claims for the detached and context-free qualities of writing.
What  they are writing about in reality are the ideal standards of their own social group, those that give meaning to their work practice even if they do not always live up to them.
Greenfield's testing, for instance, of those who variously succeed and fail by these ideal standards has the quality of a social ritual to establish the true order.
Her account has some of the qualities of myth in validating shared beliefs and providing a charter for social action.
The ‘truth’ value of statements is classically tested in such ways in different societies.
The particular forms adopted by Greenfield, Hildyard and Olson can be related to the social formations and institutions that generated them, in this case specific academic institutions, just as in oral societies statements about truth are expressed and validated in terms of such complex forms and institutions as witchcraft, religion, cosmology and ritual.
It is in this sense that the claims that we have been examining concerning the consequences of literacy are ‘ideological’.
They derive from the writers' own work practice and belief system and serve to reinforce it in relation to other groups and cultures.
That Hildyard and Olson have in mind their own academic establishment is apparent not only from the standards and ideals to which they appeal, but also from the explicit nature of the examples which they use.
They support their conjecture that writing enables interpersonal meanings to be dominated by the logical functions of language, for instance, by citing the Royal Society of London.
‘Just such a re-alignment [from interpersonal to logical functions of language]in historical fact characterised the philosophical bias of the British empiricists as represented, for example, in the charter of the Royal Society of London which demanded ‘a mathematical plainness of language’ and a rejection of ‘all amplifications, digressions and swellings of style’(1978, p. 9).
Literacy, in this case, is taken to involve attention to the ‘meaning expressly represented in the sentence per se ’ to the exclusion of the interpersonal and social implications that dominated oral language.
The example appears to be offered in order to demonstrate the relationship of literacy to a scientific tradition.
It presents the Royal Society as evidence of the logical and socially detached nature of language.
Yet this is the very example that one would have used to challenge their argument.
For the origins and development of the Royal Society of London, far from demonstrating the objectivity and truth of scientific inquiry, is a classic example of the extent to which such inquiry is contingent on social pressures, political interests and the nature of the institutions in which it is conducted (cf.
Smith, 1960, Ch. 1).
The competition for status and patronage between the Royal Society and the British Academy, for instance, demonstrates how alternative theories of knowledge are embedded in real ideological and political circumstances and are not as   rarefied and detached as they are commonly claimed to be.
The charter that was drawn up represents, in fact, just such a claim: it was a political weapon in the battle for status and funding and is not to be taken simply at face value.
Similarly, the description of the conventions regarding the form of language to be used are to be interpreted more as a parody and critique of the rival Academy than as evidence of what members of the Royal Society really did.
The aims set out in the charter do not, in any case, represent the only form in which scientific progress can be achieved; other conventions than ‘mathematical plainness of language’ could also be appealed to as significant for intellectual endeavour.
As with all claims made by competing groups for the objective nature of their own discourse, those made by the Royal Society are tainted by the contingencies of the world in which they were made.
Observers from other periods attempting to make sense of such discourse have to understand the conventions and to unpack the ideology.
Far from doing this, Hildyard and Olson simply reproduce those very conventions in their own work making the same claims for objectivity as those made by the Royal Society.
The claims which they make for the consequences of literacy belong to the same tradition.
They are not made any more convincing to a modern reader by the assumption that this tradition really was ‘objective’.
That they are really writing about the superiority of their own academic tradition, rather than about some universal characteristics of literacy in itself, becomes apparent when they pursue the implications of literacy for language forms.
The result of acquiring literacy, they conjecture, ‘is not an ordinary language…it is the language of analytic thinking and explicit argument and it is the tool that has been adopted by science and philosophy and to a large extent by the formal school system’(ibid. p. 10).
If they are saying that ‘analytic thinking and explicit argument’ are the sole province of literate cultures, and by implication their own, then they must confront the counter-evidence provided by social anthropologists of the intellectual achievements of so-called ‘primitive’societies that do not have literacy.
Without this cross-cultural breadth their argument appears parochial and ethnocentric.
What is also required is some analysis of the social practice of ‘science and philosophy’ in different contexts.
We might find, for instance, that ‘analytic thinking’ of the kind they describe, free of interpersonal bias and meaning what they say with little or no room for interpretation' is no more apparent within university institutions and the formal school system than within other social institutions.
Such practice needs investigation before we can accept it,en bloc , as evidence for objectivity and logical thought.
The investigations by social anthropologists of the conventions of other societies for detaching utterances from their immediate context would provide a useful model for such an inquiry.
Forms of oratory  described by Bloch in Madagascar and Turton for the Mursi of East Africa (Bloch, 1975), for instance, involve conventions for distancing the speaker and separating out some aspects of meaning from contingent social pressures, without the use of written forms.
They do, nevertheless, reveal implicit social bias and have political implications, just as does the work done in British universities.
While societies do themselves construct devices for specialising and separating out levels of meaning, this does not mean that they ever achieve in reality the claims that they make about such discourse.
As we saw earlier, the very writers whom we are discussing themselves make ritualistic claims for objectivity that function more to support their own ideology than to convince a sceptical reader of the ‘truth’.
But writers do not have a monopoly on such claims; they are part of oral practices too.
There has not been any demonstration of a necessary correlation between the incidence of claims to objectivity and the development of literacy.
Even less has there been evidence of any real correlation of objectivity itself with literacy practice.
Moreover, the representation of literate practice that is offered by writers like Olson, Hildyard and Greenfield is a limited one in relation to the whole range of literate practices that could be described.
Olson's claims for the consequences of literacy refer only to the essay-text form of writing, as though this was what is generally meant by ‘literacy’.
Yet the evidence we have available suggests that this is too specific and narrow an example from which to generalise.
Goody's examination of historical records, for instance, suggests that for many centuries very few ‘texts’ were produced, the vast bulk of writing being concerned with lists, tables, charters, headings, business records etc.
(Goody, 1977).
Recent ethnography of writing has demonstrated that the same is true for many contemporary societies now labelled ‘literate’; much of the practice turns out to be, as in Iran (see below, Section 2), writing names on crates of produce, keeping records of business transactions, writing cheques etc., or, as in English factories, reading warning or instruction labels, one-word sign symbols and signing names or filling in forms (see Section 3).
The generalisations made about the essay-text form already assume a social formation in which it is significant and embedded in specific social institutions.
Thus, what is said about the text is contingent on the nature of those institutions: it will differ across literate societies, as it does for instance between those with a tradition of novel-writing or of academic institutions etc. and those without, and its consequence will depend on the social role, functions and meanings of its practice.
The essay-text is not the same, then, as ‘literacy’.
If Hildyard and Olson were saying that the form of literacy represented by its essay-text development in European academic institutions facilitates certain social, political or ideological functions that other forms of literacy and oral forms handle  less efficiently, then one could test the hypothesis against the social facts.
Even then, when formulated in this more precise and sociological way, the hypothesis is not yet proven.
But their argument is not couched in these terms.
Rather it is couched in absolutist terms that reify literacy as though its very essence were being described and that unjustifiably relate specific cultural manifestations of it to such universals as logic, abstraction etc.
Expressed in this way the hypothesis does not do justice to the variety and complexity of literate practices, undervalues the character of oral practices, and sets up a ‘great divide’ that they themselves reject when it is made explicit.
Indeed, Hildyard and Olson do recognise the dangers of stating their case in such strong terms and they attempt to qualify it.
‘We do not wish to imply that all written language is autonomous and that all oral language is context-based.
Clearly some forms of written language, for example personal letters, do rely on a shared knowledge base and some oral language, for example lectures, can employ the autonomous language of text’(ibid. p. 10).
But they go on to represent these examples as limited qualifications to their general thesis and to argue that nevertheless ‘literacy fosters the specialisation of the logical functions of language resulting in a focus on sentence meaning per se ’(ibid.).
If the examples cited by Hildyard and Olson of oral language being ‘autonomous’ and of written language being ‘context-based’were the rare exceptions that the reference to letter writing and to lectures suggests them to be, then their conjectures about literacy would have some credence, though the argument could not be as absolute as they sometimes make it appear.
But the many complex descriptions of the real social practice of literate and oral modes that are now becoming available suggest that literacy and orality are not so vastly differentiated as these writers claim.
The examples which they cite as exceptions in fact correspond more closely to the norm: literate practices are everywhere ‘context-based’ while oral language has everywhere developed techniques for separating out different contexts.
This can be illustrated from a wide variety of cases: the uses of literacy for social control in nineteenth century Canada, for instance, where any ‘critical’ element was carefully excluded (Graff, 1979); the restriction of the content of written forms to religious tracts by the Methodist missionaries who introduced literacy to Fiji in the nineteenth century (Clammer, 1976); the examples from British literacy campaigns that show how illiteracy developed in schools because of the class-based nature of schooling (Mace, 1979); the uses of literacy for religious and symbolic purposes in Ghana (Goody, 1968); the greater trust placed by thirteenth century knights in England on seals and symbols as means of legitimating charters and rights to land and their suspicion of the written document as more likely to be forged and inaccurate  (Clanchy, 1979); the development in Iranian villages of forms of literacy taught in Koranic schools into forms of literacy appropriate for commercial trading in a rapidly modernising and urbanising economy (Section 2).
All of these descriptions of literacy practice, which I shall deal with in more detail below, suggest that attention to the ‘interpersonal’, socially-conditioned aspects of literacy is central to understanding the nature of that practice.
These are not just minor counter examples that prove the rule, as Olson's reference to the personal nature of letters attempts to suggest: they are what literacy is.
It is always embedded in some social form, in conventions such as letter writing, charters, catechisms, business styles, academic ‘texts’ etc., and it is always learnt in relation to these uses in specific social conditions.
These conditions include theories of pedagogy and practices of hegemony that help to determine the meanings of literacy for particular practitioners.
As Graff argues, literacy can only be understood in context: ‘it can be established neither arbitrarily nor uniformly for all members of the population’(1979, p. 292).
I shall now examine these works in more detail in order to develop my critique of the ‘autonomous’ model and to move towards an alternative ‘ideological’model.
I have cited the work of Olson, Hildyard and Greenfield as representative of the ‘strong’ version of the ‘autonomous, model, although other writers could have served the purpose equally well so my criticisms are not intended as specific to them.
In the next chapter, I shall examine the work of Goody, which appears to justify the ‘autonomous’ model from a more detached, anthropological perspective and which is probably the major source of general conceptions about literacy outside that discipline.
We will see from this how deeply the ‘autonomous’ model is rooted in contemporary thought and at what levels, therefore, the challenge to it must be conducted.
THE ‘AUTONOMOUS’ MODEL: II GOODY
The most influential presentation of the ‘strong’ version of the ‘autonomous’model has probably been that of the social anthropologist.
Jack Goody.
Frustrated by his colleagues' lack attention to the problems of literacy, partly because of their tradition of studying ‘pre-literate’ societies, Goody has attempted in a number of articles and books (1963, 1968. 1977) to describe the importance and ‘potentialities’of writing.
This polemical concern to highlight the importance of what had been ignored is significant in helping to explain why Goody so overstates the case.
For, despite his explicit recognition that ‘writing is not a monolithic entity’ and that ‘in the study of behaviour, there are few, if any ‘sufficient causes’’(1968, p. 4), Goody can quite legitimately be charged with arguing for the ‘autonomy’of literacy and with reducing its significance — as the ‘technology of the intellect’— to a kind of technological determinism.
The various versions of Goody's case comprise major characteristics of what I term the ‘autonomous’ model.
He believes that the distinction literate/non-literate is similar to, but more useful than, that traditionally made between logical and ‘pre-logical’.
This, he claims, is because of the inherent qualities of the written word writing makes the relationship between a word and its referent more general and abstract, it is less closely connected with the peculiarities of time and place than is the language of oral communication.
Writing is closely connected to, ‘fosters’ or even ‘enforces’the development of ‘logic’, the distinction of myth from history, the elaboration of bureaucracy, the shift from ‘little communities’to complex cultures, the emergence of ‘scientific’thought and institutions and even the growth of democratic political processes.
These views of the consequences of literacy, held with greater or lesser attention to the explicit caveats which Goody enters, deeply permeate the work of his fellow anthropologists as well as that of developmentalists and some social psychologists.
It is important, then, in attempting to establish the study of literacy practices on a sounder basis, to examine Goody's argument as a test case for those of many other writers who have paid less explicit attention to the questions than he has.
I shall argue that he overstates the significance that can be attributed to literacy in itself: that he lends authority to a language for describing literacy practices that often contradicts even his own stated disclaimers of the ‘strong’ case; that he understates the qualities of oral communication; that he sets up unhelpful  and often untestable polarities between, for instance, the ‘potentialities’of literacy and ‘restricted literacy’; and that he polarises the differences between oral and literate modes of communication in a way that gives insufficient credit to the reality of ‘mixed’and interacting modes.
Despite the density and complexity of social detail in Goody's descriptions of literacy practice, there is a peculiar lack of sociological imagination in his determination to attribute to literacy per se , characteristics which are clearly those of the social order in which it is found.
In an essay written with Watt in 1963 (in Goody, ed. 1968), Goody sets out to counter-balance the relativism of his colleagues in anthropology which, he feels, ‘has now gone to the point of denying that the distinction between non-literate and literate societies has any significant validity’.
The ‘personal observation’ of Goody and Watt is contrary to this so they intend to pursue ‘the traditional dichotomy between literate and non-literate societies’(1968, p. 28) in order to see if any genuine illumination can be found in it.
They begin from a description of ‘the ways in which the cultural heritage is transmitted in non-literate societies’ and then inquire ‘how these ways are changed by the widespread adoption of an easy and effective means of written communication’(ibid.).
What characterises oral societies, and justifies drawing the distinction between them and ‘literate’ societies, is that ‘all beliefs, and values, all forms of knowledge, are communicated between individuals in face-to-face contact; and, as distinct from the material content of the cultural tradition, whether it be cave-paintings or hand-axes, they are stored only in human memory’(ibid. p. 29).
From this sharply drawn difference Goody and Watt draw all their inferences concerning the thought process, cognitive skills and social achievements of the two kinds of societies.
Yet the distinction is clearly overdrawn.
Goody himself in a later essay points out that ‘at least during the last 2,000 years the vast majority of peoples of the world (most of Eurasia and much of Africa) have lived in neither kind of situation, but in cultures which were influenced in some degree by the circulation of the written word, by the presence of groups or individuals who could read or write’(1968, p. 4).
Ruth Finnegan, in a recent article that challenges many of Goody's contentions regarding literacy, expands the area of the world to which this comment can be applied:
Even in areas outside this great span — in Australia for example, the South Pacific or Amerindia — the main detailed knowledge that we have of these cultures is — almost by definition — in neither kind of situation, but in cultures which were influenced in some degree by the circulation of the written word, by the presence of groups or individuals who could read or write.
By now, at least , it  would be hard to find an example of either of the supposed mutually exclusive ‘pure’ types of culture; indeed, there are few, if any, historical cases where we have detailed and solid (rather than speculative) evidence about the processes of communication in a purely ‘oral’society.
It is in practice the ‘mixed’ rather than the ‘pure’type that in one form or another provides the typical case and — furthermore-the available evidence for analysis (Finnegan, 1981, p. 5).
So it is not possible to test Goody's hypothesis since one cannot find an isolated society on which to test the cognitive and other consequences of ‘purely’ oral communication.
Every society represents some ‘mix’ of oral and literate modes of communication.
Even in the so-called ‘developed’ societies, which claim ‘high’literacy rates according to various measures, people experience a variety of different forms and meanings of literate and oral communication, according to such aspects of the social context as, for instance, class, gender, age and ethnicity.
Moreover, recent surveys have suggested that not so many members of these societies are ‘literate’ by the standards expected than had previously been assumed: in the UK it is now held that over one million people have an acquaintance with literacy that is insufficient for the demands made on them by this kind of society (DES, 1980).
Such measures and judgements are themselves, however, imprecise and depend upon political and ideological positions, so they, too, must be part of our object of study.
Although within Goody's own terms they do provide a challenge to his claims for the consequences of a shift from oral to literate culture, they do not provide an unambiguous or ‘scientific’ starting point from which to test those claims.
In his study of the development of literate practices in medieval England,From Memory to Written Record 1066–1307 (1979), Michael Clanchy has suggested that the problem is better formulated in a different way.
He considers the ways in which oral conventions persisted in twelfth and thirteenth century English society at a time when larger numbers of people were beginning to use literacy for more purposes.
He recognises that the ‘shift’ from memory to written record involves changes in conventions for which social explanations have to be offered, rather than a change in ‘cognitive’processes or at the radical, absolute level that Goody implies.
This kind of change is simply disguised by the use of quasi-scientific measures and statistics of ‘literacy’.
The change is in the ‘mix’ of oral and literate modes and this is related to changes in the conventions associated with them.
In medieval England what came under pressure were the conventions by which claims to land rights were legitimated; while some sectors of society were attempting to make written records the prime guarantor of ‘truth’ and legitimacy, others were suspicious that  such records could easily be forged and preferred to put their faith in seals and in the oral testimony of ‘twelve good men and true’.
The researcher, interested in different modes of communication, has to investigate the framework of thought within which decisions regarding what is legitimate are made and to explain how a particular group succeeds in making its ideology dominant in specific contexts.
Certain groups managed to extend the uses of writing to subserve their political and ideological interest in centralisation through the construction of what Clanchy calls a literate mentality'.
What is crucial for our concerns here is that such a ‘mentality’ or ideology is constructed ; it is not something imposed by the form of literacy itself as though the ‘technology of the intellect’, as Goody terms it, were determinate.
I shall suggest below just what insights and new directions of inquiry can emerge from this more ‘ideological’ approach to literacy practices.
As regards Goody's sharp distinction between oral and literate cultures, it demonstrates not only that the social reality does not correspond to this ‘great divide’ but also that developing a model which enables one to proceed as if it did so is not the only or most fruitful way of proceeding.
Despite his own caveats, Goody proceeds to base fundamental and far-reaching aspects of human reasoning and achievement on the distinction between oral and literate cultures.
In the essay with Watt he writes: ‘The intrinsic nature of oral communication has a considerable effect upon both the content and transmission of the cultural repertoire (1968, p. 29).
In the first place, he says ‘it makes for a directness of relationship between symbol and referent’.
In oral cultures the meanings of words are ratified in specific concrete situations where they are used, whereas in literate cultures words accumulate ‘successive layers of historically validated meanings’(ibid.).
This ‘immediacy’ of meaning in oral society he relates to the society's functional needs, citing Malinowski's claim that ‘in the Trobriands the outer world was only named in so far as it yielded useful things’(ibid.).
Since such a cultural repertoire is held only in the memory it is subject to constant change according to the new interests of the moment ‘and whatever parts of it have ceased to be of contemporary relevance are likely to be eliminated by the process of forgetting’(ibid. p. 30).
What follows from this apparently technical account of the abstract nature of communication are quite radical consequences for the intellectual potential of members of these different societies.
The development of logic, the distinction of myth from history, the emergence of scepticism, and the ability to challenge and reinterpret social dogma are all taken by Goody to follow from these initial pronouncements on communication.
Since so much else rests on it, it is clearly crucial to assess the validity of the initial analysis of communication itself.
Once again it is Goody himself who points out the counter arguments, although, again, he proceeds to ignore them.
He is not, he claims, denying the existence of social change in oral societies, nor of the ‘survivals’ which this change leaves in its wake.
These ‘survivals’ would, of course, be evidence that oral societies can and do ‘fix’some aspects of the cultural repertoire; they do not simply roll on in perpetual immediacy, responding to each new need in a new way and changing the meanings of words and communication accordingly.
There are, for instance, mnemonic devices in oral cultures which offer some resistance to this process: ‘formalised patterns of speech, recital under ritual conditions, the use of drums and other musical instruments, the employment of professional remembrancers — all such factors may shield at least part of the content of memory from the transmuting influence of the immediate pressures of the present’(1968, p. 31).
He might also have added the examples he cited earlier of the ‘material content of the cultural tradition’, such as cave-paintings and hand-axes, since these also serve as repositories of meaning which may persist over time.
More recently, Bloch's work (1975) on political language and oratory has provided evidence of ways in which speech is formalised and is used for functions which Goody attributes solely to writing.
These formal devices enable cultural heritage to be maintained beyond the lives of single individuals and offset what Goody sees as the ephemeral nature of ‘face-to-face’ communication.
The distinction between literate and non-literate societies based on the contrast between ‘immediacy’ and ‘storage’of the cultural repertoire thus becomes less clear cut.
Even if an idealised model of the two kinds of society could be constructed, it is apparent that the nature of communication in each of them would have to be less strongly differentiated than Goody is claiming.
The notion that ‘primitive’ societies classify and organise their intellectual world simply in terms of their crude ‘needs’, which Goody derives from Malinowski and uses to further characterise ‘oral’societies, has also been subject to some radical revision in recent years.
In his latest publication on literacy,The Domestication of the Savage Mind (1977), Goody acknowledges this work, but does not allow it to deflect from his design.
Lévi-Strauss, he acknowledges, has criticised Malinowski's claim that the interest of ‘primitive’ peoples in totemic plants and animals was inspired by ‘nothing but the rumblings of their stomachs’.
Lévi-Strauss' counter argument was that ‘the universe is an object of thought at least as much as it is a means of satisfying needs’(Goody, 1977, p. 5).
‘Classifying as opposed to not classifying has a value of its own, whatever the form the classification may take’(ibid.).
In other words ‘primitive’ peoples do not simply construct words and meanings in relation to the felt needs of everyday life but classify according to more general intellectual interests and concerns.
The characteristics of ‘storage’, ‘indirectness’, and the construction of ‘successive layers of historically validated meanings’ which  Goody attributes to literacy alone are, then, part of the intellectual framework of any society.
In oral as well as in literate culture, it would appear that there are techniques whereby the directness and immediacy of everyday experience are contrasted with the holding of traditions over time, and with the ‘fixing’ and ratifying of definitions and meanings.
It is not true to say of oral cultures that there is a peculiar ‘directness of relationship between meaning and referent’, that ‘the meaning of each word is ratified in a succession of concrete situations’ only, that meanings in oral cultures are always particular and specific.
Goody however attempts to evade the implications of Lévi-Strauss' argument by pointing out that, ultimately, Lévi-Strauss himself provides a dualistic model of the world: one which distinguishes between ‘primitive’ and ‘modern’, mythological and scientific (Goody, 1977, pp. 7 — 8).
Goody claims to reject these distinctions as ethnocentric and suggests that we ‘should look for more specific criteria for the differences’ between these kinds of societies.
These criteria will include ‘the material concomitants of the process of mental ‘domestication’, for these are not only the manifestations of thought, invention, creativity, they also shape its future forms.
They are not only the products of communication but also part of its determining features' (ibid. p. 9).
In other words it is the development of literate modes of communication that provides the basis for making a distinction between two kinds of society, and those modes themselves have determining effects: if some societies are more ‘scientific’ and ‘logical’than others, it is not on account of the nature of their thought processes but because their acquisition of literacy has released these capacities.
There is a dangerous circularity about this argument.
If it begins from the assumption of difference and then adduces literacy as the explanation, the argument is open to the same criticism that Goody himself levels at Lévi-Strauss' dualism; if, on the other hand, it begins from the assumption that literacy is the crucial source of difference and that the mental differences follow from this, then it is beginning from the very assumption that it claims to be setting out to prove.
This circularity is apparent in the seminal article written by Goody and Watt where they lay down the reasons why they attribute such importance to literacy.
Summarising the previous versions of a ‘great divide’ between primitive and modern societies they write:
Nevertheless, although we must reject any dichotomy based upon the assumption of radical differences between the mental attributes of literate and non-literate peoples and accept the view that previous formulations of the distinction were based on faulty premises and inadequate evidence, there may still exist general  differences between literate and non-literate societies somewhat along the lines suggested by Lévy-Bruhl.
One reason for their existence, for instance, may be what has been described above: the fact [sic]that writing establishes a different kind of relation between the word and its referent, a relationship that is more general and more abstract, and less closely connected with the particularities of person, place and time than obtains in oral communication.
There is certainly a great deal to substantiate this distinction in what we know of early Greek thought…
It was only in the days of the first widespread alphabetic culture that the idea of ‘logic’ appears to have arisen.
(Goody, 1968, p. 44.)
Goody and Watt, and Goody himself in later developments of these ideas, lay great store on the example of classical Greece.
It is presented as virtually the defining case for the argument that there is a crucial distinction between literate and non-literate societies and that this difference relates to differences in cognitive processes and the development of ‘logic’.
Classical Greece is for them the ‘prime historical example of the transition to a really literate society’ without the interference of ‘other cultural features imported from the loan country along with the writing system.
Greece thus offers not only the first instance of this change but also the essential one for any attempt to isolate the cultural consequences of alphabetic literacy’(ibid. p. 42).
Looked at more closely, however, the Greek example is not as powerful or effective as Goody and Watt would have us believe and we would need to be cautious in drawing any general implications from it.
To begin with, literacy in general was not, of course, independently invented in Greece, as Goody and Watt recognise: the form of literacy particular to Greece developed from the Semitic writing system over a long period of time.
This system was widely adopted in the ancient world, although the ‘social diffusion of writing’ was slow, mainly due to‘the established features of the societies which adopted it.
There was, for one thing, a strong tendency for writing to be used as a help to memory rather than as an autonomous and independent mode of communication’(ibid. p. 40).
To this extent, then, the adoption of a writing system in classical Greece does not in itself provide an example of development without the cultural ‘interference’ that goes with diffusion, nor of the characteristics of writing independent of oral modes of communication.
What Goody and Watt have in mind, however, in citing their Greek example, is not simply the adoption of a writing system in general but the development of a particular form of writing in a particular way: ‘in the sixth and fifth centuries BC in the city states of Greece and Ionia…there first arose a society which as a whole could justify being characterised as  literate’(ibid.).
What they take ‘literate’ to mean, then, delimits the term considerably in relation to the larger world experience of forms of writing.
They mean an easy, phonetic (or rather phonemic) system such as alphabetic literacy and they think of a ‘literate society’ as one in which such a script is widely assumed in public life, as they claim it was in sixth century Greece.
It is this form of ‘literacy’ which has the consequences they then describe.
According to Goody and Watt, the development of alphabetic script and its wide diffusion throughout society — the two criteria for ‘literacy’ as they mean it — happened independently within Greece and were not the result of cultural borrowing.
It is in this sense that Greece represents ‘the prime historical example of the transition to a really literate society’.
It is important to bear this definition in mind, since elsewhere Goody employs the term ‘literacy’ in ways which appear more general than this.
In his latest book (1977), for instance, he includes under ‘literacy’ such graphic devices as lists, tables and Ramus systems.
Definitions, of course, are only relevant to the interests they are constructed to serve and it would be fruitless to enter into a definitional argument as to what ‘literacy’ really is.
But, if Goody is going to draw significant consequences from what he defines as ‘literacy’, then it is important to be clear as to just what it is that is supposed to have these consequences.
If this varies, as seems to be the case in Goody's work, then the general argument about consequences loses some of its force.
If, for the moment, we accept the narrow definition offered by Goody and Watt (in Goody, 1968) and remember not to draw general conclusions about ‘literacy’ as such from the arguments presented there, we nevertheless still find some problems about accepting the kinds of consequences they assume for even that limited form of ‘literacy’.
A major problem is that, despite the socially specific nature of their definition of Greek literacy, they still couch the argument in a way that tends towards technological determinism.
The reasons for the widespread development of the particular form of alphabetic literacy evident in Greece must clearly be sought in the social structure; Goody and Watt, however, insist that ‘considerable importance must surely be attributed to the intrinsic advantages of the Greek adaptation of the Semitic alphabet, an adaptation which made it the first comprehensively and exclusively phonetic system tor transcribing human speech’(ibid. pp. 40–1).
Social factors are then suggested as somehow additional to this essentially technical breakthrough: ‘The extensive diffusion of the alphabet in Greece was also materially assisted by various social, economic and technological factors’(ibid. p. 41)(my emphasis).
I shall discuss later the theoretical objections to technological determinism; Goody in any case recognises the dangers and in a later essay himself rejects such determinism, refuting the claims  that this is what he was doing.
To counter these claims he tempers the language slightly: ‘The article should perhaps have been entitled the ‘implications’ rather than the consequences of literacy.’
(1968, p. 4.)
The tenor of Goody's general statements on literacy often seems at variance with such caveats, but even couched in these terms the argument is overstated.
The ‘implications’ of literacy are not so obvious nor so easily elicited or described as Goody suggests.
He argues, for instance, that the intrinsic advantages of the Greek adaptation of the Semitic writing system were that it became ‘easy, explicit and unambiguous’.
Yet Goody and Watt themselves provide evidence to refute such a judgement:
It must be remembered, of course, that Greek writing throughout the classical period was still relatively difficult to decipher as words were not regularly separated; the copying of manuscripts was a long and laborious process; and that silent reading as we know it was very rare; until the advent of printing in the ancient world books were used mainly for reading aloud, often by a slave.
(1968, p.42.).
The ‘ease’ of any writing system is, clearly, relative.
But if Greek literacy is not, in fact, as easy or as unambiguous as Goody sometimes claims, then its ‘implications’ may not be so important as those claims assert.
It is, however, the grand claims rather than the caveats that other writers tend to follow.
An example of this can be found in the volume of essays edited by Goody in 1968,Literacy in Traditional Societies where, in an article by Meggitt, we find uncritical use of the claims for the ‘ease’ and lack of ambiguity of writing.
Meggitt contrasts the ‘ritualised’ literacy supposedly apparent in Melanesian politico-religious movements with a model of what literacy ‘really’is in a way that obviously owes much to Goody: ‘It seems that writing was rarely treated as a straightforward technique of secular action, one whose prime values is repeated and surrogate communication of unambiguous meanings in a variety of situations’(1968, p. 302).
These assumptions about what literacy ‘really’ is generate misleading representations of the political and ideological nature of Melanesian responses to colonialism.
But what the example also indicates is that Goody's claims for the consequences of Greek literacy, for all the qualifications that he and Watt make, do lay themselves open to more general and misleading applications.
Despite their recognition that even the model example of Greek literacy was not always ‘unambiguous’, explicit and easy, they nevertheless tend to represent these qualities as ‘intrinsic’ to literacy and as the source of its great potential.
They can hardly be surprised when others make use of this representation rather than the narrower and more qualified one.
But even in its narrow definition and with the actual limitations of its  practice in classical Greece, literacy is still takes by Goody to have consequences, or implications, of a far-reaching kind.
We have already seen that, whatever doubts Goody may have about the distinction ‘logical'/ ‘pre-logical’, he is still inclined to identify ‘general differences between literate and non-literate societies somewhat along the lines suggested by Lévy-Bruhl’(Goody, 1968, p. 44): i.e. that the idea of ‘logic’ is connected with the growth of alphabetic culture.
Linked with this is the notion that writing is responsible for the distinction between myth and history and this distinction, like the idea of logic, he associates with classical Greece.
Again, however, the precise definition of literacy, and its location in that particular society, tends to get forgotten in grand general claims for the consequences of ‘literacy’ itself and in the general distinction between ‘literate’and ‘non-literate’societies.
In oral cultures, he claims: ‘The individual has little perception of the past except in terms of the present; whereas an analysis of a literate society cannot but enforce a more objective recognition of the distinction between what was and what is’(1968, p. 34)(my emphasis).
He goes on to say ‘The pastness of the past, then, depends upon a historical sensibility which can hardly begin to operate without permanent written records’(ibid.).
There are, again, problems for the researcher hoping to test out such hypotheses.
About whom is he speaking?
Which individuals or groups are being ‘objective’ as a result of having writing?
Is he referring to the whole of a literate society in the reference to ‘historical sensibility’?
The unit of study is, in fact, unlikely to be a whole society since, as an anthropologist, Goody is fully aware that the ways in which a society represents its own past are always entangled in the present ideological and political concerns of particular groups and factions.
One has only to think of the way in which the Shah of Persia reinforced his position by claiming direct descent from the Achaemenids of the third century BC, to give depth to a genealogy that in fact started with his father — a Cossack officer — assuming the throne in 1920 when the previous dynasty collapsed (see Avery, 1965); or the use in Britain of the ‘historical’ roots of the Royal Family to support such current political structures as the House of Lords.
In line with these more specific uses of the ‘past’ by specific groups, Goody's claims for changes in perceptions of the past as a result of the development of literacy in classical Greece appear to refer specifically to scholars and intellectuals rather than to the society as a whole.
It was the writing down of the poems of Homer and Hesiod that led scholars to ask, for the first time apparently: ‘How far was the information about their gods and heroes literally true?’.
Goody traces the development of written forms in early Greece until the point when alphabetic literacy enabled ‘groups of writers and teachers…to take as their point of departure the  belief that much of what Homer had apparently said was inconsistent and unsatisfactory in many respects’(1968, p. 46).
In this context ‘critical’ and ‘rational’powers were developed and Goody sees this as connected with the beginnings of religious and natural philosophy and ultimately with science (ibid.).
He reads the texts that remain to us from sixth century Greece as evidence of ‘a more thoroughgoing individual challenge to the orthodox cultural tradition…than occurred elsewhere’(ibid.).
Since it is difficult to find independent evidence with which to test the interpretations of their own past offered by Greek historians, we cannot know whether they were ‘really’ being exceptionally ‘rational’and ‘scientific’.
What we can glean, though, and what Goody appears to take at face value, is some insight into how they represented themselves, such as in the statements they made about the reliability of their own accounts.
Thucydides, for instance, made ‘a decisive distinction between myth and history, a distinction to which little attention is paid in non-literate society.
Thucydides wanted to give a wholly reliable account of the wars between Athens and Sparta; and this meant that unverified assumptions about the past had to be excluded.’
(ibid. pp. 47–8.)
The fact that Thucydides wanted to do this, or said he did, does not of course provide evidence of whether he actually did.
Some recent interpretations of Greek history, and of the Greek historians' versions of it, have suggested that there was, in fact, a gap between such ideals and the actual practice and that we should not take their own statements too literally.
Professor John Boardman, for instance, Lincoln Professor of Classical Art and Archaeology at Oxford University, recently shocked an audience of classicists by claiming that: ‘The exploits of Theseus, the ancient Greek hero who tamed the Minotaur and repulsed the Amazon invasion of Attica, were probably no more than state propaganda invented to rouse nationalistic pride’ and were ‘manufactured to glorify the role of Athens in the Ionian revolt of 499 BC’(Times Higher Educational Supplement 7.8.81).
His version of the ‘reality’ of what happened is that: ‘In 499 BC Athens sent half her fleet to help the Ionians fight the Persians.
The story was recast to raise the popularity of Theseus, the rising star, to show how the Athenians taught the barbarians a sharp lesson’(ibid.).
It is difficult to believe that the historians were not party to such constructions, although Goody might justifiably envisage that such honourable men as Thucydides would have been shocked if his material had been manipulated in this way by the politicians.
The social reality is that the uses of ‘history’, if not always as crude and blatant as this, always involve selection, speculation and hypothesised connections, and that the scholars operating this process are products of a specific society, speak its language and are imbued with its ideology, so their work must always bear a  complex if not tangential relationship to ‘reality’ and ‘objectivity’.
A recent work on political theory in ancient Greece has pursued this question more explicitly than has traditionally been the case in classical scholarship and provides a further check to our ready acceptance of Goody's grander claims for the consequences of literacy in classical Greece.
Ellen and Neal Wood, in Class, Ideology and Ancient Political Theory maintain that the ‘classics of political theory are fundamentally ideological’(1978, p. ix) and they set out to relate them ‘more closely and systematically’ to their social contexts.
They consider the ‘lives, class affiliations and social circumstances’ in which Socrates, Plato and Aristotle were writing and ‘try to establish that their political theories are essentially partisan in origin and ideological in content’(ibid.).
These writers were, the Woods claim, defending the declining way of life of the landed aristocracy, challenged by urban developments which saw the rise of traders, manufacturers, artisans and wage-labourers many of whom had migrated from rural areas where they had worked as slaves and peasants for the old nobility.
The writers, while condemning the failings of the old nobility, notably their decadence and degradation, thought that their way of life could be revitalised and could become the foundation of a civil life that stemmed the rising tide of democracy and, as they feared, mob rule.
Their philosophical idealism was at once a retreat from the material world of unruly mobs and declining privilege and a programme for maintaining their position while accommodating some change: ‘Socratic political thought was an intellectually sophisticated and ingenious justification for counter-revolution in democracy and the maintenance of the status quo in oligarchy’(ibid. p. 4).
One can recognise easily why so many later European commentators extolled classical Greece as the model for their contemporaries since the material conditions of these changes from rural to urban, from aristocracy to bourgeoisie, and from oligarchy to proto-democracy similarly characterised their own social situation.
As Wood and Wood argue, the sympathy of the classicists for the social class represented by the Socratics of classical Greece made them ‘more than ready to accept rather uncritically their account of the situation in Athens and throughout the Greek world’.
Plato's claims, for instance, that his work enabled him to ‘rise above ideology and the immediacy of mundane affairs’(ibid. p. 9) have been accepted faithfully by classicists who wanted to believe what he said because of its significance for their position in and views of their own society.
Goody's claims that Greek historians have distinguished myth from history is of a kind with the uncritical faith of these classicists.
His grander claims for the significance of literacy are based, then, upon assumptions about the ‘objectivity’ of Greek historians that turn out, on closer scrutiny, to be unfounded.
The historians and the political theorists (as well as recent  commentators on them) must themselves be seen in their historical and social contexts.
Their work is relevant to us and speaks of the human condition not because it attains universality and ‘objectivity’, as Goody and others would imply, but on the contrary precisely because of its articulation with the real social experience in which they participated.
As Wood and Wood comment, ‘relating ideas to their social context’ far from ‘depriving them of their universal meaning’in fact ‘rescues them from the emptiness of ethereal abstractions which have no human meaning at all’(ibid. p. x).
Not only is it impossible to demonstrate whether the writers of classical Greece really attained ‘objectivity’; but our regard for them and our ability to learn from them do not require it.
However, Goody's claims for the ‘consequences’ of literacy are couched in such a way that they do require it: he imposes upon himself the obligation to establish that the Greeks really did achieve the distinction of ‘myth’from ‘history’if his claims for literacy are to be credible.
If his foundation is insecure, as the arguments of the Woods and others would suggest, then the structure he builds upon it must also be unsafe.
If we have no evidence or proof of a ‘real’ distinction of myth from history, as opposed to an ideological claim or commitment to it, either in society as a whole, or amongst the community of scholars or even, it now appears, in the exalted ranks of classical Greek historians and political theorists, then to ask whether literacy, however defined, is a cause of such a distinction becomes fruitless.
That some individuals or groups challenge received opinion in their society, as Goody claims some Greek historians did, is obviously true.
But the conditions in which this challenge becomes significant are social ones rather than‘technological’ as Goody would have us believe.
An analysis and cross-cultural comparison of such circumstances would involve study of political and ideological structures rather than technologies.
Despite the claims by many that advanced levels of technological development somehow lead to democracy and scientific thought, the ‘advanced’ states of the modern world would not necessarily emerge very favourably from a comparison of degrees of historical ‘objectivity’, however defined.
Conversely, Goody himself recognises that ‘In non-literate society…there are usually some individuals whose interests lead them to collect, analyse and interpret the cultural tradition in a personal way’ and the work of his fellow anthropologists is ample testimony to the variation and potential for challenge in non-literate societies.
Goody, nevertheless, believes that such individuals are more likely to appear and to have scope for challenge in societies with the ‘technology’ of literacy.
Apart from the ‘evidence’ of classical Greece, another main plank of the argument in favour of this belief is the hypothesis that one is more likely to put together two statements in writing and then compare them than two oral utterances.
As a result of acquiring writing ‘one can  compare side by side utterances that have been made at different times and places’(1977, pp. 11 — 12).
This, he claims, helps foster criticalness and awareness of contradiction.
This property is, he argues, intrinsic to literacy and the reason for many of the grand consequences which, given the right circumstances, arise from the spread of literacy.
However, even at the hypothetical level, the proposition is not as obviously true as Goody seems to assume.
One can, for instance, easily imagine circumstances in which oral utterances including recollections from different times and places are, as it were , placed side by side as in a debating chamber and where the listeners could then recognise contradictions and employ their ‘critical’ faculties.
There are many examples of this.
Bloch's work (1975) on political language and oratory, as we saw above (p. 41), provides evidence of ways in which speech is formalised in non-literate and in literate societies alike and is used for the functions which Goody attributes to writing alone.
A sense of the past may be retained by the use of remembrancers whose representations of it are differentiated from the everyday casual memories of people.
The formal devices of political oratory amongst the Mursi, a technologically primitive people of Ethiopia described by D. Turton (Bloch, 1975), similarly perform functions which Goody appears to restrict to literacy.
The context of speech-making and the techniques and conventions that have been developed ensure that many sides of a case are put at the same time as maintaining the proprieties due to different statuses.
There is, in a sense, an ideology of scepticism within clearly defined boundaries and as old men die out of the system and younger ones join it the tradition becomes cumulative and socially-constructed rather than just an individual matter.
Goody, however, claims that if the processes of political scepticism do occur at all in non-literate societies, they must always be limited and individual.
In non-literate society…the cultural tradition functions as a series of interlocking face-to-face conversations in which the very conditions of transmission operate to favour consistency between past and present, and to make criticism — the articulation of inconsistency — less likely to occur; and if it does, the inconsistency makes a less permanent impact, and it is more easily adjusted or forgotten.
While scepticism may be present in such societies, it takes a personal, non-cumulative form; it does not lead to a deliberate rejection and reinterpretation of social dogma so much as to a semi-automatic readjustment of belief.
In literate society, these interlocking conversations go on; but they are no longer man's only dialogue; and in so far as writing provides an alternative source for the transmission of cultural orientations it favours awareness of inconsistency.
(1977, p. 48.)
Despite the general level of the analysis, which offers ‘scepticism’ as a further quality to add to ‘logic’and ‘objectivity’as characteristics associated with literacy, this passage does offer a more precise formulation of what Goody has in mind as the consequences of literacy.
Just as the term ‘literacy’ itself turned out to be more precise than in general use, and we were able to pin down the distinction ‘literate/non-literate’to ‘literacy in classical Greece’as opposed to literacy or non-literacy elsewhere, so the grand consequences of the literacy being described can be seen from this passage to hinge on very particular distinctions.
The crucial difference is between two categories of social thought and action: those defined, on the one hand, by ‘deliberate rejection and reinterpretation of social dogma’ and, on the other, by ‘semi-automatic readjustment of belief’.
It is by reference to this distinction that we are to test for ‘scepticism’ and, presumably, can expect to find the Mursi lacking.
What Thucydides and his contemporaries were doing was ‘challenging’ social dogma, not simply ‘readjusting’it, and it is in this characteristic of classical Greek scholarship that we can identify the crucial consequence of acquiring literacy.
The researcher, unfortunately, has the same problems with testing this hypothesis, despite its greater precision, as he or she has with the grander ones.
In order to test it he or she would presumably have to examine a number of literate and non-literate societies from the point of view of their degree of ‘scepticism’.
The difficulty of finding such clearly defined ‘literate’ and ‘non-literate’societies has already been alluded to and Goody himself recognises that there are few societies today not touched in some way by literate practices.
The difficulties in Goody's use of classical Greece as the defining example are also apparent.
But what we are now faced with more clearly than in his other claims for the consequences of literacy is an argument based on socially relative judgement and ideology.
The distinction he adduces as the crucial consequence of literacy depends upon interpretation of what is ‘readjustment’ as opposed to‘reinterpretation’and ‘rejection’of ideas and beliefs.
That is, of course , a personal and ideological matter.
To the capitalist, socialist countries would represent the situation where deliberate ‘rejection’ and ‘reinterpretation’of social dogma is not widely evident, since the capitalist rejects the underlying philosophy of those countries himself but finds that its inhabitants do not.
Conversely, a Marxist is scornful of the supine, uncritical level of political consciousness in western ‘liberal’ societies, where readjustments of ideas and practices are allowed but no general challenge to capitalist theory is evident.
In Goody's terms either one of these would provide an example of the characteristics of non-literate societies — lack of scepticism and of radical challenge to social dogma.
Couched in these terms, where the political nature of the interpretation is not hidden behind the language of  ‘cognitive’ structures and ‘intellectual’abilities, the argument for the consequences of literacy appears less absolute, less ‘technical’and more obviously dependent on ideologically-based assumptions.
Looked at from this perspective, however, the distinction itself is not a very fruitful one.
The notion that some societies ‘reinterpret’ and some ‘readjust’does not provide a very helpful model for the analysis of social change and for understanding why certain historical events appear to involve more radical and revolutionary changes than others.
A causal explanation for these events is not to be found by looking at the mental processes of particular social groups or categories involved in them since any traits so identified are as likely to be effects as causes.
The explanation is better sought in the specific social and material circumstances and their articulation with political and ideological structures.
Gellner (1973), for instance, provides a more complex intellectual framework for analysing such change.
He argues that no social units can be treated in isolation as though they had no contact with others: all groups, whether tribes, villages, nations or families interact with other groups.
Our representation of them as groups is an intellectual device for handling them, just as the people themselves use names and labels, but this does not correspond to the empirical reality which is of constant contact and flow between ‘peoples’: a continuum rather than a series of separate but interlocking units.
It is, therefore, impossible to isolate such a unit for the purpose of testing it for ‘closed’ or ‘open’minds or for ‘reinterpretation’as opposed to‘readjustment of belief.
‘Readjustment of belief’ is, in fact, the norm and all social groups are continually undergoing the process.
They may construct artificial representations of a fixed reality at any one point of time as a means of handling the continuous flow of social change, but these are simply data for the social scientist and not to be taken at face value.
Constant contact with other social groups, whether within or between identifiable political units, means that new ideas are being constantly encountered.
At different points of time, one set of ideas may be abandoned and another adopted, and the history of any society consists of a series of such adjustments, some more radical than others.
Why a particular adjustment or radical change is made, and by what sectors of a society, depends on the conjuncture of a number of factors.
When this process becomes revolutionary upheaval is not always easy to identify and the decision as to whether it was a radical reinterpretation rather than simply an adjustment depends on the observer's standpoint.
This, then, makes for serious definitional and methodological problems in identifying and pursuing Goody's distinction between the two kinds or levels of thought.
It is doubtful, therefore, whether pursuing the ‘consequences’ of literacy in this direction is very fruitful.
Moreover, there are serious theoretical problems in attempting to isolate those intellectual factors that might be held to account for social change, apart from then attempting to associate these factors with particular social groups on the one hand or with literacy on the other.
As Kuhn argues in The Structure of Scientific Revolutions , intellectual rigour and purity are seldom major factors in changes even in the scientific world.
The adoption, for instance, of Darwinian views of evolution depended not simply on the intellectual breakthrough of a brilliant mind but on the conjuncture of social movements that made these propositions more acceptable then than they might have been at other periods.
Contemporary breakthroughs in nuclear science depend on large funding and on the construction of elaborate institutions geared to that end, which in turn depend on political decisions, not those of the neutral scientist in the laboratory.
Parry, for instance, cites the scientific achievements of ancient India, such as logic and medicine, astronomy, grammar and mathematics, as arising out of ‘non-scientific’ institutions and ideologies: ‘essentially religious preoccupations seem to have provided the stimulus for developments in all these fields;— the discipline of yoga, for physiological knowledge, the construction of sacrificial altars for geometry and so on ,(1982, p. 23).
Goody himself provides a telling example of how ‘scientific’ progress may be the product of social forces which, in themselves, do not represent the kind of scholarly community and logical thought which he extols.
The development of Pythagoras' theorem, he notes, is not related to the separation of mathematical, scientific thinking from mythological and non-literate practices but rather was associated with ‘the use of number magic’ and:
was discovered in the course of such numerological experientation.
The theorem is now recognised to be older than Pythagoras, much of whose mathematics has an eastern origin.
But the interpenetration of mathematics and magic in the school is well attested; Dodds, for example, sees Pythagoreanism partly as ‘a development of shamanism and partly as a development of number mysticism and the speculations about cosmic harmony’.
The world of nature was for them constructed on a mathematical plan, things were generated from numbers an idea to whose mystical overtones Aristotle objected.
(1977, p. 17.)
Elsewhere Goody cites Guthrie's comment that the Pythagoreans were ‘highly arbitrary and inconsistent’(ibid. p. 11).
Goody, then, sees the activities of Pythagoras and his followers as quite different from the flowering of logic, scientific clarity, lack of ambiguity, scepticism etc. for  which he praises classical Greece.
Indeed he explicitly opposes the secretive and mystical practices of the Pythagoreans to the ‘spirit of enquiry’ which, he believes, literacy ‘fosters’.
‘Pythagoras scarcely typifies the Greek reaction to the growth of learning’(1968, p. 11).
Despite the attempt to treat the Pythagorean example as an exception, it cannot but weaken Goody's case.
For it illustrates well how literacy co-exists with arcane mystical practices and how such practices co-exist with and even help to account for scientific progress.
The flowering of the very Greek culture that Goody takes as the example par excellence of rationality, philosophy and science is inextricably linked with mysticism, secrecy and ambiguity.
The distinction between these apparent opposites is, in fact, an ideological one common in Goody's own culture.
The social reality is always a mix of such modes and practices.
Goody, however, retreats from the implications that this more flexible model of scientific progress hold for his claims regarding literacy.
He continues, instead, to insist on the existence of a ‘real’ distinction between scientific and mythological deriving from that between literate and non-literate.
The counter-evidence that we have been considering is, in a sense, defined away.
Where, for instance, the characteristics which he attributes to oral communication persist in a society with literacy, and would thus appear to undermine the case for the ‘intrinsic’ qualities of literacy, Goody draws a further distinction which enables him to maintain the purity of his ideal model.
This distinction is one between ‘restricted’ literacy and the ‘full’realisation of the ‘potentialities’of literacy.
Where the ideal type of literacy is not found in a particular practice that practice is taken as an example of ‘restricted’ literacy.
This provides one of Goody's main claims to be making a contribution to further research: the field worker, whether anthropologist, historian, social psychologist or whatever, can ask of a specific culture why literacy did not fulfil its potential there, and what were the factors that ‘restricted’ its development.
Since most societies would appear not to match up to Goody's ideal, there would seem to be few studies that can avoid the question.
Goody cites a range of examples where factors in the society itself or intrinsic to literacy ‘restrict’ its potential: the secrecy of the Koranic tradition in Africa and the Middle East; the ceremonial texts of Egypt and Mesopotamia; Brahminic uses of the Veda; the ‘guru’tradition; the educational system of Europe in the Middle Ages; the religious uses of alphabetic literacy in Tibet; the uses of literacy by the lo Dagaa and Gonja in northern Ghana, where Goody himself did field work (1968, 1977, p. 20).
The concept is taken up by Meggitt in relation to Melanesia where he refers to ‘ritualised’ literacy (Goody, 1968) and more recently Clammer has allowed it to influence his study of Literacy and Social Change in Fiji (1976).
Goody himself seems to suggest that ‘restricted’ literacy is indeed the norm in all societies except later classical Greece, thereby undermining somewhat the significance of these general applications of the term: ‘Nowhere was the impact of literacy as radical as it has been in classical Greece.
Indeed the kind of situation which so often arose elsewhere seems more akin to the ‘restricted’ literacy that characterised pre-alphabetic scripts.
In other words, the potentialities of the medium were not explored to anything like the same extent' (1968, p. 4).
This argument is of course open to the same criticisms as were levelled against the distinction originally drawn between ‘literate’ and ‘non-literate’societies.
The categories ‘restricted’ and ‘full’realisation of potential cannot be so clearly distinguished.
They in fact shade into each other, even more obviously so where the distinction is between different forms of literate practice; and the distinction, if it is based on supposed differences in cognitive processes, in ‘logic’ and the development of ‘science’, is open to the criticisms that Goody himself, along with Lévi-Strauss and others, levels against the theory of a ‘great divide’.
But there is a further problem: classical Greece it transpires, is a less than perfect model of ‘full’ literacy and certain periods and uses, even there, have to be termed ‘restricted’.
Pythagorean uses of literacy, for instance, did not fit the criteria and Goody had to cite them as exceptions; they did not ‘typify’ Greek uses of literacy or ‘the Greek reaction to the growth of learning’(1968, p.
I 1).
Moreover, Greek historians appear to have not always distinguished as clearly between myth and history as their adoption of literacy would lead Goody to expect.
And Greek script was less ‘easy’ and ‘unambiguous’than the consequences assumed to arise from it would require.
In addition Havelock has pointed out that the Greek concern with metaphysics did not, in fact, develop simultaneously with the growth of alphabetic literacy but only much later.
The pre-Socratics, he explains, were ‘essentially oral thinkers, prophets of the concrete linked by habit to the past, and to forms of expression which were also forms of experience’(quoted by Goody, 1968, pp. 3–4).
Havelock is here, of course, giving authority to Goody's distinction between ‘oral’ and ‘literate’thinkers and their connection respectively with the concrete and experience as opposed to the abstract and impersonal.
But he is also posing the problem of how subscribers to that view accommodate examples where ‘oral’ thinking is found in literate societies.
Goody's answer is simple: these uses represent ‘restricted’ literacy.
However, although early Greek literacy must therefore also be labelled ‘restricted’, the foundation was nevertheless being laid for future developments of the ‘full’ potential of literacy: ‘It was only by the time of Plato that the language had changed sufficiently to express new ideas’(ibid.).
Havelock, like Goody, sees these changes as ‘generated by changes in the technology  of the intellect, or what he calls the ‘technology of preserved communication’(ibid. p. 4).
But since literacy was already present in early Greece, at a time when the ideal consequences of literacy (such as logic, metaphysics and objectivity) had not yet developed, it is impossible to test the extent to which these developments were due to literacy itself.
What happened between early and later Greek society to generate these developments must have been something other than the ‘intrinsic’ qualities of literacy alone since literacy was present in both periods.
To argue that the early period represents a situation of ‘restricted’ literacy is simply to beg the question.
There is a circularity in these arguments about the consequences of literacy that makes it difficult to test them out or to apply them fruitfully elsewhere.
As we have traced them so far, Goody's arguments and my counter-arguments seem to go something like this.
Oral communications, being face-to-face and immediate, are more limited than those in literate cultures, where meaning can be held and validated in impersonal ways.
However, many of the examples of literate societies that are available for study suggest that this is not the case: in fact these societies continue to practice what Goody has defined as ‘oral’ modes of communication, with all its limitations.
So he labels them ‘restricted’ and continues to pursue his ideal by identifying it with a specific culture, that of classical Greece, where the ‘potentialities’of literacy were fully realised.
Unfortunately classical Greece as a whole does not live up to these ideals either, and he is forced to recognise certain periods and sectors of that society as having ‘restricted’ literacy.
The search becomes desperate and one begins to get the impression that Aristotle alone is going to fit the bill.
The constant narrowing down, redefinition and drawing of ever more refined distinctions lead to a position where the argument has no general significance at all: Greek society, defined in a particular way, represents the advantages of a form of literacy defined in the same way.
Greek society developed ‘logic’, ‘scepticism’ etc.
Literacy, too, has the potential to generate logic and scepticism — but not literacy in general, only that form of it which developed in classical Greece.
What one is left with, then, is a particular correlation: alphabetic literacy, of the kind that facilitates unambiguous communication, is first found diffused throughout a whole society in that period of late classical Greece when the idea of ‘logic’ and other aspects of ‘unambiguous’communication also first developed.
If this were all that Goody claimed he was saying there would still be problems of definition but it might provide some insight into the specific nature of classical Greece and the specific forms of literacy developed there.
However, he often appears to be saying much more than this and he has certainly been taken as making significant generalisations about the  nature of literacy as such.
The way in which the argument has been couched in Goody's work over the years has been to construct an apparatus of grand distinctions on which discussion of literacy could be based.
He distinguishes between literate and non-literate societies; between ‘restricted’ literacy and the ‘full’realisation of the ‘potentialities’of literacy.
And, in describing the consequences of what he defines as literacy, he distinguishes between societies which employ the notion of ‘logic’ and those which do not, between societies with ‘historical sensibility’and those with only myth, and between societies where ‘scepticism’is present involving ‘deliberate rejection and reinterpretation of social dogma and those limited to ‘semi-automatic readjustment of belief.
The relationship of literacy to these supposed changes from limited to more developed states is described in terms which implicitly tend towards determinism, despite explicit denials: literacy ‘fosters’ a ‘spirit of enquiry’(1968, p. 14); it ‘cannot but enforce’a more ‘objective definition of what was and what is’(ibid. p. 34); historical sensibility ‘can hardly begin to operate without permanent written records’(ibid.); the existence of an elite group ‘followed from the difficulty of the writing system’(ibid. p. 37); ‘logic’seemed to be ‘a function of writing’(1977, p. 11) etc.
The contradictions between these implicit tendencies and Goody's explicit rejection of them can be explained by the framework of distinctions on which the inquiry is based in the first place.
By making such distinctions Goody is constructing a model in which literacy is conceived of as ‘autonomous’ and which has a built-in tendency to determinism.
I would argue that it is possible to consider both literacy and social change from a perspective which avoids such distinctions and such determinism and which allows us to develop a model from which new and interesting research questions can emerge.
The nature of scientific endeavour and achievement, for instance, can be analysed in terms of a framework which does not require a rigid dichotomy between science and mysticism.
As I have emphasised above, what we think of as ‘scientific’ endeavour takes place in a social context, within institutions and ideologies which are not themselves necessarily committed to ‘scientific’thought or logic.
The development by the Pythagoreans, for instance, of important mathematical theories out of organisations concerned with mystical cosmologies and shamanistic practices is no more an exception to the way in which scientific progress has been made or to the ‘spirit of enquiry’ than the fact that many modern scientific achievements arise out of arcane political interests or commercial ethics.
These intellectual developments, and the apparent contradictions within them, can be more satisfactorily explained in terms of models which stress their political and ideological character than by the dualistic, cognitive models proposed by Goody.
This alternative approach, instead of looking for polarities and constructing  rigid distinctions in intellectual development with which to correlate similarly reified literacy practices, recognises these literacy practices as themselves social products, no more isolable from the political and ideological context than are the ‘scientific’ achievements that Goody would associate with them.
The arguments concerning the social nature of scientific progress relate also to the product of that progress — technology.
This includes what Goody calls the ‘technology of the intellect’— literacy.
Technology is, however, not a neutral ‘thing’ that arises out of disinterested scientific inquiry and which must then be accommodated, responded to, decided about in the society.
It is itself a social product that has arisen as a result of political and ideological processes and institutions and its particular form has to be explained in terms of such processes.
Literacy, then, is not, as Goody appears to be arguing, a ‘neutral’ technology, with ‘potentialities and restrictions’depending simply on how it is used.
Rather it is a socially constructed form whose ‘influence’ depends on how it was shaped in the first place.
This shaping depends on political and ideological formations and it is these which are responsible for its ‘consequences’ too.
Before I examine some of the ways in which recent analyses of literacy practices in a number of disciplines have taken account of these political and ideological factors, and have implicitly challenged the model of literacy put forward by Goody, it is important to recognise the extent to which many of Goody's arguments and those of the ‘autonomous’ model of literacy have derived support from assumptions within the specific field of linguistics.
In the next chapter, I consider these assumptions in the light of recent developments within that discipline and I shall attempt to demonstrate that they do not, in fact, justify the claims made for literacy by Goody and others.
Many linguists in recent years have questioned the early assumptions of the discipline with regard to literacy and their work now serves to undermine rather than to support those arguments regarding literacy that I have referred to as the ‘autonomous’ model.
LITERACY AND LINGUISTICS
Many of the claims for literacy examined above rest upon theories developed within the discipline of linguistics.
If, however, we look at recent developments in this area, we find that there is little justification for such claims.
Those linguists who have paid explicit attention to literacy, and they are as yet few, have been forced to question the early assumptions of the discipline with regard to literacy and to cast doubt on what I have termed the ‘autonomous’ model.
Writers in other areas, however, as well as many linguists, have gone on using these assumptions as though they were secure and certain.
It is important, then, to establish what linguists have had to say and are now saying about literacy.
Many influential linguists of an earlier generation, such as Bloomfield, and grammarians and educators deriving their practice from linguistic theory, assumed that there was little significant difference between speech and writing.
Given that speech is primary, in that all peoples have speech but only some have writing, they assumed that the main function of writing must be to represent speech.
They did not recognise that writing is multifunctional and has characteristics which may be different from and independent of speech.
Despite this view of the dependence of writing on speech, some linguists and educators have, apparently paradoxically, used written forms as models for spoken forms.
It was assumed that spoken forms which failed to observe the rules of morphology and syntax considered appropriate to written forms were ‘incorrect’ and ‘ungrammatical’.
In fact there was no paradox, for it was the theoretical assumption that speech and writing were fulfilling the same functions and the inability to recognise their separate characters that made it possible to use one as the model for the other.
This perspective is now being made more explicit amongst linguists.
Deuchar, for instance, offers a social rather than ‘pure linguistic’ explanation for the dominance of written language in both linguistic theory and general belief.
In many literate cultures, written language ‘has greater social prestige than the spoken language, and most official recognition’ on account of the important functions which writing fulfils in those societies.
As a result of these specific, socially constructed functions: ‘Speech is often evaluated socially according to its closeness to the written language, which explains why standard spoken English is probably closer to written English than is any other spoken variety.
Written language is often viewed  as more ‘correct’ than spoken language, and as more worthy of study’(Leech et al.1982, p. 8/3).
However, she points out that ‘from a linguistic point of view we can only say that speech and writing are different: we cannot say that one is superior to the other’(ibid.).
Linguists have not always, however, made this point clear and, indeed, many of them have, often implicitly, taken their models of language from their own experience of written forms.
The issue has recently been pursued in greater detail by Per Linell in Sweden.
In The Written Language Bias in Linguistics (1982) he lays out for fellow linguists the detailed ways in which that bias has, he believes, affected their theory.
He writes: ‘It seems to me that a great number of our explicit or implicit theories, our methods and preferences are heavily influenced by the very long traditions of analyzing mainly, or only, certain kinds of written language.
Even when we are in fact focussing on spoken language, we seem to approach it with a theoretical apparatus which is more apt for the analysis of written language’(1982, p.
III).
As we shall see, there is some question as to whether that apparatus is really ‘apt’ for written language either.
Linell, however, provides a basis for pursuing both questions by indicating ‘the extent to which linguistics, like most other sciences, is still dependent on important events of the past, both technological inventions…and practical political goals and social concerns that have motivated the practice of linguistic science since antiquity’(ibid. p. 1).
Crystal has shown how this bias in linguistics carries over into lay views of language.
Many educators and non-linguists, for instance, have criticised such spoken uses as ‘you know’, which they have taken as signs of ‘sloppy’ speech or ‘imprecise’thinking.
In fact, he says, they are rule governed and functional: ‘In informal conversation they have a proper role, as they are one of the main means language has of expressing the various alterations in the force and direction of argument that we find ourselves using’(Crystal, 1976, p. 24).
They facilitate syntactic flexibility in conversation.
Furthermore: ‘They are governed by rules of usage, as any other area of grammar.
These rules may not much resemble the traditional grammatical rules of school textbooks but rules they are none the less.’
(ibid.)
The interpellation ‘you know’ is not considered appropriate in standard written styles of the kind taught in schools and used in the ‘essayist tradition’nor in certain formal situations, for example in a television interview.
But Crystal points out that most language use does not occur in such contexts: language is generally used in informal, everyday, conversational ways and writing or formal utterances are special cases of language use, with their own conventions and rules.
The problem has been that descriptions of language in general tended to be based on these special cases.
It was from these that the ‘grammatical rules of school textbooks’ were derived, at least until the work of  descriptive linguistics in this century, and perhaps still despite it in some cases.
This was partly because of methodological difficulties in recording ‘natural’ everyday speech and partly because early grammarians tended to privilege the conventions and prestige associated with their own practice of academic writing.
Advances in technology and methodology as well as in linguistic theory have now enabled researchers to gather sufficient evidence of conversational speech for its significance, grammaticality, and difference from such special cases as the literary standard and other writing styles to be recognised.
The argument has not, however, been resolved in linguistics and many prominent writers, notably Chomsky and, as we shall see below, to some extent John Lyons, have argued that linguists have to study idealised ‘system sentences’ because much of everyday speech is ungrammatical.
These idealised sentences often turn out to be based, in fact, on the conventions of written language in the academic sub-culture and these linguists could be seen to be perpetuating, albeit in more sophisticated terms, the older, ideological conception of writing as the model for speech.
Chomsky's work has also encouraged another set of assumptions in linguistics that have consequences for the models of literacy with which we are here concerned.
These have been loosely termed ‘universalist’ theories of language, since the basic tenet is that there are universal structures of grammar and especially of syntax, in which all people have ‘competence’and which  underlie and make possible the different utterances that we observe in the actual practice of language.
Criticising this development, Lyons says: ‘Linguists have been very much concerned in recent years with the postulation of universals of language structure and have all too often discounted the differences among languages’(1982).
Recently ethnolinguists, deriving their inspiration in England from the work of J. R. Firth and his disciples at SOAS (The School of Oriental and African Studies), have also challenged ‘universalism’ and have argued for more attention to ‘language-specific’descriptions before more general claims about language can be made, Fought, for instance, writing of attempts to analyse traditional Mexican languages, argues:
traditional grammatical structures…are not appropriate to Mayan structures: they can be applied only with violence to their common usage or to the structural features they are intended to fit…
If the pattern of formal equivalences and differences of a language cuts across the categorical distinctions as they are usually interpreted, the result of using the traditional categories will be a confusing description, despite careful redefinition of the familiar terms to suit the unfamiliar forms.
I think it is fair to say  that the tradition of structuralist and transformational descriptive grammar contains many examples of this kind.
(Fought, 1973, p, 64; see also Hymes and Fought, 1975.)
Lourdes de Léon (1982) similarly points out how many Amerindian languages were studied and described by Catholic missionaries who, despite their undeniable achievements, fell into this ethnocentric trap by using Latin grammar as their model and then forcing native data into it.
She cites a number of linguists working on non-European languages who, recognising this problem, have argued for ‘language-specific descriptions adequate to the particular structure of those languages’(1982, p. 9).
This challenge to ‘universalism’ need not pose in its place a simple relativism or a mere piling up of empirical descriptions.
Rather, as in social anthropology, it is possible to develop a dynamic model in which the student begins from the acute self-consciousness that his or her own concepts may be culture-specific at depths so far unexamined, and so starts out tentatively from them, being ready to revise them in the light of new ethnography.
He or she then constructs new, cross-cultural models for further work, recognising that these too may have to be revised.
Moreover, members of other cultures are understood to be themselves active participants in such model building and so their social and linguistic ‘grammars’ have to be taken into account also.
In the work of most linguists today, then, speech is not overtly seen as dependent on the rules of written language, while for many the ‘universalism’ of some approaches is being closely questioned.
However, the theoretical advances that these views represent do not seem to have significantly affected statements about literacy, which appear at times to remain in a pre-Saussurian world.
The special cases of literacy usage represented by the analysts' own academic experience, by the literary forms of their own culture and other specific social conventions are still taken by many, often implicitly, as the appropriate models for describing the ‘universal’ qualities of literacy and for testing other groups' or societies' conventions of literacy usage.
John Lyons, for instance, while complaining that ‘much linguistic theorising is vitiated by the uncritical transference by linguists and philosophers of attitudes which derive from the cultural peculiarities of English and a few other so-called world languages’(1982), himself goes on to rest part of his view of literacy, implicitly, on exactly such ‘cultural peculiarities’ of written English.
Rather than giving the same recognition to differences among literacies which he proposes to be differences among languages, he uses what is in fact the ‘autonomous’ model of literacy as the basis for arguments about the specific nature of the English language.
His argument begins with a rejection of ‘universalism’ and a claim that  different varieties of language can be associated with different levels of such general qualities as ‘objectivity’: ‘there are gross differences among languages, such that it does seem reasonable to say of some that they allow their users to approximate to neutral, objective description’.
‘Languages can’, he maintains, ‘legitimately be analysed in terms of their greater or lesser context-dependence and culture-dependence.’(ibid.)
He substantiates these claims with reference to his own language: ‘it is possible to address someone, or talk about someone, in English without indicating one's relative social status or attitude etc., whereas in many languages this is not possible.
Again it is possible to make categorical assertions in English without giving any indication of the evidence that one has for making them or of one's attitude towards what one is saying: there are languages that cannot do this.’
(ibid.)
The similarity of these claims to those made by Olson, Hildyard and others for literacy is striking.
Indeed, as we shall see below, Lyons' general arguments about language differences can be claimed to rest to some extent on implicit assumptions about literacy of the kind that they make.
These arguments are subject to the same criticisms, regarding ethnocentrism and academic-centredness that were levelled at these writers, both in terms of their assumptions regarding literacy and those regarding ‘objectivity’.
Within linguistics, then, as we have seen within other disciplines, these two concepts are closely linked.
Before investigating further what Lyons has to say about literacy, then, it is important to analyse what he means by ‘objectivity’ and what force arguments about it have within his own discipline.
The argument that in English one can theoretically address others without revealing status, on which some of Lyons' claims for the ‘objectivity’ of the language rest, is not in fact readily subscribed to by linguists.
Testing these claims against how a language actually operates in practice, Pulgrum, for instance, points out:
We can recognise a person by his speech quite apart from the intelligence or intelligibility of his utterance.
The mere physical features of his speech, conditioned anatomically and by habits, suffice for identification.
If, in addition, what he says and how he says it, in other words his style, provide further clues, all the better.
The what and how are socially conditioned, however, by the speaker's education, surroundings, profession etc.
Directors and actors of radio plays who cannot convey any part of the contents of the performance visually, are very skilful in the art of voice characterisation.
Even the psyche, the temperament of a person finds expression in his speech, to say nothing of his temporary moods and every hearer makes a certain value judgement of a speaker simply on the basis of ‘what he talks like’(Pulgrum, 1951, p. 17).
(My emphasis.)
The point is not simply that we can identify status from speech if we wish to, such as with the clever elaborations developed on radio; rather, that it is difficult to conceive of an utterance in English in which this is not the case.
Whatever formal characteristics Lyons might attribute to English in theory, in practice it would be difficult for him to sustain the claim that ‘it is possible to address someone or talk about someone in English without indicating one's relative social status or attitude’.
It would certainly be unsafe to generalise from a quality that is so difficult to establish, that English therefore ‘allows its users to approximate to neutral, objective description’.
More precisely, in linguistic terms, it has been suggested that it is not as straightforward as Lyons implies to attribute the possibility of ‘neutrality’ to English grammar; some aspects, such as pronoun usage, are more context-dependent than he allows.
The use of ‘one’, for instance, is frequently a device for indicating status or attitude, as when a politician attempts to establish neutrality or objectivity for his or her own opinions, through such phrases as ‘one knows…’.
Similarly, the use of ‘we’ to express solidarity and ‘institutional voice’may invoke power and status through, amongst other things, lending oneself the strength of numbers.
‘We’ may be used in a number of status-embedded ways, as when a doctor addresses a patient with ‘How are we feeling?’or an adult says to a child ‘Have we lost our voice, then?’.
Although, as Lyons says, English does not oblige speakers to classify the addressee with regard to status, an analysis of the actual uses of pronouns demonstrates that it is, in practice, almost impossible to avoid.
Dialect, accent, lexical choice and grammatical structures are all interpreted by speakers and addressees as signifying status.
One might, perhaps, break this down further by maintaining a distinction between ‘grammatical’ and paralinguistic ways of indicating status.
In these terms one might argue that some languages ‘give away’ more about the status of a speaker (and the relationship with an interlocutor) through their grammatical structure, while others do so through paralinguistic features.
The T/V distinction found in every European language except English provides the classic example of this, while English is, according to Lyons, a particularly clear example of how status, while clearly indicated in paralinguistic ways as Pulgrum indicates, need not be indicated in the grammar (Lyons, 1977).
Within this framework, Lyons' emphasis on the particular demands made on English by its international functions might provide some partial explanation for its greater use of paralinguistic features rather than grammatical ones for indicating status, although more  comparative and historical research would be necessary.
Lyons, however, is attempting to say more than this.
He is attempting to link these differences in ways of indicating status, as between grammatical and paralinguistic forms, with the concept of ‘objectivity’.
There is, however, no necessary reason to suppose that languages which indicate status only in paralinguistic ways offer their users more possibility of ‘approximating to neutral, objective descriptions’ than those which oblige their users to do so through grammatical structures.
Lyons would argue that his statements are only about ‘language-systems’(Lyons, 1977) and that the paralinguistic aspects are by definition not included in these and so are irrelevant to the point about ‘objectivity’.
The idealised language-system encodes meaning through grammar, phonology and the lexicon and the question of how this system is used differs from that of how linguists analyse and describe it.
The relationship of the language-system to other things, such as culture, psychological mechanisms etc. is, he maintains, a separate problem.
When he says that ‘English’ relates to such cultural characteristics as ‘objectivity’in specific ways, he is referring to a language-system, not to English in the loose everyday sense.
What the utterer commits himself to is all encoded in the language-system.
Within any particular language-system that English users subscribe to, and these may include different dialects, different phonological relationships and different lexical choices, it is possible, argues Lyons, to make statements without qualification of the speaker's commitment to their truth.
That such qualification may occur outside the language-system, through paralinguistic means and in the observation of and judgement on which language-system, dialect etc. is operating in a given context, is irrelevant, Lyons would claim, to his central point.
There are language-systems, he points out, within which that characteristic of English whereby the utterer is not obliged to commit himself as to the truth of his utterance is not to be found; in such systems the utterer is obliged to commit himself.
within the language-system itself, to some judgement as to the truth of the utterance.
The grammar and lexicon oblige him to do this.
It is more difficult, according to Lyons, tor users of such language-systems to approximate to neutral, objective statements since they must always comment on and judge the truth value of what they say (Lyons, 1982).
The problem with this argument, however, is that it is impossible to discover, in practice, a ‘pure’ use of English syntax that does not, also, similarly oblige its users to indicate a view on what is uttered.
As we saw above, and Lyons would not disagree, it is mostly in the paralinguistic features that English performs this function.
But Lyons cannot simply shrug off such features as irrelevant and somehow ‘impure’, for no use of English occurs without them.
Utterances are always coloured by their  context.
The meaning of any spoken language is not simply altered but actually determined by dialect, accent, facial expression etc., while written communication derives much of its meaning from the format, layout, institutional context etc.
If such features are to be separated, for purposes of the division of academic labour, from the language-system itself, then one wonders quite what is left at the core and what uses it can be put to.
Whatever uses it may serve within descriptive linguistics, and there is clearly some advantage in dividing up and abstracting fields of study for specific purposes, it is quite a different matter to then take such abstract categories as ‘language-systems’ rather than language uses as the basis for cross-cultural comparison, particularly when what is being compared is such a socially charged concept as ‘objectivity’.
As soon as the language-system is related to concepts such as‘objectivity’ then it is located within the social and ideological domain and concepts in that domain have political and evaluative implications, whether the user wishes to make them or not.
Once he introduces them, the linguist cannot simply retreat into claiming that he is only dealing with the abstractions of descriptive linguistics.
The concept of ‘objectivity’ is not neutral in English culture nor in international affairs in the modern world; the appeal to it has significant implications not only for status but, more crucially, for power and control of resources.
If it could be demonstrated that English facilitated ‘objectivity’ more than other languages, then users of it would have a powerful weapon for affirming and legitimating their rights to certain positions of authority in relation to cultures or sub-cultures in which language use lacked this quality.
Members of those cultures might, with some justification, argue that the distinction between language-systems and the state of the world is not simply a neutral, theoretical tool but itself an ideological weapon constructed within a dominant culture and serving the purposes of cultural and linguistic imperialism.
Once the linguist ‘brings over’ his formal abstract concepts into the cultural domain then, however much he protests that no ranking is intended, the attribution of such qualities as ‘objectivity’to some languages and not others cannot but have implications for ranking and for power.
There are also powerful economic implications in this attribution of ‘objectivity’ to the English language.
The provision of English language teaching is already a major source of revenue to Britain, from the language schools that yearly bring literally millions of foreign students to the country, to the British Council exports of English language and culture across the world and the institutional supports for such practices provided by publishing houses, printers and writers of textbooks.
In Third World countries, in particular, where governments are seeking efficient ways of adopting scientific and technological know-how, the characteristics of English as an international language  already give it considerable advantage over others in the commercial competition to ‘sell’ such language training.
In addition, the hidden advantages for the host country of other nations using its language, such as ease of commercial interaction, cultural ties etc., are well enough known and indeed provide one of the justifications for the continuation of such institutions as the British Council.
In the hard sell of this linguistic and cultural economy, claims are made for English, not unlike those formerly made for Latin or for certain styles of French, that it is better suited to particular intellectual and scientific purposes, notably in the current situation, those for which consumers want to buy languages.
If scholars in the host country can establish with authority that English really can facilitate neutral, objective statements then its value on the world market is correspondingly increased.
To attribute these characteristics to English is not, then, ‘neutral’, even if it may have derived from a genuinely detached ‘academic’ inquiry.
These arguments are given some strength when we realise that the claims being made for English language by Lyons are remarkably similar to those being made for other aspects of English in general, or of English class culture in particular , by other writers.
Bernstein, for instance, in his attempt to attribute less ‘context-dependence’ and greater ‘objectivity’to certain language uses, correlated these characteristics with certain ‘codes’which he identifies with certain social classes (1971).
Greenfield has attempted to apply this to other cultures, using questionnaires given to Wolof children to establish an empirical basis for the distinction (1972).
Hildyard and Olson have restricted the claim to written modes of communication, arguing that speech forms are ‘context-dependent’ while written forms, in which English is particularly developed, facilitate ‘objectivity’(1978).
The same attempt is being made by all of these writers to distinguish ‘objective’ and ‘context-independent’uses from ‘subjective’and ‘context-dependent’uses: in one case the difference is couched in terms of‘differences among languages’, in another in terms of differences within a language (elaborated and restricted codes), and in yet another in terms of differences between language modes, namely speech and writing.
Claims made for the differences between speech and writing, then, are put into perspective by the fact that the same claims are attributed to other variables.
One is led to ask whether it is the attention to and general nature of such claims that first needs explaining, especially when it appears that they derive from such a specific social group, namely those in a western academic sub-culture who could arguably be said to have their own interests at stake.
I would suggest that this attention to differences between context-dependent and objective description can be explained as a product of the  specific academic tradition to which these writers are the heirs.
Some description of that tradition, in terms of its linguistic and literacy conventions, may help to put into perspective the claims for language and literacy made by exponents within it.
The academic tradition in which Lyons, Olson, Hildyard, Bernstein and others work has developed, over time, specific aims, one of which is indeed ‘approximation to dispassionate, neutral, objective description’.
In fulfilling these aims, specific use of the potential of different aspects of language and of literacy has been instrumental.
The organisation of seminars, lectures, essay writing, journal articles and books in academic institutions makes use of a number of different ‘forms, characteristics and functions’(Leech et al.1982) of speech and writing.
Seminars make use of the speech function of instant feed-back, and of quick and direct communication, with the help of such speech forms as intonation, stress etc.
Lectures make less use of the feed-back function of speech but depend heavily on the speech characteristic of needing less explicitness.
The lecturer can point to objects, diagrams etc. and the context of the lecture means that he or she does not need to make explicit statements about why everyone is there and for what.
The essays required of students make use of the writing function of ‘visibility’(ibid.), which enables re-reading and planning, while the publication of articles employs both this function of writing and its ability to facilitate communication over distance and to large numbers.
With articles and books the distance between addresser and addressee is theoretically at a maximum, and communication is at its most impersonal.
Indeed, these qualities are frequently the ones cited as crucial in identifying writing as ‘neutral’ and ‘objective’.
However, in practice, these forms of communication belong, like the other aspects of the academic tradition, to a specific culture, or sub-culture, in which assumptions are shared and meaning remains dependent on context.
Such articles and books will make little sense, for instance, to an untutored reader: this, in fact, is the major justification for organising learning in specific institutions where such readers can learn how to make sense of ‘the words on the page’.
Students are taught, for instance, to ‘read’ in a different way from that of everyday practice: rather than reading a text from beginning to end in the sequence in which the publisher has ordered it, they are urged to select what they want for particular purposes from different parts of the text, using the contents page, index, chapter headings etc. and moving backwards and forwards within that text and to other texts.
They also learn to plan and edit their own writing in a way which is not common to most everyday uses of written language.
The unusual nature of this process can be seen through a comparison of these academic practices with those conventionally associated with the most common uses of reading and writing in this culture, such as reading  adverts, notices in factories, magazines, popular newspapers etc., and the writing of lists for shopping, writing letters and filling in forms.
Academic tutors not surprisingly experience considerable difficulty in attempting to teach their particular forms of reading and writing to students acculturated in the conventions of these popular uses of literacy.
The use of tape recordings and videos adds further elaborations of form and function which are just being recognised and incorporated into this traditional complex of language use.
All of these processes combine to produce a particular form of language, what we can loosely call ‘academic language’.
It is clearly a product of specific circumstances and needs, and it makes variable and often distinctive use of particular language forms, functions and characteristics.
It is often this particular language to which academics are referring when they make general claims about the nature of English or of literacy.
They tend to privilege their own language, to make claims for it which derive from the requirements which brought it into being in the first place.
Popper, for instance, makes it quite clear that his ‘World Three’ is a world of academics.
He argues, for instance, that the evolutionary emergence of ‘our self transcendence by means of selection and rational criticism’ depends upon developments that have taken place in academic language: ‘It is only within a language thus enriched that critical argument and knowledge in the objective sense become possible.’
(Popper, 1979, p. 122.)
Similarly, Olson's claims for literacy, that it for instance‘unambiguously represents meanings’, turn out to rest on descriptions of the ‘British essayists’ of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries.
They were ‘among the first to exploit writing for the purpose of formulating original theoretical knowledge…
Knowledge was taken to be the product of an extended logical essay — the output of the repeated application in a single coherent text of the technique of examining an assertion to determine all of its implications.’
(Olson, 1977, pp. 268–9.)
Olson, indeed, recognises the historical specificity of the development of scientific institutions and of distinctly academic forms of language and literacy in England and he notes that these were not general in the society as a whole: ‘Locke's essayist technique differed notably from the predominant writing style of the time’(ibid,).
But Olson nevertheless slides from these precise comments into grander generalisation and appears to attribute the characteristics associated with specific exponents of the essay technique to writing as such and to the whole culture.
He claims, for instance, that Locke's ‘intellectual bias’ characterises ‘our present use of language’, presumably using ‘our’to refer to himself and fellow academics but failing to make the restriction clear.
‘The essayist technique’, he admits, ‘was not an ordinary language, not a mother tongue, but rather a form of language specialised to serve the requirements of autonomous, written, formalised text.’
(ibid. 1977, p. 270.)
This might be better put as follows: that the specialist language and the written formalised text alike served the purposes of the particular sub-culture.
By attributing the specialisation to the ‘requirements of autonomous…text’, he inverts the historical process and reifies the text.
These writers, then, derive doubtful generalisations, often implicitly rather than explicitly, from the specific character of ‘academic language’.
They assert, for example, by implication that non-academics in their own culture and members of other cultures, particularly illiterate ‘primitives’, cannot have the skills of ‘objectivity’, ‘neutrality’ and ‘logic’which their own academic language is specifically designed to facilitate.
The fact, however, that they have designed a language to fulfil these functions does not necessarily mean that these functions could not be fulfilled in other ways, nor that their language is intrinsically connected with them, nor that the language has necessarily been proven to succeed in achieving these ideals.
Anthropologists and others have produced evidence of the range of languages and institutions within which ‘scientific progress’ has been made, as in the mix of mathematics and astrology in ancient Greece (Goody, 1977, p. 17), and of geometry and the building of sacred altars in ancient India (Parry, 1982, p. 23), while in Europe developments can be traced through a number of traditions, of which the essayist tradition is only one.
Attention to differences between context-dependent and objective language may arise, to some extent, from this particular essayist tradition.
However, this does not mean that people do not act upon or make some such distinction, in everyday life and in other cultures.
The distinction may, though, be conceptualised in different ways than those familiar to English academic usage, and the means employed to attain ‘objectivity’ may be different.
To privilege one of these ways of attaining objectivity, particularly when that way happens to be one's own, is fraught with difficulty, not least because the assessment is likely to be circular, depending on the very standards that the proponents are trying to verify.
To put such an effort into perspective, it is necessary first to investigate cross-culturally the various different conceptions of ‘objectivity’ and different means of attaining it.
This involves, in the first instance, taking the concept of ‘objectivity’ as itself an object of study, rather than as a known and secure starting point.
It is, in fact, relatively obvious and uncontentious to argue that in some societies or sub-cultures the distinction between ‘objective’ and ‘context-dependent’is more consciously drawn and given more weight than in others (cf.
Karp and Bird, 1980; Finnegan and Horton, 1973; Wilson, 1974).
The explanation for the differences is, however, more problematic.
One way of explaining them is by reference to institutional features of  these societies.
For example, the existence of educational institutions specifically directed to this task can clearly be a causal factor.
John Lyons could be taken to be offering such an analysis when he says that the English language is different from other languages in that it ‘extends’ the meaning of particular words beyond the culture-specific because of the international demands made on it (Lyons, 1982).
Lyons attempts to put this into perspective by pointing out that ‘the value set upon objectivity varies from society to society: indeed, that the concept itself may be given no recognition at all in some societies’.
However, he says, ‘our own society — at least the academic sub-society within it [a significant qualification in view of the current argument]— sets great store by what it calls, and thinks to be, objectivity and has certain standards of dispassionate, scientific investigation, to which at least lip service is paid and which may, of course, be distorted by unrecognised prejudice of one kind or another’(ibid.).
He is not content, however, to leave it at that: to recognise that the perception of and attention to objectivity varies culturally while claims to objectivity itself are often more biased than is realised.
He wants to go beyond this testable assertion and maintain that there is a real difference, not simply one of perception, between different languages in their ability to ‘allow their users to approximate to neutral, objective description’ and that English has this ability.
This would seem to imply that some, at least, of the terms developed by academics within the English tradition are really ‘universal’, ‘culture-free’ and ‘analytic’as their proponents claim them to-be.
This, however, remains problematic and unproven, if not unprovable.
Whether, for instance, concepts such as ‘ethnicity’, ‘class’, ‘politics’ are ‘culture-free’, that is whether academics have succeeded in freeing them from their narrow everyday cultural uses and made them available for cross-cultural use, is a question of judgement and, ultimately, of ontology.
Yet, in the cultural and specifically academic world within which Lyons is making claims for ‘objectivity’, this is what the term is taken to imply.
Whatever claims for the English language he may wish to make from a supposedly technical, linguistic perspective, he cannot assume that attributing ‘objectivity’ to it is unproblematic, or that the meaning attributed to it within that sub-culture can safely be carried over into cross-cultural correlations with the features of certain languages and grammars.
Romaine (1982) suggests an alternative framework to the ‘objective/ subjective’ dichotomy that Lyons' argument seems to rest on.
She ‘would prefer to think of different languages as having the potential to exploit differing degrees of subjectivity’ but she does not think there is ‘any neutral ontology or world view which is objective and can serve as a universal yardstick.
The most we can get is some idea of the world view  the one hand, impossible to say on the other and most importantly, what it is not possible not to say or avoid saying/implying’(personal communication).
She adds that we ‘only realise this by learning other languages’(ibid.).
Anthropologists, who attempt to answer precisely such questions by the learning of other languages, can provide ethnographic substance for Romaine's study of ‘differing degrees of subjectivity’.
Lienhardt, writing of the Dinka of the southern Sudan, provides support for Romaine's view but also suggests a further elaboration of it, impinging as he does so on a number of the issues raised here.
He compares Dinka representations of the ‘self’ with those common in certain English usage and concludes:
It seems to me that the Dinka language, unlike modern, educated, and for the most part metropolitan English, compels its speakers to integrate the moral and physical attributes of persons together within the physical matrix of the human body.
In modern English, moral and mental conditions are spoken of in more or less abstract terms (anger, suspicion, forcefulness and so on) cut off for the most part , from their etymological roots…
It may be that the disjunction, for most modern English speakers, between abstract terms and concrete imagery has something to do with the complex foreign origins of the English language.
Non-literate Africans can explain the etymology of words as non-literate English-speakers cannot…
The difference is…consistent with the absence, among (in this case) the Dinka, of the mind — body dichotomy which many writers of this century have wished to resolve.
(1980, pp. 77 — 8.)
Lienhardt is not, however, being quite as Whorfian as this may sound.
He is not denying the possibility of the English language overcoming the mind — body dichotomy nor of the Dinka language expressing it.
But he sees such expression as running contrary to the dominant idiom and cultural meaning in which users of the language are socialised and as therefore not what the anthropologist is trying to make sense of.
With regard to English, he suggests that what he sees as the limitations of ‘metropolitan’ use of the language may not be present in other registers: ‘still an integration of thought and feeling in metaphor and imagery is what we seek to have recreated for us in the best literature’(ibid. p. 78).
As regards the Dinka, he suggests that it may be possible to persuade users of the language to reply to questions about the mind — body dichotomy: it is not that the language is incapable, at a formal level, of making such a distinction, but that such usage would be unrepresentative in cultural terms.
He writes: ‘among [the Dinka]I had that experience of daily  conversation which enables one to discriminate, as we take for granted in the language into which we were born, between what people mean and what they say.
Then one learns what kinds of questions, formulated in an alien mode of thought, might receive answers — but answers which, though grammatically, syntactically and even semantically plausible, do not represent, and may positively misrepresent, indigenous and spontaneous interests and ideas’(ibid. p. 74).
The general implications of Lienhardt's argument are that all languages have the potential to make abstract, relatively neutral statements, if called upon to do so.
(The ability to make statements without indicating status, which Lyons attributes to English, is not, of course, the only or even the major way in which abstract and neutral meanings can be formulated.)
Hence, in terms of what they can ‘say’, it would be wrong to argue that there are distinctions between languages according to their approximation to neutral, abstract description.
However, in terms of what they ‘mean’, their use in a specific cultural context, it is reasonable to maintain that some languages pay less explicit attention to abstract formulations.
This cultural, as opposed to linguistic, distinction does not, however, necessarily tell us very much about ‘objectivity’, as Lyons claims.
Even if these differences did tell us something about differences in attention to ‘objectivity’, this would not necessarily be the same as attainment of ‘objectivity’, as we saw above in relation to‘academic language’.
Lienhardt, as an anthropologist, leaves that question alone and is concerned simply with the different ways in which people in different cultures make sense of their worlds, without attempting to attribute greater truth to any one way as, by definition, the attribution of ‘objectivity’ does.
His work would, I think, support Romaine's general concern with studying ‘differing degrees of subjectivity’ rather than assuming and searching for ontologically neutral ‘objectivity’.
Lyons, in fact, concedes this point, although I feel that he does not follow through fully its implications for the rest of his argument.
He admits that he cannot appeal to some absolute conception of ‘objectivity’ in claiming that some languages ‘allow their users to approximate to neutral, objective description’.
He maintains, instead, that there are differences between languages as regards their relative ‘objectivity’.
However, he couches his explanation for these differences not simply at the level of what actual language users ‘mean’, that is in relation to particular cultural practice and institutions (within which the concept of ‘relative objectivity’ might make some sense), but instead at the level of what they ‘say’, that is in relation to‘the lexical and grammatical structure of languages’, at the level of ‘language-systems’, which appears to assume again the notion of absolute ‘objectivity’, since, as we have seen, it offers no cultural context in which to make sense of such systems.
When Lyons attempts to specify  differences between ‘language-systems’, such as in the example of English pronouns, or in that of the lack of status marking in English grammar, it becomes virtually impossible to keep the formal ‘lexical and grammatical’ features separate from the cultural context.
This methodological problem generates a crucial theoretical problem since, as Lienhardt demonstrates, whatever formal ‘grammatical’ features a language may exhibit, they do not make much ‘sense’apart from the context in which they are used.
One way in which some writers have attempted to avoid this problem has been by appealing to literacy, as a case where the formal features of language can be claimed to make sense apart from context.
With writing, at least, they believe, what is said can be taken to be what is meant.
Lexical and grammatical structures, when represented in written form, can be isolated from the context-dependence of oral modes of communication.
‘Objectivity’, then, is more possible in English because it has a highly developed form of writing.
It can be argued that it is on the strength of these supposed qualities of writing, as identified by Hildyard, Olson and other exponents of the ‘autonomous’ model of literacy, that Lyons rests some at least of his more general claims for ‘differences among languages’.
The ‘objectivity’ and neutrality that these authors discover in certain uses of writing correspond to the ‘objectivity’that Lyons identifies in the English language.
Moreover, Lyons himself does make explicit appeal to the characteristics of literacy in his description of ‘objectivity’.
He suggests that the perception of objectivity to be observed in some areas of English culture may stem from the ‘real’ objectivity provided by writing: ‘The intrinsically greater objectivity of written language (or, alternatively, the intrinsically lesser subjectivity) could’, he argues, ‘have encouraged the development of an institutionalised greater respect for written evidence’(1982).
There is, however, powerful ethnographic evidence to challenge this explanation and to suggest that the ‘institutionalised greater respect’ for written language in England can be better explained in terms of political and ideological practices in the real history of that country.
Clanchy shows that, between 1066 and 1307 in England, the criteria for validation of land rights and other significant social facts, and the relative weight given to written and oral criteria in such validation changed as a direct result of political pressures (1979).
The Norman conquerors, in attempting to establish rights to land in England, undermined indigenous oral criteria for proof of ownership, by which they as newcomers were on weaker ground than native land owners, and set up centralised, bureaucratic procedures with emphasis on written documentation, records, cross-referencing etc. over which they could exercise greater control.
As a result of the ‘literate mentality’ that these institutions helped to form in England, and to which Lyons and fellow academics now subscribe, later  historians, looking back to records of eleventh century England, tended to discard medallions, seals and other material objects that had been major criteria of validation in the oral culture of that period.
They retained and emphasised, instead, the written documents deliberately produced by a centralised Chancery and other Norman offices and institutions.
Clanchy points out the anachronistic nature of the historians' practice.
The knights of the eleventh century, not being socialised in the ‘literate mentality’ of these later historians, knew well enough that such institutions were not simply a ‘neutral’bureaucracy guaranteeing the ‘objectivity’of written documents, and they knew well enough, too, how these documents were untrustworthy.
Both the institutions and the documents were the product of deliberate political manipulation to deprive them of their rights to land.
Written documents could be and were easily forged whereas seals, crosses, medallions etc. were, in the way in which they had been developed and used in pre-Norman Britain, distinctive individual objects, which were less easily forged, more identifiable and more obviously linked to particular individuals.
Moreover, these material objects were ‘known’ to generations of those for whom the land rights that they validated were important.
They were thus more reliable guarantees of ‘truth’ than written documents.
To both later historians and eleventh century knights it appeared that ‘truth’ was intrinsic to the kind of evidence that they had both, in their different ways, been socialised into respecting.
To us it is clear that it was the forms of social organisation in which such evidence was carried that gave them this quality and not the intrinsic nature of the evidence itself.
The same, of course, is true of the written records of the present period.
In contemporary England written language takes precedence, for instance, in a legal context — a written contract being more binding than a spoken agreement — while in Scotland verbal contracts are binding in some cases.
These differences are to be explained in terms of those contexts and the socially agreed constructions of how these institutions should operate rather than in terms of any supposed intrinsic qualities of writing.
It is, then, unsafe to generalise as Lyons does that: ‘until modern methods of sound recording were developed (a) the inscription of language utterances on durable materials provided a more reliable means of transmission than memory and oral reproduction’ and (b) that this was ‘recognised to be so in the western tradition in which literacy developed in the first instance for this purpose’(1982).
Not only was literacy not necessarily recognised as more ‘reliable’, but we would be bound to say that it really was not more reliable.
Lyons, in fact, concedes (b): ‘I am only too prepared to accept that in other traditions scribal records either are not or are not seen to be intrinsically more reliable than memory and oral  transmission.’
But he still wishes to maintain (a), that writing is intrinsically more reliable.
This appears to be contradictory.
In conceding (b) he recognises that scribal records actually were unreliable, as well as being seen to be.
There is, then, no intrinsic reason why ‘the inscription of language utterances on durable materials provides more reliable means of transmission than memory and oral reproduction’ and there is empirical evidence to the contrary.
Moreover, the criterion for ‘reliability’ is itself culture-dependent.
In some cultures, scribes do not record texts with word-for-word fidelity, while in others one is not free to alter anything in the process of re-recording.
Lyons could legitimately maintain that scribal records have some potential, according to the institutions in which they are developed and used, for reliability as defined in that culture or even as defined by him.
But, as we have seen, other products of social organisation, such as seals and medallions, can have this quality too and, in the right conditions, may be aptly considered more reliable, as they were by the medieval knights.
So writing is not unique in this respect.
However, like Olson, Hildyard and Greenfield, Lyons does not allow such qualifications to impinge on the general claims he is making for literacy.
Olson, for instance, does admit at one point that all we can really be sure of is that some academics have made claims for objectivity while the question of assessing those claims is a different matter:
Whether or not all meaning can be made explicit in the text is perhaps less critical than the belief that it can and that making it so is a valid scientific enterprise.
This was clearly the assumption of the [eighteenth century]essayists, and it continues in our use of language for science and philosophy.
Explicitness of meaning, in other words, may be better thought of as a goal rather than an achievement.
But it is a goal appropriate only for the particular, specialised use of language that I have called text.
(Olson, 1977, p. 275.)
If that were all Olson were saying, then it would be reasonable enough and would provide an interesting basis for historical study of the reasons for specific literacy practices in specific cultures.
But, throughout his essay, his use of language suggests that he is making more general claims.
Like Lyons, he links cultural interest in ‘objectivity’ with the supposed ‘real’objectivity to be found in writing.
Olson says, for instance, that:
the invention of the alphabetic writing system gave to Western culture many of its predominant features including an altered conception of language and an altered conception of rational man.
These effects came about, in part, from the creation of  explicit, autonomous statements — statements dependent upon an explicit writing system, the alphabet, and an explicit form of argument, the essay.
In a word, these effects resulted from putting the meaning into the text.
(ibid. p. 262.)
He also says that ‘the decoding of sentence meaning should be treated as the end point of development’ as though the universal superiority of the essayist technique had been firmly established.
Amidst these grand claims for the ‘effects’ of writing, Olson suppresses the qualification cited above that ‘whether meaning can be made explicit in text is perhaps less critical than the belief that it can’and proceeds as though it were agreed and verifiable that writing can and does have such effects because of its intrinsic qualities.
According to Olson, it was not the beliefs of the eighteenth century essayists that led to changes in the conception of language and rationality, an assertion that could be tested against the historical evidence, but the forms they used, the alphabet and the essay.
Yet the only evidence that he brings forward turns out to be, in fact, the essayists' own belief that this was what literacy could achieve.
Both they and Olson use the fact that claims for ‘objectivity’ are made as proof of their veracity.
Similarly, Lyons presents in universalistic asocial terms an argument that elsewhere he admits is culture-dependent.
He recognises at one point that claims for the ‘intrinsically greater objectivity of written language’ in literate culture may derive from socially constructed beliefs about what literacy can achieve (1982).
But he then proceeds to write as though those claims were really ‘true’ and uses this ‘fact’to ‘explain' the beliefs.
With all of these writers the technical, and apparently neutral, quality of their specialist, language is used to give greater weight and universality to arguments about literacy and objectivity which, when analysed closely, can he demonstrated to rest upon social and ideological presuppositions.
Ragnar Rommetveit has provided a powerful challenge to this positivist tendency (1982).
He identifies the attempt by some linguists to discover ‘literal meanings’ with the belief that there can be a ‘natural science, approach to language.
He notes, for instance, that linguists have attempted to apply some of the terminology of natural science inappropriately to language, often through such metaphors as ‘cohesion’, ‘balance’ etc., which fix and reify what is in fact a more flexible and dynamic phenomenon.
He opposes to this a hermeneutic approach which asks always what a particular utterance is for and where it is located.
From this viewpoint, meaning is seen as relative and truth as negotiable.
Rommetveit does not believe that we can understand meaning by paring an utterance down to its ‘core meaning’ and then following up variations on it, as the formal linguists are attempting to do.
They build idealised models but  then carry them over into real usage as though they really existed, forgetting that they had initially involved ‘bracketing’ certain assumptions.
Rommetveit quotes Hilary Putnam as saying ‘we cannot know ourselves as we understand hydrogen’(ibid.); linguistics, in contrast, must always take into account contextuality.
This involves ‘redrawing the boundaries of semantics/pragmatics’, in other words recognising that meaning cannot be understood by addressing ourselves only to formal, syntactic processes: ‘pragmatics’, the study of why and how utterances are used, has to be included within the study of what the utterances mean, and how their semantic load is constructed and regularised.
We are concerned, then, with more than simply linguistic competence.
There is never only a ‘core meaning’ of an utterance but rather there are always alternative models; novel contexts are being re-created with each utterance; language users are continually establishing and transforming social reality in their communications.
The social system is dynamic and our models of language must take account of this and not be restricted to idealised models of ‘literal meaning’.
The ambiguity of the social system is present in the semantic system too.
This involves, in Rommetveit's opinion, rejecting ‘pre-theoretical notions’ such as the belief that language functions as a ‘conduit’, simply passing on feelings and transferring literal meanings.
Rather, he prefers to view language as a ‘circular’ process of inter-communication in which speakers take account of the view of their listeners in constructing the utterance in a continual interaction.
Language is activity and we will not understand it by trying to put a static model of a complete language-system into the lead of an individual user.
Meaning is not simply in an utterance, irrespective of the participants: to understand it we must take into account the inter-subjectivity of the participants, addressing ourselves to such questions as who controls the meaning and the nature of the reference.
Rather than looking for formal ‘truth conditions’ in an utterance, Rommetveit prefers to start from H. James' point ‘we trade on each other 's truths’(Rommetveit, 1982).
The ambiguity of layman's oral language should not be lost in specialised technical language.
Calling upon Wittgenstein's writings on aspect theory, ‘possible worlds’ and pluralism, Rommetveit proposes that the meanings of an utterance can be analysed in terms of their ‘aspects’(ibid.).
There are always referential alternatives possible to the speaker and addressee and to the observer in relation to any utterance.
Knowledge is not storage but activity and making sense of it will be very impoverished if this involves looking for only one account of it, the so-called ‘literal meaning’, at the expense of all the other ‘potential’ meanings.
Even if Popper's claims for ‘World Three’ and Olson's for ‘autonomous text’were valid — and Rommetveit's work casts further doubt on them the world which they are striving for would be an  impoverished one and the ‘knowledge’which could be stored in it would be narrow and limited.
Linguistics, according to Rommetveit, can provide an experimental study of the process represented by ‘knowledge as activity’, showing, for instance, the different possible worlds, perspectives, aspects and referential alternatives embedded in any speech act.
This is not a matter of adding information to an assumed ‘real world’ on which any communication is based, but of recognising that there is no unequivocal, neutral description of a situation: once verbalised, communication involves many possible worlds.
As a language user you may start from a position of ‘innocent egotism’, whereby you assume that others are like you and share your assumptions, or you can start by trying to assume what the addressee's terms of reference are and continue in a circular process of mutual discovery.
Although many of us in our social use of language may begin from the ideologically narrow position of ‘innocent egotism’, this position is not a fruitful one for the student of language to begin from.
The social reality of language use always involves the latter, interactive process even though the participants may act ‘as if ’ it does not.
Indeed, that ‘as if ’ model is an important part of the act of communication and must itself be treated as an object of study.
In a communicative act all possible worlds are not, in practice ‘dragged in’, even though they are potentially available.
In order to communicate, some agreement has to be reached by the participants as to what worlds, out of all possible ones, are being referred to.
This commitment to shared worlds is in fact socially contingent and will vary from time to time and between different communicators.
Although it may be represented by the participants themselves as ‘real’ and ‘literal’, the analyst should not be taken in by appearance which, while necessary for the act of communication, is only an ‘as if ’state.
This perspective, says Rommetveit (1982), makes arguments about the ‘truth conditions’ of utterances sterile, since what we should really be looking at is how the participants themselves constructed such an appearance.
Analysts, however, have taken the concept of ‘literal meaning’ as a ‘neutral’and ‘universal’tool of study rather than treating it as an object of study in itself, as a part of the ‘social construction of reality’which they are trying to describe and to explain.
For instance, one explanation for the emphasis on ‘truth conditions’ in linguistics, Rommetveit claims, could be the beliefs associated with literacy.
Popper has claimed that the possibility of understanding meaning as in the sentence alone, independent of its social context, increased with the growth of literacy.
He cites Luthce's ability to claim that truth was ‘immanent’ in the text of the bible as being associated with the growth of printing in his time (Rommetveit, 1982).
This.
says Rommetveit, might have been all well and good for religions, but it should hardly  be taken as axiomatic in the rational study of society.
The belief that ‘meaning is in the text’, which represents a particular and currently powerful aspect of the search for ‘literal meaning’, should be treated with the same scepticism with which we confront Luther's claims.
We need, then, to ‘demystify’ the authority given in our society to written texts.
Lawyers in Norway, he suggests, are doing this with regard to legal concepts and linguists have to do the same with regard to linguistic concepts and theories (ibid.).
Sociolinguists in this new, pluralist tradition, of which Rommetveit is perhaps an extreme exponent, have recently begun to challenge the ‘mystification’ of writing and of ‘literal meaning’and to apply to literacy the more culturally relative, anthropological perspective that Rommetveit is proposing for language in general.
Stubbs, for instance, presents arguments that seriously challenge Olson's belief that the ‘meaning is in the text’(1980).
Stubbs points out that, in order to analyse how readers:
make sense of written material we need to know more than simply the ‘linguistic’ characteristic of the text: in addition to these characteristics we need to recognise that any writing system is deeply embedded in attitudinal, cultural, economic and technological constraints…reading and writing are therefore also sociolinguistic activities.
People speak, listen, read and write in different social situations for different purposes…
If a coherent theory of literacy is to be developed, it will have to account for the place of written language, both in relation to the forms of spoken language and also in relation to the communicative functions served by different types of language in different social settings.
(1980, pp. 15–16.)
Until recently, he complains, theories of literacy have tended to be based on instructional techniques rather than linguistic theory: research on reading has been dominated by experimental psychology, with the kinds of results we saw above (Chapter 1).
He urges, instead, emphasis on literacy as a mode of language and on its social functions.
As a sociolinguist Stubbs sees reading, for instance, as more than simply a mechanism for decoding written into spoken words: he prefers to concern himself with understanding meaning, pointing out that ‘we do not normally read meaningless material’(ibid. p. 15).
Emphasis on the different communicative functions of speech and writing involves Stubbs, and others he cites such as Vachek and Basso, in seeing the complementarity of the two modes of language.
As with the freeing of the study of speech from ‘universalism’, this approach to speech and writing can lead to value judgements: ‘this view therefore allows us to make controlled value judgements about the appropriateness of written  and spoken language for different functions…written language clearly serves various functions which spoken language never could and is therefore superior from that point of view.
Conversely, written language has clear disadvantages in other situations’(ibid. p. 17).
Such value judgements must, however, be controlled and at the level of functions: this might lead to precise descriptions of particular skills appropriate to one or the other but would not justify the grandiose claims for ‘logic’, ‘objectivity’ and ‘culture-free neutrality’which we have been examining.
In relation, for instance, to Clanchy's material on medieval England, Stubbs' ‘controlled value judgements’ might lead to an examination of the relative advantages of seals, medallions, the swearing of oaths and the use of writing for the ‘reliability’of claims to land rights, according to the interests of the different groups involved.
In order to do this one would need to know about the nature of land rights in that particular society and about the organisation of writing within central bureaucracy, and not just about the different functions of written and spoken language in general.
The various functions that different language modes serve are closely integrated with the institutions, structure and conventions of the society in question.
The sociolinguist and the anthropologist, then, in studying the various functions of spoken and written language, begin from the social data of the conventions in which they are acted out and through which members of that culture are socialised into their use.
Stubbs points out, for instance, that many of the confusions for children acquiring literacy arise because these children are not yet familiar with some of the purposes for which writing is used and the conventions through which these purposes are articulated in their culture: ‘many of its functions are often so specialised and particular’ that they are ‘mostly quite beyond children's experience’and ‘many of the situations which conventionally require writing are of a fairly specialised and restricted kind’(ibid. p. 108).
There is no simple tree variation in the choice of written or spoken modes for particular purposes: ‘the choice of medium is normally determined by the social function of the communication.
In our society, there are conventions, usually quite clear cut, which determine whether messages are relayed orally or in writing and little choice is possible.’
(ibid.)
Committee meetings, for instance, are conventionally recorded in writing not on tape; certain forms of legal contract must be written down to have the ‘force of law’(a practice whose specific historical and ideological origins have been well described by Clanchy amongst others).
A child is often unacquainted with the precise and specialised social functions which are conventionally ascribed to either speech or writing and thus may be confused when asked to acquire ‘skills’ whose functions he or she cannot see or act upon.
Stubbs makes some effort to link the conventions for the use of writing  to general linguistic characteristics of writing, but finds it difficult to establish any hard and fast rules since different cultures see different characteristics as significant and so a variety of literacies has been developed.
For instance, the fact that the addressee is often unknown in written language cannot be cited as a general ‘characteristic’ of writing, since it is relative to the social use of the medium (ibid. pp. 108 9).
In personal correspondence the addressee is known and some feed-back is expected; in institutional writing, on the other hand, the addressee is usually unknown, as with the bulk of published material, books etc. and feed-back, therefore, is at most only indirect.
There are, then, different conventions for these forms of writing that relate directly to the differences of function and context.
Where the addressee is unknown and feed-back is indirect, as with much institutional writing, the writer has to supply contextual information unnecessary in speech or in letters.
Certain forms of writing, such as academic articles, extend this even further and writers are required to develop skills in explicitness, and in being aware of hidden assumptions, so that readers who have not directly had the writer's experience may understand it.
For Chipewyan literates, on the other hand, in situations where the relationship between the addresser and the addressee is unknown, the norm is to keep silent (Scollen and Scollen, 1979).
The differences in these forms of writing, and the different skills required of writer and reader in relation to them, are more appropriately understood as different social practices related to, amongst other things, different functions they are attempting to fulfil.
They are explicable, therefore, in terms of different social structures, rather than in terms of the supposed ‘intrinsic’ qualities of writing per se .
Exponents of the ‘autonomous’ model of literacy, by searching for absolutes, especially in what is currently limited data, run the danger of having to change their supposition concerning the ‘intrinsic’qualities of writing every time a new form of literacy practices is identified, which undermines their claims to ‘universality’.
The problems of such an approach can be easily identified in relation to Stubbs' description above of the varied functions of literacy.
To extrapolate from the fact that some forms of literacy practice develop explicitness to a theory that literacy is intrinsically capable of being culture-free and therefore represents an evolutionary advance in intellectual power, as some of the writers we have been examining do, is to take literacy out of the very context that enabled it to develop explicitness.
It is to reify the technical aspects of a more complex and integrated practice.
As Stubbs says: ‘Although institutionalised writing is decontextualised in these ways, it nevertheless has some firm points of contact with social situations and social purposes, even if these are indirect and heavily conventionalised’(Stubbs, 1980, p. 109).
One point of contact between institutionalised writing and the social situation, for instance, is that the ‘text’ has a communicative function and so one can ‘talk meaningfully of a sender/addressee, a message, a receiver/addressee, and a purpose’(ibid.), even if the communication is not face-to-face and the audience is attenuated over time and space.
Also, the writers always write as incumbents of ‘known social roles: academic, journalist, newspaper editor, lawyer, ‘expert’, and others’(ibid.).
Moreover, the very form of the text itself is important to its meaning.
Whether the words are printed, typed or handwritten; whether they appear on a screen or on different types and qualities of paper; whether a ‘text’ occurs as a separate item, as part of an academic journal, or in a book or an encyclopaedia; how the page is laid out, the extent to which it is broken up by illustrations, headings, and the use of different typefaces.
All of these aspects of the production of the text affect its meaning, both from the point of view of the author's intention and of the most probable interpretation, even before we consider the wider social situations in which it may be encountered.
Researchers in the adult literacy campaigns in England have devoted considerable attention to these features of writing and have pointed out the possible practical consequences of imprecise layouts and unconsidered presentation of text.
In ‘Understanding Labels’, for instance, an article in the ALBSU (Adult Literacy and Basic Skills Unit) Newsletter, it is pointed out that many of the subjects questioned about their ‘reading’ of a label on a bottle of pills would have given their children the wrong dosage as a direct result of the interpretation of the layout of the instructions.
The writers of the article recommend that typeface, size, colour of print and label background be taken into account by those responsible for the production of such labels, since these factors are also significant for ‘meaning’ and not just the actual words themselves (ALBSU, 1980b).
Olson, then, is claiming too much for academic texts when he says ‘an explicit writing system unambiguously represents meanings — the meaning is in the text (1977, p. 264).
The meaning of a text cannot, in fact, be derived only by ‘decoding written words and knowing their linguistic characteristics’, as Stubbs points out (1980, p. 15).
Texts are always ambiguous since their meaning depends not only on the lexical and syntactical structure, in which ambiguity, according to Olson and others, can be reduced to a minimum, but also on paralinguistic, contextual structures, of which interpretation can never be exhaustive.
Even the academics of Popper's ‘World Three’, then, do not work with ‘literal meanings’ but only with relatively more or less ambiguous languages, texts and contexts.
Lyons, in fact, would support this view and, whatever other characteristics he might attribute to literacy, or to specific language-systems such as English, he would not associate them with lack of ambiguity, as do Hildyard, Olson and Greenfield.
Indeed, as regards literacy, he has argued that  ‘there is more ambiguity in written texts — though possibly in certain styles greater explicitness — because of the absence of disambiguating prosodic information’(1981 c, p. 95).
Recent studies of literacy by sociolinguists have also suggested that, even with regard to syntactical and lexical structures, the case for the unambiguity of writing has been overstated.
Stubbs gives some examples of how written English is seen, in linguistic terms, to reduce ambiguity.
He notes that ‘there are many more homophones (words which sound alike but differ in meaning) in spoken English than there are homographs (words which look alike but differ in meaning) in written English’.
‘It follows’, he says, ‘that the written language pays more attention to disambiguating word meanings than the spoken language does’(1980, p. 56).
He is referring here to the way in which written language may make the difference between structures clear, rather than to ‘ambiguity’ in the sense that a word may be taken as having two or more meanings.
However, even in the structural sense, written English does not always clearly ‘disambiguate’ units such as words, sentences, morphemes etc.
One cannot read English unambiguously, he says, unless one has competence in the phonology and morphology of the language, a source of difficulty for foreigners and a problem even for competent native speakers:
In English writing, word boundaries are marked by spaces, but morpheme boundaries are generally not marked at all.
So it is a problem for readers to know where to put them.
For example, nothing indicates that the word structure differs in ‘finger’ and ‘singer’.
One simply has to know that ‘sing’ is a word but ‘fing’happens not to be one.
Similarly one has to decide whether to read ‘misled’ as ‘mis-led’or as ‘misl-ed’, assuming a verb to ‘misle’…
Fluent readers do occasionally have problems with this.
For example, I recently came across the word ‘homerun’ and tried for several seconds to read it as ‘homer-un’, until I saw the correct morpheme structure.
It is only relatively rarely then, that morpheme boundaries can be inferred unambiguously from the spelling alone (Stubbs, 1980, p. 56).
Stubbs cites many other examples of how written language may involve structural ambiguity so that making grammatical sense of it depends on context and the knowledge the reader brings to the text (e.g. ibid. p. 59).
In this sense writing is not necessarily ‘better’ or ‘worse’than speech, it simply involves further variations in the relationship of structure to meaning.
Both writing and speech require context to make sense of what might formally be ambiguous.
Deuchar notes that: ‘In spontaneous speech, sentences are often difficult to delimit: they may simply be unfinished, because the knowledge of  the addressee makes completion unnecessary, or they may not be discernible as units at all.’
However: ‘In context, the absence of clear sentence boundaries does not mean that conversation is difficult to follow: it just shows that conversation is organised in a different way from writing’(Leech et al., p. 8/7).
One such difference for English users can be discerned in conventions for punctuation.
In written English, says Deuchar, ‘a grammatical sentence is expected to begin with a capital letter and end with a full stop and people are expected to write in sentences’(ibid.).
This does not, however, mean that the written form is necessarily easier to make sense of or to follow than speech, nor that this particular set of conventions necessarily advantages English users.
Meaning does not, of course, depend upon the representation of utterance in the form of separate words or sentences.
This, in fact, is why Lyons has proposed the concept of a ‘system-sentence’.
He would distinguish the various forms in which meaning may be actualised from the underlying structures on which meaning rests.
I would simply add that such analysis remains partial if it excludes, as his does by definition, paralinguistic features of communication.
The ways of constructing and understanding meaning, both within the lexical and grammatical structure and in paralinguistic features, vary across cultures and in different mediums and styles, and the attribution of general value, such as objectivity, logic, or lack of ambiguity to any one system, medium or feature is both impossible and fruitless.
The English conventions for punctuation for instance, may have some advantages for some purposes, although disambiguating ‘sentence’ units should not necessarily be taken as a significant one.
Other literacies make use of different convention and may, for instance, without any loss of clarity for those who know the rules, not mark sentence boundaries at all .
In Persian uses of Arabic script, for instance, words are distinguished from each other by the forms the letter takes at the beginning, middle or end of a word but there are no particular conventions for indicating where a sentence begins and ends.
The sentence unit must be inferred from the context, to some extent as with speech.
However, this does not necessarily create problems for understanding any greater than those present in speech, as Deuchar suggests.
In Vai script there are no spaces between either words or sentences and the reader has to become practised at separating out units of meaning without visual guides.
Cole and Scribner point out that the specific skill developed for this purpose can be transferred to other tasks: they tested literates and illiterates in the Vai script for their ability to distinguish and reproduce units of meaning when heard as a continuous flow, and discovered that the literates were better at this task (1981).
There are, then, many different varieties of literary practice whose  characteristics, advantages and disadvantages for various purposes have scarcely yet been investigated.
Far more cross-cultural research, of the type suggested by Cole and Scribner for instance(ibid.), would be necessary before any useful generalisations could be made even about the relative functions and worth of the various parts of these different systems (such as their punctuation conventions).
This is even more true if we wish to make generalisations of the kind I examined above with regard to the relative logic, objectivity and neutrality of whole systems.
Olson, at least, does appear to accept such qualifications, although like others attempting to make general claims for literacy, he does not always follow through the implications of this for these claims.
He writes: ‘The faithful transcription of the sound patterns of speech by a fully developed alphabet has freed writing from some of the ambiguities of oral language.
Many sentences that are ambiguous when spoken are unambiguous when written.’
(1977, p. 265.)
As we have seen, such claims require more precise demonstration before they can be readily accepted and Olson would not be justified in using the facility of written English to ‘disambiguate’ some units of structure, such as sentences and words, as proof of its overcoming ambiguity.
One might, for instance, add that if ‘many sentences that are ambiguous when spoken are unambiguous when written’, the opposite is also true.
Olson does, in fact, recognise that writing alone will not in itself provide the clarity he wants and he continues; ‘However, a fully developed alphabet does not exhaust the possibilities for explicitness of a writing system.
According to Bloomfield (1939) and Kneale and Kneale (1962), the remaining lack of explicitness necessitated the invention of formal languages of logic and mathematics’(ibid.).
It is not, then, writing per se that has the qualities of explicitness and lack of ambiguity which Olson is attempting to locate, but rather the languages specifically designed for this purpose, of which certain aspects of literacy are a part.
‘Written language can only became relatively free from judgement or interpretation’ and higher standards of certainty require more precise tools.
Despite these important qualifications, Olson still implies elsewhere in that and other articles (1977; Hildyard and Olson, 1978) that writing itself can be unambiguous and that this is what facilitates objective knowledge.
Referring to the English essayists, he says: ‘A sentence was written to have only one meaning’: and the writer's ‘task was now to create autonomous text to write in such a manner that the sentence was an adequate, explicit representation of the meaning, relying on no implicit premises or personal interpretations’(1977, p. 268).
As we have seen, this is an impossible task and at times Olson himself seems prepared to admit as much, But the tenor of his claims, and those of others, for the lack of ambiguity of literacy, and of Lyons' claims for its ‘objectivity’, are, as we have seen, such as to imply that not only can the goal be achieved, but that it has been uniquely achieved in the form of writing developed in their own culture or sub-culture.
A more appropriate model of academic goals, one which does not construct or require a ‘great divide’ between an ‘objective’, written, academic language and a ‘context-dependent’, oral, lay language, is offered by Godfrey Lienhardt, in his attempts to find a language for describing concepts of ‘self’in different cultures.
He cites a distinguished, contemporary English descendant of the eighteenth century essayists, Gilbert Ryle, whose account of ‘self’ corresponds in both mode of thought and expression to that of the non-literate Dinka people of the southern Sudan, amongst whom Lienhardt did field work.
Ryle says of ‘the elusive concept of I’: ‘Like the shadow of one's own head, it will not wait to be jumped on.
And yet it is never very far ahead, indeed sometimes seems not to be ahead of the pursuer at all.
It evades capture by lodging itself inside the very muscles of the pursuer.
It is too near even to be within arm's reach.’
(Quoted in Lienhardt, 1980, p. 79.)
Lienhardt says of the similar Dinka way of conceptualising ‘self’: ‘Thus in the use of bodily imagery, the Dinka (and probably other African peoples), and one of the most reformist of modern English philosophers, come together — the Dinka never having been entangled in the ‘entities and quidities’ of European metaphysics, the Waynflete Professor of Metaphysical Philosophy in Oxford having determined to get rid of them.’
(ibid.)
The ‘objective’ language which Olson, Lyons and others are so concerned to identify, and which they incorrectly associate with written language, turns out not to be so functional after all.
The representation and classification of complex concepts may, perhaps, be achieved equally well in other ways that do not, whether explicitly or implicitly, pose a ‘great divide’ between European philosophy and primitive thought.
To Lienhardt, oral Dinka language can be as effective for intellectual purposes as academic, written English: ‘at almost every point the Dinka language allows for a wide range of moral and intellectual discriminations without leading into a seemingly autonomous world of abstractions.
Words, as it were, must return to base.’
(ibid. p. 78.)