

Introduction
THE HOTEL INDUSTRY
In the ever shrinking, fast-moving world of today, boats, trains, aeroplanes and cars carry travellers all over the globe, either as tourists or in the normal course of their business.
These travellers normally require food, lodging, hospitality and service of a good standard.
Progressive and enterprising caterers and hotel proprietors constantly study and analyse in detail the current trends and developments in the industry in order to provide a high standard of accommodation and service at reasonable prices and to improve the efficiency of their establishments.
They are also aware of the need to make their establishments bright and cheerful with all the modern conveniences, whilst also preserving the spirit and traditions of the inns of older times.
The Hotel Proprietors Act of 1956 defines a hotel as ‘an establishment offering food and drink and sleeping accommodation if so required to any traveller who appears able and willing to pay for services and facilities provided’.
Therefore, by common law a hotel must offer food and accommodation to its guests; but it must also assume a liability for the property of guests, conform to public health and safety regulations, and provide a high standard of cleanliness and sanitation.
The growth and international expansion of the hotel and catering industry has been phenomenal during the past decade, ensuring a constant demand for trained and skilled staff and providing ample opportunity for those who are temperamentally suited to the industry.
In Britain alone over a million people are employed in hotels, motels, guest houses and catering establishments.
In America the tourist industry grosses billions of dollars a year.
In Spain, Portugal, Majorca, the Canary Islands, the West Indies, American states such as Florida, and Hawaii, and many other countries, tourism is the principal industry.
DIFFERENT TYPES OF HOTELS
Hotels fall into many categories, ranging from boarding houses, guest houses, country inns, small hotels with between 25 to 50 bedrooms, medium-sized hotels with up to 200 bedrooms, large hotels with several hundred bedrooms, and special transient hotels such as motels, motorway hotels, post-houses, airport hotels and hotels in large cities whose business consists mainly of guests in transit that stay for one or two nights only.
The type of guest for which a hotel caters gives it special characteristics and atmosphere: for example, some hotels are family-type hotels with a fair proportion of  residential guests, while others are commercial hotels usually catering for commercial travellers continually in transit.
There are the resort hotels, which are seasonal and cater for holidaymakers, though many of these are now also providing facilities for large conferences and trade fairs, which gives them an additional form of income.
Then there are the large international hotels whose operations are geared to the needs of overseas travellers.
Many  organisations such as the AA (Automobile Association) and RAC (Royal Automobile Club) and others make their own classification of hotels and restaurants and award stars or seals of merit as guides to travellers and tourists.
The classification of hotels by the AA, to mention just one, in addition to providing an indication of the type of hotel, is often regarded as an accepted mark of quality in all classifications from the simplest inn to the most luxurious hotel.
What the AA star classifications indicate
Hotels and inns generally of small scale with acceptable facilities and furnishings.
All bedrooms with hot and cold water; adequate bath and lavatory arrangements.
Meals are provided for the residents but their availability to non-residents may be limited.
Hotels offering a higher standard of accommodation and some private bathrooms/ showers.
A wider choice of food is provided but the availability of meals to non-residents may be limited.
Well-appointed hotels with more spacious accommodation with a large number of bedrooms with private bathrooms/showers.
Fuller meal facilities are provided, but luncheon and weekend service to non-residents may be restricted.
Exceptionally well-appointed hotels offering a high standard of comfort and service with the majority of bedrooms providing private bathrooms/showers.
Luxury hotels offering the highest international standards.
Hotels which conform to most star classification requirements and are worthy of recommendation.
The symbol used to denote an AA country-house hotel where a relaxed informal atmosphere and personal welcome prevail.
However, some of the facilities may differ from those found in urban hotels of the same classification.
These hotels are often secluded but not always rurally situated.
White stars
This method is used to indicate establishments high in amenities but with deliberately limited personalised services, designed and operated to cater predominantly for short stay guests.
Under this heading will be found some motels and motor hotels, with bedroom facilities mainly on a self-service basis.
It is emphasised that white stars are an indication of a type of hotel.
Red stars
The award used to denote hotels considered to be of outstanding merit within their classification.
Subjective awards
In addition to the classification granted to indicate the scope and range of services and facilities provided by appointed hotels, the AA assesses them subjectively to highlight aspects of their operation which are of particular merit.
Applications for these awards are unnecessary as each hotel is automatically considered at the time of the annual inspection.
Merit symbols
H Hospitality — friendliness and quality of service
B Bedrooms
L Lounges, bars and public areas
These symbols are used to denote particular aspects of the hotel's operation which are considered significantly above the standard applied by the star classification granted, but not necessarily above that expected from a hotel in a higher classification.
AA rosette awards in hotel dining rooms and restaurants
AA rosettes were introduced to highlight hotels and restaurants where it was judged that the food could be specially recommended.
A single rosette is an indication that the food is of a higher standard than could normally be expected in a hotel or restaurant within a particular classification.
Two rosettes are awarded where the hotels are judged to offer very much above-the-average food, irrespective of classification.
Three rosettes are the supreme award for those hotels where the food is considered outstanding.
HOTEL ORGANISATION
Organisation means the arrangement of staff and the allocation of their duties and responsibilities so that the whole establishment functions as one unit.
It is important that there are clear lines of authority and good lines of communication.
The organisation of a hotel will depend on its size and type.
In a small hotel (Fig. 1.1) the organisation is comparatively simple, with a manager or manageress supervising all the areas of operation.
Communications are therefore usually direct and easy, and the staff are able to relate their work personally to that of other departments.
As a hotel increases in size, however, the tasks have to be subdivided into separate   areas of work and supervised by section heads; and in a very large hotel (Fig. 1.2) the volume of work is such that under departmental heads staff specialise in one aspect of the work only and there is little opportunity to relate their individual efforts to the whole operation.
Figures 1.3,1.4 and 1.5, are examples of the management structure of some hotels, but it must be remembered that these diagrams are only examples and what is suitable for one type of hotel is not necessarily suitable for another.
The function of the reception office
In all hotels the reception office is the focal point.
Receptionists are expected to be charming, tactful, diplomatic and capable of dealing with members of the public as well as carrying out the innumerable tasks that ensure the smooth and efficient running of the office.
Whether that office is a small centralised office of a medium-sized hotel, or the front office of a large hotel with clearly defined areas for advance reservations, cashier and billing, accounts, telephone and front desk reception, its function is to:
1.
Sell accommodation.
2.
Receive and welcome guests.
3.
Check-in and register guests.
4.
Check-out guests and deal with the settlement of their accounts.
5.
Handle enquiries and complaints and provide information.
6.
Deal with advance reservations.
7.
Allocate rooms.
8.
Chart all reservations.
9.
Keep up-to-the-minute records of room status.
10.
Handle incoming and outgoing mail.
11.
Deal with telephone communications.
12.
Attend to all duplicating and photocopying.
13.
Maintain good communications with all departments.
The billing office has to ensure that charges are posted correctly to the guest's folio (bill).
The accounts office has to deal with all aspects of the accounts system.
In large hotels the front reception office is basically the sales department dealing with enquiries, necessary records and charts for letting accommodation.
The cash control, banking, accounts, maintaining of records and filing systems are dealt with in subsidiary offices to relieve the pressure on the reception office.
In the average-size or small hotel these tasks could be centralised and dealt with by the brigade of receptionists in one office.
The billing office
This section of the front office concentrates on the recording of the daily sales and charges on the guests' bills.
Billing machines and the tabular ledger are used in the preparation of accounts and the work must always be up to the minute, as it should be possible to produce a guest's bill immediately on request.
The cashier's office
A separate cashier's office will receive all payments for guests' accounts, deal with foreign currency and any petty cash disbursements, and take care of guests' valuables that may be deposited with them.
The enquiry office
The enquiry office will deal with all messages and enquiries for guests.
The key and letter racks can be situated in the enquiry office, which is usually under the direction of the head porter.
The uniformed staff
The number of uniformed staff will depend on the size of the hotel.
Figure 1.6 shows the uniformed staff for a large hotel.
The head porter is responsible for the supervision and allocation of duties to all the uniformed staff, works in close liaison with the reception office, and usually keeps a log book recording all the various happenings and events during the day.
The head porter  needs to have an exceptional memory for names and faces, and be a fountain of knowledge in order to deal with the numerous enquiries of the guests.
The night porters usually work eight p.m. to eight a.m. shift, performing all the duties that the day porters would be required to do.
They are responsible for the security of the building during the night and will often be required to operate the telephone switchboard if there is no telephonist on duty.
It is customary for the night porter to leave a report for the oncoming morning shift, detailing late arrivals and departures, special happenings or instructions regarding the guests.
The housekeeping department
Under the supervision of the head housekeeper, this department is responsible for maintaining the bedrooms and public rooms in a clean and sanitary condition.
There must always be good communications and liaison between the reception office and housekeeping department, because in order to sell accommodation efficiently the receptionist must be kept informed by the housekeeping department of the exact status of all rooms at all times.
Restaurants and bars
The restaurant manager has the responsibility for the organisation and administration of the restaurants, bars and other food and beverage service areas.
In a large, well-appointed hotel the service of food and drink will be organised on the lines indicated in Fig. 1.8.
Kitchens
The chef de cuisine (head chef) has the responsibility for the organisation and supervision of the kitchens.
A large hotel or restaurant kitchen, preparing meals of the highest international standard, is traditionally organised as shown in Fig. 1.9.
PROGRESS TEST QUESTIONS
1.
Define a hotel within the meaning of the Hotel Proprietors' Act of 1956.
2.
What responsibilities and liabilities are proprietors expected to assume with regard to their guests?
3.
Give five different categories of hotel.
4.
Explain the basic principles of good hotel organisation.
5.
Describe briefly the basic function of the reception office, enumerating the services it provides.
6.
Explain the following terms:
(a)
maître d'hôtel 
(b)
chef de cuisine
(c)
sous-chef
(d)
sommelier
(e)
chef de rang
(f)
chef de partie
(g)
chef d'étage
Social skills
THE ROLE OF THE RECEPTIONIST
The reception office is the nerve-centre of the hotel.
Not only is it the communication centre of all the servicing departments, it is also the first point of contact for incoming visitors and the departure point for the outgoing.
Therefore, the receptionist, whether male or female, has a very special role to play in the establishment.
Many qualities are desirable in a first-class receptionist; some of these qualities, such as charm and personality, come naturally, but others can be acquired by good training and the conscious development of social skills and personal attributes.
A smile of welcome from a charming, attractive, well-spoken receptionist immediately creates a warm, friendly atmosphere for the often weary traveller on arrival.
But a capable, competent, intelligent person is also needed to ensure that the many tasks that have to be dealt with every day in the office are carried out smoothly and efficiently, and that good relationships and communications with all other departments in the hotel are maintained.
POISE AND DEPORTMENT
The term ‘poise’ is difficult to define — it is the self-discipline that enables you to appear serenely dignified when your head is throbbing, your feet aching and you are confronted with an irate guest full of complaints.
Poise is the ability to be friendly yet businesslike, to suggest efficiency without frenzied effort, to be self-assured without appearing smug.
Poise is directly concerned with good deportment; a poised person does not walk noisily or clumsily, slump in a chair, or sit or bend down in an ungainly manner.
You should walk with a brisk step which indicates that you are interested in your job, never slouch along, droop your shoulders or flop awkwardly in a chair; your head should be held high, your shoulders back; you should walk gracefully with good body line, and sit and bend down elegantly.
Aim for neat foot and hand movements and a graceful carriage.
Remember, poise and good deportment can be cultivated, and achieving them will give a sense of well-being and an improved mental attitude, for you can never feel completely at ease if you are self-conscious about your appearance and movements.
PERSONAL APPEARANCE AND HYGIENE
Anyone who has to deal with the public or who is in continual contact with other people as part of their job must always be aware that attention to their appearance and personal  hygiene is of the utmost importance.
It does not take much imagination to realise the bad impression that can be created by a person who has greasy unkempt hair, unclean or unpressed clothes, laddered stockings or tights, dirty down-at-the-heel shoes, chewed or dirty fingernails or unfortunately halitosis (bad breath) or body odour.
It is essential that a receptionist, whether male or female, should appear on duty immaculate in every way.
Therefore, a regular daily routine should be developed so that care of personal appearance and hygiene is automatic.
Hair
Extremes in hair style are not advocated whilst on duty.
Neat well-groomed hair cut in a style that suits the face and personality is much more pleasing.
When bending over a desk the top of the head is often presented; therefore, the hair must always be clean and free of dandruff, and not trailing over the paperwork.
Complexion and make-up
There are many aids to beauty available and no lack of advice on the correct use of make-up, but one should bear in mind that use of it should be discreet and not overdone.
Good eating habits, plenty of fresh fruit and vegetables, and, of course, a reasonable amount of sleep all lend themselves to good health, which in turn will be reflected in a clear skin and bright eyes which are attractive in themselves.
Hands
Hands are always on display and nothing looks more unsightly than broken fingernails, highly coloured chipped nail varnish or chewed nails.
Well manicured hands with a carefully toned nail varnish are much more attractive.
Clothing
Many hotels provide uniforms for their staff to be worn when on duty.
Uniforms should be kept fresh and crisp.
If one is permitted to wear clothes of one's own choice, they should be smart and attractive, but extremes in fashion should be avoided and colour kept discreet.
A spare pair of stockings or tights should always be handy as nothing looks so unattractive as laddered tights.
Shoes should be smart but comfortable, for receptionists may have to spend many hours on their feet.
Halitosis
Halitosis (bad breath) can be very unpleasant.
The causes of it are numerous.
Sensible diet and regular brushing of teeth will obviously help, but one should visit the dentist at least once every six months for a check up.
If the problem of halitosis persists, a visit to the doctor is necessary to determine the cause.
Body odour
Like halitosis, body odour can be extremely unpleasant and embarrassing.
Regular bathing and daily use of an anti-perspirant or a good deodorant will normally ensure personal freshness, but if the problem persists, a visit to the doctor is necessary.
THE VOICE AND SPEECH
The receptionist is in constant oral communication with the public; therefore, the voice must be pleasing and manner of speech correct.
Clear enunciation of sounds is very important, particularly when speaking into the telephone.
Slovenly speech is a bad habit, for example, saying ‘aving’ instead of ‘having’, ‘jer know’instead of ‘do you know’?‘jist’instead of ‘just’, and using slang such as ‘OK, Yeh, ain't it, arf a mo, hang on’.
If it is possible, listen to a tape recording of your voice, note the defects and consciously practise clear enunciation and correct pronunciation.
TELEPHONE MANNER
A good receptionist must develop a telephone personality — remembering that you cannot be seen, only heard.
The voice must be well modulated, the spoken words clear and distinct, and the tone of voice must be friendly, interested and helpful.
It should never sound mechanical, indifferent or impatient.
The following simple rules will help develop a good telephone manner and technique:
1.
Answer the telephone promptly and make a habit of picking up a pencil and notepad at the same time — being kept waiting will make the caller impatient.
2.
Greet the caller pleasantly with: ‘good morning’, ‘good afternoon’ or ‘good evening’— never ‘hallo’— and then identify the establishment, e.g. ‘Imperial Hotel’, or if an internal call, answer: ‘good morning, reception desk’.
3.
Callers usually respond by giving their name and stating their business, but if they do not, tactfully ask: ‘who is calling please?’ or ‘may I help you?’.
4.
Listen attentively, and if information or details have to be recorded, write them down clearly and legibly, as they are given.
5.
If a message has to be taken, be certain to record the date, time of message, who it is for, and who it is from, and always repeat the message back to the caller to ensure that the details are correct.
6.
When receiving incoming calls for executives or management, always ascertain who the caller is and, if possible, the nature of his or her business, and then check whether the member of staff wishes to accept the call.
Busy executives should not be bothered by trifling matters, so the receptionist must learn how to classify calls and route them to the person best suited to deal with them.
Example 1
Receptionist:Good morning, Imperial Hotel.
Caller:May I speak to the manager?
Receptionist:Who is calling, please?
Caller:Mrs Jones.
I have a room booked for the thirtieth of July and I'd like a word with the manager.
Receptionist:(Quickly checking the advance booking chart)Oh!
Yes, Mrs Jones, we have a room booked for you on the thirtieth of July — can I be of any assistance to you?
Caller:Well, I just wanted to ask the manager if it is all right to bring my poodle with me?
She does fret if I leave her behind.
Receptionist:That will be quite all right, Mrs Jones.
The hotel has facilities for small  dogs at a charge of 90p per day, but I am afraid they are not allowed in the public rooms.
Caller:Oh, that's fine.
Receptionist:Would you like me to make arrangements for your poodle, Mrs Jones?
Caller:Yes, please.
Thank you very much.
In this telephone conversation the receptionist tactfully ascertained the nature of the call, realised that it could be dealt with without bothering a busy manager, dealt with the matter according to established policy and reassured the caller.
Example 2
Receptionist:Good afternoon, Imperial Hotel.
Caller:This is the secretary of the Sidham Sailing Club.
I'm phoning about our dinner on the twelfth of November; I want to discuss the seating arrangements.
Receptionist:Just one moment, please.
You will want to talk to our Mr Wyatt, the assistant manager and function controller, who deals with all our function bookings.
May I have your name, please?
Caller:Mr Williams.
Receptionist:If you will please hold the line a moment I will see if Mr Wyatt is available.
(The receptionist then locates Mr Wyatt as quickly as possible and informs him that there is a call from Mr Williams, Secretary of the Sailing Club, who wishes to discuss the seating arrangements for their dinner on the twelfth of November.
This will alert Mr Wyatt to the nature of the call.
The call is then put through.)
TACT AND DIPLOMACY
Diplomacy is the art of conducting negotiations between people.
Tact is the skill of handling a difficult person or situation without giving offence.
The day-to-day experience of dealing with people and problems will develop the skills of tact and diplomacy.
It is not difficult to deal with people who are pleasant and co-operative, but it requires intelligence, understanding, common sense and self-discipline to handle difficult and awkward people or situations without giving offence and putting yourself or the management in the wrong.
The following examples illustrate the type of situation that could call for the utmost in tact and diplomacy.
Example 1
Guests in the restaurant have reason to complain about their dinner.
They have already complained to the waiter without satisfaction, so they have descended on the reception desk demanding to see the manager.
The manager is not available and the receptionist on duty has to handle the matter.
In this position it is absolutely essential that the receptionist remains cool, calm and in control of the situation.
The exact cause of the complaint has to be ascertained.
The kitchen and restaurant staff must be contacted immediately and the cause for complaint dealt with.
The guests must be persuaded to return to the restaurant, where it is imperative they be served with a more than satisfactory meal and be completely pacified.
As you can imagine, the receptionist in this situation will require patience, self-control, initiative, resourcefulness, understanding and persuasiveness.
Needless to say, the receptionist will have to be the soul of tact and diplomacy.
Example 2
A guest, Mr Green, is dining in the restaurant with a young lady, when another lady purporting to be his wife arrives at the reception desk and asks that her husband be paged.
To avoid any possible embarrassment the receptionist should show the lady to a seat in the lounge.
She should then telephone through to the restaurant manager who will be asked to see that Mr Green is discreetly informed that his wife wishes to speak to him at the reception desk.
If the public address system has to be used for paging Mr Green, the words for the announcement should be very carefully chosen, for example: ‘Will Mr Green please come to the reception desk’.
Example 3
An urgent message is received for a guest, Mrs Jones.
The caller asks if she can be informed as gently as possible that a very close relative has died.
The hotel manager is at a very important meeting and the receptionist is asked if she could cope and deal with the difficult task of breaking the news to Mrs Jones.
This is a problem which again requires the utmost tact and diplomacy, for one can never be sure of the reaction of a guest on hearing sad news.
In a situation like this, it would be advisable to use the privacy of the manager's office, order a pot of tea or coffee and have a drink of brandy or something similar handy.
Then send a message to the guest, Mrs Jones, making sure it does not alarm her, asking her if she could possibly call at the manager's office.
On her arrival, you invite her to sit down and offer her a cup of tea or coffee, which will have a calming effect, and then, as gently as possible, you break the news, and offer every possible assistance for any arrangements she may have to make.
When dealing with any manner of complaint by a guest:
1.
The name and room number of the person making the complaint should be noted.
2.
The exact nature of the complaint should be ascertained.
3.
The guest must be assured that the complaint, no matter how trivial, will be dealt with immediately.
4.
The complaint should be investigated by contacting the departmental supervisor of the area concerned.
Example 4
A guest complains to the reception office that she has no soap in her bathroom and the towels had not been changed.
The receptionist will ascertain the name and the room number of the guest, apologise to the guest for the oversight and reassure her that the matter will be dealt with immediately.
The reception office will then contact the housekeeping department, informing them of the complaint, who should then deal with the matter immediately.
DEALING WITH VERBAL ENQUIRIES
All verbal enquiries should be dealt with quickly and efficiently.
The receptionist should learn how to extract from the caller the exact nature of the information required in order to classify the enquiry.
The reception office should be so organised that all sources of information necessary to answer enquiries are immediately to hand.
The layout of the hotel, the organisation and the names of all persons responsible for the function of servicing departments should be learnt thoroughly so the calls can be routed to the persons best suited to deal with them.
ENQUIRIES THAT ARE USUALLY DEALT WITH BY THE RECEPTION DESK
Reservations
To deal with enquiries referring to reservations the receptionist must have to hand the up-to-the-minute room availability chart; the advance booking chart; the bookings diary; and the hotel tariff.
(These will be dealt with in detail in Chapter 3.)
By referring to these the receptionist will be able to inform the enquirer as to the availability of accommodation and give details of the charges and facilities of the hotel.
Information for guests
It is sometimes quite incredible the kind of information people expect the reception desk to supply, but generally it takes the form of questions about train, bus and taxi services, which means up-to-date timetables and the telephone numbers of the local taxi services must be to hand.
Enquiries regarding the geographical location and other details of places of interest require the receptionist to know the locality well and have a guide book on the area.
Details of activities and entertainments going on in the town can be obtained from the entertainments page in the local press.
The local guide book will provide information on local churches and public services.
The Post Office Guide will give details of the postal services, and of course the receptionist will be expected to know the local hairdressers, doctors, dentists, shops, restaurants, bars and clubs.
Foreign visitors will expect the receptionist to have a very good knowledge of the country in general.
So guide books on London, the stately homes of England, places of historical interest and beauty spots in Great Britain should be studied.
Information regarding guests
The guest is entitled to a measure of privacy and protection and any enquiries asking for information about guests should be handled with caution and the utmost discretion.
One must avoid publicity or anything that could damage the reputation of the hotel.
The Police, Home Office officials, and people holding a court warrant are the only persons who may inspect the hotel register on demand, but then only in the presence of the management in the privacy of an office.
Anyone else asking for information should immediately be referred to the manager who will take the responsibility of dealing with the enquiry.
COMMUNICATION WITH THE GUESTS
Every employee is the personal representative of the establishment and has a public relations job to do.
To establish good communication with the guests is part of this job; they are paying for service and how much nicer that service is if it is given with a smile by a person who takes a personal interest!
There should always be a willingness to help and an understanding of the guests' anxieties and problems.
Always greet the guest warmly by name and say something pleasant, never argue or  contradict, and avoid controversial conversation.
Do not be too familiar, and remember that ‘Sir’ or ‘Madam’is not a sign of servility but one of respect.
Immediate attention to requests for information is part of the service that the guest will appreciate.
It is not difficult to please nine out of ten people, so regard the difficult and awkward customer as a challenge which will prove your skill in human relations.
PROGRESS TEST QUESTIONS
1.
Write a short paragraph on the desirable qualities of a good receptionist.
2.
Write briefly how you, as a receptionist, would deal with the situation where guests complain that their room has not been cleaned and they have had to wait over a half an hour for room service.
3.
‘Attention to personal appearance and hygiene are of the utmost importance to a receptionist.’
Discuss this statement.
4.
What are the essentials of a good telephone voice?
5.
Explain how you would deal with an agitated lady on the telephone who wants to speak to the manager because she thinks she left her watch on the washbasin of her room when she checked out.
6.
The secretary of the local tennis club telephones to say that he wants to make a booking for their annual dinner and dance.
Detail what action you would take.
7.
You receive a telephone call from the husband of a guest who happens to be out for a stroll.
He asks if you would inform her as soon as possible that her son has had a serious accident and would she go straight to the hospital.
Describe how you would deal with the situation.
8.
A guest, Mr Prentice, is attending an important luncheon being held at the hotel; a very hysterical lady who says she is Mrs Prentice comes to the reception desk and demands that Mr Prentice be found as she wishes to speak to him.
Explain what action you would take to avoid embarrassment to Mr Prentice and the hotel.
Reception
Irrespective of whether a hotel is small, medium or large the basic work of the reception office is the same, selling accommodation, receiving and welcoming guests, maintaining accounting and other records, liaison with all other departments within the hotel and integrating all activities relating to the service and comfort of the guests.
Whether the reception office has all the latest computerised equipment or whether aids and records are manually operated, good hotel reception is based on procedures and principles applicable to all types of hotel and the following tasks have to be dealt with:
(a)
reservations;
(b)
room allocation;
(c)
registering of guests;
(d)
guest accounting;
(e)
departure of guests;
(f)
guest history records;
(g)
management information;
(h)
control procedures of the front office;
(i)
reports and statistics.
These tasks will be dealt with in detail in the following chapters.
Large hotels never close, and operate a 24-hour service, 365 days a year.
The reception desk is usually staffed by a brigade of receptionists working a rota system of 3 shifts to ensure a 24-hour coverage; for example, 8 a.m. to 3 p.m., 3 p.m. to 11 p.m. and 11 p.m. to 8 a.m.
On the late shift the desk and telephone switchboard are often covered by a skeleton staff or a night porter.
Most hotels have periods of high activity and low activity and therefore it is quite common practice to organise the duty rotas for certain members of staff on a ‘split duty’ basis.
This simply means that the normal 8-hour duty shift is split; for example, 4 hours on duty, 2 hours off duty, then 4 hours on duty, or 4 hours in the morning and 4 hours in the evening, or whatever combination lends itself to the efficient running of the hotel.
The busiest time and peak hours of the reception office will depend on the type of hotel.
At hotels near airports and in major cities visitors are arriving and departing at all times with peak periods being the morning departures and arrivals building up during late afternoon and early evening.
In residential or seasonal holiday resorts where guests stay for a week or more the busiest time for the reception office is usually Friday, Saturday or Sunday with the peak period for arrivals and departures being Saturday.
The head receptionist is usually responsible for planning the rotas to ensure that the reception desk is adequately staffed for peak periods and throughout the week.
For the hotel and catering industry split duties, weekends, Christmas, Easter and bank holidays are normal  working periods.
However, most people who join the industry feel that the interesting nature of the work and career opportunities more than compensate for the unusual hours they are expected to work.
Layout of reception area (Fig. 3.1)
The design, colours used and decor of the reception area will depend entirely on the tastes and policies of each individual hotel or group of hotels.
The first impression the guest will have on arrival will be the front desk, so obviously the counter and receptionists must be pleasing to the eye.
However, the reception office is very much a functional working area and should be well planned with work centres focused around the major equipment used, and located so that communication and liaison with the other sections is easy, simple and efficient.
THE RECEPTION AREA
It is the responsibility of the staff to see that the reception area is immaculate at all times and when arriving on duty the shift should check the following:
1.
The reception counter should be free from dust and any display literature should be up to date, neat and tidy and in its correct place.
2.
Ashtrays should be emptied and cleaned throughout the day.
3.
Flower arrangements must have fresh water and dead flowers and leaves must be removed.
If artificial flowers are used they must be dusted.
4.
A clean sheet of blotting paper should be in the blotter.
5.
A good usable pen or biro should be available in or attached to a stand.
6.
Desk calendars should always show the correct date.
7.
The Tourism (Sleeping Accommodation Price Display) Order 1977, which became effective in 1978, requires that the  tariff showing rates for each type of room to be displayed at the reception desk in a prominent position (see Chapter 8).
The Hotel Proprietors Act of 1956 is similarly displayed in a prominent position.
There are certain basic rules of behaviour which the management expect their reception staff to follow:
1.
It is unfair to other members of staff to be late on duty as they cannot leave a reception desk unattended.
2.
Reception staff should neither smoke or eat food in the reception area.
3.
It is considered bad manners for reception staff to address a visitor from a sitting position; they should always rise and be attentive when someone approaches the counter.
4.
It is ungainly and slovenly to lean or lounge on a counter or desk.
5.
It is ill mannered to stand around gossiping, as nothing is more irritating to a person waiting for attention.
6.
Always be prepared to listen patiently to a guest's chatter no matter how boring, but develop a technique of being able to detach, oneself politely from a conversation without giving offence, especially if there is work to be done or other people waiting for attention.
7.
The management usually have a ruling that receptionists do not socialise with the guests on a personal basis; therefore staff should not make dates with guests or visit their rooms even if invited to do so.
8.
It is accepted trade practice that staff do not use the bar facilities of the hotel at which they work.
THE HOTEL BROCHURE AND TARIFF (Fig. 3.2, Fig. 3.3)
Hotel brochures are designed to present the most attractive aspects of the hotel to the prospective guest.
They are usually colourful with photographs and descriptions of the various facilities the hotel has to offer.
The hotel tariff is the structure of charges made for the services the hotel provides.
Due to rapidly changing prices, the tariff is often printed on flimsy inserts.
It is a question of management policy what terms are quoted and could be based on any of the following systems:
En pension terms (fully inclusive)
Residential and resort hotels usually quote in the tariff ‘en pension terms’, which means weekly or daily prices inclusive of accommodation, breakfast, luncheon, afternoon tea, dinner.
Demi-pension terms (half-board)
The terms means a charge which is inclusive of accommodation, breakfast and one other main meal, usually dinner.
Bed and breakfast terms
Some tariffs quote terms which include the accommodation and breakfast.
Breakfast can be ‘continental’, which consists of croissants (rolls) and butter with jam and either coffee or tea.
A full ‘English’ breakfast would include fruit juice, cereal, sometimes kippers or smoked haddock, bacon or sausages, eggs, tomatoes, toast, marmalade, and tea or coffee, usually at an extra charge.
Separate charges
Many large hotels quote separate charges for their services.
The accommodation price is quoted either as a price for the room, or a price per person per room, with meals charged to the guest's account as they are taken.
Other terminology
Rack rate — This term is used to describe the full tariff rate for accommodation.
R & B — Room and breakfast.
Discounted rate — A percentage is deducted from the rack rate.
Special rate — Hotels often quote a special rate for functions, groups, tours, businessmen or certain organisations who use the hotel on a regular basis.
Continental plan — Room and breakfast.
American plan — This term is used to describe full board terms to include accommodation, breakfast, luncheon, afternoon tea and dinner.
Inclusive terms — The same as American plan.
Modified American plan — Room, breakfast and one main meal.
European plan — This term is used to describe the charge for accommodation only.
Half-board — Accommodation, breakfast and one main meal, either luncheon or dinner.
Low season — The time of year when business is at its quietest, usually the winter months when the lowest tariff prices are quoted.
High or peak season — The time of year, usually the holiday and summer periods, when the highest tariff prices are quoted.
Shoulder period — The mid-seasons, usually spring and autumn when a mid-tariff price is quoted.
THE ADVANCE RESERVATION OFFICE
The staff who work in the reservation section have a great deal of responsibility and it is their task to see that all reservations are dealt with promptly and efficiently.
Rooms must be allocated and charted on the reservation and room status charts so that not only the clients get the type of accommodation they have requested but also the hotel achieves the maximum occupancy of the rooms.
The first indication that a person requires accommodation is through a request for a reservation.
This can be by letter, telex, telephone, through a central reservation service, or as a walk-in or chance guest at the desk.
Whenever a request for accommodation is received the receptionist must establish:
(a)
the guest's name;
(b)
the arrival date;
(c)
the length of stay;
(d)
the departure date;
(e)
the type of room required.
With this information the receptionist is able to check the availability of accommodation.
The reservation form (Fig. 3.4)
People requiring accommodation often make use of the reservation form which hotels include in their hotel brochure.
The reservation forms are specifically designed to provide all the necessary details and information required to process the booking, that is:
(a)
date of receipt of reservation;
(b)
name, address and nationality of the client;
(c)
date and time of expected arrival;
(d)
length of stay;
(e)
date of departure;
(f)
method of payment, e.g. cash, cheque, credit card;
(g)
advance deposit;
(h)
any special requirement, e.g. garage, special diet, requirements for children or pets;
(i)
signature of clerk processing reservation.
Procedures following a request for accommodation
Enquiry by letter
1.
A letter of enquiry is received (see Fig. 3.5).
2.
A letter of acknowledgement (see Fig. 3.6) is sent back immediately enclosing a hotel brochure with reservation form (see Fig. 3.4) and hotel tariff (see Fig. 3.3).
3.
On receipt of the reservation form, a room is allocated, and pencilled in on the advance reservation chart (see Fig. 3.10) and density chart (see Fig. 3.12) and a confirmation slip (see Fig. 3.8) is sent to the client.
4.
Details from the completed reservation form are entered in the hotel's diary (see Fig. 3.9).
5.
The reservation form and confirmation slip copy are then filed alphabetically in date of arrival order.
6.
On the date of arrival the guest's name is typed on a card strip and inserted into the reception board (see Fig. 3.18) in the room number allocated.
Coloured strips are often used to indicate VIP's or groups, and in some cases colours are used to indicate the standard of the rooms and rates, e.g. standard rate of discounted rates.
7.
A name strip with the room number allocated is also typed for insertion into the alphabetical guest list, which is usually located on a rotary stand in telephone exchange area.
8.
On arrival the guest must complete a registration form (see Fig. 3.8b) or sign the hotel register (see Fig. 3.21).
9.
Details of the booking are entered on the room history card (see Fig. 3.33).
10.
If this is the first time the guest has used the hotel a guest history card is sometimes created (see Fig. 3.35).
11.
The day prior to arrival the guests' names and rooms allocated will be entered on the arrivals and departures list (see Fig. 3.27) and circulated to all heads of departments, e.g. housekeeping, restaurants, bars and accounts.
12.
If a manual tabular ledger is maintained (see Chapter 5) the names of the guest will be entered on it and the guest's folio (bill) will be started.
These procedures are discussed later in the chapter.
It must be remembered that not all of these records are kept by all hotels.
Confirmation slips (Fig. 3.7)
A telephone or telex request for accommodation is usually acknowledged by a ‘confirmation slip’ if there is time before the arrival of the guest.
The confirmation slip has several copies.
The top copy is sent to the client; other copies are used in the reservation office, for the allocating of rooms, charting the reservation, compiling the arrivals and departures lists and alphabetical guest list and providing information for other departments.
The copies are then filed in date of arrival order.
Combination confirmation slip, guest registration slip, guest folio (Fig. 3.8)
Many hotels use specially designed sets of documents to provide them with their required information.
By use of NCR (no carbon required) paper whatever is typed on the top copy will be recorded on all copies, thus eliminating errors by transferring information.
This method is also time- and labour-saving.
The following set of documents illustrates a typical set:
(a)
the confirmation slip — with copies for records;
(b)
the guest registration slip — with copies for records;
(c)
the guest folio (bill)— with copies (see Fig. 3.8).
The hotel bookings diary (Fig. 3.9)
Some hotels maintain a hotel bookings diary, usually a large loose-leaf ledger to which pages are easily added when necessary.
A separate page is used for each day, the date being clearly marked at the top of the page.
When a reservation form is received or a booking confirmed the names of guests, time of arrival, length of stay and any special requirements are entered on the date of arrival page.
Notes are made on VIP guests, any tour groups, seminars or special events, and the diary is used to alert and remind the front office staff of the expected activity on that day.
Room allocation
The allocation of rooms so that the hotel achieves the maximum occupancy is a task that requires skill and experience.
Large hotels often have agreements with airlines or travel agents whereby they reserve a certain number of rooms each night on a guaranteed basis.
These rooms are marked in on the visual advanced reservation chart automatically, as are confirmed package tours, groups, conferences and seminars.
Confirmed individual reservations, walk-ins or chance guests are plotted on the chart as they occur.
Colours are often used to indicate the type of booking.
For example:
Red — rooms that have not been confirmed or guaranteed.
Green — rooms which have been confirmed, a deposit paid or a guarantee received.
Yellow — airline or travel agents guaranteed bookings.
Blue — groups, seminars, conferences confirmed.
Black — rooms 000 (out of order).
Unconfirmed reservations marked red on the chart usually have a three-week time limit hold period.
The reservations manager will either write or telephone near that date to verify the reservation, as a ‘no show’ means a loss of business to the hotel.
RESERVATION CHARTS
The types of charts used by the reservations office can vary from hotel to hotel.
Groups or chains of hotels usually follow a standard system and use the same type of reservation and room status charts.
What is more important is that the reservation office and front desk have an up-to-the-minute visual picture of the room status of the hotel whatever system is used.
Advance reservation — power scan (Fig. 3.10)
This is a manually-operated scan.
All the rooms of the hotel, floor by floor are charted on a flat board.
A clear white transparency on a roll with all the days and dates of the year at the top, revolves from right to left at the touch of a button.
Special coloured marking pens, which can be easily erased when changes are made, are used to block in room allocations.
With this type of scan the room reservations for every room for any given day can be brought into view.
The conventional chart (Fig. 3.11)
1.
This bookings chart covers one calendar month with dates clearly marked at the top and the room numbers and their descriptions at the side.
Symbols are sometimes used to indicate the type of room:
2.
In hotels where bookings are made several months in advance, charts for each month are prepared.
3.
Entries are made on the chart as soon as an offer of accommodation has been made.
The entries are always in pencil so that they can be easily erased should there be any cancellations or changes in the booking.
4.
When a room reservation has been confirmed it is then marked as confirmed on the chart and great care must be taken that all entries are correctly checked and charted.
The chart shows that room 402 has been allocated to R. L. Essex from 1 May to noon, 8 May and room 405 has been allocated to J. Essex (1 guest) from 1 May to noon, 8 May.
The density chart (Fig. 3.12)
This chart is designed to show at a glance exactly how many rooms have been let and exactly how many rooms are still available to be let and their type.
As with the conventional chart, the dates are marked clearly along the top and the rooms in their different categories run from top to bottom.
A large hotel with several floors would have a density chart for every floor.
By studying Fig. 3.12 you will observe that:
Sometimes a large coloured dot (red for stop) is used to emphasise when there are no rooms available for let in a certain category.
Stop-go charts (Fig. 3.13)
Another type of chart used by large hotels is called a ‘stop-go chart’.
These are prominently displayed in the reservations area or the reception office and enable the receptionists to see at a glance whether they can accept a booking for a certain date.
The chart has a space for each day of the year and symbols are used to indicate the non-availability of the various types of accommodation on certain days.
From the ‘stop-go chart’ the reservations staff can see at a glance that on Friday 4 May and Saturday 5 May there are no single or double rooms available.
On Friday 1 June and Saturday 2 June there are no single or double rooms available.
On Monday 2 July, Tuesday 3 July, Wednesday 4 July there are no singles, doubles or suites available as there is a conference in the hotel, and there is no accommodation available on Friday 6 July or Saturday 7 July.
Simultaneous message machine
This machine has a two-station link; a message written on the machine in the reception office will appear simultaneously on the machine in the housekeeping department and vice versa.
When a guest checks out, the reception desk staff will write a message on the machine informing the housekeeping department that the room is vacant and needs servicing.
When the room has been cleaned the housekeeping department staff will write a message on the machine informing the reception desk that the room is ready for reletting.
This simple device provides instantaneous communication between departments and ensures that the room status board has up-to-the-minute information on the availability of rooms.
Electronic room status boards
Many of the more modern hotels have installed electronic room status boards which link the reception office with the housekeeper and every room.
There is a board in the reception office, cashier's office and housekeeper's office with a switch in every bedroom.
The system is simple:
1.
A green light on the board indicates that the room is vacant and has been serviced and cleaned.
2.
A red light on the board indicates that the room is ‘on change’.
3.
Both lights off indicate that the room is let.
When a guest checks in the receptionist allocates a room showing a green light; he or she presses a switch and the green light goes off on the board as well as on the cashier's and housekeeper's boards.
When the guest departs, after settling the account, the cashier will press a switch and the light will go from off to red to indicate that the room is vacant and ready to be cleaned.
The housekeeper then has the room serviced and when it is ready for letting, presses the switch in the bedroom which will then show a green light on all boards, indicating that the room is now ready to be let.
The Whitney system (Figs. 3.14 and 3.15)
This is a USA patented system for hotels, whereby the names of guests requesting reservations are typed on four by one and a half inch paper or cardboard and inserted in moveable aluminium pockets (Fig. 3.16) alphabetically under the date of reservation.
The night prior to the arrival of guests the section of the rack containing the reservations for that particular day is removed from the advance reservations rack (Fig. 3.15) and placed alongside the room rack (Fig. 3.14) and becomes the current reservation rack.
After serving its purpose it is returned to the advance reservation section and used for additional future reservations.
These reservation racks replace the booking diary and are used as the ‘arrivals list’ for each day in conjunction with the reception board.
Room racks (Figs. 3.16 and 3.17)
The Whitney rack system is planned exactly as the advance reservations.
There are racks for each floor containing an aluminium pocket for each room in vertical number order.
Details of the type of the room, rates and equipment remain permanently in the rack.
Details of the guests occupying the room are typed on a slip and inserted in the room pocket.
The system provides several different types of room racks with innovations and signals that can provide information for the receptionists; for example, pockets can have a centre window with two-colour sliding signals which can be moved to show red when the room has been assigned, yellow when the room is ‘on change’ and clear when the room is ready for letting.
The reception board (Fig. 3.18)
There are many different designs of reception board used in hotels but whatever the style the purpose is the same: to provide the receptionist with up-to-the-minute information on the status of every room.
The board is usually angled in the reception office in such a manner that it is entirely out of view of the guest but visible at all times to the receptionist.
The board is arranged horizontally so that each tier represents a floor.
There is a slot for each room and the names of the occupants, dates of arrival and departure and terms are typed on a card or slip and placed in the appropriate room number slot.
Coloured cards or strips can be used to indicate whether a room is vacant, occupied by staff, being cleaned or out of commission.
As the reception board can only show the accommodation position for one day, the conventional and density charts are still necessary for selling accommodation in advance.
Airline and travel agents guaranteed reservations
Large transient hotels very often enter into agreements with certain airlines or travel agents whereby they will hold a number of rooms specifically for them on a guarantee basis.
This means that the airlines or travel agents guarantee to pay for those rooms whether they are used by their clients or not.
If they wish to cancel any of the rooms allocated they must do so within the time limit set by the hotel or they will be billed for them.
A typical example of this type of agreement is when an airport hotel will hold a set number of rooms for the airline pilots and stewards/stewardesses who have stop-overs between flights.
Travel agents often advertise package tours which include a stay at a certain hotel.
When this is the case the travel agent will have an agreement with the hotel to reserve the number of rooms required for their package tour clients.
The hotel will send the bill for accommodation used, direct to the airline or travel agents.
Meals and drinks are usually paid for separately by the guest unless it is included in the package agreement.
Central reservation systems
Large groups of hotels which are linked by computer usually operate their own central reservation system.
Information on the availability of accommodation within the chain of hotels is fed into the computer and by telephoning the central reservation number the customer can be directed to the location and type of hotel which is able to meet their requirements.
Similarly, other centralised reservation systems are in operation which are not attached to any particular group.
They work on a commission basis.
Hotels that wish to join the scheme provide details of their location, accommodation and facilities.
The information is fed into a computer so that when an inquiry is made to the centralised reservation service number the customer can be directed to the hotels with the available type of accommodation in the area they require.
In order that the scheme functions efficiently it is essential that the reception offices of the hotels within the scheme inform central reservations of the up-to-the-minute availability of rooms to let at all times; failure to do this could result in double-bookings, loss of goodwill and unnecessary charges being levied against the hotel for the service.
The central reservations service is invaluable to overseas visitors or travellers who have limited knowledge of the areas and hotel accommodation available in the various localities.
RESERVATION TERMINOLOGY AND RULES
Confirmation
Some hotels follow the practice of confirming a reservation by sending a standard letter or card which acknowledges a deposit, the type of accommodation reserved and garage space if necessary.
No confirmation
In large transient hotels it is not practical to confirm in writing every reservation, as guests come and go at short notice.
Some hotels telephone confirmation of a booking and will of course acknowledge receipt of a deposit or a special request if the time factor allows.
Deposits
Non-returnable deposits are usually requested from overseas visitors booking in advance, and resort hotels whose business is seasonal also usually request a deposit to confirm a booking.
Cancellations
When a cancellation is received the reservation has to be cancelled throughout the system, in the diary and reservation chart and noted on documents in the filing system.
If it is a cancellation at very short notice and the hotel is unable to re-let the accommodation, particularly in the case of resort hotels whose reservations are taken well in advance, the hotel may then be able to claim compensation for the loss of business.
Transient hotels are less likely to suffer a loss of business and can usually re-let the accommodation.
6 p. m. release
Most hotels operate on the basis that unless previously notified by the guest that they will be a late arrival, the accommodation will be released for reletting if the guest fails to arrive by 6 p.m.
No show
This term is used to indicate the non-arrival of a guest, and for whom no formal cancellation has been received.
T or P (take or place)
Hotels will sometimes offer a ‘T or P’ booking to people, usually regular business clients who are only able to reserve their accommodation at very short notice.
The take or place booking means that the client will be offered a room if there has been a ‘no show’ or cancellation, and failing that accommodation will be found for them at a comparable hotel, usually within the same chain of hotels.
Guaranteed arrival
This type of facility is usually only offered to travel agents or companies who deal regularly with the hotel, and can be relied upon to guarantee their commitment.
Payment will be made for the accommodation reserved whether the guest arrives or not.
This type of guarantee will reverse the 6 p.m. release procedure and is useful for overseas travellers whose times of arrival are governed by their air, sea or rail travel arrangements.
VIPs or CIPs
Reservations for very important persons or commercially important persons are usually dealt with by senior members of the  management.
If special arrangements have to be made a note in the diary will remind the duty manager when VIPs or CIPs are due to arrive.
Special commission bookings
Reservations made through travel agents, tour operators or certain companies are usually subject to special rates and commissions.
A note is usually made in the diary to this effect to remind the reception desk.
Hotel discount card
This card costs approximately twelve pounds p.a. and entitles holders to a ten per cent discount on accommodation.
Back to back reservations
Travel agents and tour operators often make back to back reservations which means that certain accommodation is booked over a period of time and as one group of guests depart another group takes their place.
A & TO
This is an accommodation and taxi order.
This is a voucher issued by airlines when travellers have been delayed in transit.
It is issued to passengers whose flights have been cancelled or delayed and is redeemable by the airlines at face value.
It usually covers the cost of accommodation, breakfast, a main meal and return taxi fare from airport to hotel.
Lead time
The time between the booking date and the arrival date.
Chance
No previous reservation with the hotel.
Stay on
A guest who extends his/her stay beyond the original reservation date.
Early departure
A guest who checks out before his/her scheduled departure date.
Room nights
Number of rooms available × the period of time covered by reservations chart — a principle of reservations charts to show the number of room nights available.
TRAVEL AGENTS, TOURS AND GROUPS
Today most people rely on travel agents to make their travel arrangements and book their accommodation.
Tour operators organise and plan package holidays and tours and specialist organisations plan conferences and group travel for other organisations.
These agents work on a commission basis and special rates and discounts are negotiated with the hotel groups and will depend on several factors:
(a)
the amount of business guaranteed by the agents during both high season and low season;
(b)
the time of the year;
(c)
the time of the week;
(d)
the numbers in the group;
(e)
the accommodation required;
(f)
other facilities required.
Not all hotels will accept package holidays or tour groups.
Luxury hotels may only allocate twenty per cent of their accommodation, whereas other hotels may regard this type of business as their main source of income and allocate eighty per cent or more of their accommodation and plan their services around this kind of market.
Tour booking
When handling tour bookings details must be thoroughly discussed with the agents before the group's expected arrival, for example, whether the baggage handling and tips are to be included in the rates and the methods of payment for extras, by the guests.
Group booking form (Fig. 3.19)
This is a reservation for the group to be completed by the tour operator giving full details from which the hotel will be able to organise all the services required.
Confirmation and room list
It is usual for the hotel to have a cancellation deadline usually four weeks before the expected arrival date.
Any cancellation after that date will be charged at full non-arrival rate.
When finalising arrangements and confirming the reservation the tour operator will usually include a rooming list giving full names of all the group, their nationality and passport numbers and any special requirements such as family groupings or adjacent rooms.
Registration
1.
Groups can register in the usual way when they arrive, each individual completing a separate registration form.
With large groups, however, this method can cause chaos at the reception desk.
2.
Individual registration forms could be dispensed with and a list of names, initials, nationality and passport numbers could be handed in by the tour operator.
This method is not exactly reliable as the information given could not be accurate and there are no individual signatures of the members of the group, which could cause problems when billing the guests for any extras.
3.
Individual registration forms could be given to the tour operator for completion by the guests en route to the hotel; it is then a simple matter of handling the registration forms at reception on arrival.
Arrival of groups
The arrival of large groups of people at the same time will always mean pressure on the reception staff, hall porters and other departments.
If a group arrives in the morning before the housekeeping department has had time to clean and service all the rooms, then the group must be made comfortable whilst waiting to gain access to their rooms.
The head porter will have the responsibility of organising parking spaces for the coaches, seeing that the luggage is unloaded, counted, checked and agreed with the group leader and dispatched to the rooms as quickly as possible.
Account charges
Details of what is included in the rate to be charged to the tour operators, such as meals, beverages and gratuities, will have been discussed and finalised between the tour operator and the hotel before confirmation of the reservation.
It is usual for a group account to be opened and a separate account for the individual guest also to be opened.
Any extra charges the guest incurs will be charged to their room number, and the account settled personally by them on check-out.
To avoid having a large number of small accounts in the ledger it is often the case in some hotels to ask members of groups or parties to pay for ‘extras’ at time of service.
A tour operator voucher will have been sent to the hotel with the confirmation and room list.
On check-out the group leader will hand the reception manager a copy of this voucher detailing all the charges the tour operator will be responsible for and signed for by the group leader.
The two copies of the voucher and the hotel's account will be married together, thoroughly checked and authorised by the reception manager, then forwarded to the tour operator or travel agent for payment.
Departure of groups
Like the arrival of a big group, the departure can be equally chaotic.
It requires organisation and planning, as one group usually follows another and for the changeover to be smooth all departments must be working to maximum efficiency.
Guests will be required to vacate their rooms by 11 a.m., noon at the latest, to enable the housekeeping staff to service and clean rooms for the next group.
If a group is not leaving until the  afternoon it is advisable to have a hospitality room available for luggage to be stored and for guests to have access to toilet facilities.
The billing office must ensure that all ‘extras’ are charged to the correct accounts and bills settled before luggage can be moved, and finally that all room keys are collected.
Group bookings, tours, conferences
When a hotel receives an enquiry for an ‘en bloc’ reservations, which means that a number of rooms have to be reserved to accommodate a group of people, it is essential that the reservations charts are studied carefully.
If the hotel accepts too many block bookings that could possibly result in the loss of other reservations from clients who may return to the hotel on regular basis.
To avoid this, research work is done and the hotel decides how many of this type of booking they can accept.
OVERBOOKING
It is the aim of any hotel to achieve the maximum room occupancy and one must remember that a ‘sleeper’ lost (bed unoccupied) is a financial loss that cannot be regained.
Therefore, many hotels work on the principle of accepting a percentage more reservations than there is accommodation available.
A calculation is made of the percentage of non-arrivals, cancellations and guests that terminate their stay earlier than expected.
For example:
This figure is noted on the reservation charts and means that the reception office will accept that number of reservations above their maximum accommodation.
If the unexpected happens and the hotel is completely full and they have overbooked then it is the responsibility of the hotel to find alternate accommodation of the same standard at another hotel for the overflow and bear any additional costs (cf. transporting guests).
CHECK-IN OF GUESTS
When the guest arrives he/she should have their confirmation slips, airline or travel agents voucher as evidence of their reservation.
These are checked against the hotel's records.
If no confirmation slip has been sent the receptionist would check the reservation.
In the case of a walk-in or chance guest then the room status board would be checked to see if accommodation was available.
Checking credit-worthiness
As it takes approximately three or four days to clear a personal cheque, more hotels are adopting the policy of only accepting personal cheques for payments in advance, or with seven day's notice if payment of the bill is to be made by cheque.
Payment by cheque will be accepted if accompanied by a banker's card (see Chapter 5) and if it is within the limit of the banker's card (usually £50).
Credit card approval
Credit cards are now being regarded as a more acceptable method of settling accounts as the credit card companies guarantee settlement of the bill up to the credit limit of their clients (see Chapter 5).
If a guest has indicated that he/she intends to settle by credit card, on arrival of the guest the credit card is requested and an imprint of the card is taken and signed by the guest.
The hotel can then telephone the central number of the credit card companies and request the approval code as to the credit-worthiness of the card holder.
If the credit approval is declined then the management contacts the guest immediately.
If guests have no credit cards they are usually asked to prepay for their stay at the hotel and all incidentals in bars and restaurants etc. are on a cash basis.
Many hotels now have a credit card microphone machine, which is linked to a central computer serving the five major credit card companies, i.e. Visa, American Express, Diners Club, Carte Blanche, Mastercard (see Chapter 5).
By putting the card into the machine an approval or disapproval code number will be shown on the visual digital screen.
Identity booklets (Fig. 3.20)
It is now common practice in large hotels to issue guests on arrival with identity booklets in attractively designed folders containing information on the facilities available in the hotel.
The booklets are also designed to advertise and highlight features of the hotel.
The name of the guest, room number and key code number which, for security reasons, is different from the room number are printed inside.
If the guest is settling the bill by credit card they can avail themselves of the express check-out service.
Specially coloured booklets are used for VIP guests or regular users of the hotel and carry added privileges such as preregistration, express check-in, special rates, welcome cocktails, daily newspapers and other complimentary features.
Receiving and registering guests
The law requires that guests must register with the hotel (see Chapter 8).
Some small hotels still maintain a hotel register in either book form or (Fig. 3.21) with loose leaves.
The majority of hotels now use the printed registration forms (Fig. 3.8) because of their many advantages:
1.
They are neat, legible, easily handled and can be filed in chronological order.
2.
The information on them is confidential and therefore it ensures that guests only see their own forms.
3.
In the case of a group booking, or a rapid succession of arrivals many guests can be completing their registration forms at the same time.
4.
International hotels can produce the registration card in several languages, which is of assistance to foreign travellers.
5.
The registration forms can easily be checked against the original reservation.
When receiving guests the procedure is as follows:
1.
On arrival the guests are assisted with the luggage by the hall porter, who will escort them to the reception counter.
2.
The receptionist welcomes the guests with a smile and greeting, hands the pen to them and asks if they will kindly complete the registration form (Fig. 3.8) or sign the hotel register (Fig. 3.21).
3.
The registration is checked to see if it has been correctly completed.
4.
The identity booklet (or key card) together with any messages or letters that may be waiting for them are handed to the guest.
The room key is given to the porter, who will escort the guest to the room.
In the case of a group checking-in the keys, identity booklets or key cards and information sheets are put in individual envelopes for distribution by the group leader.
5.
The receptionist should point out to the guest the location of the restaurants, lounges, public rooms and emergency exits and enquire whether there is anything the guest may require or need to know.
6.
If possible, either the hall porter or receptionist will escort the guests to their room offering to carry any hand luggage and walking a few steps ahead to open any doors.
7.
The escort should  precede the guest into the room, make a quick check to ensure that the room is in order, then hand the key to the guest.
8.
Any electrical appliances should be pointed out to the guests with instructions on use if necessary.
The escort should then enquire if they can be of any further service.
9.
The number of pieces of heavy luggage the guest has on arrival should be entered into the luggage book (Fig. 3.22), which is usually kept at the hall porter's desk.
10.
The room number should be ticked off on the arrivals and departures list and the guests' names entered on the tabular ledger and their bills started.
Aliens (Fig. 3.23)
An alien (foreign national) in addition must register (the Immigration Hotel Records Order 1972):
(a)
the number of his or her passport or registration certificate or other documents establishing the identity or nationality of the alien;
(b)
the date of departure and the next address if known.
If there is any doubt about the passport or other identifying documents advice can always be obtained from the police.
VALUABLES FOR SAFE-KEEPING
The hotel has a strict liability for the property the guest may bring into the hotel (see Chapter 8) and is obliged to accept valuables such as money, jewellery, furs, etc. for safe-keeping.
A special receipt book in triplicate is kept for the purpose.
The top copy is given as a receipt to the guest, the second copy remaining in the receipt book, and the third copy is attached to the parcel or valuable concerned.
Full details must be entered on the receipt (Fig. 3.24).
If a guest deposits a jewel case it must be locked; loose money should be counted and descriptions of individual items should be exact.
If a guest wishes to deposit a sealed item, they should sign across the seal and the description ‘one sealed envelope’ should be written on the receipt.
When guests wish to withdraw from the safe deposit the original receipt must be produced and they must sign the receipt book as proof that they have received back the valuables.
If for any reason the original receipt cannot be produced positive proof of identification must be produced before any deposits can be handed over.
If a guest wishes to redeposit valuables a new receipt must be issued every time.
An estimated value of the articles is sometimes requested in order that the hotel can be adequately covered by insurance.
Safe deposit boxes
Many large hotels provide individual safe deposit boxes or wall safes for the use of their guests.
The models and types may vary, but usually the guest is given one key to the box for which a signature is requested, and the particulars are recorded in a key receipt book.
The cashier holds the other key and the safe deposit box can only be opened if both locks are operated at the same time.
This is a security precaution against an unauthorised person or the cashier alone being able to open the box.
LETTER AND KEY RACKS (Fig. 3.25)
In many hotels letter and key racks are located in the hall porter's enquiry office.
However, in smaller hotels they are usually located in the reception office.
The rack consists of a number of pigeon holes large enough to hold mail of normal size, with a key hook above.
Each pigeon hole is clearly numbered by floor and by room.
It is used to distribute incoming letters, small packages, and any messages for guests, and it also provides a definite place for keys not in use.
Keys
Master keys, which open all doors, are kept by certain senior members of staff such as the head housekeeper and head porter, and there are usually two keys for every bedroom.
The first set of keys is handed to the guest on arrival and the second set is kept on a duplicate key board under the strict supervision of either the head receptionist or  head porter.
It should be drawn to the attention of the guest that it is desirable that they hand in the keys if they go out and collect them from the enquiry or reception desk on their return.
When keys are returned care must be taken to see that they are placed on the correct key hook.
By looking at the key rack it is easy to see, if the key is there, that the guest is out of the room or that the room is vacant.
If the key is not on the hook then the guest is in.
Constant checks should be made on the key rack, usually late at night or early in the morning, so that if any keys go astray the matter is investigated immediately.
Electronic key system (Fig. 3.26)
To overcome the problem of missing and lost keys and keys not being handed back by the guest on departure and to combat the problem of security by which unauthorised persons obtain keys to rooms, many hotels are going to the expense of installing keyless locks on their rooms.
This is an electronic system whereby upon arrival the guest is issued with a plastic key card (see Fig. 3.26).
A computerised console in the reception office punches holes on the key card.
These holes indicate a code of which there are at least four billion combinations in the system.
There is no room number on the key card and only the correct code punched on the card will operate and open the room door.
If a guest loses a key card or another guest takes over the room a new key card with new code punch holes is issued.
The old key card code is invalidated on the computer console and only the new key card code will operate and open the room door.
THE ARRIVALS AND DEPARTURES LISTS (Fig. 3.27)
It is essential that all departments are notified in advance of guests due to arrive and those due to depart.
The housekeeping departments has to ensure that all rooms are prepared for the new arrivals and when a room is vacated the chambermaids have to change the linen and clean the room ready for the next letting.
The restaurant manager has to know the estimated number of guests to be expected in the restaurant and in order to prepare the meals the chef needs to be informed of any special requirements.
Arrivals and departures lists are prepared daily in advance and copies circulated to all departments.
Arrivals list
This list is prepared one day in advance from the reservations records.
It is in alphabetical order and shows rooms allocated, name, number of nights' stay, number of guests, estimated times of arrival and any special requirements.
If the Whitney system is used the arrivals list can be prepared from the arrival rack.
Notification slips (Figs. 3.28, 3.29)
As the arrivals list is only made up from guests who have made reservations in advance, it will not show ‘chance’ guests or a guest who changes rooms after the list has been circulated.
As room status information must be up-to-the-minute, notification slips are circulated immediately to all departments should a ‘chance’ arrival or sudden change of room, or any other eventuality make it necessary to inform all departments, so that any action required can be taken.
Chance guests
Chance visitors are those that arrive without previous reservation.
If a guest has no luggage, payment in advance is usually requested.
If, however, a chance guest with luggage can produce credit cards and identification, no deposit is asked for.
Tact must always be used when asking for identification or payment in advance.
Change of room
If a guest wishes to change rooms and his or her arrival has already been entered on the arrivals list, the change of room must be treated as a departure from one room and an arrival in another room.
As the change of room will have no effect on the number of guests staying in the hotel, no entry is made in the column showing number of guests (Fig. 3.27).
If the arrivals and departures list has already been circulated, a change of room notification slip must be sent to all departments informing them of the room change.
Departure lists
The departure list is prepared by the reception office and circulated to all heads of departments in order that:
1.
The housekeeper can plan the work rotas to ensure that all rooms will be checked, cleaned and serviced ready for re-let, as soon as they have been vacated.
2.
The hall porter will be able to organise his or her staff to handle the luggage for departing guests.
3.
All other departments will check that charging vouchers have been forwarded to the billing office for entry on the guest's folio (Fig. 3.8(c) Fig. 3.30) before the guest departs.
Procedures for departure
Should there be an unexpected early departure of a guest, a notification slip is circulated to all departments immediately, informing them of the name and room number of the departing guest.
Procedures for departures
1.
The billing office will check that all charges and payments made have been posted to the guest's account and have it prepared ready to present to the guest for settlement.
2.
The cashier will ensure that all valuables in the safe or in a safety deposit box are collected by the guest and a signed receipt obtained.
3.
The head porter will have staff ready to handle any luggage.
Some hotels give a luggage clearance pass to the head porter when the account has been settled.
The head porter will check off his or her departure list when luggage is cleared.
4.
The head housekeeper will tick off his or her departure list when the room has been checked and cleared.
5.
The account is settled, keys are handed in and the guest departs with a warm invitation to ‘please come again’.
The reception office will then amend their records as follows:
1.
The guest's name card will be removed from the reception board (Fig. 3.18).
2.
The name strip is removed from the guest's alphabetical list (Fig. 3.32).
3.
Date of departure is noted on the room history card (Fig. 3.33).
4.
If a guest history card is kept it will brought up to date (Fig. 3.35).
5.
If a mail forwarding form (see Fig. 6.2) has been completed it will be filed alphabetically.
Daily summary sheets (Fig. 3.31)
Daily summary sheets are prepared for management and other heads of department.
These are for information, for cross-checking purposes, and for statistics.
BASIC RECEPTION DUTIES IN THE AVERAGE-SIZED HOTEL
A large percentage of the hotel industry consists of small or medium-sized hotels where manual systems are still operated.
In these hotels the receptionist duties are many and varied.
Apart from receiving and registering guests, making reservations, dealing with enquiries and maintaining records, the following tasks have to be dealt with:
Morning duties
1.
Check the night shift log book for any messages or matters to be dealt with.
2.
The post has to be sorted, letters attached to previous correspondence and any mail requiring attention dealt with or distributed to the appropriate department.
3.
Cash floats, which are the set sums of money handed out to the restaurants and bars in order to provide them with change to start the day's business, are checked, ready for collection by the departmental heads.
4.
Any late night arrivals must be entered on the previous days tabular ledger (see Chapter 5) and the guest's folio (bill) started.
The tabular ledger is then balanced and closed, and a daily summary sheet completed.
5.
Early morning teas, telephone calls, newspapers and any other visitors’ charge slips or paid-outs must be entered on the current tabular ledger and guests' folios.
6.
All bills for departing guests must be made up and double checked to ensure that all charges have been posted to them (Fig. 3.8(c), Fig. 3.30).
7.
Correspondence relating to reservations and arrivals is checked.
8.
Menus have to be typed and duplicated.
9.
The cash book (see Chapter 5) is written up and balanced.
10.
Cash is counted and prepared for paying into the bank (see Chapter 5).
11.
During the morning checks should be made on guests scheduled for a noon departure who have not yet settled their accounts.
12.
A midday balance should be struck on the tabular ledger.
13.
Any luncheon checks, lounge drinks and room service checks are posted to the tabular ledger and entered on guests' folios.
14.
Before the brigade of receptionists change shift they must ensure that all work has been processed as far as possible and that any messages or matters to be dealt with are brought to the attention of the evening shift.
15.
Incident book (log book) Most hotels keep an incident book or log book to record any unusual happenings during the course of the day.
It is not necessary to write a long report of each happening but the essential details such as date, time, detail and signature of person making the entry.
An example would be:
Evening duties
1.
Cash floats should be rechecked to ensure that cashiers have enough change for the evening business.
2.
Any new arrivals should be dealt with as they come in and guests' folios started.
3.
Any correspondence or filing left over from the morning shift should be dealt with.
4.
Any charges for luncheons, afternoon teas and dinners should be posted as far as possible to the tabular ledger and the guests' bills.
5.
Any purchases invoices should be checked and entered into the purchases day book and the ledger.
6.
The arrivals and departures list for the next day should be typed and copies distributed to all departments.
7.
A final check balance on the tabular ledger should be made.
If machine accounting is used, the roll should be taken out of the machine, the date changed and all totals checked to make sure that they are at zero.
8.
Check housekeeper's lists (room vacancy list (see Chapter 7, Fig. 7.2)) to note rooms available for letting.
9.
Write up night porter's book and notify him or her of rooms available for letting and any late arrivals, their names and room numbers.
10.
Prepare the manager's report on daily turnover and rooms occupied.
11.
Prepare new tabular ledger.
12.
Check all cash received from bars and lounges and place in safe.
13.
Check all cash floats, lock safe and all cupboards.
14.
Leave messages for night and morning shift.
These duties are discussed fully in detail in the following chapters.
RECORDS
Alphabetical guest list (Fig. 3.32)
In large hotels it would be impossible for staff to memorise all the names of the guests and their room numbers.
To help facilitate the distribution of mail and delivery of messages an alphabetical guest list is maintained, usually on a revolving stand located in an area easily accessible to all staff of the reception area.
These stands can hold several hundred strips, on which are typed the guest's name, initials, room number.
Strips are inserted in strict alphabetical order and colours are sometimes used to indicate the type of room, i.e. standard, superior, deluxe or suite.
Writing of names
A standard method of writing names should be adopted.
The surname should be written or typed in block letters followed by the title of the guest, and then the initials.
For example: Mc, Mac are all treated as Mac; the next letter in the name determines the Position.
Room history record (Fig. 3.33)
Most hotels maintain records of the occupancy of the room so that at any time they can refer to it and see when and by whom the room was occupied.
The room history cards are filed in room number order and must be kept up to date at all times as constant reference is made to them.
For example, if any property has been lost or found in the rooms then by referring to the room history card it is possible to discover who was the occupant of the room at a certain date.
Room inventory cards (Fig. 3.34)
These cards are sometimes prepared back-to-back with the room history card (Fig. 3.33) and filed in room order number.
They provide details of the furnishings and fittings of each particular type of room.
Any repairs or replacements or renewals of furnishings are noted on the cards, and they are constantly referred to by the housekeeping and maintenance departments, whose responsibility it is to see that the room is maintained to the required standard.
They provide information for the receptionist when dealing with enquiries for the guests as to what standard equipment is in the room.
They are also used by the housekeeper to check that no contents have gone astray.
Guest history card (Fig. 3.35)
Some hotels maintain guest history cards.
They show the names, addresses, dates of visits to the hotel room occupied, rates, credit ratings, and patronage, and any special likes and dislikes of the guests.
These cards are filed in alphabetical order and if used intelligently by the management will provide useful information as to the type of accommodation and service to offer the guest and how to cater for their preferences, and thus promote good public relations.
These cards are also useful when doing market research.
Black lists
Some visitors may have proved to be undesirable or objectionable, or perhaps have left without paying their bill, and therefore it is essential that this type of guest be blacklisted for future reference.
Sometimes a separate list is prepared but as guest history cards are filed alphabetically coloured stickers can be used, e.g. black which would indicate that a particular person was on the blacklist.
Notations are made on the card as to the reasons for blacklisting, and any instructions such as‘refer to manager’, ‘do not accept’ or ‘undesirable’should be carefully adhered to by the staff.
Sometimes the police will circulate a list with details of people who are fraudulently using hotels in the area.
These lists must be carefully noted by the staff.
Reference books
An efficiently organised reception office should always have an up-to-date set of reference books in order to be able to answer the innumerable and varied questions that could be put to them by the guests.
The reference library should contain:
1.
A Concise Oxford Dictionary.
2.
Foreign dictionaries with conversational phrases.
3.
Post Office Guide.
4.
Postal addresses and index to post code directories.
5.
Telephone directories — alphabetical and classified.
6.
Telephone Dialling Codes — an essential booklet providing STD (subscriber trunk dialling) codes.
7.
UK Telex directory.
8.
Whitaker's almanack — a useful source of names and addresses of associations and societies, government offices and national institutions.
9.
Kelly's Post Office — London.
This publication has a street directory for commercial concerns and information on official, legal, ecclesiastical and local government offices and personnel in the area.
10.
Information and guide books on London and other places of geographical and historical interest in Great Britain.
11.
A London Underground route map.
12.
Fodor's Guide to Europe (for overseas visitors).
13.
 Bartholomew's   Gazetteer  .
This gives names of cities, towns, villages, rivers, lakes etc. in the British Isles with details of situations, populations and, in the case of large towns or cities, of government buildings.
14.
Timetables of local bus services.
15.
British Rail timetables.
16.
Rail guide.
17.
Cooks' continental timetable.
18.
World airways guide.
19.
Air/rail guide Europe.
20.
National Express Guide to Express Services — a guide to coach travel within Great Britain.
21.
AA and RAC guide books.
22.
Maps of the locality.
23.
A local guide book.
24.
A local paper.
25.
A current entertainments page from the local press.
26.
Local trade associations' and professional bodies' directories.
27.
Local physicians list in case a doctor is required.
28.
 Crockford's  Clerical Directory (C of E clergy).
29.
Who's Who — names of distinguished people.
30.
Burke's Peerage — useful for all questions on social precedence.
31.
Black's Titles and Forms of address — how to address titled people.
COMMUNICATIONS
PBX (private branch exchange)
The telephone service in most establishments involves the use of a private branch exchange.
The PBX is a switchboard connected to a public exchange.by one or more lines, and extension telephones in the various offices and departments.
Calls must pass through the switchboard with the minimum delay and maximum courtesy.
Even the most efficient switchboard operator will at times dial a wrong number or make an incorrect connection, but this should never cause impatience or anger, the error should be corrected as quickly as possible in a pleasing and charming manner.
PABX (private automatic branch exchange)(Fig. 3.36)
This system combines exchange services with automatic intercommunication facilities.
Each telephone instrument had its own dial and from it can be dialled other extensions as well as outside calls.
The operator is only used to give special service to customers and to connect incoming calls, while the extensions have the convenience and speed of dialling their own calls.
 PMBX (private manual branch exchange)(Fig. 3.37)
This system requires an operator and the board can be switch or cord operated.
The operator makes all the incoming, outgoing and internal connections.
Push-button intercom system
This telephone system provides communication between each extension as well as connections to the public exchange.
Loudspeaking device
This is attached to the telephone to enable several people to listen to a call simultaneously and it is also useful if you wish to keep your hands free during a call.
Automatic answering telephone
A device can be fitted to the telephone which enables callers to hear a prerecorded announcement and dictate a message onto a tape.
This is extremely useful if the office has to be left unattended for any period of time.
Executive bleeps
This is an electronic system whereby executives are issued with small bleepers.
If they are urgently required their ‘executive number’ is tapped and an electronic signal is sent out which activates their particular ‘bleep’.
They will then go to the nearest telephone and receive their message from the operator.
Freefone
The establishment undertakes to pay in advance for incoming calls.
The caller dials the freefone number and is connected by the operator on a transfer charge basis.
ADC (advice of duration and charge)
The cost of a call made by an operator will be notified to the caller on its completion.
Transfer charge calls (collect calls)
The charge for the call can be transferred to the number called if it is accepted when the operator offers the call.
Fixed time calls
A call can be booked in advance with the operator to be connected at a specified time.
STD (subscriber trunk dialling)
The subscriber can dial trunk calls direct by prefixing the STD number to the number they wish to call.
Booklets are provided by Telecom giving lists of STD area code numbers, e.g. 0273 (area) 21345 (subscriber's number).
IDD (international direct dialling)
It is now possible to dial direct to many countries throughout the world.
The IDD number prefixes the number to be called, e.g. 0101 (America) 813 (Florida) 377 (area) 4307 (subscriber's number).
Modern communication systems
The reception office has the responsibility of maintaining the communication services between the guest and the hotel and internally between the departments within the hotel.
Modern microprocessors and computer technology have made such rapid advances that telecommunications and internal communications systems are now in compact units without plugs, switches, or buttons: just small keyboards with touch-sensitive depressions, some with small visual display units (VDUs) which can show at a glance the status of all calls being handled and prompt the operator through every procedure so that training can be reduced to a minimum.
Some modern telephone communication systems have as many as 26 exchange lines and 134 extensions providing the following:
Facilities
1.
All others extensions can be dialled from the front office.
If an extension is engaged or does not reply, a simple code can be dialled which monitors the extension you require.
When it is free the system will automatically connect to the extension user who gave the code.
2.
When dealing with an enquiry, the call can be held whilst the enquiry is being made.
3.
A call can be transferred to another extension.
4.
A conference system can be set up whereby up to six people can listen and talk simultaneously.
5.
Calls can be diverted to other extensions if the office is very busy or unstaffed.
Special features for hotels
Electronic room status boards.
The status of every room can be displayed, enabling the reception office to tell at a glance whether a room is occupied, waiting to be cleaned or ready for the next guest.
Wake up calls.
Guests can program their own wake up calls on the telephone.
Message waiting.
The switchboard can automatically call the guest's room at regular intervals until a reply is received.
Call metering.
Guests can make their own private calls and the metered units will be recorded automatically against their room.
Details can be recorded on an electronic printer.
Room monitors.
Reception can monitor a room where a child has been left.
Priority calling.
Preferential telephone service can be given to VIP guests.
Rooms service.
Guests can call a range of services from their own rooms by dialling or keying one digit.
Do not disturb.
This is a service whereby all calls can be routed to the operator.
Call barring.
This is an unobtrusive way of keeping expensive unofficial calls to the minimum.
The system can be instructed to prevent individual extensions from making certain calls such as IDD (international direct dialling) and STD (subscriber trunk dialling).
Telex and teleprinter (Fig. 3.39)
A teleprinter is a machine with a typewriter keyboard on which messages can be typed and reproduced on a teleprinter at the end of the wire.
Modern technology is now so sophisticated the microprocessor-based design of the teleprinter gives it enormous power and flexibility.
Some features of the modern teleprinter
1.
Alphanumerical keys are arranged like a conventional typewriter.
2.
There are integrated visual display units attached.
3.
Telex messages can be typed direct into the teleprinter's memory and automatically transmitted at a preset time.
4.
Messages can be received and transmitted automatically whilst the operator is preparing another message on the screen.
5.
Incoming messages can be stored in the teleprinter's memory until the printer is free, or by pressing an attend call an incoming message can be given priority.
6.
The same message can be transmitted to several different destinations.
7.
The contents of any message stored in the teleprinter's memory can be viewed on the visual display unit.
8.
Word-processing facilities can be incorporated, giving fast and efficient message editing.
Letters, words or whole lines can be deleted and new texts inserted at the touch of a button.
Prestel (Figs. 3.40, 3.41)
Prestel is a new kind of information service used by customers in Britain and overseas.
An adapted television set and an ordinary telephone line link the Prestel customer to an enormous range of computer-held information.
By pressing numbered buttons on a small key pad a page of information appears on the television screen.
British Telecom have launched ‘Room Service’, which is an electronic booking system linking all Prestel users with more than 1000 hotels throughout the world.
It lists rooms and amenities available at each hotel.
To use ‘Room Service’ customers specify the area in which they intend to stay.
An index showing hotels and rates in that area appears on the screen.
Having decided on the hotel the customer is then able to fill in the requirement on a booking page which is then transmitted to the hotel.
Hotel Television Network (HTN)
This service funded by National Advertisers is an addition to the normal TV channels.
It is a free television channel to three-to five-star hotels in London.
Programmes include a London guide to shopping, entertainment, theatre and Cinema reviews, tourist attractions, news of forthcoming events, feature films, guide book information, leaflets and maps and teletext information.
PROGRESS TEST QUESTIONS
1.
Define the following terms:
(a)
en pension;
(b)
demi-pension;
(c)
rack rate;
(d)
American plan;
(e)
modified American plan;
(f)
European plan;
(g)
shoulder period.
2.
Define the following terms:
(a)
VIPs and CIPs;
(b)
back-to-back reservations;
(c)
A & TO;
(d)
T or P;
(e)
no show;
(f)
6 p.m. release;
(g)
guaranteed arrival;
(h)
hotel discount card.
3.
Define the use and purpose of the following, using diagrams to illustrate your answers when necessary:
(a)
the conventional reservation chart;
(b)
a reception board;
(c)
the hotel diary;
(d)
the arrivals and departures list;
(e)
the alphabetical guest list.
4.
Explain how the hotel could check the credit-worthiness of a guest.
5.
The hotel receives a letter from Mr and Mrs Jones who wish to reserve a double room with bath from 7–14 June.
Explain briefly how you would deal with the request and then process the reservation from the arrival to the final departure of the guests.
6.
Explain briefly how:
(a)
the Whitney reservations system operates;
(b)
an electronic room status board operates.
7.
Explain how an ‘electronic key system’ operates and its advantages.
8.
The Silver Star tour operator wishes to book accommodation with the Royal Hotel for a group of 20 people on a package tour.
Detail briefly the step-by-step procedure of handling the booking from the time the enquiry is made to the departure of the guests.
9.
How does the central reservations system operate?
10.
A guest wishes to change rooms.
What action would you take to ensure all records are amended and all departments are notified?
11.
A guest requests that you accept a jewel box and a bundle of notes for safe-keeping.
Describe the procedures in this instance, illustrating your answer with diagrams of the records that should be kept.
12.
A group of five guests are due to arrive at 9.30 p.m.
What action should be taken and what instructions would be left with the evening shift?
13.
You are a head receptionist at a medium-sized hotel, instructing a new trainee receptionist.
Write briefly on how you would explain some of the tasks that have to be carried out:
(a)
on the morning shift 8 a.m. -3 p.m.
(b)
on the evening shift 3 p.m. -11 p.m.
14.
Detail some of the features of modern hotel communication systems.
15.
Explain briefly the following terms:
(a)
PBX;
(b)
PABX;
(c)
PMBX;
(d)
executive ‘bleeps’;
(e)
Freefone;
(f)
ADC;
(g)
STD;
(h)
IDD;
(i)
telex.
16.
What ‘books of reference’ would you use to deal with the following enquiries:
(a)
the address of the nearest dentist;
(b)
train or bus service;
(c)
places of historical interest in the locality;
(d)
what is on at the local theatre;
(e)
postal charges to Japan;
(f)
the distance by road between two points;
(g)
the address of the local chamber of commerce?
Selling and marketing
SELLING TECHNIQUES FOR THE RECEPTIONIST
Successful selling not only maximises the profitability of the hotel but, more to the point, assists customer satisfaction by offering food, accommodation and services at a price the guest can afford.
In order to sell accommodation successfully receptionists must learn how to use their eyes, ears and intelligence in order to assess their clients and their needs.
All guests will differ emotionally, physically and temperamentally and will have a wide variety of likes, dislikes, tastes and income levels.
The receptionist must have a complete knowledge of the hotel, the rooms, types, location, furnishings and rates, and all the other facilities the hotel has to offer.
As the management will be aiming for maximum room and bed occupancy practice and experience will train the receptionist how to plan bookings on the conventional chart (Fig. 3.11) so that one letting follows another and no gaps are left unnecessarily.
Simple rules to be followed when selling accommodation
1.
Whenever possible, rooms are let floor by floor upwards, grouped together.
This helps facilitate the organisation of labour and the servicing of rooms.
2.
Select rooms to be offered which are within the apparent price range appropriate to the guest.
3.
Do not confuse the guest by offering too wide a variety of rooms.
Confine the selection to one or two at a time.
4.
Always tactfully ascertain whether a couple would prefer a double-bedded room or a twin-bedded room.
5.
Families may require adjoining or adjacent rooms.
6.
Bear in mind that elderly, handicapped or disabled people will not want stairs to climb or long walks to lifts, stairs, public rooms or restaurants.
7.
Before offering accommodation try to ascertain any preference the guest may have, such as for a room with a view or a room away from traffic and noise.
8.
If a person requests a single room and none is available, offer a twin-bedded room as opposed to a double as it is more economical to change a single bed than a double.
When all single rooms have been sold hotels may offer their twin-bedded rooms or double rooms at a reduced rate.
This is known as ‘middle rate’ for single occupancy.
9.
The management will obviously expect their reception staff to sell the higher priced accommodation whenever possible, but it must be borne in mind that the interests of the client must come first, for a happy satisfied guest will return and spread goodwill.
RECEPTION AS A SALES DEPARTMENT
In any organisation people are either the strongest or weakest link, and all operations within that business will depend on their ability to listen, think, remember, communicate and act, and the impact of their performance, either on the technical side or on the side dealing with the public, will invariably have a profound effect on the selling of their product which, in the hotel industry, is accommodation, food, drink and hospitality.
There is no substitute for knowledge and above all the reception staff must have a complete knowledge of the product they are selling if they are going to sell effectively.
The receptionist must be  thoroughly familiar with the following:
(a)
all of the information contained in the hotel brochure;
(b)
details of tariff changes, special rates, and discounts, charges for children, pets, etc.;
(c)
all the general facts and figures appertaining to the size, shape and types of rooms, their fixtures and furnishings; any special information relating to the lounges, bars and restaurants, swimming pool, sports facilities, hairdressing, valeting, shops theatre tickets, etc.
(d)
information on transport connections to and from the hotel by road, rail, sea and air and car hire;
(e)
parking facilities at and available to the hotel;
(f)
details of facilities and equipment available in the hotel for conferences, special functions and other events;
(g)
details of all types of menu offered by the hotel and times of service;
(h)
information on facilities for the elderly, handicapped, children and pets;
(i)
information on special offers for mid-week and weekend breaks, package holidays, Easter and Christmas special programmes;
(j)
the entertainment programmes offered by the hotel;
(k)
information on local events, entertainments and places of interest in the area;
(l)
details of travel agents, tour operators, airlines, business organisations, and central reservations numbers with whom contact can be made if accommodation becomes available;
(m)
rules and regulations relating to arrival and check out times, methods of payment accepted, chance business, licensing for special functions etc.;
(n)
any other specialised information regarding the hotel.
To develop their awareness and need to know their product simple questionnaires could be put to the staff along the lines of:
1.
Describe the layout of the room in the hotel used for functions.
2.
Describe the layout of a room for a conference of fifteen.
3.
Give details of the luncheon  table d'hôte menu.
4.
Give details of the entertainment provided by the hotel for a mini break.
5.
For a special function, how would one obtain an extended licence?
6.
What are the maximum covers the hotel can take for a banquet?
7.
Does the hotel provide a playroom for children?
If so, describe a range of toys for ages up to twelve.
8.
What hours does the swimming instructor attend the pool?
4.3 METHODS OF SELLING
By letter
Any enquiries by letter should be dealt with immediately by return enclosing the hotel brochure, tariff and any other relevant information that will assist the sale.
By telephone
A good telephone voice is a considerable asset as its tone and manner will create an impression in the minds of the enquirer.
When dealing with a telephone enquiry it is essential that all the necessary information is at the fingertips of the receptionist as nothing is more irritating on the telephone than hesitancy through lack of knowledge or being asked to hang on whilst information is being looked up — and always have alternatives to offer if the first choice is not available.
Personal selling
Whether by telephone or face-to-face, personal selling is an art, and a good selling technique can be developed so that with quiet confidence, knowledge and enthusiasm for the product the receptionist can highlight the special features of the establishment, so that in the minds of the customer that particular establishment has something extra special to offer.
For example, instead of just stating the facts about the accommodation and facilities of the hotel one could add small descriptive notes without exaggerating.
For example:
Question
Is the hotel central?
Answer
Yes — we are very centrally situated for all forms of entertainment, theatres, parks and public transport.
Question
Are there any parking facilities?
Answer
Yes, we are fortunate; we have uncovered parking, and there are ample other parking facilities nearby.
Question
What facilities are there in the rooms?
Answer
Every room has a nineteen inch colour television, tea-making facilities and a direct dialling telephone system.
Question
Is there an extra charge for a child of nine?
Answer
No, there is no extra charge for children under twelve, and we have a small playroom for young children in the hotel.
Question
Is there a night service?
Answer
We have a night service porter on duty and he will be pleased to provide late snacks if required.
The list is endless and a good receptionist will seize every opportunity to sell the services of the hotel without over-selling and appearing pushy, so that the highly developed selling technique becomes an art.
SELLING TO THE BUSINESS PERSON
By land, sea and air, international travel is now fast, easy and quite commonplace.
A great deal of hotel business comes from people travelling not just for holidays or sightseeing but by people travelling by virtue of their business activities.
When selling services to the business person one must remember that the circumstances and their needs will differ:
1.
Business people are usually travelling at the company's expense and are unlikely to be on a strict budget.
They will probably require room service and avail themselves of the amenities of the hotel.
2.
They are travelling out of necessity not for pleasure, therefore, the hotel must be a home from home, and they will most likely eat and drink in the hotel.
3.
Time will probably be of the essence; therefore, they will want a quick efficient service of check in and check out, and possibly room service or late night snacks.
4.
They may require a television and radio in the room and a flat surface on which to work at their business papers.
They may also require secretarial services if available at the hotel, and a direct dialling telephone.
5.
If the services are satisfactory the business people are quite likely to become regular visitors and recommend the hotel to their business associates.
6.
There are no high or low seasons for business people and they will often require their accommodation at short notice.
Many large business houses have a regular room allocation with hotels which can be placed on release after a certain time lapse if not required.
Some hotels maintain ledger accounts for the regular business users and the account is sent direct to the companies which enables a speedy departure for the guest.
CONFERENCE AND BANQUETING BUSINESS
Trade exhibitions, seminars, workshops, conventions and conferences, have now become a specialised market and it has been quoted, even at a conservative estimate, that there is at least ten million pounds worth of business available through conference agencies.
It is an increasingly competitive market and conference organisers whose function it is to provide complete package deals for buyers are continually looking for new hotels and venues that can provide something different every year.
It is not only the very large hotels which enter into this market: smaller hotels with twenty bedrooms upwards, a quiet fair-sized conference room, good bedrooms and adequate facilities can compete for the smaller trade exhibitions, training courses, seminars and conferences.
Hotels with only the basic facilities can attract this type of business by putting together composite package deals and offering them to the conference agencies.
To this end managers should follow:
1.
Study what has been successful and popular in the past.
2.
Consider the size, structure and special features of the hotel and what special type of event it could lend itself to, e.g. mediaeval banquets etc.
3.
Study the locality and its geographical, historical or sporting interests, e.g. stately homes, good golf courses, marinas, etc.
4.
Structure a conference social programme, including sporting programmes, evening entertainments, and ladies' programmes, for delegates' wives and husbands.
5.
To be successful the hotel will provide a friendly atmosphere, good service and the personal touch.
They will ascertain the conference buyer's need and structure their services to meet these needs.
Large conferences
The very large hotels are comfortably geared to provide the venue for any type of conference, large or small.
They usually have a wide range of rooms available with major conference and banqueting areas supplemented by smaller syndicate rooms, private suites and other facilities.
Hotels offering these types of facilities usually have their own carefully prepared brochures, describing the area, and giving full details as follows:
Dimensions of rooms
(a)
floor area;
(b)
room length;
(c)
room width;
(d)
ceiling heights.
Maximum capacity each room will take for:
(a)
lunch/dinner — round tables, sprigs;
(b)
dinner dance;
(c)
cocktail reception;
(d)
fashion show;
(e)
stage show;
(f)
conference only: school room style, cinema style;
(g)
conference with lunch/dinner.
Other information on:
(a)
air conditioning;
(b)
sound insulation;
(c)
lighting equipment;
(d)
technological equipment AV/Film/VTR;
(e)
access for loading and unloading equipment;
(f)
space for exhibition booths;
(g)
telephone points;
(h)
switches;
(i)
power socket outlets;
(j)
TV outlets (closed circuits etc.).
(k)
microphone sockets;
(l)
audio jack outlets;
(m)
amplifiers;
(n)
moveable partitions, blackboards, flipboards;
(o)
clocks;
(p)
direct dialling services;
(q)
emergency exits.
Secretarial services:
(a)
telex;
(b)
photocopying;
(c)
printing of schedules, lists, speeches, name tags, menus, give aways;
(d)
translation service.
Colourful pictorial brochures are circulated to all conference agencies and enquirers can then contact and discuss package deals with the hotels offering the services.
Conference booking
When a conference is booked the management will discuss full details and prepare a check list with the organisers, detailing all their requirements.
When this is finalised and agreed, schedules will be prepared and put into action.
1.
Rooms will be booked for VIPs, delegates and their spouses (if applicable) and organisers.
2.
Meeting rooms and equipment required will be booked, planned and organised.
3.
Food and beverage departments will be given a detailed schedule of meals required.
4.
All departments involved will be notified and given detailed schedules.
5.
Any other action necessary will be taken.
The success of this type of operation depends on planning, organisation, attention to detail, efficiency of staff and complete co-operation from all departments.
If a hotel gains a reputation for high standards and professionalism in handling this type of business, that will be a recommendation in itself.
MARKETING
The term ‘marketing’ started gaining prominence in the business arena after the Second World War.
Today the marketing executive has the responsibility for co-ordinating all aspects of a product or service: packaging, labelling and presenting the product in a manner likely to improve its saleability, then fully exploiting existing markets, always thinking of new ideas and plans for creating new markets.
Marketing a ‘product’ like the hotels, catering, hospitality and tourism industry involves several factors, as follows.
Market research and analysis (Fig. 4.1)
Continual research into market trends provided by the statistics and information contained in sales analysis, guest record cards, guest history cards and trade magazines.
Questionnaires in the rooms inviting the guests to comment on the standards of facilities and service and what extra facilities the guests would like incorporated is another method of providing ideas on how to improve the saleability of the product.
Promotional literature
Brochures and tariffs should be well designed, colourful and descriptive.
If the Hotel is part of a group, brochures of other hotels within the group should be on display and receptionists instructed to see that they are well distributed to guests and casual enquirers.
Promotional ‘give-aways’
Give-away packs in guest rooms are designed to create a welcoming impression in the guest's mind, whilst promoting the name and the facilities offered by the hotel.
Give-aways such as book matches, note pads, pens, pencils, diaries, calendars and stationery, can be regarded as a good investment if they promote the good image of the establishment.
Personal selling
All members of staff, in particular the reception and contact staff, must be trained in the development of selling techniques and good public relations.
They must know their product thoroughly and how to promote sales by word of mouth, telephone or correspondence.
Staff should be involved in the marketing and sales programmes and targets should be set and staff rewarded if they are achieved.
Advertising
The method of advertising used will depend largely on the ‘advertising or marketing budget’, but the product can be advertised using several different types of media and the hotel or hotel group will select the method that will give them the best coverage within their financial means.
Types of advertising include:
(a)
the press — national and local newspapers, trade magazines, guide books, local magazines;
(b)
posters at air terminals, railway stations, buses, hoardings;
(c)
radio;
(d)
television;
(e)
direct mail;
(f)
newsletters.
Travel agents and tour operators' promotions
Package deals promoted by travel agents and tour operators are increasingly being used to promote sales during off-season periods.
Colourful brochures and posters proclaim bargain weekends, mini breaks, etc.
The promoters are also marketing imaginative packages which sometimes include books of vouchers giving entrance to places of historical or geographical interest, discounted theatre tickets, unlimited travel on the bus or underground, tee shirts and other promotional give-aways as well as hotel accommodation and meals.
Promoting special services and events
Many hotels are showing enterprise and imagination by staging special events, such as golfing weekends and gourmet holidays where the emphasis is on specially prepared gourmet meals, trekking holidays, tudor banquets, etc.
These types of events are well advertised in the appropriate magazines, and the hotels gain a reputation for this type of promotion which appeals to people who are looking for a change or something different.
Promoting family weekend breaks
The weekend break has now become a regular feature amongst the many special offers by hotels.
Attractive brochures illustrating all the additional facilities of the hotel, such as coffee bars, discos, saunas, swimming pools, tennis courts, golf courses, bars and  restaurants are aimed at attracting the family.
Large bedrooms with two large beds accommodating the family for little or no extra cost means revenue from extra meals and drinks.
Weekend hostesses organise special tours and entertainments, welcome drinks, tee shirts and children's entertainment, and special vouchers give cheap entrance to local attractions such as safari parks or stately homes.
Ingredients like these add to the promotion of this type of package deal.
Many London hotels offer a similar weekend break at special prices encouraging people to take in the sights and pageantry of the capital city.
This type of package is sometimes offered in conjunction with cheap rail fares and bus vouchers.
Overseas marketing
A report by the British Tourist Authority estimated that twelve million overseas visitors came to the United Kingdom in 1982, spending in the region of two thousand million pounds.
In July and August approximately two million visitors came to London attracted by the historical interest and other events and places common only to the British Isles.
Typical package tours marketed abroad are ‘the grand tour of historical Britain', Wimbledon, and the British Open Golf Championships, stately homes of England, the castles of Scotland.
The tours usually includes air travel accommodation and organised escorted tours.
PROGRESS TEST QUESTIONS
1.
What are the basic rules to be followed when selling accommodation from the reception desk?
2.
Discuss the statement ‘there is no substitute for product knowledge’, relating it to the receptionist as a salesperson.
3.
Give five illustrations of using good sales technique.
4.
How does the method of selling to a business person and a tourist differ?
5.
What essential information would need to be available when dealing with an enquiry from a conference organiser?
6.
Define the term ‘marketing’.
7.
Suggest the methods you would use to promote:
(a)
a weekend break in a country hotel;
(b)
a weekend break at a London hotel;
(c)
a tour of the Scottish highlands.
Book-keeping
BASIC PRINCIPLES OF DOUBLE-ENTRY BOOK-KEEPING
Book-keeping is the recording of the transactions of a business in a simple and reliable manner in order to provide the trader with information to show:
(a)
the trader's financial position;
(b)
whether the business is making a profit or loss and how this profit or loss is made up.
Double entry
The double-entry system is the basis of modern systems used by businesses both large and small, governments, banks, insurance companies and industries.
It records the twofold effect of every business transaction.
For instance, if a business sells ten pounds worth of goods for cash, the goods go out of the business as sales and the cash comes into the business.
If goods are sold and payment postponed until a later date, we still have ten pounds of value in goods going out of the business, and we have a debtor who represents ten pounds worth of debt owing to us.
Every business transaction will therefore require two entries to be made in our books — one representing value going out , the other representing value coming in .
In order to record this we must divide our accounts into two sides.
The left hand side is known as the debit (entry for value coming in) and the right hand side the credit (entry for value going out).
Therefore, every time an entry is made on the debit side, another entry of equal value must be made on the credit side somewhere in the books.
Every debit must have a corresponding credit and vice-versa .
The whole of the double-entry system is based upon this principle and it follows from this principle that at any time the total debits must equal the total credits and by adding the two a check can be made on the double entry; this is one of the main advantages of the system.
The ledger
The core of the double-entry system is the ledger, in which all the transactions of the business must ultimately appear, either individually or as totals from subsidiary books, as shown by Fig. 5.1.
The ledger is a book of accounts.
Accounts
As previously mentioned, each account is divided into two sides, the left hand side known as the debit and the right hand side known as the credit (see Fig. 5.2).
Separate accounts are made for each person and for each class of asset, liability, profit or loss.
Accounts are classified into two main divisions.
Personal accounts
These record transactions with persons, e.g. debtors or creditors, and also include the bank account and the capital account.
Impersonal accounts
These are divided into two classes:
Nominal accounts — these accounts deal with the profits and losses of the business and include the sales account, purchases account and all expense accounts.
Real accounts — these are the accounts that deal with the assets or property of the business, e.g. fixtures and fittings; kitchen equipment; office equipment; freehold premises.
Types of ledger
In most large organisations today ledgers are of either the ‘card’ or ‘loose leaf’type.
This allows for the entries to be made by machine accounting whereby several operations can be carried out at the same time.
The accounts can also be kept in strict alphabetical order and up to date.
These ledgers can be easily subdivided, enabling several clerks to work on them at the same time and it is also easier to withdraw old accounts and insert new ones in their place.
See Fig. 5.2 for the rulings of each type of ledger.
An example of posting direct to the ledger follows, illustrating the rules of the double-entry system (Fig. 5.3):
(a)
On 1 Jan. 19 — B. Jones started in business with capital in cash of £10 000.
(b)
2 Jan.
Purchased furniture on credit from Mitre Furnishings Co.
Ltd £1500.
(c)
3 Jan.
Purchased provisions for cash £250.
(d)
4 Jan.
Paid rent by cheque £500.
(e)
5 Jan.
Sold meals for cash £200.
(f)
6 Jan.
Paid wages in cash £55.
Each entry is made twice and cross-reference is assured by entering in each account the name and reference (folio) number of the other.
Examples of posting to an account
Example 1
On 1 March 19 — A. Debtor, who has an account with the Atlas Hotel, owed the hotel £23.50.
On 7 March he entertained at the hotel — the bill No. 216 amounting to £16.50 was posted to his account.
On 8 March an allowance due to an overcharge on wine was posted to A. Debtor's account.
On 31 March a cheque was received from A. Debtor in settlement of his account less an agreed discount of five per cent.
Example 2
On 1 September 19 — A. Creditor, who is a supplier to the Atlas Hotel, was owed by the hotel the amount of £85.00.
On 3 September he supplied goods to the hotel valued £35.00.
On 5 September a credit note No. 19 was received from A. Creditor in respect of damaged goods valued £5.00 returned by the hotel.
On 30 September the hotel sent A. Creditor a cheque in settlement of the amount owing on 5 September less the agreed five per cent cash discount.
BUSINESS DOCUMENTS (SOURCES OF ENTRY — SEE FIG. 5.1)
Order form
Whenever a purchase is made an order (using an official order form) should be sent to the supplier.
Orders should be in duplicate and numbered and should state exactly the goods required, quoting catalogue numbers when possible.
Orders should always be signed by a responsible official.
Delivery note (Fig. 5.6(b))
When goods are delivered they are usually accompanied by a delivery note showing details of items supplied.
This delivery note should be used for checking purposes against the goods, and any damage or shortages should be noted.
Invoice (Fig. 5.6(c))
An invoice is a detailed account of goods purchased.
It is numbered and shows quantities, quality, prices, packing charges and details of terms and discounts.
It is sent by the seller to the customer.
Invoices received should be checked for prices and calculations and passed if correct for entry into the appropriate columns of the purchases day book.
Credit note (Fig. 5.6(d))
This document is sent by the seller to the customer when goods have been returned or an overcharge has been made.
It is numbered and usually printed in red.
It shows the customers that their account has been credited with the amount involved.
It is entered in the returns day book.
Debit note
This document is sent by the customer to the seller when goods are returned.
It shows that the customer has debited the seller's account with the value of the goods returned.
Statement (Fig. 5.6(e))
This is a summarised account usually sent to the customer at the end of each month.
It shows the amount owing at the beginning of the period plus the amounts on invoices issued, and deducting any discounts, returns or cash payments.
It shows the balance due and is notice that payment is due.
Petty cash voucher (Fig. 5.6(f))
These are numbered, showing details of cash handed out by petty (minor) cashiers.
They must be duly authorised and signed by the person receiving the cash.
They are entered in the petty cash book.
SUBSIDIARY BOOKS
It would be possible to record every business transaction directly into the ledger, but the volume would be very great; therefore, most businesses keep subsidiary books, or books of prime entry as they are called, and post only the totals periodically to the appropriate account in the ledger.
In addition to the basic six books of prime entry a petty cash book is also kept to avoid having to enter petty or small cash payments into the main cash book and this is discussed in more detail later in the chapter (see Fig. 5.6(f)).
A separate wages book is also kept.
Purchases day book
Most establishments keep their purchases day book in the form of a weekly invoice summary sheet, which is analysed (see Fig. 5.7).
This assists the management in exercising cost control on commodities.
The general journal
The journal is a book of prime entry used to record transactions which do not pass through the cash receipts or payments books, or purchases, sales or returns day books, for example, purchases and sales of fixed assets on credit, the correction of errors and other entries of an extraordinary nature.
A journal entry consists of three parts:
(a)
the debit entry (Dr);
(b)
the credit entry (Cr);
(c)
the narration — this is a short note of explanation.
Returns outwards
It frequently occurs that goods have to be returned to suppliers for various reasons, e.g. damaged or defective goods.
The suppliers then send the customer a credit note to show that they have credited the customer's account with the amount involved.
The credit note is entered in the customer's returns outwards book and in turn posted to the suppliers' ledger accounts.
Total returns outwards are deducted from the purchases account.
Petty cash
In most businesses it is usual to keep a petty cash book for the payment of small expenses.
This petty cash is kept on the imprest system, whereby the petty cashier is entrusted with a fixed sum of money.
This is called the imprest, and out of this he or she makes all small payments.
Periodically the petty cashier presents the petty cash book, receipts and vouchers to the head cashier, who audits them and, if correct, reimburses the amount spent.
This brings the petty cash back to the original imprest.
Advantages of the system
1.
The petty cashier must always account for a certain fixed sum of money.
2.
There is regular auditing of petty cash expenditure.
3.
The chance of theft is limited.
4.
Small items of cash are kept out of the cash book, thus saving time and space.
5.
Items of expenditure are summarised and posted to the ledger at regular intervals.
THE TABULAR LEDGER
In hotel and catering accounts, the sales day book is replaced by the visitors' tabular ledger, which is simply a form of analysed or columnar book-keeping.
Several different types of tabular ledger are in use, but always the basic principle is the same.
It consists of a sheet for each day which has numerous analysis columns — the headings of these will depend on the requirements of the hotel.
Guests' bills are written up daily from the duplicate vouchers which are debited to the visitors' tabular ledger and it follows that the balances shown on the guests' bills must correspond with the balances in the visitors' tabular ledger.
Example of vertical tabular ledger (see Fig. 5.10)
Column
1
Room No.
2
Name of guest — a line through means departure.
3
Terms, e.g. room & breakfast or fully inclusive (en pension).
Rate — Charge per person.
4
B/F — Balance brought forward.
5
Apartments — Charge for apartment per night.
6
Pension — Charge for inclusive meals (i.e. breakfast, luncheon, afternoon tea, dinner).
7
Breakfast — Charge for any chance breakfasts.
8
Luncheons — Charge for any chance luncheons.
9
Afternoon teas — Charge for any chance afternoon teas.
10
Dinners — Charge for any chance dinners.
11
Early tea — Charge to guests for early morning teas.
12
Beverages — Charge for any teas, coffees or other beverages.
13
Wines — Charge for any wines at meals.
14
Spirits, liquors — Charge for spirits and wines taken.
15
Beer — Charge for any beers.
16
Minerals — Charge for any minerals.
17
Telephone — Charge for any telephone calls made.
18
VPOs — Visitors paid out — Any monies paid out on behalf of guests.
19
Sundries — Any sundry charges the guest may incur, e.g. laundry, valeting, taxis.
20
Total debits — Total of all charges made to the guest's bill.
21
Cash — Any cash, cheques or payment made by credit cards made by guest.
22
Allowances — Any allowances made to the guest which will be deducted from their bill.
23
Ledger — Any amount which is transferred to a ledger account.
24
Balance c/f — Amounts which are carried forward to the next day's tabular ledger.
An amount circled indicates a credit balance.
25
Total credits — Total of all payments, allowances or transfers to ledger.
26
Folio No. & notes — Any ledger folio No. and notes.
To balance the tabular ledger the columns should be added across and down and the total debits should equal the total credits.
Notes
1.
The line through 501 indicates that Mr R. James departed after lunch settling his account of £80.15 by Access credit card.
Room 501 was relet later in the day and this would be entered in red on the ‘Tab’ to indicate a relet.
2.
By paying £60 cash Miss J. Paige's room 504 would have overpaid by £3.75.
Therefore, her account would be in credit and ringed to indicate a credit balance carried forward.
3.
Any cash taken in the restaurant from chance sales would be entered on the tabular ledger under the ‘chance meals’ column, and also shown as cash received.
4.
For the ‘Silver Tours’ package tour a column would show the inclusive charge to be made to ‘Silver Tours Ltd’for the apartments and meals.
That account would be transferred to a ledger account and a statement sent to ‘Silver Tours Ltd’ for payment.
Separate accounts would be opened for the members of the party (rooms 507–510) for any extra charges they would incur and settlement of these accounts would be made by the individuals.
5.
Peacock Bar — Any monies taken in the bar would be paid in; the takings from wines, spirits and beers would be entered in the appropriate column and the cash would be entered as paid in.
From the daily tabular ledger sheets monthly summary sheets are prepared (see Fig. 5.11).
Chance trade
A ‘chance’ guest or ‘walk-in’is a person who has no reservation.
‘Chance’ trade is the term used also to describe the business which comes from guests who take meals or drinks in the hotel which are not included in the terms of their reservation and has to be charged to them.
‘Chance’ business comes also from non-residents who have meals or drinks in the hotel and pay cash.
Details of ‘chance’ business is entered on the tabular ledger in the appropriate column, i.e. breakfast, luncheons, afternoon teas, dinners, bars, and any cash received is shown in the cash received column.
Credit sales
If the hotel has regular restaurant credit customers to whom a monthly statement is sent, it is usual to keep a sales day book for the restaurant which is posted to the ledger.
(See Fig. 5.12).
Special functions
If the establishment has substantial special function business, e.g. banquets, weddings, dances, dinners, conferences, etc., it is usual to open a separate special functions day book which is posted to a composite special functions debtors account in the ledger.
Deposits in advance
Any deposits received in advance are entered in the cash book and posted to a composite account in the ledger in which is entered all deposits received.
When the guest arrives the deposit is transferred (Dr) from the advance deposit account in the ledger to the guest's account on the tabular ledger (Cr).
CONTROL ACCOUNTS
A control account is constructed apart from the system of double entry.
It is a device which enables a clerk to balance a section of the ledger, e.g. the sales or purchases, independently in order to check the accuracy of the entries in that section.
One of the great advantages of mechanised accounts is that machines accumulate the amount of individual postings as they are made so that the total balance of the ledger can be ascertained each day.
The total balances on the sales ledger (visitors' ledger) will give the total sundry debtors; the total balance of the purchases ledger will give the total of the sundry creditors.
THE TRIAL BALANCE
This is a list of the balances extracted from the ledger at the conclusion of posting.
It provides a check on the arithmetical accuracy of the double entry, but it is not proof that the transactions have been correctly recorded.
Errors a trial balance will show
1.
The cash book balanced incorrectly.
2.
Incorrect additions of sales, purchases or returns books.
3.
An entry posted to the wrong side of an account.
4.
An incorrect amount posted to the ledger.
5.
Discounts transferred incorrectly.
6.
A debit or credit omitted in posting.
7.
A combined journal entry added incorrectly.
Errors a trial balance will not show
1.
Errors of omission — An entry completely omitted from all books.
2.
Errors of commission — Entry posted to the wrong account.
3.
Errors of principle — A purchase treated as a sale; a receipt treated as a payment; returns in treated as returns out; an asset treated as an expense.
4.
Errors in original entry — Wrong amount entered in book of first entry.
5.
Compensating errors — Two errors of the same amount, one on each side of the ledger.
6.
Error of duplication — The same transaction entered twice.
Methods of locating errors in trial balance
1.
Check ledger to see if every account, including the cash and bank, is in the trial balance.
2.
Check the balance of the cash book.
3.
Check additions in the subsidiary books of first entry.
4.
Add credit and debit sides of the trial balance, take one from the other, halve the difference and check if any item of this amount is on the wrong side.
5.
Check posting of discounts.
6.
Check additions in ledger.
7.
Check folio columns for any posting omitted.
8.
Check each item in ledger ticking the entry in both ledger and book of first entry.
9.
Look for slides, e.g. £17.93 written as £17.39.
BANKING AND CASH CONTROL
The main cash book
Most businesses keep most of their cash in the bank for security reasons, and only a certain amount of cash is kept on the premises for ‘floats’ or office cash.
Some payments are made by cash and some by cheque; therefore, to keep control of the cash on the premises and in the bank, a three-column cash book is used (see Fig. 5.14(a).
On the debit side of the cash book all amounts of cash received are shown in the cash column, and all amounts banked are shown in the bank column.
On the credit side all payments made in cash are shown in the cash column and payments made by cheque are shown in the bank column.
If any cash is transferred from the office to the bank or a cheque is cashed for office use a contra entry is made, which means an entry is made on the debit and credit side of the cash book showing the transfer and c is written in the folio column.
Trade discount is an allowance made off the catalogue or list price of goods given by a wholesaler to a retailer.
It is shown on invoices only.
Cash discount is an allowance off a debt given to encourage prompt payment.
Any discount allowed to a customer is entered in the discount allowed column of the cash book; and any discount received from a supplier is entered in the discount received column of the cash book (see Fig. 5.14).
Analysed cash books
Many small hotels and similar establishments keep analysed cash books where the income and expenditure is analysed.
This provides information and data and is useful when preparing final accounts (Fig. 5.15).
Bank reconciliation statements
Periodically a business will receive a bank statement from the bank.
This is a copy of the customers' accounts in the books of the bank.
In theory the entries should correspond with the entries in the cash book of the business (but on opposite sides); in practice, however, it is found that the cash book balance and the balance as shown on the bank statement rarely agree.
A bank reconciliation statement is therefore prepared to show how the difference has arisen.
This difference may be brought about by:
1.
Cheques credited in the cash book but not yet presented for payment to the bank.
2.
Cheques debited in the cash book but not yet paid in or credited by the bank.
3.
Items appearing on the bank statement but not entered in the cash book such as bank charges, standing orders, interest charged on overdrafts or bank giro credits.
Banking
The bank provides many services for their customers besides keeping their money safe; it provides convenient means of making payments by cheque and also submits a clear statement of their customer's account at fixed intervals.
Types of bank account
1
Current account.
Cash is paid in, drawn out or paid away to a third party by means of cheques.
No interest is paid on a current account by most banks.
2
Deposit account.
Sums of money not required for immediate use can be put into a deposit account on which the bank will pay interest.
Types of cheque
Bearer cheques
The amount stated can be paid over the counter to the person presenting the cheque.
Order cheques
The cheque is made payable to a specific person.
Open cheques
Cash may be given by the bank.
Crossed cheques
The holder cannot cash the cheque, but only pay it in to a bank account, or savings bank, or assign it to a third party.
A crossed cheque therefore gives some protection against fraud if it falls into the wrong hands.
It has two parallel lines drawn across its face.
If a bank disobeys the instructions in a special crossing, then it becomes liable to the owner if any loss is suffered.
Not negotiable
A cheque is a ‘negotiable instrument’.
Accepting money or negotiable instruments in good faith does not render the acceptor liable to return them if they turn out to have been obtained illegally.
But any persons accepting a cheque marked ‘not negotiable’ must take it subject to any defect in title.
This means that if the cheque has been stolen or obtained by fraud, they will have to suffer the loss if they accept it.
Example 1
Mr Jason, a small hotelier, accepts a crossed cheque marked ‘not negotiable’ from a guest calling himself B. Smythe for £10 in payment of his bill.
 Unknown to the hotelier, the cheque had been stolen and the signature forged.
As the guest calling himself Mr Smythe did not have legal title to the cheque, he could not give legal title to the hotelier; therefore, the cheque would not be paid and the hotelier would suffer the loss.
(This emphasises the point that before accepting any cheque proof of identity should be sought.)
Example 2
Mr Williams had no bank account and received a crossed cheque marked ‘not negotiable’ payable to himself for £15.
He asks a hotelier if he will accept the cheque in payment of a bill for £15.
As Mr Williams has legal title to the cheque, and provided that he endorses it (signs his name on the back), a good title can be passed on to the hotelier and it can be paid into the hotelier's bank account.
Correction of a mistake on a cheque
If a correction has been made on a cheque, the correction should be signed in full by the drawer.
Dishonoured cheques
A bank dishonours a cheque by stamping it ‘RD’ which means ‘refer to drawer’.
The bank can do this for any of the following reasons:
(a)
insufficient funds in the account of the drawer;
(b)
no signature;
(c)
words and figures do not agree;
(d)
incorrect signature;
(e)
mutilated cheque;
(f)
stale cheque (more than six months old);
(g)
if the drawer dies.
Cheques requiring endorsement
Endorsement consists of the signature of the payee on the back of the cheque.
Cheques requiring endorsement are:
(a)
cheques payable to a person who wishes to pass it through another person's bank account, e.g. if they have no bank account of their own;
(b)
cheques with a receipt on the back;
(c)
drafts drawn on HM Paymaster and Inland Revenue warrants.
Stopping payment on a cheque
A drawer can stop the payment of a cheque lost or stolen by immediately informing the bank, giving the cheque number and payee, providing it has not already been passed through a bank.
Loans and overdrafts
A loan is a sum of money borrowed over a period of time at a certain rate of interest.
An overdraft is when the customer has the permission of the bank to overdraw his/her account by a set sum on which the bank will charge interest.
Traders' credits (Bank Giro)
Instead of drawing individual cheques for each creditor, a trader may give his bank a list of creditors to be paid with the name of the bank where each creditor has his account.
The bank then transfers the appropriate amounts to the creditors' banks, and deducts the total amount paid from the trader's account.
Accepting a cheque
A receptionist accepting cheques from a guest should note the following points.
1.
The cheque must not exceed the limit set by the banker's card, i.e. £50 unless the management personally accept the responsibility of authorising cheques over this amount.
2.
The date must not be a future one, nor must it be out of date(more than six months).
3.
The words and figures must agree, if either has been altered the alteration must be signed by the drawer.
4.
The hotel must be named as the payee.
5.
The guest must sign the cheque.
6.
The guest should sign his name and address on the back for reference and identification and the cheque should be supported if possible by a credit card or cheque guarantee card.
Special clearance of a cheque
If the cashier wishes to verify if a cheque is acceptable, a telephone call to the hotel's bank giving details of the cheque, the drawer's name, and the branch on which it is to be drawn, the bank will make contact with the drawer's bank and establish whether the cheque is acceptable.
The cost of the telephone call is usually passed on to the guest.
CREDIT CARDS
The method of making payment by use of credit cards is now quite commonplace.
They are accepted by most hotels, shops and garages.
The banks or organisations that issue them guarantee payment of bills run up by the credit card holder up to a certain limit.
Accepting payment by credit card
When accepting settlement of a bill by credit card the cashier should:
1.
Check that the total amount of the bill does not exceed the ‘floor limit’, which is the maximum amount of credit allowed without getting special authorisation.
The major credit card companies have a direct telephone system and by telephoning the number and quoting the credit card number an approval or disapproval code number will be given to the caller.
2.
The cashier completes a sales voucher, which is usually in triplicate, for the amount due.
3.
The credit card is presented by the customer to the cashier who checks the details, in particular the expiry date of the card.
4.
An imprint of the details on the card is made on the sales voucher.
5.
The cashier should retain the credit card whilst the customer signs the sales voucher.
6.
The signature on the voucher is checked against the signature on the credit card.
7.
If all is satisfactory the credit card is handed back to the customer with a copy of the sales voucher and a receipted bill.
Accounting for payment by credit card
Credit card companies operate on a commission basis.
Sales vouchers for payment made by the bank credit cards such as Access and Barclaycard are treated as cash.
The vouchers are paid into the bank on a separate paying-in slip and the hotel's account would be credited with the amount owed less the credit card company's commission.
Sales vouchers relating to other credit card companies such as American Express, Diners Club International, Carte Blanche, etc. are dealt with in a different manner.
These vouchers are collected together and despatched with an account to the respective credit card companies, who will then pay the amount owing less commission, direct to the hotel.
In the accounts system the cash and discount received from credit card sales would be debited in the cash book and credited to the sales account.
TRAVELLER'S CHEQUES
These can be in sterling or in another currency.
The guest must sign the traveller's cheque in front of the cashier and this signature must correspond with the one already on the cheque.
If there is any doubt, the cashier should tactfully try to obtain proof of identity, e.g. passport or driving licence.
Lists of stolen or lost traveller's cheques are circulated to hotels and the cashier should consult these lists discreetly when dealing with traveller's cheques.
PAYING IN
Paying-in books are issued by the bank and are stamped with the name and number of the establishment's account at the bank (Fig. 5.19).
When handling or checking cash the cashier should exercise particular care.
Separate the £50, £20, £10, £5, £1 notes and stack them face upwards in the same direction.
£1, 50p, 20p, 10p, 5p coins should be stacked in their respective denominations; 2p, 1p or ½p coins should also be stacked into piles for easy checking and counting, then bundled into the appropriate cash bags supplied by the bank.
Bank credit card vouchers and traveller's cheques and foreign currencies are entered on separate paying-in slips.
The paying-in slips are completed and the cash and slips are handed in to the bank cashier who will check that they are all correct, stamp the counterfoil and retain the paying-in slip.
The establishment's account is then credited with the amount paid in.
VAT (VALUE ADDED TAX) AND SERVICE CHARGE
In the United Kingdom value added tax (VAT) has to be paid to the Customs and Excise Department, and it is levied on most goods and services unless specifically stated otherwise.
VAT was introduced in April 1973 and from then the standard rate has varied from ten per cent to eight per cent to fifteen per cent, and the Treasury is empowered to change the rate at any time.
Some goods and services are deemed zero-rated which means that no VAT is levied on them.
Such exceptions are:
(a)
most foods;
(b)
books and newspapers;
(c)
insurance;
(d)
education;
(e)
banking;
(f)
doctors' services;
(g)
dentists.
Food, drinks and services sold in restaurants and hotels are liable to VAT, but there are certain modifications to the VAT levied on long-term residents.
All information on the details relating to VAT for the hotel and catering industry can be found in the VAT booklet issued by the Customs and Excise Department.
The Tourism (Sleeping accommodation Price Display) Order 1977 No. 1877 makes provision for hoteliers and Caterers to quote their prices as VAT inclusive.
Therefore, the tax due to the Customs and Excise must be extracted from the price quoted; for example, if the VAT is at fifteen per cent the calculation would be:
Service charge
Any service charge added to a bill is subject to VAT.
If a bill is quoted as service charge and VAT included the VAT is extracted first (see example) then the service charge is extracted.
FOREIGN CURRENCIES
The hotel can be the authorised agent for foreign currency transactions.
The cashier should observe currency regulations and be aware of the rates of exchange, which change daily.
Foreign currency is exchanged at the bank and any ‘profit on exchange’ is entered in the cash received book.
Hotel receptionists dealing with foreign visitors should become conversant with the currencies of other countries and should be able to convert currencies easily and rapidly.
The method of converting is simple.
Complete the above table with present day rates.
Example
To convert sterling into foreign currency multiply the amount by the rate of exchange.
For example, convert £15 into French Francs (rate: £1 = 11.35 f.).
To convert foreign currency into sterling divide the amount by the rate of exchange.
For example, 170.25 francs divided by 11.35 gives the sterling equivalent.
MECHANISED ACCOUNTING
Advantages of office machines
1.
Increased speed.
Time and labour can be saved by simultaneous posting in one operation (about five times faster than posting by hand).
2.
Greater accuracy.
Some of the human errors can be reduced, especially in calculations.
3.
Improved records.
Bills prepared by machine are neater and more legible, therefore more helpful to the staff and more pleasing to the customer.
4.
Elimination of tedious repetitive work such as casting and balancing.
5.
Information for management can be quickly and easily produced.
Types of office accounting machines
1.
Adding machines.
These can be either electric or manually operated and are useful for checking additions and prelisting.
2.
Calculating machines.
There are numerous types, nearly all electronic, and these machines can perform all four basic arithmetical functions: addition, subtraction, multiplication and division.
They are useful for invoice checking, valuation of stock, conversion of foreign currencies and other control calculations.
3.
Accounting/book-keeping machines.
There are numerous types, which are a combination of a calculating machine and typewriter.
Many businesses use accounting machines for ledger posting, payroll, receipt writing, stock records, sales analysis, cost analysis and various statistical reports.
Computerised guest accounting for hotels
A well-known Minister of Technology defined information technology (IT) as the use of computers, microelectronics and telecommunications designed to help us produce, store, obtain and send information in the form of pictures, words or numbers more reliably, quickly and economically.
Without a doubt ‘information technology’ has become the most rapidly developing area of industrial and business activity in the Western world.
There are many large and reputable organisations in the computer servicing industry producing:
Hardware.
This means the physical components of computers, including the minicomputers, microcomputers and integrated systems and attachments to the computers.
Software.
This means computer programs, including the specially designed programs on various types of disc, e.g. hard discs, floppy discs which are used in conjunction with the hardware.
Floppy disc
So called because it is a flexible disc, 5¼ inches in diameter, with limited capacity.
The surface must not be touched and it must be stored in a cool dry place away from electrical equipment because it is magnetic.
Hard disc
It is not possible to remove a hard disc.
It is totally sealed and spins at very high speeds and can therefore retrieve and store information very quickly.
It is the equivalent to four floppy discs.
It is not possible to go into the details of the technology involved or to mention all the companies now producing hardware and software for the hotel industry, but to name a few:
The NCR Quicksilver (Fig. 5.21)
This is a guest accounting control system with a front desk terminal:
Special features
1.
A simplified programmable keyboard with a ten-key numerical arrangement, multiple departmental keys, settlement keys and an assortment of special function keys.
2.
Departmental keys which enable separate totals for guests services, room charge, restaurant and bar services, valet, laundry, garage and others.
3.
Cashiers' keys which identify the cashier or shift which is printed on the folios (bills) vouchers and audit journals.
4.
Room rates are stored in the computer's memory and when the cashier enters the room rate code and presses the room rate look-up key; the terminal locates the rate in its memory, prints it on the folio and updates the totals.
5.
Room number and balance can be verified.
An automatic check digit is generated every time a new balance is printed.
When the room number and balance pick up check digits are entered they are verified electronically and if incorrect the terminal will reject the entire entry as invalid thus eliminating a common error in posting to guest's folio.
6.
A posting error can be corrected by using a correction or void key.
7.
Advance payments can be transferred to an advance reservation deposit by using the transfer debit and credit keys.
8.
Package rates — when special rates are offered to travel agents or tour operators, the computer can distribute the charges to their respective departments.
This information is printed on the audit journal but only the total package prints on the guest's folio.
9.
The trial balance feature provides the automatic  accumulation of debit and credit balance in separate totals.
Sweda L-4-30 (Fig. 5.22)
The Sweda is an electronic hotel posting machine and cash register which has been specially tailored for the hotel industry.
It produces clear legible bills for the guest, fast accurate operations for reception and security and information for the management.
Special features
1.
The departmental digits cover all the services such as laundry, telephone, valet, restaurant, bars, coffee shops, newspapers, etc.
2.
The keys cover eleven types of payment and eight miscellaneous keys cover the major credit cards, all with programmable limitations to alert the operator when management authorisation must be given to accept vouchers over a certain limit.
3.
Three separate cashier totals ABD.
4.
Up to 512 room balances may be stored, including ‘split rooms’ where two individuals in a room want separate bills.
5.
Currency conversions on ten rates of exchange.
6.
Debit and credit balances.
7.
VAT system where VAT can be added or extracted.
8.
Folio printer with four columns: reference, debit, credit, balancing for easy reference (Fig. 5.23).
9.
Alphanumerical display to alert cashier when to insert vouchers.
10.
Trial balance to facilitate hotel accounting.
11.
A training mode for cashier training.
Abbreviations used in machine accounting
Hoskyns computer systems (Fig. 5.24)
The Hoskyns Group have developed a range of computers specially tailored to the hotel industry.
HARDWARE
The range of hardware equipment available depends on the special requirements of the hotel and the volume of business and which software modules are installed.
Features
(a)
the processor;
(b)
the memory configuration to meet the individual requirements;
(c)
discs — Winchester hard discs are used;
(d)
streamers — used to back up the Winchester disc — software is distributed using tape streamer cassettes;
(e)
visual display units;
(f)
printers;
(g)
terminals in restaurants, switchboard, porters desks, housekeeping office to post charges direct to the guest's account or in the case of the housekeeper to enquire or update on the room status;
(h)
communications — with central reservations or other departments.
SYSTEMS (SOFTWARE)
Systems can be designed to cover the complete guest cycle and management control features:
Reservations
(a)
individual and group bookings;
(b)
travel agents, block allocations;
(c)
room pre-allocation;
(d)
deposit requests, and confirmation letters;
(e)
commissions;
(f)
statistical analysis.
Rooms Management
(a)
room status displays;
(b)
arrivals and departures list.
Registration
(a)
registration;
(b)
key cards;
(c)
individual and group check in;
(d)
guest messages;
(e)
baggage control.
Guest accounting
(a)
advance deposits;
(b)
multiple folios;
(c)
automatic apartment charging;
(d)
analysis of inclusive terms;
(e)
tour accounts;
(f)
function accounts;
(g)
flexible rate charges;
(h)
VAT analysis.
Cashier departures
(a)
bill settlement and any other payments in any combination of cash, cheques, traveller's cheques or credit cards with automatic sterling conversion;
(b)
foreign currency exchange using up to sixteen present rates;
(c)
automatic posting to guests' accounts from other terminals; tax analysis;
(d)
detailed analysis of cash drawer totals, cashier totals and banking totals;
(e)
fully itemised receipts for guests;
(f)
baggage control.
Control office
(a)
comprehensive revenue analysis;
(b)
full transaction auditing;
(c)
sales analysis.
Management information
(a)
forward analysis of rooms, revenue sleepers;
(b)
guest credit control;
(c)
statistics;
(d)
budgetary control;
(e)
guest history sales analysis.
5.16 PROGRESS TEST QUESTIONS
1.
Give two examples of each of the following.
(a)
a nominal account;
(b)
a personal account;
(c)
a real account.
2.
J. Chalan is a supplier to the Hotel Unicorn.
From the following information write up his account as it would appear in the books of the hotel:
3.
From the following information prepare a bank reconciliation statement as at 31 March: the bank statement shows a credit balance of £298.75.
Cheques drawn but not yet presented for payment £131.00; standing orders shown as paid on the bank statement but not entered in cash book £82.00; cheques entered in cash book but not yet paid into the bank £64.00.
What does the cash book balance show?
4.
Explain what is meant by an error of commission; an error of omission; and an error of principle.
5.
In which book of first entry would you enter the following business documents:
(a)
a purchase invoice;
(b)
a credit note from a supplier;
(c)
a petty cash voucher?
6.
Explain the difference between a current account and a deposit account at the bank.
7.
Draw a specimen cheque, complete it and name the payee, drawer and drawee.
8.
Explain what is meant by endorsing a cheque and say when it is necessary to endorse a cheque.
9.
Explain what you understand by the ‘imprest system’ of keeping petty cash.
10.
Enter the particulars of the guests listed below who are in residence at the Atlas Hotel on an analysed visitors tabular ledger.
Close and balance the TAB as if it were the end of the day's business, adding and reconciling all totals:
11.
Complete the following table:
12.
What do you understand by the terms:
(a)
hardware;
(b)
software;
(c)
hard discs;
(d)
floppy discs.
13.
What are some of the advantages of mechanised accounting.
14.
List some of the features of:
(a)
the NCR 2251;
(b)
the Sweda I-45-30.
15.
List the advantages and disadvantages of a computerised hotel accounting system.
Business practice
In a large transient hotel where the length of stay of the guests averages only two to three nights, the volume of work will probably result in a high degree of specialisation and the tasks that have to be performed by the front office staff will be sub-divided into separate sections.
In such hotels the brigade of receptionists would in the main be occupied with the front desk reception duties connected with selling accommodation.
In smaller seasonal or residential hotels all the office work could be centralised in the reception office, and during the quiet period on the front desk the receptionist would be expected to carry out the task of maintaining accounting and other records.
However, whether employed by a large, medium or small establishment, the receptionist will be required to have a sound general knowledge of business practice, and, if called upon to do so, must be able to perform competently and efficiently the following tasks:
(a)
dealing with correspondence;
(b)
handling inward and outward mail;
(c)
control of stationery;
(d)
filing and maintaining records;
(e)
duplicating and photocopying;
(f)
maintaining stock-control systems;
(g)
control of wages systems and staff records;
(h)
preparation of statistics and reports;
as well as various miscellaneous office duties.
CORRESPONDENCE
Every business letter should be written with the idea of creating a favourable impression in the mind of the reader.
A badly constructed letter, crude in style, vague in wording and careless in grammar, will create an unfavourable impression, whereas a well framed letter, clear and concise in wording, indicates efficiency.
To be an effective business correspondent one should have a sound knowledge of English, which includes correct spelling, grammar and punctuation, and also be able to construct sentences so that the exact meaning is conveyed in the fewest possible words.
Business terms, definitions and abbreviations should be studied.
Desirable features of a good business letter
1.
Accuracy — As business letters are usually records of business transactions, all details must be scrupulously accurate.
2.
Conciseness — This means that the message of the letter must be conveyed in as few words as possible, using clear, simple expressions and avoiding the use of any unnecessary phrases.
3.
Grammatical correctness — In addition to correct spelling, a sound knowledge of the rules of English grammar is essential.
It is worth remembering that simple sentences are more likely to be grammatically correct than long, involved ones.
4.
Courtesy — A business letter is often used to obtain new business or to create goodwill; therefore every letter should convey genuine sincerity and courtesy.
5.
Good layout — The letter should present an attractive appearance and arrangement.
A good letter writer will place in a logical sequence the matter about which he or she intends to write.
Each topic should be dealt with in a separate paragraph as paragraphing focuses attention on the important points in their correct order.
INWARD MAIL
Business letters and enquiries for the attention of the management or various departments should be date stamped, sorted and distributed to the appropriate departments immediately upon arrival.
Mail for guests in residence
Any incoming mail for guests should be sorted and placed in the letter rack.
The room numbers are ascertained by using the alphabetical guest list.
Large envelopes or packets and registered letters are stored in a separate place and a notification slip (Fig. 6.1) is placed in the appropriate pigeon hole in the letter rack asking the guest to collect it either at the reception desk or enquiry office.
Mail for departed guests
If any mail arrives for guests who have departed, providing they have completed the mail forwarding form (Fig. 6.2) the mail is then readdressed and forwarded.
These forms are filed alphabetically, the expiry date carefully noted and systematically cleared out after the expiry date has elapsed.
Any mail arriving after that date is marked ‘address unknown’ and returned to the post office.
Mail for future guests
Mail for guests yet to arrive is sorted into alphabetical order and kept to one side in a separate compartment.
The advance bookings diary or chart is checked for the guest's arrival date, a note is made in the diary that mail is awaiting and on the appropriate date it is placed in the letter rack.
Registered mail (incoming)
The head porter or head receptionist is usually authorised to sign for registered mail.
A separate book is kept to record the date and time of arrival and receipt number.
A slip to notify the guest that registered mail is awaiting collection is placed in the letter rack.
The letters or packages are kept under lock and key or in the safe and when guests collect them they must sign the record book to indicate that they have taken delivery.
Staff mail
The head porter or housekeeper usually distributes any mail that arrives for residential staff.
Procedure for handling cash or cheques in the mail
1.
Any cash received in registered letters must be double-checked by the head receptionist.
2.
Uncrossed cheques and postal orders should be crossed immediately or stamped with a ‘crossings stamp’ to avoid fraud.
3.
A checklist should be made of all cash, cheques and postal orders received through the post and handed to the cashier for entry into the appropriate records.
The cashier should give a receipt to the receptionist that he or she has taken charge of the money.
OUTWARD MAIL
1.
A specified time should be set as a deadline when outgoing mail should be ready if it is to be despatched that day.
2.
Regular collections of mail for posting should be made throughout the day; this will ease the pressure and build-up of outgoing mail at the end of the day.
3.
All mail should be sorted; if there is any post for overseas, care must be taken that the correct postage stamps are affixed.
4.
Any post office receipts for registered mail should be gummed into a special book kept for that purpose.
5.
All mail for despatch should be franked if a franking machine is used, or the stamps used entered into the postage book, which should be kept on the imprest system (Fig. 6.3).
Business reply-paid cards or envelopes
These cards and envelopes are used for establishing goodwill, advertising purposes and for soliciting business.
The sender pays the postage if the recipient sends them back.
They must conform to the pattern and standard size laid down by the Post Office.
A licence has to be obtained and a deposit paid in advance to cover charges for a reasonable time.
Recorded delivery
If proof of postage is required for sending important documents through the post, the package or letter is taken to the post office, and for an extra charge the delivery will be recorded and a receipt obtained as proof.
Compensation up to eighteen pounds is payable for loss or damage.
Recorded delivery packets must not be dropped into a letter box.
Expresspost
This involves rapid same day delivery.
Expresspost is a fast messenger collection and delivery service available in London using radio controlled motor cycles and vans.
It is also available in certain other large towns and cities.
In addition to local services within the particular area, there are also many same day inter-city links between Expresspost centres.
Charges are based on distance.
Royal mail special delivery
This gives extra assurance for first class letter mail.
This service provides delivery by a Post Office messenger for letters and packets arriving at a delivery office on the next working day after posting but too late for normal delivery on that day.
In addition to first class postage a Royal Mail Special Delivery Fee of £1.50 must be paid.
A Certificate of Posting will be issued.
Items must be posted at post office counters in advance of latest recommended posting times for next working day delivery.
The special delivery fee will be refunded to the sender in respect of any item posted in advance of latest recommended posting times which does not receive delivery on the next working day after posting.
Registered mail (outgoing)
Registered mail has to be handed in to the post office, which issues an official receipt.
These receipts are gummed into a special book kept for the purpose, as they would have to be produced if a claim for compensation is made.
Registration of mail is used when money or valuables are sent through the post.
Registered letter envelopes in different sizes can be obtained from the post office, or a stout envelope or package can be used by drawing blue lines across the face before it is handed in to the post office.
Registration is not a safeguard against damage and the Post Office will only pay compensation if the contents were adequately packed.
EQUIPMENT AND MACHINES
Letter and parcel scales
If a letter contains more than one sheet of paper it should be weighed on the letter scales to ensure the correct amount of postage is affixed.
All parcels and packets should be weighed on the parcel scales.
Stamp folder
Stamps are easily lost; therefore, it is essential that they are contained in a special folder with separate divisions for each denomination.
Stamp folders should be kept under lock and key to avoid pilfering.
Franking machines (Fig. 6.4)
If the volume of mail is high, a franking machine can save a lot of time.
A postal franker is a machine which has to be hired or purchased from supplying companies licensed by the Post Office.
It stamps on the envelope (or on an adhesive strip) the amount of postage required and the date cancellation mark.
Advance payment has to be made to the Post Office to cover the value of the postage expected to be used.
As the stamp value is printed on the envelope, the amount is reduced on the machine until the machine reaches zero.
The machine will then lock and has to be taken back to the post office for further payment.
Machine-franked mail must be faced, securely tied in bundles and handed in to the post office.
A control card showing the readings of the meter of the franking machine must also be tendered to the post office.
Care must be taken that the correct denomination of stamp is printed on the envelopes.
First-class and second-class mail should be put through the machine on separate runs.
The date stamp must be altered every day, as the Post Office will not accept pre- or post-dated mail.
FILING AND INDEXING
Filing is a process of systematically classifying and storing records so that they can be produced without unreasonable delay.
Indexing is the process required to facilitate the location of records.
The basic principles of a good filing system are as follows.
Compactness and accessibility
Filing cabinets should not take up too much floor space and be sited so that it is easy to open drawers and get at records.
Simplicity and elasticity
A good filing system should be simple and easy to understand and operate.
It should also be capable of expansion if necessary.
Safety and security
Records may have to be kept for reference over a long period of time and therefore they must be adequately protected.
Security measures should be taken for the safe custody of confidential and important files; therefore, cabinets should have locks, with the keys kept by a responsible official.
Speed and efficiency
The proof of a good filing system lies in the ease with which records can be found.
Speed is essential, as delays are time-wasting and irritating.
Filing should be kept up to date.
If a file is removed, an ‘out’ guide with the date and name of the person or department that has taken it should be inserted in its place.
The files should be cleared out regularly and out of date records removed and placed in the ‘dead files’.
Methods of filing
Flat filing
Documents are placed one on top of the other in drawers or box files.
Cabinets with shallow drawers are available for the horizontal files.
Vertical filing (Fig. 6.5)
Vertical filing cabinets with up to five drawers are in general use in offices.
These drawers are fitted with rails for suspension files.
Dividers in filing drawers are called ‘guides’.
A ‘primary guide’ shows the main division and a ‘special guide’will donate a special section of the files.
Classifications
There are five basic classifications for filing: alphabetical, numerical, geographical, chronological (date order) and subject-matter.
The basis of all these systems is the alphabetical filing of names of either persons, places, things or subjects, and even when the system is numerical it requires an alphabetical index.
Alphabetical
Records are filed according to the first letter of the surname and then in the order of the first letter of the Christian name, for example:
Surnames beginning with ‘Mac’ or ‘Mc’are treated as ‘Mac’and the next letter in the name determines the filing position, for example:
The ‘Mac’ prefix is usually at the beginning of the ‘M’filing.
The same principle applies when the prefix is ‘Saint’ or ‘St’, ‘O'Brien’or ‘O'Toole’.
Hyphenated names such as‘Wynne-Jones’ should be filed under ‘W’, but ‘Mr S. Gabriel Brown’should be filed under ‘B’.
Titles and ranks such as‘Captain', ‘Sir’, ‘Lord’, should be disregarded.
Numerical
Documents or files are given numbers and are filed in number order.
This system has to be used  in conjunction with an alphabetical index.
To locate a particular file it is necessary to consult the index first, which will give the file number to be located.
Copies of bills or invoices are usually filed in numerical order.
Geographical
In this system the location or address is used as the identifying heading.
The arrangement would be by country, county, town, street, then number.
After grouping in geographical order, then the alphabetical system is used, for example: a document could be filed under the general heading of Southern Counties, then under the names in alphabetical order.
Subject-matter
When records are filed under this system it means that all documents relating to the subject are brought together under one heading, for example:
Chronological
Any subject matter which is filed in date order.
Indexing
The purpose of an index is to make it easy to locate any record in the system.
Indexing can take any of the following forms:
1.
A page as in the back of a book.
2.
Vertical cards arranged in drawers or trays (Fig. 6.6).
3.
Strip index — This is a frame into which strips of stiff card can be inserted.
This is only suitable when the information consists of one line only, such as names and addresses (Fig. 6.7).
4.
Wheel index — This form of card index is arranged around the circumference of a wheel.
Many thousands of cards can be attached to one wheel, which makes it a suitable and speedy system for a large volume of records (Fig. 6.8).
STATIONERY
Stationery should be stored in a clean and dry cupboard or stockroom, centrally situated.
It should be neatly stacked and clearly labelled.
Coloured cards should be inserted in stock as a reminder when to re-order.
The type of headings and the colour of paper is entirely a matter of choice and a decision of the management.
Paper sizes are standardised and the most commonly used are:
A4 — 210 mm × 297 mm and
A5 — 210 mm × 148 mm
and the Post Office prefer envelope sizes to be:
(for A4) 235 mm × 121 mm (width)
(for A5) 140 mm × 89 mm (width)
Continuous stationery
Bills, invoices, office forms and memos can be produced in a continuous strip which is divided by perforations so that the forms can be detached.
Several copies of each form can be produced by inserting carbon paper or by using ‘no carbon required’(NCR) paper.
This paper is chemically treated and whatever is written or typed on the top copy, automatically creates a carbon copy on the paper beneath.
The continuous stationery can be folded in a zig-zag fashion (which is the most popular); or fan-folded (which is joined end to end or horizontally and folded concertina fashion), or in a continuous roll.
DUPLICATING AND PHOTOCOPYING
When a large number of copies of the same document or form are required, they can be duplicated or photocopied from a master copy.
The method used for this process will depend on several factors, mainly the number of copies, the quality and cost.
Stencil duplicating
Stencils consist of a very thin skin with a plastic coating through which ink will not pass, and a backing sheet.
The stencil is the master copy, and is cut by a stencil key on a typewriter with the ribbon out of action and the keys thoroughly cleaned to prevent a smudged outline.
If drawings or handwriting has to be reproduced then the stencil can be cut by a ‘stylus’ pen.
It is then placed on to the inked drum of a duplicating machine (Fig. 6.9) and the ink is then forced through the cuts in the stencil and the copy is produced on absorbent paper.
Electronic stencil cutting is becoming more popular for, although more expensive than the ordinary method, it is still less expensive than printing.
Advantages
1.
Good quality stencils can produce several hundred copies per run, and, if stored carefully, can be reused.
2.
Correction of errors or alterations on the stencil are easily made by using special correcting fluid.
3.
Electronic stencils produce photographic reproduction.
4.
The absorbent copy paper is reasonably cheap.
Spirit duplicating (Fig. 6.10)
This method of duplicating can reproduce typewriting, handwriting or drawings in a variety of colours.
The master copy is made on special coated paper which has a glossy surface on one side.
Hectographic carbon paper is placed with its coated surface upwards and the glossy surface of the special paper is placed down on to it.
Whatever has to be copied is typed or handwritten on to the exposed surface of the special paper creating a reverse image in carbon on the back of the paper.
The master copy is then placed round the drum of the duplicator.
The copy paper fed into the machine is automatically dampened with a spirit which will dissolve some of the carbon.
It then passes under a roller which presses it against the master copy, leaving a positive image on the copy paper.
Advantages
1.
100–250 copies can be obtained from the master copy or it can be used for short runs until the carbon deposit is exhausted.
2.
This is the only method that can reproduce several colours simultaneously by the simple process of writing over different coloured carbon papers in turn when preparing the master copy.
3.
Both the carbon and special master paper are reasonably cheap.
Offset lithography (Fig. 6.11)
Lithographic duplicators work on the principle that oil and water do not mix.
The master copy is prepared on a thin metal plate or special paper.
A specially inked ribbon must be used if it is typed; handwriting or drawings require the use of a special pen.
The master is placed on a drum and comes into contact with damp rollers then ink rollers.
The blank spaces become wet and therefore reject the printing ink.
The greasy impression made by the special typewriter ribbon or special pen rejects the water and takes the ink, and the positive image is ‘offset’ or transferred to a second roller and is picked up in reverse.
When the paper is fed between this second roller and an impression roller, the image is printed the right way round.
This is a printing process and a machine would only be practical if the volume of office printing was high.
Advantages
1.
Up to 50 000 copies can be obtained from a metal master copy, which can be stored for reuse.
2.
High quality reproduction.
3.
A cheap form of printing.
Typeset lithography
These duplicators are basically small printing presses and only economic when there is a regular flow of work calling for high quality printing.
Photocopying (Fig. 6.12)
There are many modern photocopying machines on the market.
The methods and processes differ but the equipment used consists basically of the original to be photocopied being exposed to light or heat, together with a special light or heat-sensitive paper, and a processing unit in which the copy paper is developed.
When many copies of a document are required, photocopying can prove expensive.
Advantages
1.
Exact facsimile copies.
2.
Simplicity of operation.
3.
Useful for making copies of incoming letters, copy invoices, complicated official or legal documents.
THE ELECTRONIC OFFICE
Microcomputer software (program etc.) manufacturers are revolutionising office procedures by producing advanced software systems with facilities that include:
(a)
sophisticated word processors;
(b)
comprehensive calculators;
(c)
communications systems;
(d)
flexibility that allows the tailoring of the office specially to the requirements of the establishment.
Filing (Fig. 6.13)
1.
The system allows information to be ‘filed’ on floppy discs so that stored information can be called up at any time on the computer's visual display unit.
2.
Records can be updated or deleted.
3.
Search can be made through a number of different files at the same time.
Word processors
A word processor is a screen-based memory system which means that if you type a letter or a calculation on the visual display unit then press the print-out command, the letter or calculation will be typed exactly as it is on the screen.
Advantages
1.
Standard letters can be stored on floppy discs.
2.
If you want to add or remove words from documents the text is adjusted automatically.
3.
Calculations for invoices or statement can be used in conjunction with the word-processing facilities.
4.
Spelling mistakes can be adjusted or a document redrafted.
5.
Letters can be compiled from standard paragraphs stored in the memory.
Accounting
1.
All calculations can be carried out by the computer, e.g. discounts, VAT, etc.
2.
Calculations can be carried out using information from the files.
3.
Results can be printed in any form using the word processor.
CONTROL SYSTEMS
In the hotel and catering business, as in all other types of business, control should be exercised over all operations throughout the establishment, for control attacks fraud and ineffectiveness and promotes efficiency.
The triplicate checking system (Fig. 6.14) for restaurant control
Under this system a triplicate check pad is used.
Each pad has an identifying number, and each check is numbered consecutively.
No check should ever be destroyed; if errors are made, the word ‘cancelled’ should be written across the face and it should be left in its numbered order.
The basis of the system as used by the restaurant is as follows:
1.
On each check the waiter or wine waiter must fill in the date, table or room number and details of the order and sign his or her initials or number (Figs. 6.14(b) and (c)).
2.
The top copy of the check is handed into the kitchen or bar for the order to be taken.
The second copy is handed to the cashier who uses it to prepare the customer's bill and the third copy is retained in the waiter's book.
3.
The cashier's bills (Fig. 6.14(a)) are made out in duplicate.
The top copy acts as a receipt if the customer pays cash, or as a charging source on the tabular ledger for its residents or account customers.
Analysis sheets (Fig. 6.15) are written up from the duplicate copies of the bills.
4.
In the control office the top copies of the waiters' checks from the kitchen or bar, together with the second copies from the cashiers, are checked against charged bills, duplicates of the paid bills and summary sheets to ensure that the pricing is correct and that everything has been charged.
5.
Charged bills are sent to the reception office for entry in the tabular ledger.
They are then returned to the control office.
This triple checking system can be used for other items to be charged by the hotel.
Books of triplicate checks are issued to the following staff, and in each case, one copy is sent to the control office for checking and another to the reception office as a source for charges on the tabular ledger.
Using colours helps facilitate the sorting of checks and the analysis work done in the control office.
Different coloured books of checks can be used for easier identification of the various departments from which the charges originated.
Audit roll control
Checks should be made that the total on the tally roll of all the tills in restaurants, bars, and cash desks should agree with the cash returned by the cashiers.
A senior clerk should clear the machines and then reset them to zero at various times during the day.
Stock control
It is essential that control should be kept over all stock, whether it be food, drink or items of equipment.
A good system for ordering and recording the receipt of all items is necessary and regular stock checks should be made.
The basis of a good stock control system is as follows:
1.
When goods are received into the stores, cellars, linen rooms or other sections, they are checked against the delivery note and a copy of the order and entered in the goods received book.
2.
Goods are binned and entered on the ‘bin cards’(Fig. 6.16).
3.
The goods received are also posted to the individual stock record cards from the invoice which will show the prices (Fig. 6.17).
4.
Departmental requisitions are used to book items out from stores, cellars, linen rooms, etc.
(Fig. 6.18).
5.
Goods are issued and the requisitions are used to post the times used to the bin cards and stock record cards.
6.
Requisitions are used to compile an issue analysis sheet.
7.
Regular stock checks should be made to see that the balance of stock in the bin agrees with both the balance on the bin card and the balance on the stock record card.
WAGES SYSTEMS
There are many patented wages systems in use especially adapted to meet the requirements of the individual employers, but the basic principles underlying all the systems are the same.
1.
To provide records of work and attendance and the pay rates of all members of staff.
2.
To calculate the gross pay of each employee, which includes basic pay plus any extra payment in respect of overtime, bonuses, share of service charge, allowances, holiday pay, sick pay and expenses.
3.
To calculate the net pay which means subtracting the various deductions from gross pay such as income tax, national insurance contributions, and any other deductions specific to the organisation such as pension contributions, savings clubs and social clubs.
4.
To conform to the statutory requirements in respect of the deduction of income tax and national insurance, and the Wages Councils Act 1959.
5.
To prepare the payroll and payslips for the employees.
6.
To maintain all income tax and national insurance records and keep them up to date.
7.
To distribute on time pay envelopes to members of staff.
8.
To ensure that income tax and national insurance contributions (including employer's contributions) are paid to the local inspector of taxes.
The payroll
In a large establishment employees are each given a works number, which is entered in numerical order on the weekly payroll sheet or a separate payroll sheet kept for each department.
Some hotels use accounting machines which can produce the payroll, tax deduction records and payslips simultaneously.
Some patent systems produce a master payroll sheet and a perforated top copy, which can be torn off in strips to provide individual payslips for the employees; details of pay and deductions for each employee are entered on the top copy and appear as a carbon copy on the master sheet.
The perforated slips are then torn off and placed in the pay envelopes of the employees.
PAYE (Pay-as-you-earn)
This system means that income tax is deducted from the wages as they are earned.
The employer has the responsibility of deducting the income tax from the employee's salary, maintaining all records and sending the tax deducted to the local inspector of taxes.
Each worker is given an income tax code number which is related to the total of his personal allowances.
His income tax liability is then calculated by referring to tax tables which are supplied by the Inland Revenue.
Tax Tables
Income tax must be deducted or refunded in accordance with these:
Table A — The free pay table
Table B — The taxable pay table
Meal vouchers are not regarded as taxable.
Gratuities (tips) or a share in a service charge distribution should be included in the gross pay.
Income tax documents
Along with the tax tables, the Inland Revenue issues an Employer's Guide to PAYE booklet (P7) which gives instructions on the preparation and use of the official income tax forms and documents.
1.
P11 — This is a weekly/monthly tax deduction card, one to be maintained for each employee.
2.
P45 — This form is in triplicate and must be handed to all employees leaving a firm.
It shows their tax code number and details of their gross pay and tax deducted to date.
The top copy is detached and sent to the firm's local tax inspector.
Parts II and III are handed to the employees to take to their next employers, who will copy the details on to the P11 card, file Part II for reference and complete Part III and send it to their local inspector of taxes.
3.
P46 — This form has to be completed by the employer when a new employee does not produce a P45.
4.
P60 — This is a certificate issued to every employee at the end of the financial year showing the amount of gross pay and tax deducted during the year.
5.
P35 — At the end of the financial year the employer has to complete this return and send it with the completed P11's to the Collector of Taxes.
6.
P47 — Employer's application to the inspector of taxes for authority to refund tax over £20.
National insurance contributions
The Social Security Act 1973, came into operation on 6 April 1975.
Earnings-related contributions are collected along with income tax under the pay-as-you-earn system.
The following are the rates that were effective from 6 April 1976, but it must be remembered that these are liable to change at any time; full information on contribution rates can be obtained from the Department of Health and Social Security.
Employee's contributions
These contributions are payable at two different rates:
(a)
standard rates to be paid by most employees;
(b)
reduced rates payable by certain married women and widows.
Employer's contributions
The contributions paid by employers are at the same rate, regardless of whether the employee pays at standard or reduced rate.
Recording and payment of national insurance contributions
The Department of Health and Social Security allocates national insurance numbers to all contributors and these numbers must be entered on all relevant documents.
New employees normally produce a P45 on which their national insurance numbers will have been entered by their previous employers.
The P11 tax deduction card provides columns for the recording of the contributions, Col. I(a) for the total of the employee's and employer's contribution, Col. I(b) for the amount of the employee's contribution.
Contribution tables
These tables are produced by the Department of Health and Social Security.
They cover earning periods of one week and one month and are used to calculate the contributions to be paid.
There are three tables for each set and each bears a distinct category letter which is entered on the P11.
Table A — for standard rate contributions;
Table B — for reduced rate contributions;
Table C — for use where the employee is not liable for any contributions.
End of year procedures
At the end of the financial year the employer must ensure that:
(a)
the employee's national insurance number, surname and forenames are correctly entered on every deduction card;
(b)
the identifying letter of the contribution table used has been entered on the deduction card and that contribution totals are correct.
The employer's annual declaration (P35)
This annual return made by the employer covers both income tax and national insurance contributions.
The total amount of contributions and tax paid by each employee is entered on the P35.
All completed deduction cards, the P35 and the balance of any tax or contributions due should be sent to the Collector of Taxes.
Wages Councils Act 1959
In the hotel and catering industry five separate wages boards implement the Wages Councils Act 1959, with regard to the statutory minimum remuneration and holidays and holiday remuneration within the industry.
It is likely they may be amalgamated or changed in the future, but at the time of writing they are:
(a)
the Industrial and Staff Canteen Undertaking Wages Board (ISC);
(b)
the Unlicensed Place of Refreshment Wages Board (UPR);
(c)
the Licensed Residential and Licensed Restaurant Wages Board (LR);
(d)
the Licensed Non-Residential Establishment Wages Board (LNR);
(e)
the Unlicensed Residential Establishment Wages Board (UR).
In the schedules issued by the Catering Wages Councils to employers in the trade the following terms describe the areas:
Area A
The Metropolitan Police District and City of London
Area B
(a) In England and Wales, the districts of Birmingham, Bradford, Bristol, Cardiff, Coventry, Kingston-upon-Hull, Leeds, Leicester, Liverpool, Manchester, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, Nottingham, Sheffield and Stoke-on-Trent (b) In Scotland, the Cities of Edinburgh and Glasgow
Area C
All other areas than Area A or B
PROGRESS TEST QUESTIONS
1.
Explain briefly how you would deal with:
(a)
mail for guests in residence;
(b)
mail for departed guests;
(c)
mail for guests yet to arrive.
2.
When receiving registered mail for an expected guest, what procedure would you follow?
3.
Describe briefly the following methods of despatching outward mail:
(a)
recorded delivery;
(b)
special delivery.
4.
Describe the purpose and use of a franking machine.
5.
Explain briefly the five basic classifications for filing.
6.
Write brief notes on the following methods of reproduction:
(a)
stencil duplicating;
(b)
spirit duplicating;
(c)
offset lithography;
(d)
photocopying.
7.
Explain the triplicate checking system for restaurant control.
8.
Describe the basic principles of a good stock control system.
9.
Write brief notes on the following terms:
(a)
PAYE;
(b)
Tax Tables A and B;
(c)
P9, P11, P45, P46, P60, P35;
(d)
national insurance contributions Tables A, B and C.
10.
Name the five separate wages boards which implement the Wage Councils Act, 1959, in the hotel and catering industry.
Reports and statistics
In modern business organisations, reports, statistics, graphs and charts are prepared regularly as an aid to management.
They provide information and data which help guide and control the affairs of the business and assist management to make decisions on policy and future developments.
Percentages, accounting ratios and averages are helpful in presenting the operational information in a simple manner.
PERCENTAGES
The simple method of calculating percentages are as follows:
ACCOUNTING RATIOS
A ratio is a way of expressing the relationship of one figure to another, for example:
AVERAGES
When preparing statistics on guest spending power, room sales and length of stay of guests it is common practice to use averages.
There are three methods of arriving at averages:
1.
Mean — Add the weekly totals and divide by the number of weeks they cover.
2.
Median — Arrange the figures in either ascending or descending order.
If the number of figures is odd, select the middle figure.
If the number of figures is even, add the two middle figures together and divide by two.
3.
Mode — This is the most frequently repeated figure in the series.
The moving average
This method of calculating an average is favoured by the hotel and catering industry as it can show the trend over a period of time and eliminates the effects of seasonal fluctuations.
Method
At the end of each month the top figure is removed and the new month's figure is added and a new average is calculated.
SALES MIX PERCENTAGES
The term ‘sales mix’ is used to denote how the total volume of sales is composed and what percentage of that total is contributed by each revenue-producing department.
ROOM OCCUPANCY/BED OCCUPANCY
As the sale of accommodation produces the highest proportion of the income of a hotel, daily occupancy reports are prepared and analysed in order that management can measure whether the hotel is operating to its maximum efficiency.
Room occupancy
To calculate the room occupancy percentage accurately, the number of rooms out of service (OSS) for any reason such as maintenance or redecorating must be deducted from the total number of rooms in the hotel.
Bed occupancy
A more accurate method of measuring the efficiency of the sales department is to calculate the actual bed occupancy (sleepers) percentage.
Example
Double occupancy
To measure the skill of the reservations clerk in achieving a maximum occupancy percentage the following calculations can be made.
This type of calculation could reflect the revenue that would be lost by offering a ‘middle rate’.
Housekeeper's report (Figs. 7.2 and 7.3)
Each day the housekeeper prepares a room occupancy report and from this the statistics on room occupancy, bed occupancy, rooms out of service and sleeper loss percentages are calculated.
AVERAGE LENGTH OF STAY
To assist the management in organising staff, shifts, holidays and rotas utilising time and equipment a useful statistic is calculating the average length of stay of the guest.
Example
During the course of one week four hundred guests were booked into a hotel.
An analysis showed:
GRAPHS AND CHARTS
Some hotels maintain graphs and charts to be used for easy visual reference and to gain an overall picture without having to refer to detailed records.
The information tabulated is shown as a graph in Fig. 7.5(a) and as a bar chart in Fig. 7.5(b).
OVERSEAS VISITORS PERCENTAGE
Many hotels maintain records and statistics relating to overseas visitors and their nationality.
Tourists from other countries account for a great deal of revenue to some large hotels and therefore a watchful eye is kept on the figure, so that advertising campaigns can be planned to attract foreign visitors.
FORECASTING
Hotels with computers programmed to produce forecast printouts of future room and guest occupancy have an advantage, but there is no guarantee that there will not be a power or computer failure, and of course not all hotels have computers.
It is therefore essential that reservation staff are able to project an accurate handwritten forecast, and this requires knowledge, skill and experience.
These forecasts are an extremely useful tool for management; sales revenue can be estimated and it provides a means of control by the measurement of actual results against the forecast.
Management can plan projects such as hotel maintenance and redecorating; advertising campaigns can be directed so as to improve low occupancy percentages.
Heads of departments can forecast their purchase requirements and plan the labour and holiday rotas.
The forecasts period can cover 7 days, 11 days, 30 days or 90 days, depending entirely on management policy.
The information necessary to project the forecast is:
(a)
the actual number of rooms confirmed as shown by the reservations chart of scan;
(b)
a study of the reservations chart for the same period last year;
(c)
a calculation of the average walk-ins or chance guests;
(d)
a calculation of the percentage no shows;
(e)
a note of any changes between this period last year and now likely to affect the forecast;
(f)
The basic formula for the calculation of guest occupancy; that is:
(i)
it is simple to calculate one person in a single room, two in a double, but that would not allow for an extra person in a room or for children; therefore an average is calculated thus:
(ii)
a large transient hotel with a high percentage of double rooms, very often occupied by one person only; therefore:
Using the second formula follow the forecast chart (Fig. 7.7) for the period Wednesday, 3 October to Saturday, 13 October (11 days).
PROGRESS TEST QUESTIONS
Legal aspects By Alan Pannett
This chapter provides an outline of the law as it relates to the work of a hotel receptionist.
BOOKING CONTRACTS
A booking contract between a guest and a hotel may come into being in any one of a number of ways.
All bookings are made through the receptionist of the hotel.
Normally prospective guests either write or telephone the hotel prior to booking.
A booking contract may be formed by a telephone conversation between the prospective guest and the hotel.
Only where the words used are sufficient to amount to an offer by one party to the other to contract and an acceptance by that other party of the terms of the offer, will a contract be brought about.
It is normal practice for hotels to require confirmation from a prospective guest in writing.
The guest's letter requesting accommodation amounts to an offer to contract; the hotel's written acknowledgement is the acceptance of it.
Where bookings occur by an exchange of letters, the initial inquiry by the guest does not amount to an offer to contract, nor necessarily does the hotel's reply to the guest stating the tariff and room availability.
It is afterwards when the prospective guest writes to the hotel that he or she requires a room between certain dates that an offer is made.
The hotel's response in writing confirming the booking is an acceptance of the guest's offer to contract.
The contract is then completely formed.
Bookings may also be made as a result of a chance call at reception of the hotel by a person seeking a room.
In this situation the traveller's request for a room is merely pre-contractual, the receptionist by telling the traveller that a room is available at a given price for one or more nights is making an offer to the traveller.
The traveller may thereafter accept the terms of the offer, or reject them and seek accommodation elsewhere.
In modern sophisticated hotels bookings may be made by telex.
Telex is treated in law as an instant form of communication.
Hence, the same principles apply to telex as apply to chance call bookings made on a face-to-face basis.
A hotel receptionist should be sure that prospective guests are aged 18 or more, since otherwise if the bill remains unpaid a court action if brought to recover the debt will fail because the contract of booking is unenforceable.
What are the terms normally included in a contract of booking?
The terms of a contract are normally express (i.e. stated by the parties to be part of it).
The express terms contained in a booking contract are likely to relate to the following points:
(a)
payment and confirmation of booking;
(b)
cancellation by either client or hotel;
(c)
alteration to the terms of the contract by the hotel;
(d)
liability of the hotel for guest's property etc.;
(e)
liability of the hotel for unforeseen occurrences.
Terms may not be added to a contract once it has been made.
The terms of a contract are settled either before or at the time of making the contract.
In Olley v. 
Marlborough Court Ltd (1949) the guest booked a room in a hotel.
The contract was made at the reception desk.
A notice in the guest's room sought to exclude liability for loss or damage to guest's property.
A thief gained entry to the guest's room and stole her property.
The hotel tried to rely upon the notice in guest's room as excluding their liability for the loss.
The court took the view that since the contract was formed at the reception desk, the notice in the bedroom did not form part of the contract, thus it could not be relied upon by the hotel as excluding liability.
A booking contract will normally come to an end in any of three ways:
(a)
performance;
(b)
frustration;
(c)
breach.
A contract ends by performance when the terms of the contract have been performed by both parties, i.e. the hotelier has supplied the accommodation contracted for and the guest has paid the contract price for the accommodation services rendered.
Frustration is where a contract is terminated by an event which has arisen through no fault of either contracting party.
The most likely way in which a booking contract may be frustrated is through severe illness on the part of the guest.
Other circumstances which may amount to frustration of a booking contract are the flooding of the hotel so as to make it uninhabitable or its destruction by fire.
Breach of contract occurs where one of the parties fails to perform any one of the contract terms.
The effect of the breach will depend upon the nature of the terms breached, if the term breached is a condition, i.e. a fundamental term of the contract, the victim of the breach may treat the contract as at an end and sue for damages.
Where the term breached is a less important term, a warranty, breach merely entitles the victim of it to sue for damages and does not allow the victim to end the contract.
In the area of booking contracts a form of damages has developed which may enable the guest to obtain more than the value of the contract.
This form of damage is called damages for disappointment.
This principle has been extended so that a person who books a holiday on behalf of others, e.g. a husband booking on behalf of himself his wife and children, may obtain damages not only for his own disappointment etc. but also for the disappointment sustained by his wife and children.
What happens where an untrue statement is made which induces a guest to book at the hotel?
This does not amount to a breach of contract by the hotel unless the  misrepresentation is incorporated into the contract and thus forms one of its terms.
However, where a person is induced to make a contract by a false statement this may give rise to a civil action brought by the party to whom the statement was addressed for misrepresentation under the Misrepresentation Act 1967.
In addition, the making of false statements (whether in adverts or otherwise) which are made either knowingly or recklessly may give rise to a criminal prosecution under section 14(1) Trade Descriptions  Act 1968.
Such prosecutions are brought by trading standards officers working for the local authority, the purpose of such prosecutions is to punish offenders.
The provisions contained in s.14(1) affect the hotelier in many ways.
Examples
A hotel advertises that the hotel is RAC- and AA- recommended when it is not, this is an offence within the scope of s.14(1).
A hotel advertises that it is 100 yards from the beach and all rooms have a sea view.
The hotel is half a mile from the beach and none of the rooms overlook the sea.
Section 14(1) also applies here.
A receptionist assures a potential guest that she has been allocated a room with a bathroom/w.c. and a balcony, when the room in fact allocated has none of these facilities; s.14(1) also applies to this situation.
If a hotel receptionist double-books a room does this give rise to criminal liability?
You may be surprised to learn that it can do.
The principles of law involved are discussed in section 8.3 of this chapter.
PRICE DISPLAY
The Tourism (Sleeping Accommodation Price Display) Order 1977 requires the display of overnight accommodation prices in residential establishments with more than four rooms.
The notice required by the Order must be clearly displayed either at the entrance to the hotel or at reception.
The information which must be provided in the notice comprises:
(a)
price of a single room;
(b)
price of a double room;
(c)
price of any other type of bedroom (e.g. suite);
(d)
all prices must be inclusive of service charge and state this to be so;
(e)
the VAT element in the price must be shown in some form or other;
(f)
it should be made clear whether the stated price is inclusive of meals.
A failure to display such a notice may lead to a criminal prosecution brought by the trading standards office of the local authority.
The maximum fine upon convictions for breach of the order is £200.
A sample notice is set out below.
REGISTERING GUESTS AND OVERBOOKING
Registration of Guests
By virtue of the Immigration (Hotel Records) Order 1972 all guests over the age of sixteen are required upon arrival at a hotel to register their full name and nationality, or have it registered for them.
The hotelier is required to keep a record of this information which is open to inspection by the police for a period of up to twelve months.
British subjects and Commonwealth citizens need not give their address.
Each guest must be the subject of a separate entry in the hotel register.
Non-British and non-Commonwealth citizens must give the following information:
(a)
their name and nationality;
(b)
passport details;
(c)
the date on which they intend to leave and their next destination.
Overbooking
It is a common practice within the hotel industry for hotel reception staff to overbook the rooms available at the hotel to a limited degree in the expectation that certain of the bookings made will be cancelled, ‘no shows’ as they are sometimes called.
The reception staff therefore take a calculated risk that there will be a percentage of ‘no shows’ and overbook the same percentage of rooms in an effort to maintain full occupancy of the rooms.
However, overbooking is an illegal practice following the decision of the House of Lords in British Airways v. 
Taylor (1976).
Example
Ms Jones, the hotel receptionist at the Hotel Bograte, overbooks the rooms available at the hotel on the night of 1 April.
Ms Jones, in answer to Mr Snoops letter requesting accommodation in room 214 for the night of 1 April, writes confirming the reservation of that particular room.
Mr Snoops arrives at the Hotel Bograte on 1 April and demands to stay in room 214, which has already been let for the night to Mr and Mrs Bunn.
Mr Snoop may bring a civil action claiming damages for breach of the booking contract between himself and the Hotel Bograte, including damages for disappointment (see section 8.1 above).
Furthermore, provided Ms Jones's original statement reserving room 214 was made either knowingly or recklessly an offence under s.14 Trade Descriptions Act 1968 has been committed.
Can the hotel receptionist be prosecuted for an offence under s.14 Trade Descriptions Act 1968?
Yes, she or he may be prosecuted.
The purpose of the legislation is, however, not to punish individuals, but to promote good business practices and to prevent unconscionable ones.
A receptionist will not normally overbook unless it is done in compliance with the policy of the management of the hotel, or upon the instructions of the reception manager.
In either case sections 23 and 24 Trade Descriptions Act 1968 allow for the prosecution of the hotel (whether it be a company or a proprietor) or another person who is directly responsible for the commission of the offence, i.e. the reception manager.
Section 24 may also be used by a hotelier who is prosecuted under s.14 where the overbooking was due to the actions or default of the receptionist or reception manager and was not part of the hotelier's policy.
INNS AND HOTELS: THE RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF THE PROPRIETOR
When looking at booking contracts above we did not distinguish between the various forms of establishment which offer food, drink and accommodation.
The law of England does in fact draw a distinction between ‘inns’ and other establishments.
The term ‘inn’ is given a technical meaning: it describes those hotels which fall within the scope of the Hotel Proprietors Act 1956.
Inn, therefore, has a specific legal meaning and only those establishments which fall within that definition are subject to the duties and able to exercise the rights accorded to establishments of that status.
The definition of an inn is to be found in s.1(3) of the HPA 1956 —‘an establishment held out by the proprietor as offering food, drink and, if so required, sleeping accommodation, without special contract, to any traveller presenting himself who appears able and willing to pay a reasonable sum for the services and facilities provided and who is in a fit state to be received’.
It is not easy to define in any positive way the kinds of hotel within the scope of s. (3) HPA 1956, but obviously the larger establishments such as major hotels are covered by s.1(3), as are many more modest hotels.
What are the duties which the law imposes upon an innkeeper?
The proprietor of an inn is known as an innkeeper, and it is upon this person that the duties arising both at common law and under the Hotel Proprietors Act 1956 are imposed.
Such duties are owed by an innkeeper to any traveller calling at the inn.
A traveller is any person who calls at the inn to use the services there available.
The duties owed to a traveller are:
1.
A duty to provide reasonable refreshment.
A failure to  fulfil this duty on the part of the innkeeper may render the innkeeper liable to criminal prosecution.
An innkeeper is however, only bound to supply that which he has available and is not under any duty to send out for further supplies in order to satisfy the traveller's request.
2.
A duty to provide accommodation at the inn without prior contract to any traveller seeking accommodation.
An innkeeper may refuse to accommodate a traveller only when:
(a)
the inn is full;
(b)
the traveller is unable to pay a reasonable sum for the accommodation in advance;
(c)
the traveller is not in a fit state to be received at the inn.
Where the inn is full there is no duty to accommodate.
The stranded motorist is a classic example; there is no duty to accommodate stranded travellers when the inn is full.
Often innkeepers will make exceptional arrangements for such persons as a gesture of goodwill (e.g. letting them sleep in the lounge), but they cannot legally be required to do so.
When can service be refused to a traveller?
The Hotel Proprietors Act 1956 contains two provisos.
1.
An innkeeper is not bound to supply with reasonable refreshment or to accommodate, any person who cannot pay a reasonable sum for these services.
Reception staff at hotels are often instructed that where they feel cautious about a prospective guest's ability to pay the final bill, payment shall be requested in advance.
This is a normal practice where, for instance, the night porter books in a guest after reception has closed.
It is a precaution against the guest's departing early the following morning without paying the bill.
2.
An innkeeper can refuse service to any person who is not in a fit state to be received at the inn.
An example may be a traveller who has on previous occasions caused annoyance to other guests or in some way disrupted the inn.
It is generally appreciated within the hotel industry that this second proviso provides the innkeeper with a broad power to regulate the clientele at the inn.
An innkeeper may insist that male customers wear a jacket and tie, refusing to serve persons who are casually dressed.
It is also useful when dealing with undesirable customers, e.g. drunks, and prostitutes.
Reception staff at hotels based in cities and large towns may have to persuade unwanted persons loitering in the reception lounge to move on and leave the hotel; the right to refuse service to persons unfit to be received is often the authority relied on when taking such actions.
An innkeeper must be careful however, not to refuse service for the wrong reasons.
Innkeepers who either discriminate against or refuse service to a customer on the grounds of his or her sex or race are liable to have a claim brought against them under either s.29 of the Sex Discrimination Act 1975 or s.20 of the Race Relations Act 1976.
The law regarding discrimination either upon grounds of race or sex is applicable to all establishments irrespective of whether or not the establishment is within the scope of the HPA 1956.
THE GUEST IN RESIDENCE
Innkeepers' liability for guest's property
Innkeepers have a strict duty to care for the property of their guests.
This duty of an innkeeper is owed not to travellers but only to guests; a guest is a person who has engaged a minimum of one night's accommodation at the inn.
The innkeeper's liability for guest's property is strict.
It does not depend upon proof of neglect on the part of the innkeeper.
It is the innkeeper's duty to keep the guest's property safe; the innkeeper's liability is not dependent upon how the goods are lost or damaged.
However, loss or damage due to the fault of the guest is not within the scope of the innkeeper's liability.
Section 2 of the HPA 1956 sets out the scope of the duty and restricts the kinds of property to which the duty applies.
It does not apply to the guest's vehicle or any of the guest's property left in the guest's vehicle.
In order that an innkeeper be strictly liable for loss or damage to the property of a guest, the guest must prove:
(a)
that he or she has been signed in at the inn;
(b)
that at the time of the loss or damage he or she had taken a room at the inn; and
(c)
that the property in question was of a sort covered by the innkeeper's duty.
The scope of the innkeeper's duty is further limited by s.2(3): where the proprietor of an hotel is liable as an innkeeper to make good the loss of or damage to property brought to the hotel, his liability to any one guest shall not exceed fifty pounds in respect of any one article, or one hundred pounds in the aggregate, except where —
(a)
the property was stolen, lost or damaged through the default, neglect or wilful act of the proprietor or some servant of his or
(b)
the property was deposited by or on behalf of the guest expressly for safe custody with the proprietor or some servant of his authorised, or appearing to be authorised, for the purpose, and, if so required by the proprietor or that servant, in a container fastened or sealed by the depositor; or 
(c)
at a time after the guest has arrived at the hotel, either the property in question was offered for deposit as aforesaid and the proprietor or his servant refused to receive it, or the guest or some other guest acting on his behalf wished so to offer the property in question but, through the default of the proprietor or a servant of his, was unable to do so.
Provided that the proprietor shall not be entitled to the protection of this subsection unless, at the time when the property in question was brought to the hotel, a copy of the notice set out in the schedule to this Act printed in plain type was conspicuously displayed in a place where it could conveniently be read by his guests at or near the reception office or desk or, where there is no reception office or desk, at or near the main entrance to the hotel.
The Schedule notice referred to in s.2(3) is set out below.
Schedule to the Hotel Proprietors Act 1956
NOTICE
LOSS OF OR DAMAGE TO GUESTS' PROPERTY
Under the Hotel Proprietors Act 1956, a hotel proprietor may in certain circumstances be liable to make good any loss of or damage to a guest's property even though it was not due to any fault of the proprietor or staff of the hotel.
This liability, however:
(a)
extends only to the property of guests who have engaged sleeping accommodation at the hotel;
(b)
is limited to £50 for any one article and a total of £100 in the case of any one guest, except in the case of property which has been deposited or offered for deposit for safe custody;
(c)
does not cover motor-cars or other vehicles of any kind or any property left in them, or horses or other live animals.
This notice does not constitute an admission either that the Act applies to this hotel or that liability thereunder attaches to the proprietor of this hotel in any particular case.
The effect of s.2(3) of the HPA 1956 is to afford protection to an innkeeper.
Provided the innkeeper displays the Schedule notice in the manner stipulated, his liability for loss or damage to any one article of the guest's property is £50.
In any event the total liability of the innkeeper for two or more articles of the guest's property cannot exceed £100.
Where, however, the loss or damage is due to any of the three matters stipulated in s.2(3) (a),(b), or (c), the innkeeper loses protection and is liable to the guest for the full extent of the loss.
On the other hand if the loss or damage to the guest's property is attributable to the misconduct or negligence of the guest, no liability attaches to the innkeeper for the loss or damage.
From the point of view of the hotel receptionist it is important to remember a vital practical point: do not refuse to take guest's property into safe custody, and make sure that either you or one of your staff constantly remain at the reception desk in order to fulfil this duty.
A refusal or a failure in this respect may lead to the innkeeper (your employer) being fully liable for those articles tendered for safe custody by reason of s.2(3) (b) and 2(3) (c).
Furthermore, always ensure that the Schedule notice is displayed.
A failure to display this notice will mean that the protection afforded by s.2 cannot be utilised if required.
It is possible, and indeed it is the normal practice for innkeepers to insure themselves against the risk of loss or damage to guests' property, thus limiting the likely effect of such an occurrence.
THE RIGHTS OF AN INNKEEPER
Because innkeepers are under specific duties imposed upon them by the Hotel Proprietors Act 1956 and at common law, they in return have certain rights which they may exercise over and above those which proprietors who are not innkeepers may exercise.
The most important right is the right of lien over guests' property.
The term ‘lien’ merely describes a right  exercisable by one party over the property of another.
An innkeeper may detain any property brought to the inn by a guest until the guest has paid his or her bill in full.
The innkeeper is not however, entitled to detain the guest.
The innkeeper's lien applies both to travellers' and guests' property.
An innkeeper, as we have seen, is under a duty to provide reasonable refreshment if so required and accommodation to a traveller; hence, the innkeeper has a right of lien over a traveller's property as well as over a guests' to ensure that the traveller's bill is duly paid.
It is unlikely, however, that a traveller will bring luggage to the inn, and since the traveller's car and goods contained therein cannot be the subject of a lien, cases where the lien is exercised over the property of a traveller are rare.
Where an innkeeper exercises the right of lien over the property of a guest, the innkeeper owes to the guest whose property the innkeeper is retaining a duty to take reasonable care of the property in question.
An innkeeper has a power of sale in relation to the goods over which he or she is exercising his or her right of lien.
If innkeepers did not have a right of sale they would be left with the property of guests which they could not realise in order to satisfy the debt.
The right of sale is subject to certain restrictions as provided by s.
I of the Innkeepers Act 1878.
A table showing the respective rights and duties of an innkeeper compared with those of a proprietor of a private hotel is set out below:
Duties owed by both inns and private hotels.
1.
The duty owed as an occupier of premises towards lawful visitors (e.g. guests and travellers) to the premises, under the Occupiers' Liability Act 1957.
2.
A civil duty to take reasonable care of guests' property brought to the premises, under the tort of negligence, or as an implied term of the contract of booking.
3.
The duty not to discriminate in the provision of services to the public, either on the basis of a person's race or sex — s.20 Race Relations Act 1974, s.29 Sex Discrimination Act 1975.
NON-PAYMENT BY GUESTS AND TRAVELLERS
Defaulting is a problem for many forms of catering enterprise.
The customer who walks out without paying in a restaurant and the guest at a hotel who leaves early in the morning by a fire escape are but two examples of the problems hoteliers face.
Where travellers are provided with food and drink and fail to pay before they depart from the premises, they may be charged with a criminal offence (making off without payment) contrary to s.3(1) of the Theft Act 1978.
An innkeeper may demand payment prior to the provision of the service, e.g. food, drink or accommodation; this in itself affords some protection from defaulters.
What should a hotel receptionist do if he or she believes a guest to be dishonest?
If the situation is one where the person in question is seeking accommodation, the receptionist may ask the prospective guest to pay for the accommodation, in advance.
Innkeepers have a legal right to payment in advance.
If the prospective guest is unable to pay then the receptionist may refuse to accommodate that person.
If the situation is one where the receptionist believes that the guest may try to leave without paying, the receptionist will normally advise the proprietor of his or her fears and the decision will then be the proprietor's.
If the situation requires quick action, there being no time to seek higher authority, the receptionist at an inn may detain the guest's luggage (not the guest himself or his vehicle) and exercise the innkeeper's lien over the guest's property until the bill is paid in full.
Both of these examples rely on the rights of an innkeeper which we have considered above; it is of course perfectly proper for the receptionist to call the police as an alternative measure.
THE HOTEL PREMISES
There are many legal aspects which relate to the hotel premises.
An outline is given below of important legal controls on hotel premises.
Hygiene
The Food and Drugs Act 1955, and the Food Hygiene (General) Regulations 1970 control the cleanliness of all establishments concerned with food preparation, hotel kitchens must comply with these regulations.
Prosecution for offences under either the 1955 Act or the 1970 Regulations may lead to heavy penalties, and even to the enforced closure of the premises by the Food & Drugs (Control of Food Premises) Act 1976.
Fire
Fire, should it occur in a place where a substantial number of people gather, i.e. a bar or a hotel, may have tragic consequences.
These are heightened in a hotel, since many people sleep within one building.
The Fire Precautions Act 1971 was passed in order to improve fire safety standards at premises frequented by the general public.
Fire certificates are required for certain kinds of premises, including many hotels.
These certificates are issued by the local fire authority.
An inspection of the premises is carried out and a certificate is only issued where the local fire authority are satisfied that adequate precautions have been taken.
Working conditions
Working conditions are regulated by two major Acts of Parliament, the Offices, Shops and Railway Premises Act 1963, and the Health and Safety at Work etc.
Act 1974.
Offices, Shops and Railway Premises Act 1963
The Act applies to office premises, shop premises and railway premises where persons are employed under a contract of employment.
Certain premises are excluded from the Act, e.g. small family businesses where only the immediate family are employed.
Hence, a small family guest house or tea rooms may be excluded from the Act's operation.
The term ‘shop premises’ covers a number of different premises, including premises from which retail trade or business is carried on.
Hence, the Act would appear to cover restaurants, wine bars, etc.
All premises within the scope of the 1963 Act are required to be kept in a clean state.
This covers all furniture and fittings, etc. on the premises.
Neither dirt nor refuse must be allowed to accumulate, and all floors and stairs shall be cleaned at least once a week.
The 1963 Act is directed towards the protection of the workforce rather than the consumer.
The 1963 Act also relates to the facilities available at premises covered by the Act, e.g. sanitary conveniences, washing facilities, drinking water and seating facilities for staff.
Some of the provisions of the 1963 Act relate to the structure of the building, that all floors, stairs, steps, passages and gangways shall be of sound construction and properly maintained.
Breach of the requirements set out in the 1963 Act is a criminal offence and may lead to prosecution.
Health and Safety at Work etc.
Act 1974
This Act is of much broader application than the 1963 Act discussed above.
The HSWA 1974 applies to all places where persons are employed, and makes provision for the health and safety of such employees.
Employers have a general duty imposed by s.2 of the 1974 Act to safeguard in so far as is reasonably practicable the health, safety and welfare of their employees.
Employees should also be given adequate training in safety  precautions etc.
Employees are themselves under a duty to take reasonable care not to injure others in the course of their work.
The 1974 Act is enforced by the Health and Safety Inspectorate, who have various powers, prohibition notices, etc.
The Health and Safety Inspectorate may ultimately prosecute the party concerned in the courts, and where a person is found guilty, substantial fines may be imposed.
LICENSING
The many rules and regulations concerning licensing will only be touched on in this section; they form in themselves a considerable volume of law.
The Licensing Act 1964 brought together the earlier liquor licensing legislation.
Licences normally take either of two forms: a full on-licence, or an off-licence.
A full on-licence enables the licensee to sell liquor for consumption either on or off the premises to any member of the public who is permitted by the law to consume it.
An off-licence permits the sale of liquor for consumption off the premises.
A hotel may apply for a full on-licence; on the other hand small establishments may merely have a restaurant licence or a residential licence.
Where the licensing justices grant a restaurant licence they must attach two conditions:
(a)
the restaurant must be able to serve both water and soft drinks as well as alcohol; and
(b)
alcohol can only be served to persons taking table meals.
A residential licence authorises the sale of liquor to residents of a hotel.
Two conditions are attached to the grant of a residential licence:
(a)
other beverages (including water) must be available with meals; and
(b)
adequate seating must be provided in a room at the hotel which is not used as sleeping accommodation or for the service of food, and in which there is neither supply or consumption of intoxicating liquor.
It is possible to combine a residential licence with a restaurant licence.
Permitted hours
It is a criminal offence for any person to sell or supply intoxicating liquor, on licensed premises except during permitted hours.
Section 60 of the Licensing Act 1964 lays down the basic permitted laws for on-licences:
Although the basic permitted hours are set there are a number of ways in which these may be varied.
Supper hours certificate
The effect of this is to allow liquor to be provided for a further hour in the evening in a part of the premises set aside for people taking table meals provided it is consumed as part of the meal.
Special hours certificate
This form of extension exists for the benefit of restaurants, hotels etc. where the sale of liquor accompanies the service of refreshment, and music and dancing is provided.
Drinking-up time
After the end of the hours during which sales are permitted, ten minutes is allowed for drinking up liquor already purchased.
The drinking-up time is half an hour for people taking meals if the liquor was supplied ancillary to meals.
The permitted hours provisions do not apply to any persons in premises where they are residing or to the supply of liquor to private friends of residents in a licensed premises entertained by the residents at their own expense.
The conduct of licensed premises
There are many requirements to be met in order to conduct licensed premises within the scope of the law:
1.
Selling liquor without a licence.
No licensee may sell liquor without a licence; to do so is a criminal offence.
2.
The sale of liquor on credit.
It is a criminal offence to sell liquor on credit.
However, residents at a hotel may be sold liquor during their residence, payment to be made at the end of their stay.
3.
The sale of liquor to persons under 18.
A licensee of licensed premises is not permitted knowingly to sell liquor to a person under 18, to allow a person under 18 to consume liquor in a bar, or to allow anyone else to make such a sale.
A person who is under 18 is not permitted to buy liquor in licensed premises nor to consume liquor in a bar.
No person is allowed to buy liquor for consumption in a bar in licensed premises for a person under 18.
4.
Drunkenness and disorderly behaviour.
It is an offence to permit drunkenness on licensed premises.
Where the licensee holds a residential or restaurant licence it can lead to disqualification of the licensee.
Other forms of licence
There are a number of different forms of entertainment where a licence of some sort or other is required by law.
These include gaming, music and dancing.
PROGRESS TEST QUESTIONS