

FOREWORD
The New Oxford English Dictionary Project requires a sophisticated and novel computer system to be built and commissioned in a short period of time.
Although this system will use as many standard equipment and software products as possible from the current IBM sales catalogue, the configuration of these products will be unique.
Certain elements of software must be written by the Computer Group within the Project Team.
Other items of equipment and software may also be required.
The satisfactory performance of the resulting computer system is of crucial importance to the success of the project and is of great concern to the managements of OUP and IBM.
The Outline Statement of User Requirements identifies the functions, method of operation, performance levels, control, and security which are required of the new computer system.
This document has been prepared by the Project Team.
It is as comprehensive as is possible at the present time.
The requirements may well be modified as detailed work and discussion proceed.
However, it is unlikely that any major changes will be made.
Material relevant to the system design is also contained in the New Oxford English Dictionary Workbook.
A guide to the contents of this Workbook, which are also subject to change as detailed work proceeds, is to be found in Appendix A.
Information on the format and specification of the data which will be transferred from the keyboarding contractor is available in the quotation from International Computaprint Corporation dated 6 January 1984.
These three documents provide sufficient information for the Computer Group to prepare a system design, to calculate the cost to the Press of acquiring and running a computer system of this design, and to prepare an implementation programme for the computer system.
The format for presenting the results of system design work to the Project Manager for approval is defined in the associated Evaluation Document.
The presentation of a complete proposal comprising system design, implementation plan and cost estimates must be made by 31 December 1984.
INTRODUCTION
An electronic text processing system is needed for the production of the New Oxford English Dictionary .
This document describes the features of a system which would satisfy the requirements of the New OED Project Team.
The work of the Project Team is concerned with three aspects of processing the text:
a)
accepting the text of the OED and Supplement in machine-readable form from International Computaprint Corporation (ICC), the firm selected to carry out the keyboarding of the text
b)
the initial entry, integration, and editorial alteration of the text, in some cases with the assistance of special computer programs
c)
the production of material for typesetting the New OED to be published in l987 and the provision of machine-readable text for further processing in Phase II of the New OED Project.
The Project Team requires a comprehensive editorial text processing system which will provide the facilities necessary to meet the objectives set for it by OUP.
The purpose of this statement is to give sufficient information to the Computer Group for it to provide an outline design for the New OED computer system.
The proposed solution will be evaluated, in accordance with the system evaluation criteria, by the Project Manager.
OBJECTIVES OF THE SYSTEM
The objectives of the system are:
a)
to read and store the data which represents the current edition of the Oxford English Dictionary and the four volumes of the Supplement as presented on magnetic tape by the keyboarding contractor
b)
to secure that data together with such amended versions as will be produced
c)
to safeguard all current data in such a way as to provide for restitution in the event of loss or damage
d)
to provide computer assistance for the lexicography of the New OED 
e)
to facilitate the production, in printed form, of an integrated edition of the OED and Supplement by the end of 1987
f)
to make available a machine-readable form of the New OED for Phase II of the project.
MAJOR DESIGN PRINCIPLES
In order to meet the requirements of the Project Team the system should conform to a number of major design principles.
These are:
a)
to provide lexicographers with text editing facilities which are easy to use
b)
to provide a range of data acceptance and printing methods which allow simple links to a variety of other text processing systems
c)
to provide a sound basis for further development of the lexicographical system
d)
to ensure a growth path for equipment which will allow a reasonable increase in the range and volume of activities to be undertaken
e)
to be independent of specialist operating and support personnel for successful day-to-day running
f)
to be designed so that essential operation does not depend on any single component.
A possible exception to this is the main processor.
If the system is totally dependent on the successful operation of a single main processor then the cost of providing a second processor for redundancy should be identified.
g)
to be designed for ‘unstressed operation’ so that processing may generally be completed within normal working hours
h)
to produce reliable, maintainable software, the performance of which can be evaluated against the Statement of User Requirements, where any of the major text handling requirements of the project cannot be met by the use of standard packaged software.
The functions to be performed may be divided into four categories:
a)
input of text, from magnetic tape, from visual display units, and from other sources
b)
all forms of text editing and manipulation
c)
archiving and retrieval from archive of stored text
d)
output of text, in a variety of forms.
Text Input and Validation
Text Sources
Text may be input in a variety of ways:
a)
the keyboarded text of the OED and the Supplement will be received from ICC on magnetic tape.
It must be possible to receive this material in the format agreed with ICC and to read it into the system without delay.
b)
new dictionary material may be entered via terminals.
The system must provide for partly entered text to be recalled for additional input.
The unit of work will be the entry (main headword) and only one person may work on an entry at any time.
Input Processes
It is an essential part of the input process that text must be subject to validation before its release for editing.
Text from ICC must be checked to ensure that:
a)
it corresponds to the original OED and Supplement sources
b)
it is marked up in accordance with the specification agreed between OUP and ICC.
The results of this validation should be reported to the Project Manager.
A method must be devised of incorporating new dictionary material into the New OED which will ensure that it is structurally compatible with the existing data.
The system must be capable of identifying any new entries or sense sections which have been incorporated into the dictionary text.
Text Editing and Processing
The system should provide extensive facilities for the review of text already entered, so that the editor may immediately examine any portion of the full text.
The VDU image should be capable of identifying the structure of the text.
The character set displayed on the screen should contain sufficient shapes to enable common special sorts, accents, and phonetic symbols to be displayed.
Text editing facilities must include the ability to add, move, copy, and delete blocks of text as well as making simple editing alterations.
It must be possible to write sections of text to external files without change to the original and to insert text from external sources at any desired position.
It is desirable for the text editor to be able dynamically to remove a block of text from the document being worked on, and to replace the block at any desired position at a later stage of the editing session.
It is desirable for the text editor to have the ability to cancel the latest operation performed.
It should be possible to search for specified strings of text and modify these either individually or collectively.
Special Editorial Requirements
It is a requirement of the system that the keyboarded text be converted to a form whereby all the structural elements of the Dictionary text are clearly delimited and can be readily identified and retrieved by software.
The text as structured above should be capable of generating the typography for the New OED .
The system must enable the text of the Supplement to be integrated into the OED with optimum efficiency; accordingly, maximal automation of the process is the desired objective.
Users should be provided with a facility for comparing screen images of two text sources side by side.
It should be possible to generate lists consisting of subsets of elements that are unambiguously defined in the text e.g. authors, headwords, sense-sections.
For example, the editor will need to check lists of headwords which begin with lower-case letters.
Thus, the dictionary text should have sufficient structure so that ad hoc generation of lists or concordances would not prove to be a difficult or lengthy task for a competent programmer.
A typical problem might be to answer the question: How many headwords belong to more than one part of speech?
The system should provide a means of performing simple string searches on the complete dictionary text.
The system must be able to count the number of characters and words in a sequence of text.
The system must ensure the integrity of dictionary cross-references which may be compromised by the process of integration; this includes cross-references within the OED .
ICC are keyboarding ‘soft’ hyphens to represent line- end hyphens in the source texts.
The majority of these will need to be discarded as a result of changed page layout.
However, some line-end hyphens represent real or ‘hard’ hyphens.
At an appropriate stage before page make-up, the system must identify all ‘soft’ hyphens, flag them as errors, and require users to delete them, or replace them with ‘hard’hyphens.
Within quotation sequences for subordinate entries in the Supplement , no typographic distinction is made between the start and finish of quotations belonging to adjacent entries (e.g. quotations for ‘pickup arm’ and ‘pickup baler’).
It is desirable that a means be found of revising the Supplement text to bring it into line with the OED in this respect.
This would greatly assist any manual integration that may be necessary and improve the readability and accessibility of the New OED .
Output and Formatting of Text
Output of Text
It should be possible to output the text in either of the following ways:
a)
to the Oxford Text System
b)
to a printing device of any of the following types:
Line Printer — with typographic style represented by conventional notation
Erosion or other printer — with accurate typography
Laser Printer — with both a form displaying codes as well as text, and a form for ‘proofing’ with as many typographic aids present as are needed
Phototypesetter.
Output Processes
For final output the system must be able to calculate the number of lines and pages that a section of text will make, generate running heads and feet, and provide for the complete hyphenation, justification, and page make-up of the text.
Only text authorized for publication should go forward for final make-up.
INTERFACES WITH OTHER SYSTEMS
METHOD OF OPERATION
The system must be available to users at any time between 08.30 and 18.00, Monday to Friday.
The system must be capable of ‘unattended operation’.
Processes designed to run outside normal working hours should therefore not be dependent upon the presence of operators for such tasks as loading tapes or attending to printers.
When the system is fully operational, such activities as accepting keyboarded input, outputting to proofing devices and to external systems (e.g. Oxford Text System), text searching, integration, and any other processes on the system data will proceed in parallel, although different sections of the text will be subject to each process.
The order in which the necessary processes are applied to each section of text, and the authorization of change of status for each document, must be rigidly controlled.
All these activities must be carried out with complete security.
Users must be fully isolated from any development activities undertaken by the Computer Group.
Task Control
Users must have a means of submitting background work to the system at any time from their own terminals without preventing the use of those terminals for interactive editorial processes.
When selecting work from queues, priority should be given to processes which modify text, and therefore make it unavailable to users; otherwise, priority should be given to tasks which make the least use of system resources.
It must be possible to override normal dispatch disciplines for urgent requirements.
Users should be able to monitor the progress of any background tasks they have initiated from submission to completion.
It must be possible to cancel any task submitted to the system.
PERFORMANCE REQUIREMENTS
The system should be able to cope at all times with the workload resulting from continuous operation of seven dedicated user terminals, and occasional use of two user terminals for simple enquiries and for examining portions of text.
The response of the system should be such that the users are not required to wait during text manipulation.
However, it is recognized that some processes, such as the production of output for proofing or to magnetic tape, may be executed in a background mode to optimize the use of system resources.
If any processes other than the production of such output are not designed as on-line operations, then the effect of this on the computer system and its environment, in particular its effect on the working method of project team members, must be clearly identified.
Allowance must be made for any demands placed upon system resources by the Computer Group.
System Performance
As a guide, the performance that the Project Team is expecting is:
a)
Response time at terminals
The response time between the instant at which the operator strikes a key and that at which the reply from the system begins to appear on the screen should be less than one second.
The time from requesting an interactive process (such as search and replace) to the appearance of an acknowledgement on the screen should be less than one second.
Response times for identical processes should be consistent.
b)
Printers
A feature of the system will be requests from users for hard copy.
The unit of proofing will be, initially, a column of dictionary text, but subsequently, a main entry.
Requests for copy on graphics or proofing printers which would occupy two columns or less in the dictionary should normally be satisfied within thirty minutes.
Requests for copy which would occupy ten columns or less should be satisfied within four hours.
The wait for longer entries should be less than 24 hours.
There is a development and maintenance requirement for a line printer capable of printing 132 characters per line.
c)
Magnetic Tape
A text section of one million characters should be able to be copied from or loaded to the system within five minutes.
Security copies of disk-held data should be taken without interruption to user service.
d)
Processing
Processes such as indexing, sorting, extractive lists, spelling checks, etc., should perform at an acceptable speed to a user.
Any process on a text of one million characters should normally be accomplished within twenty minutes.
Computer Operation
a)
Reliability
A core system capable of handling the requirements detailed in sections 4 and 5 above and sections 8 and 9 below must be available to users five days a week, fifty two weeks a year, excluding public holidays.
Non-availability of the system due to software or equipment failures during normal working hours should be not greater than 2% taken over a three month rolling average.
(See also paragraph 3(f)).
b)
Error Recovery
Restart facilities for off-line processes should be such that no more than four hours of normally processed text are lost as a result of a malfunction of equipment or software.
On-line processes should be designed to lose no more than five minutes of normally processed text.
The total time lost by system users as a result of errors or the need to correct errors should not exceed twelve and a half hours taken over a three month rolling average (i.e. 98% accuracy of processing).
c)
Currency of Data
It is required that the text and control data available to the users should be up to date.
Copies of archived material should be available within twenty four hours.
CONTROLS AND SECURITY
The system should provide the following controls and security features:
a)
back-up and recovery facilities allowing copies of all data stored on-line to be kept and reloaded in the event of machine failure such as a disk head crash
b)
an archive system ensuring the secure storage of all documents processed by the system
c)
facilities to allow the system manager to control access to the system and the allocation of resources to users.
Archiving
In order to meet the requirements for secure storage of all documents processed by the system, a comprehensive archiving system is required.
It should include the following facilities as a minimum:
a)
recording the location of each document, its length, and the date and time it was committed to the archive
b)
a record of the status of each document, including its passage through the various editorial processes
c)
rigidly enforced cycles of daily, weekly, and monthly back-up copying of documents, so that old copies may be retrieved in the event of complete failure of the text processing system.
d)
strict precautions must be taken to ensure that media deterioration does not cause loss of archived material
e)
recording of all back-up and recovery runs so that all events can be traced
f)
it must not be possible to modify archived material; system users may not have access to archive material but may read copies of it provided by the system manager
g)
access to the archiving system itself to be limited by password or other means of authentication to the system manager
h)
the archiving system must be able to identify requests from the system manager for the copying of texts and provide the necessary instructions.
Allocation of Resources
The system should provide facilities to control the allocation of resources to users.
The system manager should be able to set limits on disk space allocation and printer usage for each user of the system.
This will also help to prevent the disks from becoming filled with obsolete files.
As a user requires an additional allocation of a resource the system manager should be able to authorize this and inform the system of the new limits.
In addition, the system manager should be able to assign priorities for processor utilization when this is desirable.
The system should record the resources used during each terminal session, so that the utilization of the operation can be monitored and appropriate actions taken to prevent resource shortages from becoming a problem.
Access Control
The system should have the following security features:
a)
control of access to the system as a whole so that only authorized people can use it
b)
recording of details relating to each terminal session, including the duration of the session, the identity of the user, and the identity of all documents worked on
c)
a range of access levels to the system according to the task being performed
d)
control of access to each document
to assist in the management of the editing and integrating processes it is desirable that update privilege be assigned temporarily to sections of text (probably main headwords)
access for update to be restricted to those authorized
authorization may be assigned to more than one person
reallocation of update rights should not require the relocation of data, or the renaming of files
no two users should be able to edit text subordinate to the same main headword simultaneously.
Close-down Facility
The system should allow the system manager to remove users from the system, either individually or en masse, without causing data to be lost.
DOCUMENTATION
It is a requirement that comprehensive documentation in the form of a Lexicographer's Guide be provided.
This will consist of:
a)
An overview of the lexicographic system, describing the purpose, capabilities, and components of the system
b)
A detailed guide to the use of each of the facilities provided for system users, including the means of initiation of any system utilities, together with parameters as appropriate.
DATA VOLUMES
The transaction data volumes will depend mainly on the number of terminals installed, since the system must be able to cope with continuous usage at each terminal.
The initial requirement is for nine user terminals, although it is essential that it be possible to expand the system to handle at least twenty terminals should they be needed later.
The current versions of all dictionary material must be available for access via terminals.
These figures refer to text without typographic or other ‘mark-up’.
They are for estimating purposes only and should be assumed to have an accuracy no greater than + 25%.
Samples received from ICC show the ratio of characters to keystrokes to be 2:3 and the ratio for data delivered to the project team may increase to 1:2.
PHYSICAL ENVIRONMENT
The text processing equipment and VDUs will be used in a normal clean office environment.
There are no special considerations regarding ruggedness of the terminals, except that they should withstand the use which is to be expected in a busy department.
It is likely that the present computer room will be used at least temporarily to house the central processing equipment.
This has its own power supply and cable entry points for most parts of the Oxford site.
A new computer room will be constructed if the final configuration of central processing equipment requires it.
This will be close to the present computer room.
Terminal equipment will be situated in editorial offices.
The maximum distance from the computer room to any terminal on the Walton Street site is 300m.
There is a requirement to install terminals in separate offices for the Oxford English Dictionary department.
These offices are approximately 800m from the main site across public roads.