

SUMMARY
This document explains what the Oxford English Dictionary (OED) and its Supplement are.
It presents the options open to the Oxford University Press (OUP) in determining the future of the OED and Supplement.
It gives an outline of OUP's plan to produce a new, up-to-date, and continually updatable version of the OED, a version which will also be available in machine-readable form with commercial potentialities.
This document is also an invitation to tender.
Suppliers who believe that they can provide the basic method for the achievement of this plan are invited to answer the questionnaire included in this document and to provide a representative sample of the output of their method.
It is likely that suppliers will wish to discuss aspects of this document before making any formal response.
In this event contact between representatives of the suppliers and management and staff of the OUP should be made through E.S.C.
Weiner the Project Leader (see Section 6.3 on OED Project Management).
Suppliers are expected to propose one or more strategies which will achieve the objectives described in this document.
Formal proposals must contain responses to each specific matter raised in this document.
Other information may be provided in addition at the discretion of each supplier.
Suppliers are required to submit each proposal in writing by the tender submission date of 1 August 1983.
Three copies of each proposal are required.
Suppliers may also give a formal presentation of their intended approach if they wish.
The purpose of this document is to give sufficient information to potential suppliers so that they may estimate the cost to Oxford University Press of acquiring and using systems and services.
The issue of the document should not be taken to imply any commitment of any kind has been made to pursue possible solutions to the requirements described.
THE OXFORD ENGLISH DICTIONARY AND SUPPLEMENT
Summary of Section 2
The reader may prefer to move directly on to Section 3 ‘The OED and the Future’.
If so, he or she should read the following summary of Section 2.
The OED is a huge work in twelve volumes compiled between 1879 and 1928.
The Supplement, in four volumes, compiled between 1957 and 1985, is now complete except for the final volume.
Together they present the entire vocabulary of English from 1150 AD to the present day.
The treatment is historical, detailed, and scholarly.
The foundation of the work is the collection of quotations illustrating the meaning and use of words.
A large collection of these is held in the files of the Oxford English Dictionary Department at 37a St. Giles'.
These files, its library, the expertise of its staff, and its access to special computer databases constitute the Department's unique resources.
The OED is the flagship of the OUP fleet and the foundation of all other English language reference books.
It is also regarded as a vital resource in a wide variety of disciplines besides literature.
It has great prestige, both nationally and internationally.
As English is destined to be the international language of the twenty-first century, the OED is destined to be the world's foremost reference book.
What is the Oxford English Dictionary?
The OED is a work in twelve large (30.5 cm x 22.5 cm) volumes that was originally published in parts between 1884 and 1928.
In 1933 it first appeared in its present format, accompanied by the slim one-volume Supplement which added quotations, words, and meanings that had come to the editors' attention after the publication of the relevant part of the Dictionary.
The OED presents the entire vocabulary of the English language since c. 1150 AD.
Its treatment of each word is structured to show how the different meanings have developed historically and each meaning is illustrated by a bank of quotations from published works, arranged chronologically.
It also treats in detail the pronunciation, written forms, inflexions, constructions, and derivation of each word.
It has entries for 414,825 main words; there are about 500,000 definitions and 1,827,306 quotations.
No other work of reference attempts to contain within its covers such a complete record of the English language, past and present.
The Supplement
The Supplement of 1933 is now being superseded by the much more extensive four-volume Supplement, of which three volumes have appeared (I (A-G): 1972; II (H-N): 1976; III (O-Scz): 1982), and the last (Se-Z) is due in 1985.
The Supplement is constructed on the same lines as the OED.
Its purpose is chiefly to add entries for new words and new meanings of words: ‘new’ implying that they came into existence, or came to the attention of scholars, after the relevant part of OED was published, and therefore could not be inserted in the main work.
The two works are therefore inseparable, since the Supplement contains much of the present-day vocabulary of English, especially the terminology of the newer sciences and technology, which is inevitably not in OED, but only yields its full meaning when read in parallel with the equivalent part of the OED.
When complete, the Supplement will contain about 62,900 main words and 529,000 quotations.
The Composition of the Oxford English Dictionary and Supplement
The length of time taken to prepare the OED and its Supplement reflects the skilled, complex, and painstaking labour required in their composition.
The OED was first planned (as a ‘New English Dictionary’, a title it bore until 1928) by the Philological Society in 1858, but the real work began with the appointment of J.A.H. Murray as Editor in 1879.
It was in this year that OUP came on the scene when they contracted both with the Philological Society and with Murray to publish the Dictionary.
Thereafter OUP effectively displaced the Society as guardian and steward of the work.
The first fascicle (A-Ant) appeared in 1884.
Murray died in 1915, by which time three more editors and a large staff were engaged on the project.
It was completed in 1928.
After the appearance of the old Supplement in 1933 the staff was disbanded.
Work on the new Supplement began almost from scratch in 1957 with the appointment of R.W. Burchfield as Editor.
A vast amount of preliminary activity, including the collection of quotations and the selection and training of staff, had to be undertaken before the first material went to press in 1965.
The time taken to prepare the two works is therefore, roughly speaking, 50 years for the OED and 28 years for the Supplement.
Processes of Composition
The primary raw material of dictionary work is the file of illustrative quotations, copied from books and periodicals by both dictionary staff and outside (paid or voluntary) contributors.
The OED staff had collected about 5,000,000 before 1900; the Supplement staff began from almost nothing and now have a collection of several million quotations.
Over the last eight years, 27,000 quotations, on average, have been sent in by outside contributors each year.
These quotations constitute the objective evidence for the existence and currency of the words, meanings, or phrases which they illustrate.
In order to continue to monitor the developments in the English vocabulary from day to day and from year to year, it is essential for the Dictionary Department to continue to collect such quotations.
It is possible that in the future they may begin to be stored in an electronic, rather than a paper, file.
The ensuing processes may be tabulated as follows:
Filing of quotation slips alphabetically.
Selection of quotations for which entries are needed and sorting into senses by senior staff.
Writing of definitions and selection of illustrative quotations by junior staff.
Research into origin, meaning, use, etc., of the word or sense via libraries or computer databases.
Sub-editing of entries by senior staff.
Final editing of entries by Chief Editor.
Critical reading of galley proofs by outside expert consultants.
Final editing of galley proofs.
Correction of page proofs and checking of cross-references.
The Oxford English Dictionary Department
Besides the Supplement, now being completed, a wide range of dictionaries and related reference books is edited by the staff in the Department at 37a St. Giles'.
The resources there include the archive of quotations already described, a library of hundreds of books, and access to the libraries of Oxford University, as well as certain other libraries.
Recently a new resource has been added: terminals giving access to three specialized computer databases (DIALOG, LEXIS/NEXIS, and the Oxford University Computing Service's literary archive).
These have revolutionized many lexicographical processes, e.g. ascertaining the frequency or survival of particular words, tracing relevant scientific articles, and acquiring examples from literary works by major authors.
The Oxford English Dictionary and the Oxford University Press
Since 1928 the OED has been the flagship of OUP's fleet of publications.
This is not owing to purely commercial considerations.
Neither OED nor the Supplement has ever been profitable in itself.
Both projects have been run at a substantial deficit for the sake of other ends, which include ultimate profit.
They are published primarily for the sake of their inherent scholarly and cultural value; for the sake of the great prestige attaching to them, of which more is said below (2.9); and because they are the foundation on which all the other English language reference books published by OUP are based, reference books which are all highly successful in commercial terms.
From what has been said above, it will be clear that the Oxford English Dictionary Department would not be what it is, if it were not for the Supplement project lying at the heart of its work.
To the OUP, the Department is not only a team of writers producing commercial publications.
It is also a living resource centre stocked with a range of information on the English language that is wider and more detailed than the contents of any one of its publications (or anyone else's publications), and able to adapt and respond to the requirements of the non-specialist language user.
It represents an asset capable of many further applications by the OUP in extending its range of English language reference books.
The Applications of the Oxford English Dictionary
The applications of the OED are far wider than the immediately obvious uses of a dictionary.
Among many, four may be highlighted.
It is the foundation of English language scholarship.
Nearly every work of reference or handbook dealing with the use and teaching of the English language draws heavily, whether directly or indirectly, upon it.
It is a social document of a peculiarly comprehensive kind.
George Steiner wrote, of the Supplement, that it is ‘a piece of vital history, a register of consciousness’.
In it one can trace the origin and development of social, political, and philosophical ideas, as well as of taste, fashion, and outlook.
It is a touchstone for legal definitions and rulings.
Legal firms frequently seek the advice of the Dictionary Department concerning the application of particular words and phrases, as in the recent case regarding the status of the Sikhs.
It supplies much information which even the specialized dictionaries of technical and scientific subjects do not provide.
Bernard J. Freedman, writing in the British Medical Journal, said of Volume 3 of the Supplement: ‘Here in one volume we have a medical dictionary, and for good measure this century's terminology of all the sciences.’
The Scope of the Oxford English Dictionary
Almost as soon as the first fascicle had appeared, the OED was recognized as a unique enterprise, a pioneering work of scholarship, an unparalleled treasury of the English language, and the  indispensable key to the interpretation of the literature of past ages.
Contemporary reviewers welcomed it in terms such as these: ‘A work of this description is truly a national work’; ‘A work of unprecedented compass, a work which is a library in itself, a work which…affords…a first introductory key to every kind of human knowledge’.
Its original title (see 2.4 above) was apt because it really was a new kind of dictionary.
It became the inspiration and model for the historical dictionaries of other languages: the Spanish Diccionario Historico de la Lengua Española, the Encyclopaedic Dictionary of Sanskrit on Historical Principles, and Geriadur Prifysgol Cymru (a dictionary of Welsh) are examples.
It also continues to inspire dictionaries of regional and overseas varieties of English.
But OED with its Supplement remains the foremost example of its kind in the comprehensiveness of its scope, the completeness of its coverage, and the detail and accuracy of its scholarship.
It must, however, be stressed that the OED is the dictionary of the English language world-wide; it covers American, Canadian, Australasian, South African, Caribbean, and many other overseas varieties of English with the same care and attention as British English.
It has been the deliberate policy of the Supplement to give these the prominence they lacked during the period when the OED was being edited.
Moreover, English has become the universal language of international communication.
It is already the accepted medium of communication in science, scholarship, literature, and the law.
There seems little doubt that, by the next century, it will be the international language in every field.
As the foremost dictionary of the world's leading language, the OED commands a position unrivalled by any other work of reference.
THE OXFORD ENGLISH DICTIONARY AND THE FUTURE
The Problem Stated
Any dictionary begins to go out of date as soon as it is published.
The reason for this is quite simple: language constantly changes.
It is neither possible nor desirable to fix any language at one point in time and keep it the same ever afterwards.
This fact has always been true, but is even more apparent in the modern era.
Constant scientific, technological, political, and social changes generate a stream of new vocabulary and alter the way in which existing words are used.
Meanwhile, ever-increasing contact between distant parts of the world, the so-called ‘global village’, which has caused the emergence of English as the medium of international communication, has also caused the entry into English of scores of words from other languages, mainly words connected with aspects of the culture of other groups which have become internationalized.
And all the time the slang and colloquial idioms of the ordinary English speaker continue to evolve as they always have.
The effect of all this is to render the OED and Supplement inadequate.
Only very slightly at first, but increasingly as time goes by.
Even in the few years since Volumes I and II of the Supplement were published, numerous words and meanings in the range A-N have emerged which are therefore not to be found in the largest Oxford Dictionary.
There is no doubt that by the end of the century the same will be true of the Supplement as a whole.
A further but related problem is that many of OED's definitions enshrine outdated scientific, social, and political beliefs.
The rewriting of all but a very few of these definitions was deliberately excluded from the programme of the Supplement, as it would have been both impracticable and prohibitively expensive.
The passage of years will only serve to make these inadequate definitions, which can still be just about tolerated, completely unacceptable in the light of knowledge gained by then.
One Alternative Rejected
One possible course of action is simply to leave the OED and completed Supplement as they are, a record of the vocabulary of English up to the late twentieth century but no more, and to concentrate on the production and revision of other smaller dictionaries.
This would save the expense incurred by a scholarly project like the Supplement and reap the commercial potentialities of the short-term, low-investment project.
The new words and meanings would, of course, be constantly incorporated into the new generations of small dictionaries.
Such an argument is superficially attractive but conceals fallacies that require its rejection.
Much of the success of all English dictionaries throughout the world is due to, and dependent upon, the processes associated with the OED and Supplement.
It is because the Supplement project collects quotations on a huge scale that the staff of the Dictionary Department are alerted to new linguistic developments.
It is because the resources of historically based lexicography exist that so much is known about each new word or meaning and authoritative decisions can be made.
The applications of the OED in legal, technical, and other disciplines are highly valued (see 2.7).
But if the Dictionary's coverage became seriously antiquated, the practitioners of these disciplines would be seriously disadvantaged.
If the OED were left as no more than a monument to the English of the twentieth century it would not remain the twenty-first century's dictionary for long.
The OED is part of the British heritage.
The Tasks Listed
From what has been said already, it will be seen that the following tasks should be tackled:
The OED and Supplement need to be integrated into a single work.
The necessity of referring to two separate volumes for any enquiry renders the use of the dictionary cumbersome and inefficient.
Hence its full potential is not being realized.
The OED needs to be revised.
New words and meanings that have emerged since the publication of the relevant parts of the Supplement need to be entered.
The Dictionary as a whole needs to be kept constantly up to date.
In theory, all these tasks could be done by conventional methods, i.e. paste-up, longhand correction, etc.
But in practice, this would be far too costly in time, personnel and resources.
Moreover, the constant updating of such a huge work by repeated republication in revised form would be merely to perpetuate the inherent inadequacies of the old system.
A new approach to the whole task is called for.
A New Approach
When the OED was planned in the mid-nineteenth century it was to be a new approach to lexicography.
Now, once more, under the conditions and with the technology of a new age, a fresh approach to the production of the OED is called for.
OUP believes that modern methods of electronic data processing can be adapted to the tasks required for the production of a new OED.
Thus, to the primary objective: the production of a new OED for the twenty-first century; we must add a second objective: the electronic handling and delivery of the information contained in and added to the OED, so that the latter is able to be altered in response to changes in the language.
The aim is a new concept of the dictionary as a living and responsive reference book, rather than a fixed, inflexible one.
It is expected that this new method of information handling will have other advantages.
While the initial capture of the text of the OED and Supplement will inevitably be costly, the output of this process, the OED and Supplement in machine-readable form, will be susceptible of commercial exploitation as a database for on-line consultation, and perhaps in other kinds of ‘package’, to be determined by user research, as well.
John Maddox, the editor of Nature, wrote in 1982: ‘The OED is uniquely a data base…, which will suggest to many that it should by now be stored on a long reel of magnetic tape, floppy disks, or some other means of data storage.
It is…to be hoped that Oxford will tackle the job (of a new edition of OED) and that the result will include a printed version of an enlarged OED.’
This call is by no means that of a solitary voice.
And it is this call which OUP hopes to answer in the plan outlined here.
Steps to the Achievement of the Objectives
It is envisaged that the main objectives will be achieved by way of the following two main steps:
1.
The capture, in machine-readable form, of the information contained in the OED and Supplement.
2.
The manipulation of this machine-readable material so as to generate a number of products.
The Products Envisaged
The main purpose of the present document is to bring about the realization of Step 1.
For the sake of completeness and of the bearing it may have on the method by which Step 1 is achieved, a list is given here of the products which it is hoped to manufacture by the manipulation of the output from Step 1.
1.
A complete, unintegrated OED and Supplement, in machine-readable form, that can be sold, via an intermediary, to the end user.
The chief specification is that corresponding entries from OED and the Supplement should be able to be called up together to the screen or other outputting device.
This would simulate the manual location of corresponding entries in the present printed editions.
2.
An integrated OED, i.e. a version in which the Supplement material has all been inserted in the correct places and any alterations to the text of the OED required by the wording of the Supplement have been made.
This would exist in three editions:
a)
Machine-readable.
To be exploited commercially like product 1 above.
b)
Printed in full OED format (i.e. 16 volumes).
c)
Compact edition in reduced type size (i.e. 3 volumes).
3.
A revised and updated OED.
The basis of this would be product 2 but with revision of antiquated OED definitions and insertion of all new words and senses to date.
This would exist in two editions:
a)
Machine-readable (as above).
b)
Printed.
The printed edition would be issued in fascicles over a limited period of time.
4.
A journal publishing the new material which had been added from time to time to the machine-readable text.
The journal would serve as an announcement of the updates to the on-line users and as a supplement to the printed edition for readers of the latter.
Lexicographical Requirements
The plans outlined in this document envisage the carrying out by electronic means of tasks hitherto performed with pen and paper by lexicographers.
Thus, while the medium in which the tasks are performed will be different, the actual tasks will, by and large, be the same.
It is therefore highly important to establish that the machine-readable product of Step 1 will be susceptible of all the necessary manipulation.
It is also important to establish what kinds of operation will have to be done at each stage, in case there is any question of allocating some operations to the keyboarders or indeed to built-in automatic systems.
The sub-sections below list some of the typical operations likely to be necessary to the production of each of the products listed in 3.6 above.
The Oxford English Dictionary and Supplement in Machine Readable Form
The two most important requirements at this stage are:
1.
There must be a facility whereby, when the user calls up any OED entry, the corresponding Supplement entry is automatically called up with it, and vice versa.
2.
If the user decides to read through more than one entry in alphabetical sequence, the Supplement entries which occur in that range of alphabet will automatically appear in their correct alphabetical places between the OED entries.
The most obvious way of obtaining these two facilities would be to keyboard the Supplement entries into the correct places as the OED text was being keyboarded.
Supplement entries corresponding to OED entries would be keyboarded immediately after their OED equivalents; the other Supplement entries would be inserted in their correct alphabetical positions.
This procedure is entirely straightforward if one can assume in the keyboarder competence in the handling of the English alphabet, apart from one very important snag: homonyms.
Homonyms are headwords to different entries that are spelt in the same way, e.g. bow (the weapon), bow (the action), bow (the verb expressing the action).
In OED and the Supplement homonyms are distinguished in two ways:
1.
If they are different parts of speech, they are distinguished by the italic part-of-speech label that follows the pronunciation in parentheses, or, if no pronunciation is given, the headword itself.
These labels are: sb. (=noun), a., v., adv., vbl. sb, ppl. a., pron., conj., prep., int., prefix, suffix.
If a headword is followed by no label, this is equivalent to the label sb.
This means that an unlabelled headword in OED may, in the corresponding entry in Supplement, be labelled sb. if the Supplement has added a homonym that is a different part of speech.
The Supplement sb. entry would then follow the OED unlabelled entry.
2.
If the homonyms are the same part of speech, they are distinguished by superior numbers following the part-of-speech label.
If they are both unlabelled sb. entries, the number follows the headword.
Again, if the Supplement adds a homonym that is the same part of speech as an unnumbered headword in OED, the Supplement headwords will receive numbers.
Superior 1 will be added to the headword of the entry corresponding to the OED entry, while superior 2 (etc.) will distinguish the new entries.
Here again, the Supplement entry with superior 1 would have to follow the unnumbered OED entry in the keyboarding.
There is one other consideration which would seem to commend the keyboarding of the Supplement concomitantly with that of the OED: the phasing of the overall project.
If OUP are entirely satisfied with the method of text capture and with a reasonably large proportion of the machine-readable output (say, the equivalent of one volume of OED), there is no reason why the first editing phase, i.e. the integration of OED and Supplement into a single work, should not be begun, assuming no other technical problems prevented this.
If the phases were to be overlapped in this way, it would clearly be necessary for the Supplement entries to have already been positioned in their correct places following corresponding OED entries or between unrelated OED entries, as described above.
If keyboarding of the two texts could not be run in parallel, some other arrangement would have to be adopted which allowed the overlapping of phases.
For instance, the whole of the letter A could be keyboarded from OED, and then the whole of the Supplement's A section could be merged into it before proceeding to B, and so on .
The Integration of the Oxford English Dictionary and the Supplement
Product 1, the machine-readable OED and Supplement, may not require any direct activity by lexicographical staff, apart from general oversight and checking output.
Product 2, the integrated OED/Supplement, will be quite different.
Although many of the processes will be fairly tedious, most of them will require direct lexicographical involvement in some form, and a fair proportion will require that senior lexicographers perform the necessary manipulation of text.
The following considerations must be allowed for:
1.
The medium in which the integration will take place.
Ideally it is envisaged that the editor will be able to call up the OED entry and the corresponding Supplement entry to a VDU and carry out all the necessary operations on screen.
If this is so, there must be a facility for holding portions of text in parallel on screen, for altering either of them in any way desired, and for moving all or part out of one text and into the other.
Ideally, there should be a handy way of obtaining an immediate print-out of any portion of text which poses problems that require special attention and can best be worked out on paper before the on-screen operations are attempted.
2.
The types of operation envisaged.
The editor must be able to:
a)
delete characters and text of any reasonable extent
b)
transpose characters and text from one place to another
c)
alter the type face, fount, etc. of any characters (within the limits of the total range of faces, founts, etc. demanded by the dictionary text)
d)
compose new matter of any extent and add it into the standing text at any point
e)
recover the text as it was before the editorial operation began.
3.
Automatic operations.
As already stated, some operations will be extremely repetitive and relatively simple.
It is possible that editing could be speeded up if some of these could be carried out by a facility that operated automatically, unless told not to.
An example would be ‘change upper case initial of all OED headwords to lower case, unless told not to’.
4.
Automatic adjustments.
Any alterations, insertions, etc., made by the editor which upset the page layout should be automatically made to harmonize with the rest of the text by justification of lines, insertion or removal of new paragraph codes, etc.
Cross-reference
The system of cross-reference in the OED and Supplement is highly sophisticated and flexible and is vital to the efficient use of the dictionary.
Unfortunately, as it stands at present it has many deficiencies, because:
1.
the dictionary is split into two components, the main work and its Supplement, one published after the other, and
2.
each of these two components was published serially rather than as a whole.
An accurate cross-reference can only be written when the exact co-ordinates of the entry cross-referred to are known.
(By co-ordinates are meant the cross-reference details, viz. headword, part-of-speech label, homonym number, major entry subdivision (capital letter or capital roman numeral), sense number, sense letter, etc.).
This means that in the OED only cross-references backwards or to entries published in the same fascicle are adequate, and in the Supplement, only cross-references to OED, to earlier volumes, and to the same volume (usually) are adequate.
Cross-references forward, whether from OED to itself or from Supplement to itself, are either non-existent, inaccurate, or (occasionally) ghosts (because the object of the cross-reference never materialized in print for some reason).
Naturally there are no cross-references from OED to the Supplement.
The whole cross-reference system is therefore skewed out of its natural shape.
Another highly important fact is that some sets of cross- references taken together would actually reveal inadequacies in the way in which the material to which they refer is handled in the dictionary in its present form.
Ideally an entry which is at present only a cross-reference might be better made into a full entry, while the existing entries might be better turned into cross-references, and so on.
There are a vast number of variations on this basic theme.
At some point in the production of the new OED the whole cross-reference system should be taken in hand and put right.
It is not certain whether this should be done at the integration stage (4.2) or the revision stage (4.4), which is why the subject is raised here.
The following are the essential considerations:
1.
Often, when an entry is made, a cross-reference to that entry from elsewhere must be made.
Hence there must be a facility for storing the cross- reference until it is required, and a system by which the editor is reminded that that cross- reference needs to be written in at the other point (earlier or later in the text).
2.
There needs to be a facility whereby one is automatically informed that the entry at which one is looking has a cross-reference to it in another part of the dictionary, and whereby one is immediately given a display of this cross reference (or all of them, if there are several) if one wants to check it.
3.
There needs to be a facility whereby, when one is looking at a particular cross-reference, one can call up the entry or part of an entry to which that cross-reference refers.
The urgency with which these facilities are required is dependent on whether the cross-reference correction is to be done at the integration stage (4.2) or at the revision stage (4.4).
On present thinking, it would be more logical to treat it as revision and to do it at the later stage.
If this is so, then these facilities are urgently needed, because it is intended to produce the revised OED in serial form, which means that forward cross-references could be rendered incorrect by revisions undertaken after the fascicles in which the cross-references appear had been published.
Of course, the constant updating system will mean these errors can still be corrected later, but it is obviously desirable that the updating system should be used to incorporate changes in the language rather than to correct editorial mistakes.
One possible way of obtaining these special facilities might be to create a special cross-reference file that can be called upon at any stage and edited as the need arises.
The Revision and Updating of the Integrated Text
Many of the operations undertaken at this stage would be similar to those carried out at the integration stage (4.2).
The special needs at this stage would probably fall into two types:
1.
While some of the revision work will probably be piecemeal, e.g. correcting definitions to which the editor's attention had been drawn by other scholars or informants, quite a lot of it would be of the ‘blanket’ variety.
For example, it might be decided that the words savage and Negro should be replaced by some other terms in every definition in which they occur.
One would want a facility for finding every occurrence of these words; but only in the definitions, not in the quotations.
One might wish to replace the obsolete name of a country or language with the modern name in every definition or etymology.
One might wish to insert the correct date in quotations from a particular text which the OED regularly misdated.
One might wish to locate every entry whose last illustrative example was dated before, say, 1880, but which was not labelled obsolete or rare, in order to add to each a more recent quotation.
2.
The second operation would be needed not only at this stage but also, and even more, for the final and ongoing phase of continuous updating.
While other options were being carried out, and before the text was ready to receive entries for completely new words and meanings, it might well be desirable to begin to assemble these new entries and hold them ready in advance, so as to speed production and make the best use of the system's storage capacity.
If so, it would be desirable to have a file in which to assemble and edit these entries.
In the long run, it might even be decided to dispense with paper operations altogether and work entirely electronically from the collection stage (see 2.5 above) onwards.
Obviously such a drafting file would, in that case, become the most important component of the system, once the integration, revision, and updating work was over and done.
It might completely replace the present office desk with slips of paper and pencils, though of course library research (unless by then databases had expanded dramatically) and rough drafting would still be done by hand.
This would also imply electronic filing of incoming material (see 2.5).
Other Facilities
It would obviously be desirable to manipulate the OED database in other ways as well.
It has been repeatedly stressed above that OED is the ground from which all other dictionaries and English language reference books take their origin.
This concept could be applied to the machine-readable database in very literal ways.
Given the right markers in the basic text, it would be relatively simple to compile dictionaries in particular subject areas by means of a machine search for all entries pertaining to those subjects.
There are numerous hidden snags to this rather crude formula, but the basic idea is sound.
Moreover links could be established between the OED text and the texts of the other Oxford English Dictionaries (in machine-readable form) to aid the improvement and updating of these dictionaries.
Clearly, too, English language teaching and research would be greatly aided by facilities enabling particular types of linguistic and historical information to be extracted.
A form of voice reproduction could be built into the on-line or packaged editions so that pronunciations could actually be heard instead of inferred from the phonetic transcription.
AN INVITATION TO TENDER
We have shown above the importance of a new edition of the OED and the steps envisaged as being necessary to the achievement of that goal.
Section 5 invites potential suppliers to propose a method for implementing Step 1, the capture in machine-readable form of the information contained in the OED and Supplement, and outlines the selection procedure, terms and conditions of contract, etc.
Oxford University Press's Requirements
It is conceivable that OUP could achieve its objectives on its own.
But in reality it would be far too costly in time, personnel, and resources.
OUP is therefore looking for a business relationship with a supplier who can provide a system to do the job.
The supplier might act simply as sub- contractor, with OUP paying for the operation.
Alternatively, the supplier could enter into some form of partnership with OUP on mutually acceptable terms.
On any arrangement, OUP must retain ownership of the material produced and of the copyright.
The Choice of Supplier
OUP are well aware that there are many potential suppliers and many methods by which Step 1 could be carried out.
The selection procedure has been set up in order to discover the most suitable supplier and method.
Suppliers are asked to propose a system by which the information contained in the OED and the Supplement can be captured in an acceptable machine-readable form.
Both the functions to be performed, and the method of operation of this system must be described.
The selected supplier will be asked to produce a fifty-page sample of the output of such a system:
a)
to prove the proposed system, and
b)
for user and market research, which will enable OUP to determine how the material should be structured.
Suppliers are asked to complete the questionnaire (Section 7 of this document).
Suppliers are asked to propose a timetable for achieving the following objectives:
a)
agreement of the detailed working method
b)
production of the initial sample
c)
modification (if necessary) of the system
d)
completion of Step 1.
Suppliers are asked to outline a future system which can potentially provide facilities for Step 2, the manipulation of the machine readable text.
Both the functions to be performed, and the method of operation of this system must be described.
Contractual Matters
Suppliers are asked to state the nature of the business relationship they propose to establish with OUP.
This statement must identify:
a)
the contribution to be made by the supplier
b)
the contribution to be made by OUP
c)
the ownership of any equipment or computer software to be used in the proposed system
d)
the ownership of any selling or marketing rights for services or computer software that result from the provision of the system for OUP.
Whatever business relationship is proposed, a single, detailed, written agreement between the supplier and OUP will be required which will include the items identified in the proposals submitted to OUP, a timetable of events, and commitments from the supplier to perform all the obligations implied from the description of the contribution to be made by the supplier.
Suppliers are asked to identify all payments that OUP will be expected to make, and all revenues which OUP may expect to receive as a result of entering the proposed relationship.
Both payments and revenues should be described in detail and categorized as one-off or on-going.
The estimating accuracy for each payment and revenue must also be stated.
Suppliers are asked to state clearly where the overall responsibility for the success of the project will lie, if any aspect of the relationship proposed cannot be considered a straightforward one of OUP as purchasers of goods and services from the supplier.
OUP expect to establish with the supplier the criteria which will be used to determine whether the system functions correctly and can be accepted by OUP.
These criteria must be included in the written agreement.
In relation to the timetable of events included in the agreement, time will not be of the essence but (in accordance with the general law) may be made so through the service of notice providing a reasonable extension of time.
INFORMATION ABOUT OXFORD UNIVERSITY PRESS
The Oxford University Press
Organization
Oxford University Press is a department of the University of Oxford, and as such has charitable status.
The Press is controlled by a committee of senior members of the University known as Delegates of the Press.
The Vice-Chancellor is chairman of this committee.
The Delegates meet at intervals to determine policy, in particular publishing policy in the academic field.
The trading operations of the Press are directed by the Finance Committee, comprising Delegates and Senior Officers of the Press.
The Senior Officers are the executive managers of the various departments and operating units of the Press.
The Chief Executive, G.B. Richardson, is the Secretary to the Delegates, and he is advised by Executive Committees composed of the Senior Officers.
Oxford University Press consists of two complementary business enterprises, publishing and printing.
These activities are based in the organization's Walton Street premises in Oxford.
Other premises are owned in London and Glasgow, but the second major installation in the United Kingdom is the Distribution Centre in Corby, Northamptonshire.
A large international publishing business is coordinated from the Oxford headquarters.
This international business is conducted through branches in Canada, Australia, New Zealand, Malaysia, Hong Kong, Tokyo, India, Pakistan, Kenya and South Africa.
Each branch has its own indigenous publishing programme and also acts as sales agents for the UK publishers.
A separate subsidiary publishing business is maintained in the United States, Oxford University Press, Inc., New York.
The aims of the Press are essentially the same as those of the University itself: they are academic, educational, and cultural.
However, the Press does differ from the rest of the University in that it achieves its aims solely through publishing and printing.
The Press is also required by the University to be financially self-sufficient.
The trading operations of the Press within the United Kingdom are split between publishing and printing.
The Printing Division, under the Printer to the University, is managed as a separate enterprise complete with its own marketing, production, and administration departments.
Within the publishing business the publishing programme is controlled by two Publishing Divisions, the Academic and General and the Educational Division.
Each division has its own editorial, production, and marketing sales staff.
The International Division in Oxford provides financial and other support services to the Branches of the Press throughout the world.
Oxford University Press, Inc., New York is run as a separate self-contained publishing business.
Publishing distribution is managed by the Distribution Services Division in Corby.
Group activities which serve all these separate parts of the organization, Finance, Personnel, Information Systems, and Office Services are based in Oxford.
In total there are approximately 1,250 staff employed by the Press in the United Kingdom, 150 of these in Corby, 500 in the Oxford printing works, and the remainder working in publishing and group services in Oxford.
Approximately 700 are employed in the branches, and 300 in the New York business.
The Executive Committees comprise:
Trading Activities and Scale of Operations
Oxford University Press publishes around 900 books a year, has a back list of approximately 16,000 titles, and sells some 16 million books a year.
In the financial year 1982–83 the sales revenue from the sales of books, music and journals amounted to approximately £60m.
Within this publishing business the Academic and General Division publishes works of scholarship, college textbooks, Bibles, hymn-books, works of reference, dictionaries, books for the general reader, paperbacks, music books, sheet music, learned journals, and University publications.
The Educational Division publishes school textbooks, children's books, English Language Teaching material and bilingual dictionaries.
The Printing Division sales revenues for 1982–83 amount to approximately £6m.
This is generated from the printing of books, learned papers, and examination papers.
Books are typeset, printed, and bound: part operations of book manufacture are also undertaken.
At any time approximately 200 printing jobs are in production.
A wide variety of jobs are undertaken, ranging from 100,000 copy reprints of dictionaries, to specialized runs of a few hundreds.
Approximately half the book production work is material published by Oxford University Press, the remainder obtained from other publishers.
Recent Text Processing Experience
The Press first used computer methods to assist typesetting in 1970, beginning with An Index to the Indo Aryan Language produced from an IBM computer in London University and using the Photon Lumizip 901 typesetter of Computaprint Limited.
A small Computer Assisted Typesetting unit was established to prepare input for an ICL 1903 computer on paper tape.
The data prepared was for directories such as Crockford's Clerical Directory and the OUP General Catalogue.
In 1974 a Raytheon-Cossor PTS-100 mini computer was purchased and programmed by the Press to provide a four screen editing system using magnetic cassettes as the storage and updating medium.
This system is still available today but no new work has been attempted on it for 18 months.
The ICL Computer Composition System on the ICL 1903 was used to provide hyphenation and justification facilities in a batch mode and the Press has written a number of programs to perform generalized page make-up as well as specialized indexing, chess validation, dictionary make-up, book cataloguing and other operations.
For the last three years OUP's text processing systems have used an ICL 2904 for its main processing with certain programs on a Burroughs B6800.
The most important of these is the driver program which converts the made-up pages from the ICL into codes to drive, via magnetic tape, the Printing Division's Lasercomp.
During the last few years the Printing Division has been able to offer photosetting via its P.E.
keyboards, with a Monotype 400/8, then with page composition using Spectron 1 composers together with Keystor boards for complicated mathematics and Greek.
The installation of a Lasercomp in 1979 enabled the Division to take on the filmsetting work of the Computer Assisted Typesetting unit as well as expand the range of their own setting.
During the coming year the Press will be installing a text handling system for the use of both the Publisher's editorial and the Printer's composition staff.
This system will be based on the MILES 33 System 300 with software specially commissioned by the Press and will be known as the Oxford Text System.
The main hardware configuration will comprise:
1 x D.G. NOVA 4X with 256 KB
2 x 300 KB C.D.C. disk drives
1 x 9 track P.E., 1600 bpi magnetic tape deck
1 x Versatec printer/plotter for proofing
1 x Printronix line printer
2 x Finch Controllers
There will be two text editing VDUs and a printing device available to the Oxford Dictionary Department in St. Giles.
The Department will be connected via a private telephone line to the processing units in the computer room which is some half a mile distant.
This system will not have the on- line storage capacity to hold the complete OED at one time.
The addition of extra hardware might enable it to be used during the editorial phases of the project.
Further information on the MILES 33 System 300 may be obtained from:
Oxford English Dictionary Project Management
The work done within OUP on producing a new, up-to-date, and continually updatable version of the OED is controlled by a Project Team, managed by E.S.C.
Weiner, Senior Editor, Oxford English Dictionaries.
He is assisted by R.V. Sabido, Text Processing Manager, Information Systems Division.
The Delegates have established this Project Team as the focus of the scholarly and commercial resources of the Oxford English Dictionary Department (under Dr. R.W. Burchfield) and the OUP's marketing and production staff.
Timetable for Selection
Distribution of Invitation to Tender 
Basis for Selection
OUP's choice of supplier will be based on several factors including the following aspects of computer systems and service offered:
Proven Systems
A proven method of text capture, validation, and updating of large volumes of reference text.
Software System Credibility
Package or turnkey software should have been proven in use, ideally for at least a year.
Software which is to be written specifically for this project should be written by an organization with a proven record of successful completion of similar work for publishers within the UK.
Overall Costs
The costs of the proposal will be considered under two main categories:
a)
one-off costs, including equipment and software acquisition, licence fees, initial staff training and other costs
b)
ongoing costs, or annual running costs for the various phases, including bureau charges, communications costs, technical staff costs, etc.
Growth Path out of Proposed Facilities
The Press will assess the proposals according to the likely costs incurred and time and effort required to increase the capacity of the proposed systems in order to accommodate increased work on the project by OUP staff and the creation of new ‘spin-off’ products.
Capacity for Control by Users
It is important that the day to day running of the proposed systems can be undertaken by non-technical personnel.
Strength of Support and Standby Facilities
There must be reasonable assurance of technical support for the duration of the project, which is expected to take up to ten years: ideally, written guarantees or other contractual commitments should be provided.
Qualified engineering and software support staff should be available so that a suitable person can attend the OUP site, as necessary, within eight hours of a call for help.
Staff who are capable of giving assistance on any problems that may arise in the use of the system should be available on the telephone at any time during normal working hours.
Sufficient basic training courses should be provided to allow OUP staff to learn how to use the system.
Confidence of Success
Proposals will be assessed according to the level of confidence with which the OUP can anticipate the success of the strategies for each phase of the project.
Factors in this assessment include:
a)
the past success of similar scale projects
b)
the trading reputation of the suppliers
c)
the technical reputation of the suppliers
d)
the financial standing of the suppliers.
QUESTIONNAIRE
The object of this section is to provide a common structure for proposals from suppliers.
Depending on the strategies proposed suppliers may wish to give more information in certain areas.
Such information will be taken in to the evaluation procedure by the Press.
The Oxford English Dictionary and Supplement in Machine Readable Form
These questions concern the systems proposed for requirements stated in section 5.2.1.
Coding of the Text
Identify the type of mark-up (if any) of the text which will be applied prior to capture:
by type font change
by structure of the text
other.
What method of mark-up (if any) is proposed to identify various elements of the text:
in line flagging?
bracketing system?
record/field structuring?
other?
To what level of the text will this initial mark-up apply:
every element?
major elements only?— if so which?
Would you propose that all planned extra classifications of text be coded at this stage?(e.g. that semantic meaning be added?)
On what physical medium would you propose carrying out any mark-up proposed:
on pasted-up originals of the OED?
on photographically enlarged copies?
other?
Who do you propose does the mark-up:
the supplier?
OUP?
other?
Would you propose that mark-up is checked before capture?
If so, by whom?
Would you propose that the Supplement text is marked up and ordered in correct alphabetic position prior to capture?
If so, please describe how this would be achieved.
Text Capture
What physical method of text capture do you propose:
OCR methods?
‘blind’ keyboards?
VDU keyboards?
other?
Please give details of equipment and recording medium you propose to use.
What method of proofing of the text do you propose:
‘verification’?
reading of printed version against original?
other?
Who would proof the captured text against the original:
OUP?
supplier?
other?
How do you propose correcting errors identified in 7.1.2:
overtyping error?
merging correction ‘tapes’?
identify corrections by key?
others?
What error rate do you anticipate in the text after 7.1.2:
less than 1 in 1,000 errors?
less than 1 in 10,000 errors?
less than 1 in 100,000 errors?
What final proof would be produced from the text capture and correction phases:
line-printer?
typographic proof?
VDU screen?
How would the OED text be presented on such a proof:
in fielded format?
as a dictionary entry?
other?
How would special characters, such as element flags, be shown:
in coded form?
by their effect on the proofed text?
by structure?
other?
How would special sorts, such as phonetic characters, accents, etc. be shown on any proofs:
in coded form?
in true form?
in true position?
other?
Structure of the Machine Readable Text
What medium will the text be held on after capture:
magnetic disk?
magnetic tape?
other?
Magnetic Tape
Can you provide the OED text on a magnetic tape(s) with the following specification:
½ inch, 2400 ft reels?
phase encoded?
1600 bpi?
unlabelled?
a tape mark after every 500 entries (say)?
fixed length records of 100 characters (say)?
fixed length blocks of 2000 bytes (say)?
recorded padded out where necessary with a specified character (e.g. null)?
two tape marks to end each tape
ASCII code set?
Will the entries be recorded alphabetically in sequence of headword?
Will the Supplement entries follow their OED entry on the main tape(s) or be contained on a separate tape?
Can the tape be structured so that by reading serially through the file it would be simple to produce a text stream suitable for an automatic typesetting process:
for the Miles 33 system?
other?
Disk Storage
What method of disk storage is proposed?
sequential?
index sequential?
random?
data base methods?(if so please describe)
How do you propose to organize the elements of text within an entry:
retrievable by element classification?
retrievable by keyword?
retrievable by headword?
What is the estimate of disk storage needed for the complete OED and Supplement:
text only?
text plus structure?
Software
Will the capture and storage of the OED be done by existing or bespoke software?
Please give details of the application software proposed, including:
the originator
the supplier
description
whether standard package, modified package, or bespoke
support organization
What protection is available to prevent access to the OED text by unauthorized users?
What audit trail provisions are available for access or changes to the text?
If a Data Base Management system is proposed please answer the following:
which DBMS is proposed?
standard or modified?
when was the DBMS introduced on the proposed equipment?
how many major versions have since been released?
what is the current version?
how many installations are currently using this DBMS for text files?
Systems for the Updating of the Text of the OED and Supplement
If you have proposed a system to meet the requirements for Phase 2, described in section 5.2.5, then please answer the following questions.
If the system proposed is a package, please state:
the number of users
a summary of the modifications required (if any).
Will the completed software be the sole property of Oxford University Press?
Prepare a computer schedule for a typical working day when the systems described in 5.2.5 are available to Oxford University Press.
What will be the normal response time at terminals used for each system and transaction type?
With what reliability will computer processing be achieved on the proposed configuration(s)?
State any assumptions made in your estimate or performance.
If it is proposed that equipment is installed on OUP premises to update and manipulate the OED text please answer 7.2.7–7.2.8.
Visual Display Units
For each type of VDU proposed for text editing and manipulation please answer the following questions:
What are the VDU screen dimensions?
What screen phosphors are available?
How many rows and columns of characters may be displayed on the screen?
What data transmission speeds are proposed?
Which of the following options is available:
cursor addressing?
protected fields?
local editing?
page mode/scroll mode operations?
horizontal scroll?
local hard copy attachment under terminal control?
local hard copy attachment under main computer control?
Which of the following display modes is available:
slanting?
flashing?
reverse video?
underlining?
dual intensity?
others?
What features can be soft loaded to VDUs?
How many display colours are available?(specify these)
Provide details of the way in which characters are displayed:
vector or raster display? if raster display
number of horizontal dots per inch?
number of vertical dots per inch?
others?
number of fonts available simultaneously?
number of display characters within each font?
Is the keyboard detached from the VDU screen?
How many keys are provided on the standard keyboard?
How many program function keys are there?
How are special sort characters indicated on the suggested display:
actual shape?
coded form?
How are accents displayed on the suggested display:
actual shape?
actual position?
coded form?
How is the difference between elements of text indicated on the suggested display:
roman?
italic?
bold?
bold italic?
small caps?
serif?
sanserif?
Does the display differentiate between sizes of type.
If so, how?
Can a non-printing font be defined (for operator's notes, etc.) and displayed?
If so, in what form?
Can copy be accessed from several files and displayed at one time?
What method of access to a correction point does the system use:
scrolling forwards only?
scrolling forwards and backwards?
by line number?
by alphanumeric key?
other? please describe
Does the current system keep more than one version of a current text on the system?
Does the system mark corrected text so that only corrections may be recalled to the screen?
Is a HELP facility available on the system?
Hard Copy Devices
For each type of hard copy device proposed please answer the following questions.
Identify the method of forming the image of paper:
daisy wheel?
print drum?
print band?
‘golf ball’?
laser?
ink jet?
heat on heat sensitive paper?
electrostatic?
dot-matrix?
number of horizontal dots per character?
number of vertical dots per character?
other?
Identify the way in which characters are printed:
number of fonts available?
roman?
italic?
bold?
bold italics?
small caps?
serif?
sanserif?
How is the difference between different text sizes shown?
How are corrections to proofed text shown on the output?
Financial Considerations
Acquisition
This section is designed to identify the costs associated with each configuration of equipment that OUP will acquire (if any).
Please detail the costs of each configuration separately, in tabular form as follows:
Running
Please identify the cost of running each proposed configuration separately as follows:
Staffing Requirements
Identify the number of staff (if any) in each category which OUP will require for the systems you propose.
Existing Equipment
Identify which items of equipment (if any) which OUP already owns you would expect to make use of.
Required Background Information
Oxford University Press requires certain background information on suppliers to this project, which will be used to assess the suitability and continuing viability of the proposal.
Where the organization making the proposal manufactures, supplies, and maintains all the equipment and software, presentation of the required information will be a simple matter.
Where more than one organization is involved in the manufacture, supply, and maintenance of the equipment and software, care should be taken to make explicit the nature of the intended contractual relationship between each organization and Oxford University Press.
Suppliers
Which organizations will contract to supply Oxford University Press with equipment, software, or services?
Where there is more than one of these indicate whether they are:
independent of each other share some form of common ownership
principal or agent
equal partners (for this proposal)
principal or sub-contractor.
For each organization identified indicate which equipment, software, or services it will supply.
For each organization identified provide a copy of the latest annual report.
Which organization will accept prime responsibility for the performance of the proposed facilities to specifications?
For each organization identified, state:
the number of offices worldwide
the number of offices in the UK
the number of employees worldwide
the number of employees in the UK
the location of the main office for dealings with OUP
the number of employees at this office.