

ASSESSMENT
INTRODUCTION
The first task of a therapist faced with a new client is assessment.
A good assessment is important for both therapist and client.
The therapist needs to know what the main problems are, what caused them, what maintains them, and what possibilities there are for change.
The therapist's objective at the end of the assessment period is to be able to make an approximate formulation of what is going on, and to suggest a provisional treatment plan.
From the client's point of view the assessment provides an opportunity to express their difficulties in a structured manner, and make links between specific problems and various areas of their life, both past and present.
At the end of the assessment the client will be reassured that the problem is understandable, and that there is, ‘light at the end of the tunnel’, in terms of a provisional treatment plan.
The ability to carry out a good assessment requires the combination of a number of personal skills, and the active use of a large body of knowledge.
The skilled interviewer has to establish a fine balance between being receptive — allowing the client to relax and talk freely — and being in control — so that the client is guided into talking about fruitful areas, and also that the interview is closed on time.
THEORETICAL APPROACH TO ASSESSMENT
The assessment presented in this chapter is based largely on a cognitive-behavioural model, but encompassing both ‘psychodynamic’ and ‘systemic’approaches.
Lazarus (1976) coined the  phrase multi-modal assessment, encouraging the interviewer to look at different aspects of the presenting problem.
These form the memorable mnemonic BASIC ID — Behaviour, Affect, Sensation, Ideation, Cognition, Interpersonal, and Drugs.
Along similar lines, Lang (1969) again broke the presenting anxiety problem down, using three interconnected, but separate systems: physical sensations or feelings, thoughts and images, and behaviour.
Lang's three-system model of anxiety plays a central part in both our assessment and treatment programme.
The original overwhelming mass of stress or anxiety is broken down into smaller, interconnected parts, providing the client with greater understanding of the processes involved, and greater control over individual components of their anxiety.
This chapter will describe a structured, time-limited, assessment interview, and later examine a number of helpful questionnaires and inventories.
For a more detailed description of cognitive-behavioural assessment strategies see Kendall and Hollon (1981).
A three-sided assessment sheet, not printed to scale, is reproduced in Figure 3.1, and offers a guideline to the structure of the interview.
This form, printed on three sides of A4 paper, is a useful way of recording information elicited during the interview.
The assessment sheet corresponds to the three main sections of the interview, eliciting presenting problems, background information, and formulation and treatment plan.
THE STRUCTURED ASSESSMENT INTERVIEW
Introducing the session
After the therapist has introduced him/herself, explaining something about their profession, and the actual referral process, they might continue by explaining how the first session will proceed.
Therapist: ‘What we will do in this first session is an assessment of exactly what's going on: first we will look at the problems at the moment; second we will look at background factors such as your family and personal history; and third we will try to pull it all together and formulate what is going on, and then decide on what the best course of action is.
Figure 3.1 Assessment sheets
'So let's look at the current problems first-what is happening at the moment?
What I'd like you to do, is to try and put into words, what the main problems are at the moment, when they occur, where they occur, and how long they've been going on for’.
The client will then talk about what is troubling them.
This will probably come out as a mixture of physical symptoms, environmental, and individual stresses.
The therapist should let the client talk for a while, giving them the opportunity to relax.
Then, the therapist can try to shape what has been said by introducing the notion that anxiety is made up of three separate components.
Physical Symptoms
Therapist: ‘You say you feel awful at times; let's look at that and try and break it down into the physical sensations you feel, the thoughts you have, and how it effects your behaviour.
What kind of physical symptoms do you experience?’
The client may well give a list of physical symptoms, such as palpitations, hot flushes, nausea, headaches, dizziness, other pains, breathlessness.
These should be carefully recorded.
It is helpful at this stage to establish whether the client has panic attacks, and whether there is any degree of hyperventilation.
Thoughts (Mental Symptoms)
Therapist: ‘Now let's look at the thoughts which go with these symptoms.
When these symptoms occur what thoughts run through your mind?…
What do you think is happening to you?…
What is your fantasy?…’
Here the therapist is looking for ‘catastrophic thoughts’.
These are thoughts that exaggerate and misinterpret the significance of symptoms and generate further physiological arousal and anxiety.
The client may say, ‘My heart was beating so fast I thought I was going to have a heart attack’, or, ‘I can't cope any more’, or, ‘I think I'm going to end up in a mental hospital’.
This network of ‘catastrophic thoughts’ is the basis for secondary anxiety, in other words, ‘worry about anxiety’.
The client worries about having a panic attack, or feeling sick, or not  coping or any of a number of catastrophic consequences.
This worry increases physiological arousal, making it more likely that physical symptoms will occur in the future; an upwardly spiralling vicious circle soon gets established.
It is important to establish how much the client worries about the physical symptoms compared to the primary stresses which cause the symptoms.
Sometimes the client's main worry is the physical symptoms, and the original stresses which causes those symptoms are no longer an important issue.
The original stress may have disappeared but the anxiety symptoms are maintained by a vicious circle of catastrophic thoughts and maladaptive behaviour.
The therapist may have to prompt the client to elicit these thoughts, as very often the client is not aware of them.
Once the therapist has extracted one thought they can find out the one behind it.
One by one the client's chains of increasingly irrational thoughts can be extracted rather like a magician pulling a series of connected handkerchiefs out of a pocket.
Discovering these chains or networks of negative irrational thoughts is the basis of cognitive therapy.
When these thoughts are elicited the therapist should reassure the client that a great many people who have worrying physical symptoms have similar catastrophic thoughts which are usually unfounded.
If the client is not specifically worried about the symptoms, the therapist should find out what he is worried about, and pursue that to the end of the chain.
Very often there will be an  exagerated catastrophic image or fantasy at the back of the client's mind (i.e., ‘I'm unlovable and will never be able to have a good relationship’, or, ‘I'm not as good as anybody else’, or, ‘This job is too difficult for me, I can't cope with it’, etc.)
All these self-statements are based on ‘all or nothing’, irrational, catastrophic interpretations, of reality.
It is this style of thinking which plays a large part in producing symptoms of stress.
Behavioural Symptoms
Therapist: ‘Now we have looked at the physical symptoms and the thoughts that accompany them, let's now look at how anxiety effects your behaviour.
How do you think your behaviour has changed recently?…
More specifically, do you find yourself avoiding things you used to do?’
Clients with agoraphobic tendencies will describe a number of situations that they avoid because of the common element of entrapment and distance from a place of safety, i.e. crowded shops, lifts, queues, buses, trains, distance from home, etc.
After looking for agoraphobic avoidance, the therapist should look for social avoidance.
For example, since being under stress the client may have started to avoid business or social situations.
The therapist should look also for any avoidance of previously enjoyed recreational hobbies such as squash, golf, or sailing.
Very often when people are under stress these very important relaxing activities get squeezed out of the weekly timetable.
The therapist should look also for other maladaptive behavioural coping strategies such as increasing consumption of alcohol, drugs, cigarettes, food, or prescribed medication.
Here, the therapist is looking for maladaptive coping strategies which can be altered at a later date in homework assignments.
The client will then deliberately and gradually, confront, or alter these difficult situations and cope with the anxiety they create, using newly acquired coping skills.
Anxiety management training is about helping clients to understand what is going on, then teaching them skills to cope with anxiety, then encouraging them to put themselves deliberately into situations which create anxiety but with which they cope successfully.
The therapist is therefore looking for situations which create anxiety in the client.
Examples of ‘First’, Worst', and ‘Last’ Episodes of Anxiety
Therapist: ‘Now we have some idea of the physical, mental, and behavioural dimensions of your symptoms, let's now look at how it all started.
I'd like you to tell me about the first time you were really aware of these symptoms, then the worst episode you can remember, and then the last….
What situations come to mind?’
Very often people are almost haunted by one particular experience and they think to themselves, ‘Oh no, I couldn't stand it if it happened like that again'.
The first frightening experience of a panic attack, coming ‘out of the blue’ can, very often, also be their worst experience.
It is the memory of this event which generates further anxiety.
The therapist should encourage the client to describe these  experiences in terms of the three-systems model (physical, mental, behavioural), then ask them to describe what was going on in their life at the time, and what sort of stresses they were under.
Very often, with the benefit of hindsight, people can look back on their lives and identify stressful times more easily than identifying the present stresses that may surround them.
Precipitating Stresses
Therapist: ‘What sorts of stresses have you been under recently?
Think of a stress as being any change in your life, or an increase in the demands being made on you.’
Some clients will identify obvious external factors, such as changes at work, home, or in their personal life.
Other clients appear less aware of these changes, and often don't equate change as being stressful.
Gentle prompting and reassurance is often needed.
Therapist: ‘One of the main features of people under stress is that very often they ‘can't see the wood for the trees’.
When it's all happening around you it's difficult to step back and get a clear perspective.
Let's look at it from a different angle; if you could change anything about your life, what would you change?’
If no obvious precipitating stressors are elicited, the therapist should leave it and return to this area when they know more about the client's past history, pre-morbid personality, and present situation.
Maintaining Factors
Therapist: ‘Sometimes these types of difficulties can be affected by how other people respond to them.
How have your family and friends reacted to your recent difficulties?’
The social network the client is enmeshed in can be vitally important in maintaining the problems; particularly in the case of phobic anxiety.
A classic example is the agoraphobic housewife whose husband is, ‘really wonderful, very sympathetic and understanding…he does everything for me…he comes around all the shops with me and drives me wherever I want to go’.
In this case the husband's behaviour might be positively reinforcing the wife's avoidance behaviour.
His attention and  company are pleasant consequences, and are likely to strengthen the wife's avoidance response.
In some situations the presenting problem may have the function of balancing a particular relationship, i.e. the ‘well husband’ may feel slightly inadequate but when his wife takes on the ‘sick dependent role’, he starts to feel more adequate, needed and important.
He feels good when she needs him.
The couple may not be aware of this process and this issue may need to be handled carefully during the course of therapy.
Family Background
Therapist: ‘OK, we have looked at your current difficulties, let's now look at some background information [turns page of assessment sheet].
What I'd like you to do is to describe briefly each of the members of your family — the family you grew up in.
Just give a few details about age, occupation, their personality, and your relationship with them.
Anything that comes into your head.
Let's start with your father’.
This information is important in understanding the circumstances and influences on the development of the client's personality and belief systems.
Although these familial influences are unlikely to be the primary focus of the intervention, they are important points of reference, helping both the therapist and client make sense of the presenting problems.
There are a number of important factors to look out for.
How have the parents acted as role models?
What messages have parents given to the child about itself and the world the child lives in?
For example, ‘the world is a dangerous place, there is lots to worry about’, or, ‘children should be seen and not heard’, or, ‘you are not as important as other people’.
What type of relationship did those parents offer the child?
Was the child allowed to express a wide and deep range of emotion, or was the expression of particular feelings taboo?
Did the child have the opportunity to learn to play, relax, and enjoy itself?
The therapist should note how other siblings within the family have faired and whether they have had any stress related problems.
Personal History
Therapist: ‘Now I'd like you to run through your personal history, saying something about your childhood, school, work, and relationships…anything that comes to mind.’
It is important to try to see the client's present difficulties in the context of their life history.
Are the present problems unusual or has the client a long history of similar difficulties?
The issues to investigate might include whether the client has viewed previous difficulties as challenges or disasters, their ability to establish and maintain relationships, their tendency to worry, and their inclination to avoid rather than confront anxiety provoking situations.
This information helps paint a picture of the client's pre-morbid personality.
Spielberger (1972) made an important differentiation between ‘trait anxiety’ and ‘state anxiety’.
The former suggests a long-standing enduring personality trait or outlook — whether the world is generally viewed as a frightening place and whether the client is prone to anxiety state.
The term ‘state anxiety’ refers to a temporary subjective feeling of tension and apprehension.
Obviously people who are merely going through a bad patch (anxiety state) are easier to assist in the process of change, because they have greater resources, than individuals who have always been anxious (anxiety trait).
Present Situation
Therapist: ‘OK, now let's come up-to-date and look at your present situation.
How do you like to spend your spare time?…
Would you say that you have many people you could talk to; people you would call friends?’
Are there any activities or hobbies that the client would use as distractor to release energy and tension?
Very often when individuals are under stress the very activities that they should endeavour to keep in their weekly timetable get squeezed out or avoided.
The interviewer is looking for a relapsed sport or hobby which can be restarted and used as behavioural tasks in homework assignments.
The social needs of the client can also be an important part of the jigsaw.
The client may have needs for a high level of social contact, which for various reasons are  not being met, or, vice versa, they may have the need to spend more time alone which is not being met.
Changes the Client Wants to Make
Therapist: ‘Everybody who comes here to see a psychologist has different expectations.
Some people expect to see a Sigmund Freud-like figure and to lie down on a couch.
What were your expectations?
And specifically what sort of things would you like to change about yourself?’
Finding out the expectations of clients is important in assessing how readily they will take to an educational self-help approach.
If they are looking for an easy, magical cure — either hypnosis or a special pill — they will be disappointed.
If they are looking for the special therapist to ‘cure’ them, then, also they will be disappointed.
The therapist should emphasize that encouragement, information, and direction can be offered, but ultimately the client will have to learn to change things for him/ herself.
The most important question is, ‘What does the client want to do — specifically, what changes do they want to make?’
The importance of asking this question is two fold.
First, the therapist is placing responsibility for change firmly on the client's shoulders, reinforcing the notion that people help themselves.
Second, the therapist is asking the client to be specific and realistic, so that the therapist has goals to aim for.
The therapist should challenge any vague and woolly replies, such as‘I just want to get better’ or, ‘I'd like to be a better person’.
They should encourage the client to commit him/herself to something specific, i.e., ‘I'd like to stop having panic attacks’, or ‘I'd like to be able to catch the train up to London’, or, ‘I'd like to understand and cope more effectively with my anxiety symptoms’, or, ‘I'd like to be more relaxed giving presentations at work’.
It can also be enlightening to ask about the circumstances of the original referral.
Was it the client's idea or the GP's?
This information can often be important for assessing the client's motivation: they may only be there to please their doctor.
Formulation and Treatment Plan
At the end of the first session the therapist will try to pull all the information together and make sense out of what has been said, feeding back to the client some explanation and treatment plan.
This is perhaps the most difficult part of the assessment but becomes easier with increased knowledge and experience.
The therapist cannot expect to be able to do it easily and accurately straightaway or every time.
The therapist should always err on the side of caution; the hypotheses set up are merely shrewd guesses.
We can all be wrong.
The following example is a hypothetical formulation and treatment plan.
Therapist: ‘So let's try to pull it all together.
Over the last eighteen months there have been a number of major changes in your life.
You've moved house and now live in an area away from your family and old friends.
You've changed jobs, moving to a position of greater responsibility, where a lot of people are making demands on your time and expertise.
Work load has increased and you've found it difficult to say ‘no’, or to delegate….
Is that right?…
Then, out of the blue, at a business meeting you had a ‘panic attack’, characterized by hyperventilation and palpitations.
You felt dizzy and extremely frightened, imagining all sorts of frightening thoughts.
The main thoughts that worried you were that you were either having a heart attack or that you'd pass out in front of your colleagues….
That must have been really worrying?…
You then left that meeting, rather hurriedly, before it ended, in a very anxious state.
That evening you visited your GP who told you to take it easy and prescribed a course of tranquillizers.
After that it sounds like you were then constantly on the look out for further physical symptoms.
This over-vigilance or sensitization meant that you were noticing all sorts of minor physical symptoms you would have normally ignored….
A few further panic attacks increased your worry that something was seriously wrong…
From what you say it sounds as if , from then on, you started to avoid large business meetings deliberately, and to avoid dining in the staff canteen.
Your mood went down and you found yourself avoiding meeting friends and playing golf….
It would appear that this vicious circle of anxiety, or anxiety about anxiety, spiralled upwards.
For the last month you have been signed off sick from work, which has meant that your confidence in your ability to cope has  further diminished.
Would that be a fair summary of what you told me?…’
'It's a familiar story — a number of identifiable stresses or life events acting on a perhaps vulnerable personality, resulting in frightening symptoms, which are misinterpreted and become a major source of worry in themselves.
I say that perhaps you might be a ‘vulnerable’ person, because you say that you've always been ‘a bit of a worrier’, finding it difficult to relax; and your mother also appears to have been an anxious person.
You also come across as a bit of a perfectionist, having to do  everything perfectly and finding it difficult to delegate, or say ‘no’….
Would that be a fair comment?…’
'So what can we do?
First we can try to dismantle the secondary problem of getting anxious about anxiety, or worrying about symptoms.
This can be achieved by understanding more about what is going on.
Once you know what is happening it becomes much less frightening.
Understanding the processes involved, the stages in the development of your difficulties, is the first step.
This might involve learning about exactly what a panic attack is.
We will then look at some coping strategies such as muscle relaxation, breathing exercises, distraction techniques, and positive self-talk, which will help you to develop a sense of control over your symptoms.
Once you feel more able to control symptoms we can set about confronting situations that you have been avoiding, such as meeting people and going to work.
It might then be a good time to look at the original sources of stress which created these symptoms in the first place.
It sounds like you may benefit from looking at some time management strategies for coping more effectively at work, and also looking at how you could be more assertive in order to limit the demands colleagues make on you.
How does that sound?’
The client, it is hoped, will feel reassured at the end of the assessment interview.
The message the therapist is conveying is that ‘your problem is understandable, it is not strange or abnormal, and there is a recognized course of treatment’.
The therapist is offering ‘light at the end of the tunnel’, something to aim for.
The client may be offered a number of options at the end of the session.
These might include a number of individual sessions, or a place in an anxiety management group, or even perhaps no further involvement.
If individual sessions are the  chosen option, the therapist may give the client a number of handouts to read before the next session and a self-monitoring sheet to record incidents of anxiety.
SELF-MONITORING
Self-monitoring of identified behaviours the client would like to change is both part of the assessment procedure and part of the treatment package.
The client is given a number of record forms and is instructed to make an entry whenever they notice an inappropriate increase in anxiety.
They record the time, place, activating situation, their physical symptoms and thoughts.
They are also encouraged to rate their anxiety on a scale of 0–100, and to describe how they coped with the anxiety (see Figure 3.2).
From an assessment point of view this information establishes a baseline record of frequency of panic attacks or other physical symptoms.
It also helps the therapist identify antecedents, prominent physical symptoms, and catastrophic thoughts.
Self-monitoring also helps the client to see their difficulty in a different way.
They are encouraged to try and take a few steps back and be a little more objective with themselves.
This helps the client begin to redefine the problem in a structured cognitive-behavioural way, rather than in their catastrophic, idiosyncratic way.
The information gained from the self-monitoring sheets is then used in the next session as a basis for discussion.
Research indicates that behaviour may be altered by the very fact that it is being monitored.
This phenomenon of ‘reactivity’ is well accepted; desirable behaviours often increase and undesirable behaviours generally decrease when they are monitored.
THE USES OF QUESTIONNAIRES AND INVENTORIES
Assessment questionnaires and inventories can be useful to both therapist and client for a number of reasons.
First, they help map out a profile of the client's problems.
In our case this is in terms of mood disturbance, physical symptoms, catastrophic thoughts, avoidance behaviour, and general effects on specific areas of everyday life.
Once this map has been plotted, interventions can be specifically targeted at particular areas.
Second, quantifiable psychometric information can provide a useful baseline from which to work, and from which progress can be measured.
This informs the therapist whether their intervention is effective, and enables them to make comparisons between different types of therapy.
Having a tangible record of progress can also act as positive feedback and reinforcement for the client.
Third, quantifiable data is the cornerstone of applied clinical research.
Attempting to shape therapeutic interventions in a form that allows a research project to develop may add a rewarding dimension to clinical work, and often stimulates more academic interest.
Figure 3.2 Diary record sheet
A USEFUL BATTERY OF ANXIETY QUESTIONNAIRES
It is our practice to send out a small booklet of self-assessment questionnaires to any client referred to the department with anxiety related problems.
This collection of questionnaires takes approximately ten to fifteen minutes to complete and can be used alongside the assessment interview.
Very often, during the assessment interview, the therapist might glance at the client's completed inventories and adapt their line of questioning, or confirm a particular response.
The majority of the following questionnaires have been used by other authors for research purposes, so that they are accompanied by some normative data.
For the first part of the battery (Section 1) we use the Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (Zigmond and Snaith 1983)(See Figure 3.3).
This is a fourteen-item, screening inventory, designed to detect alterations in mood, specifically states of anxiety and depression.
There are seven questions relating to anxiety symptoms,(questions 1, 4, 5, 8, 9, 12, and 13) and seven questions relating to symptoms of depression,(questions 2, 3, 6, 7, 10, 11, and 14).
The questionnaire is scored on a four-point scale (0, 1, 2, 3).
The authors suggest a cut-off point of eleven, scores greater than this indicating clinical significance.
High scores on the depression scale suggest that treatment other than anxiety management might also be considered.
Section 2 is a physical symptom inventory (figure 3.4) designed by the authors.
Responses are scored on a four-point scale (0, 1, 2, 3).
Figure 3.3 Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale
Figure 3.4 Physical Symptoms Inventory
Figure 3.5 Cognitive Anxiety Questionnaire
Figure 3.6 The Fear Inventory (Behavioural Symptoms Questionnaire)
Figure 3.7 Effects on Life Inventory
Section 3 (Figure 3.5) is the ‘Cognitive Anxiety Questionnaire’, described by Lindsay et al .
(1987), which is a list of the twelve most commonly elicited thoughts associated with feelings of anxiety, drawn from a sample of anxious clients.
Responses are scored on a four-point scale (0, 1, 2, 3).
Section 4 (Figure 3.6) is the short form of ‘The Fear Questionnaire’(Marks and Mathews 1979), a useful measure of avoidance behaviour in phobic clients.
A total phobic score can be computed, or individual subscales can be computed, agoraphobia (Questions 4, 5, 7, 11, and 14), blood and injury phobias (questions 1, 3, 9, 12, and 15), and social phobia (questions 2, 6, 8, 10, and 13).
Section 5 contains the ‘Effects On Life Inventory’(Figure 3.7), devised by Mathews (1982, unpublished manuscript).
This inventory identifies exactly which areas of the client's life are most disrupted by their problems.
ANXIETY AND STRESS — THE PROCESS OF EDUCATION
INTRODUCTION
One of the central elements to any course of anxiety management training is helping the client to achieve a greater understanding of the origins, course and nature of the anxiety symptoms.
This information is complex and therefore it must be imparted in a language and form that the client can not only understand but also is able to remember.
A strategy for this process of education is presented.
It relies heavily on tangible examples, metaphor, and analogy in an attempt to simplify the experience of, and knowledge about, stress and anxiety.
THE PROCESS OF EDUCATION
Some Stress and Anxiety is Normal and Necessary
A certain amount of anxiety is both normal and necessary to perform any task properly.
For instance it is unlikely that we will cross a road safely if we are not mildly anxious.
However, too much or little anxiety will always affect any performance in a detrimental way.
Let us take a particular example.
Suppose you are required to perform the simple task of placing each of a pile of twenty counters into a jam jar, picking up one counter at a time and dropping it into the jar.
Now let us consider three different conditions each representing a different degree of anxiety within the same task.
First you are told that you can take as long as you like to put the counters in the jar.
Don't worry, no one is going to ever check up on you, you are only doing it for  yourself.
These demands create very low anxiety; you may well think to yourself, ‘Who cares how quickly I do it.’
Thus your performance may well be careless and slow.
Second let us suppose that you are told that for every counter that you place in the jar within thirty seconds you will receive a pound coin.
Under these conditions your anxiety will be greater, as you are keen to earn as much money as possible in the time allowed.
Therefore your task performance is likely to be very fast and efficient.
Third, you are told that for every counter that you fail to get into the jar within thirty seconds you will have a finger chopped off.
Clearly this condition will create very high levels of anxiety and in your haste you will be likely to fumble the counters or miss the jar altogether.
Figure 4.1 The relationship between anxiety and performance
This information is simplified in Figure 4.1.
Performance on any task therefore, from playing tennis, to taking exams, to going to work, will be impaired if anxiety is too high or too low, but somewhere between these lies the ideal degree of anxiety for producing our best performance.
Individuals Capacity for Stress
Despite the fact that some anxiety is necessary and normal to perform any task, in coping with anxiety and stress problems clinically we are usually dealing with levels which are too high.
Regardless of who we are or what we may do in life all of us have an upper limit to the stress that our bodies can take.
The body may be viewed as a machine, its limitations are finite.
The body's limitations for stress might be compared to all of us having a glass inside our bodies.
Every individual has a different upper limit for stress.
Therefore all of us will have a different shape and size of our internal stress glass.
Since any glass can only take a certain amount of fluid it represents an easy way of thinking of our body's limitations to the amount of stress we can endure.
We may extend this metaphor further by suggesting that our everyday experience of stress is rather like a tap which is placed over the glass and into which it drips drops of stress.
The more stress we experience, the more the tap drips.
As the level of stress in the system of our bodies rises it becomes increasingly likely that the body will produce physical, mental, or behavioural symptoms, or any combination of these, in response to this stress.
Figure 4.2 The tap and glass — a model of stress
It is important at this point to note that, just as our individual stress glasses are different, so our stress taps and what turns on these taps are different for everyone.
Therefore experiences which are stressful for some people will not be perceived as such by others — under the same circumstances some people's taps will turn on and others will remain off.
Symptoms as Signals
The idea behind any signal is that the person who receives it can act upon this information.
The symptoms of stress we experience are the body's ways of signalling to us that our stress levels are beginning to get too high.
The point at which we receive  these signals will of course depend upon the size and shape of our internal glasses, that is, it will depend upon our own physiological make-up — our individual capacity for stress.
Figure 4.3 The level of stress and degree of symptoms
Gradually, as the stress level in our glass continues to rise, we eventually reach a critical point, some distance from the top of the glass, at which the body begins the signalling process that the stress level is too high.
As we have said this signal comes in the form of a physical, mental, or behavioural symptom.
Let us say that this critical level is at point A in Figure 4.3.
The specific symptom by which our body chooses to signal stress will differ from one individual to the next.
For some, the first signal may be a headache, becoming irritable, or feeling low.
For others losing sleep, developing obsessional thoughts, or feeling nauseous, and so on.
It is very important that all of us learn what our individual specific response to stress may be so that we might learn to respond to this signal early on.
In some ways we should consider ourselves lucky if we get these types of responses to stress, because for others, unfortunately, there are other responses to stress that may also occur, such as ulcers and heart disease, from which we may get less warning.
If the signal at point A is ignored, that is, the person does nothing to reduce the stress level then, as the tap keeps dripping, gradually the stress level will continue to rise to say point B. At this stage the original symptom may become worse or another symptom may begin to occur.
Again if the signal at B is ignored and stress continues, then gradually the level may continue to rise to point C and once more the original symptom may get worse or change.
In this way the person suffering from long-term stress may initially experience, for instance, irritability, then chest pains and then sleep disturbance, or any combination of symptoms.
Or they may simply find that their headaches become more frequent and more painful.
We must remember that the signals are a means of informing the individual that their stress level is becoming uncomfortably high.
The individual must try to act to reduce their level of stress as soon as possible.
Of course our tap may cause the glass to fill up in lots of different ways.
It may fill up very slowly and gradually, particularly where stress is constant, such as when work is over demanding, financial problems can't be overcome, or the children  are going through a difficult phase.
People may then describe symptoms starting ‘out of the blue’.
Indeed it may seem exactly like this, since after all it is only one more drop of stress, on top of all the other stress accumulated over months and years, which eventually brings the level in the stress glass to a critical point.
Other events may cause the stress tap to turn on much quicker.
Our stress levels suddenly rise markedly when we go through a major life event such as perhaps a divorce, serious accident, or death in the family.
Alternatively, encountering the situations we fear most will turn on our stress taps rapidly.
At such times it may be easier to attribute our stress reaction to these events and so understand more about what is happening.
It is important to realize then that our symptoms, produced in response to stress, are not solely based upon the stress occurring at the given time, but upon all the stress accumulated in our stress glass over time.
If, at the start of a difficult problem, the glass is fairly full obviously the body is more likely to signal stress than if the glass is empty.
This is why sometimes we can achieve tasks with no difficulty and other times the same task produces anxiety and stress symptoms.
Stress can also drain out of the glass as well as drip into it, and the process of overcoming the problems of stress and anxiety is about learning how to turn off the stress tap and drain down the stress glass.
It is important also to note that we are not implying that any major catastrophe will occur should the stress level continue to rise so high that the glass spills over.
If this should occur it will only mean that the symptoms will intensify a little further, making it even more difficult to ignore the stress, forcing you to act to reduce the level.
Panic Attacks
Perhaps the most frightening of all the symptoms of stress and anxiety that a person may experience is the panic attack.
Its onset is rapid and dramatic, we may get little or no warning, occurring often ‘out of the blue’ and in situations of no real danger.
Not everyone who experiences problems with stress and anxiety will have panic attacks.
For those who do their frequency can vary from yearly, to monthly, to many times a day.
For someone who has never had a panic attack it may be  difficult to fully empathize with the client, but it may help if you were to consider the following scenario.
Imagine that you are shopping at your local supermarket.
You are happily filling your basket with the week's groceries when you turn the corner into the next aisle and suddenly you see a roaring lion, its teeth glistening, open-mouthed and heading straight for you.
Of course you'd be panic stricken, your heart would be beating wildly, you would be sweating, shaking, feeling faint, and without a further thought you'd be off like a shot.
Now try to imagine turning into that aisle, all those bodily reactions start to go off, and yet there is nothing there — no lion, nothing for you to be terrified about and yet your heart is beating faster, you're sweating, feeling faint, breathing rapidly, and so on.
What would you think?
‘I'm going mad, I'm having a heart attack, I'm dying’ or at least‘I'm going to make a fool of myself, I'm going to faint or be sick’.
Most of us would probably panic, think catastrophic thoughts, breathe rapidly, run away to a safe place, call out the doctor, and make a will.
This is often exactly what the panic attack victim thinks and does when they have no idea what is really happening to them.
Unfortunately it is exactly these thoughts and behaviours which make the panic attack worse, make us terrified of having another and make us begin to avoid any and every situation where it could possibly happen again.
The more we anticipate the fear reaction the more likely it is that it will occur.
Subsequently we look for and find, or even create, the early signals, we magnify these signals, making catastrophic interpretations and predictions which we may or may not be aware of and we may begin to hyperventilate, thereby creating a full-blown panic attack as the stress glass fills rapidly up.
Understanding Panic Attacks — The Alarm Reaction
All of us, given sufficient fright or shock, can experience an alarm reaction.
Imagine the physical feeling we would experience if we were high up a ladder and began to feel it slipping, or if we had a ‘near miss’ in a car.
This is the body's sudden and natural response to prepare us to cope with sudden threat.
This  response is entirely automatic, without the need for conscious thought.
In order to fully understand an alarm  reaction it is useful to think back many thousands of years to the time of the caveman.
The experience of a panic attack has its basis in the alarm reaction which may also be known as ‘the fight or flight response’ discussed in chapter one (Cannon 1929).
Consider the following scenario: a caveman leaves his cave one day setting out in order to hunt for food.
As he gets nearer and nearer the jungle in which he will begin hunting, he comes near to a large bush.
Suddenly from behind that bush he hears a rustle and some movement, obviously that of an animal.
Immediately the caveman must prepare himself for two possibilities.
First it may be a rabbit behind the bush making the noise.
If that was the case then the caveman's body would need to be ready to dive into the bush, or run after the rabbit, catch it, and kill it for food.
The second possibility is that the rustling is a tiger.
If this was the case the caveman's body would need to be ready to run away very quickly, or enable him to try to defend himself if caught by the tiger.
In both circumstances we can see that the caveman's body must be prepared, following the initial fright or increase in anxiety, for fight and/or flight.
This bodily preparation needs to occur so quickly that there is no time for conscious thought, the caveman does not have time to talk himself into this state of readiness.
Rather what happens is that a reflex reaction takes place whereby a signal is sent to the adrenal gland to release the chemical adrenalin into the blood stream.
This chemical causes rapid changes to take place within the caveman's body including the following:
Heart rate speeds up
The heart is a pump which pumps blood around the body.
In order for muscles to work effectively, to run and fight, they need blood rich in oxygen supplied by the heart.
Breathing rate increases
As the heart speeds up so does the rate of intake of oxygen to supply the blood
Blood is redistributed
Blood is pumped away from areas such as the head and stomach into the long muscles of the body, in the arms and legs.
These muscles tense in readiness for action.
The caveman does not need to think or use blood in digestive  processes, but instead needs it in the arms and legs for running and fighting.
Sweat glands are activated
The caveman's body begins to sweat and it thus becomes wet and slippery.
In this way it is more difficult for a tiger to grab hold of.
Additionally the sweat serves to cool down the body temperature.
Bowels may be evacuated
The caveman's body may release all waste products, this immediately makes the body feel lighter and assists the caveman to run more quickly.
All the common symptoms of a panic attack can thus be understood in terms of adrenalin being pumped round the body and in terms of the fight/flight mechanism.
During a panic attack we may feel our heart beating very fast and very hard, our bodies begin to sweat very heavily, we may feel unreal, faint, dizzy, and nauseous as blood is pumped away from the head and the stomach.
We may also feel the need to use the toilet during a severe panic attack and we may find that our breathing pattern changes markedly.
All these experiences happen very suddenly and without conscious thought and can be very frightening if we fail to understand what is happening.
A Panic Attack Cannot Harm You.
However frightening a panic attack may be we must always remind ourselves of one fact: none of the symptoms of a panic attack can harm us.
People often worry that their heart is beating so fast they will have a heart attack, or they feel so faint and dizzy they will collapse, or they will be physically sick in public.
Very often people get so afraid of these consequences that they develop a very serious fear of their own fear response.
Therefore, in order to avoid panic attacks, they stop placing themselves in the situations in which they had previously experienced these feelings.
As people avoid more and more they become a prisoner of their anxiety.
We must always remember that a panic attack has its basis in the alarm reaction which is a normal bodily mechanism which has helped to keep the species of man alive in situations of  danger for thousands of years.
If the mechanism made us faint, or vomit, or have a heart attack, then as cavemen we would have made very easy prey every time we encountered an animal we feared.
Mankind would have died out long ago if this was the case.
It is not and an acute anxiety attack will not harm you.
Hyperventilation and Anxiety Symptoms
Symptoms of a panic attack initiated by adrenalin can never cause us to faint or be sick.
However, if we hyperventilate for even brief periods we increase the intensity of the initial symptoms and may bring on these more serious symptoms.
Hyperventilation is a process of breathing rapidly, inhaling and exhaling from the chest rather than from the stomach.
This rapid shallow breath may occur in response to the adrenalin which causes the heart to speed up.
The faster the heart beats the more rapidly we may be inclined to breathe and the more oxygen we take in.
In turn then the heart must beat faster so as to pump blood quicker to cope with all this oxygen coming into the body.
Changes in the normal oxygen/carbon dioxide levels occur in the lungs and, in the much longer term, this may have an effect on the acidity of the blood.
This may cause a further increase in symptoms, similar to those symptoms of more chronic stress e.g. chest pains, headaches, etc.
A vicious circle is set up.
Eventually, if the rapid breathing continues, the body will cut off the excessive supply of oxygen by causing the individual to faint.
When we faint we return to normal breathing and so fainting is a fail-safe mechanism for hyperventilation control.
If we are prone to hyperventilating during panic attacks, and otherwise at times of increased anxiety, we must learn techniques which help us to breathe more slowly and deeply, from the stomach rather than the chest, and we may also need to rebreathe our own air, breathing into and out of a paper bag, or cupping our hands close to our mouth to catch and rebreathe the exhaled air.
This is dealt with in greater detail in chapter five.
Catastrophic Thinking and Anxiety Symptoms
Catastrophic thinking, both in the misinterpretation of bodily symptoms and the anticipation of disaster, plays a central role in  the development and exacerbation of anxiety symptoms.
There are four types of panic thoughts:
Thoughts of anticipation
These type of thoughts put us in the mood to feel anxiety.
For , people with social difficulties may anticipate that there will be nobody at the party who will talk to them.The person who fears dogs may convince him/ herself that dogs always bite people, especially them.
These thoughts anticipate catastrophe or very unpleasant outcome.
Can't cope thoughts
These thoughts relate to both the symptoms and the situations.
‘I can't bear this, this is awful’.
‘I'll never be able to do it’.
‘Everyone can see how anxious I am’.
These thoughts serve to reduce our self confidence further and encourage us to give up before trying.
Thoughts misinterpreting bodily sensations
These thoughts stem from our misunderstanding of our physical sensations.
These include ‘I'm having a heart attack’, ‘I'm going to pass out’, ‘I'm dying’.
These thoughts occur because people imagine something very serious must be wrong with their body to cause the symptoms that they are experiencing.
Such catastrophic thoughts are central in increasing our anxiety and thus making the physical symptoms worse.
Escape thoughts
These thoughts lead quickly to avoidance of the feared situation and include, ‘I'll be OK if I run home now’, ‘Get away and you'll be all right’.
When people listen to these thoughts and avoid or escape, this serves to reduce anxiety.
Thus the thought becomes very powerfully strengthened and increases the likelihood of subsequent avoidance.
A Summary — The Acute Anxiety Spiral
We have talked about the experience of anxiety symptoms as being initiated by the sudden or gradual build-up of stress.
The tap turns on, either suddenly or slowly, and the glass fills.
As the stress level rises and eventually reaches the individual's critical point a vast array of different physical, mental, or behavioural symptoms will occur to signal stress.
One of these  possible signals is a panic attack when adrenalin is released into the blood stream and an acute anxiety spiral may then be set into effect.
The first stage is a recognition of the initial bodily changes as a result of the adrenalin.
These sensations are the first acute symptoms of anxiety, often leading to hyperventilation and to the initiation of catastrophic panic thoughts.
The second stage is an awareness of, not only the situation we find difficult or are afraid of, but also of the fact that we are becoming anxious and beginning to panic.
This leads to a bigger surge of anxiety, we become anxious about becoming anxious.
The third stage is seeing our anxiety getting bigger and bigger and this makes it get worse.
This is illustrated diagrammatically in Figure 4.4.
Figure 4.4 The acute anxiety spiral
How Does Anxiety Start?
The simple answer to this question is that there may be lots of ways in which anxiety may develop.
We have suggested that the experience of physical symptoms of anxiety result from stress.
This may be from chronic stress, where our stress tap drips constantly a small amount at a time for months or years, or from sudden stress, when we encounter a specific fear, problem or major life event, which causes the stress tap to turn full on.
The  specific nature of the stress will vary enormously from one individual to another as will their specific symptomatic response.
Certain types of fears are very common when we are children.
Around 90 per cent of children between the ages of 5 and 12 years admit to having specific fears such as fear of animals, strange situations, fear of noise, and the dark.
These tend to disappear as we grow older but occasionally persist into adulthood.
Other fears may be caused by unpleasant shock or injury.
Examples might be the lift phobic who was once trapped in a lift, or the water phobic who once very nearly drowned.
Some fears can begin by seeing unpleasant things happen to others, or may be copied from other people, such as our parents.
Also any major life event is stressful and this experience may precipitate the first symptoms of anxiety.
Some people may exhibit a general anxiety.
These may be people who seem to have always been anxious, people with a predisposition to worry.
Others may have been maintaining a stressful lifestyle for years, always rushing onwards, filling their time with one impossible task after the next.
For some clients, understanding the origins of their fears and stress is easy, for others many sessions of assessment and detailed analysis may not result in any certainty as to the genesis of their problems.
Many clients can become frustrated by this fact, believing that there must be some very significant detail in their past which has caused them to become anxious or stressed currently.
The model of the tap and the glass however explains that for some people their first experience of anxiety symptoms was not caused by any specific frightful encounter but rather by the insidious, unapparent build-up of stress, one drop at a time.
The final drop was no more significant in stress terms than any of the thousands of previous drops.
It just happened to be the one which caused the glass to become overfilled and which caused the body to begin to signal being under excessive stress.
Therefore, when clients relate their first and subsequent panic attacks, or other symptoms of anxiety and stress, and explain that they were doing nothing out of the ordinary, it is entirely possible that this was the case.
One very important fact to establish at the outset, therefore, is that it is not necessary to know why a particular fear or problem started in order to overcome it.
What Maintains Anxiety?
Though it may be very difficult to establish what has triggered our first experience of anxiety, we know a lot more about what factors cause the stress tap to remain turned on, preventing the anxiety from ever going away spontaneously.
Basically there are a number of general factors which can serve to maintain anxiety.
How Lifestyle Maintains Anxiety
This includes the particular stressful lifestyle we may have become locked into.
It is useful to think of how we cope with the stresses of life as a set of scales (see Figure 4.5).
On one side of the scales are our resources and on the other side the demands that life places upon us.
Figure 4.5 Resources versus demands
Obviously if the demands upon us outweigh our resources this will create stress and will continue to do so until we act either to strengthen our resources or reduce the demands upon us or both.
Stress will be maintained for as long as the balance measures demands to be greater than resources.
Another way of thinking of this is to return to the tap metaphor and to see that the tap represents demands and the glass represents resources.
As the glass fills and demands increase so eventually demands will get very close to, and eventually outstretch our resources, producing stress and physical symptoms which occur to signal this fact.
How Avoidance Maintains Anxiety
Another behavioural pattern which maintains anxiety is avoidance.
Initially as a result of the fear reaction it seems that people avoid the situations which induced their fear or high levels of stress.
However, the more we investigate this phenomenon with the client the more often it becomes clear that the avoidance is maintained because the person is afraid of the fear response itself.
Basically they become terrified of having another anxiety attack.
This is fear of fear.
Perhaps this can be made clearer by taking the specific example of somebody who has an anxiety attack whilst shopping in a supermarket.
It is important to note that we could have chosen any example of a stressful situation with which a person is having problems.
This may include avoiding facing up to the boss at work, avoiding going to a party or social occasion, and man-; other situations.
For all of these examples the information would look the same.
If we look at Figure 4.6, which represents a trip to the supermarket, it suggests that by the time the person leaves home they are already a little anxious about the trip perhaps as a result of their previous difficulties with this task.
As the person gets nearer and nearer to the supermarket so their level of anxiety may be gradually rising in anticipation of difficulty.
The more the level of their anxiety rises the more the person will panic, further increasing the anxiety.
Eventually, still some distance from the supermarket perhaps, the person's level of anxiety may become so high that they imagine that any further increase will have a catastrophic effect on them.
For example, they feel that they will faint, be sick, have a heart attack, or imagine they are going to die.
The person feels totally unable to take any more of these feelings and imagines that the feelings themselves will get much worse.
Thus at this imaginary point A they give up, turn around, and go home.
This causes an immediate reduction in anxiety so in a sense the person is rewarded for running away.
Figure 4.6 Avoidance and anxiety levels
The next time they are able to gather together enough courage to set out for the supermarket they may get only as far as point B before they have had enough, anticipating more extreme levels of anxiety if they continue.
On the next occasion they may get only as far as point C and so on until they are virtually unable to leave home.
Being terrified of a  reoccurrence of the frightening physical symptoms, thus the avoidance becomes one of the fear response itself.
Anticipating extremely high levels of anxiety, the person no longer encounters the original situation of the supermarket.
Additionally the fear may ‘generalize’ so that a person becomes afraid of all shops, not just supermarkets, and then cinemas, and then restaurants, and so on.
How Loss of Confidence Maintains Anxiety
A person's confidence stems very largely from seeing him/herself cope effectively with all of life's everyday demands and  challenges.
The confident person is happy to try new things because in the past they have had success at similar related tasks.
The degree to which a person feels confident at performing any given task can in some ways be thought of as a ‘circle of safety’(see Figure 4.7).
A person full of confidence feels safe in having a go at most things, their circle of safety is thus very large, they can perform the given task anytime anywhere.
For people with anxiety problems however it is common for their confidence to become slowly eroded.
They begin to avoid difficult situations and tasks because they lack the self-confidence to deal with them effectively.
This can be illustrated using an imaginary person with a fear of supermarkets.
Initially they could get as far as point A, then only as far as point B, and then only as far as point C. Thus the circle of safety tends to diminish gradually.
Eventually, if this person continues to avoid without receiving any help they may become housebound altogether.
Figure 4.7 Confidence and circles of safety
We could take many such examples of avoidance.
At work a person may avoid big meetings, then smaller meetings, then talking with the boss, and eventually talking to anyone.
Socially a person may first avoid theatres and cinemas, then parties and dinners, then pubs, and then going out altogether.
In every case the person's repertoire is gradually restricted, their confidence is eaten away, and they will lose all hope of ever being able to do these things again, and eventually stop trying altogether.
It is extremely important that the client must learn that avoidance of difficult situations is never an appropriate solution for their anxiety.
How Our Thinking Maintains Anxiety
Thinking and acute anxiety
We have already discussed this in relation to the acute anxiety spiral but it is well worth repeating that avoidance, prior to encountering the full experience of the feared situation, occurs because of what the person believes is going to happen.
Examples of this may be: the agoraphobic person who never goes out because they believe they will collapse and die of a heart attack; the lift phobic who believes they may become trapped in the lift and suffocate to death; a person who avoids meeting others because, if a disagreement starts, they believe they will lose their temper and hit people; and last, a person may obsessively check the locks on doors and windows, believing that somebody is bound to break into the house if they fail to make these checks.
These examples help us to establish three things:
1 People with anxiety disorders may have exaggerated, irrational beliefs concerning the consequences of facing up to the feared or difficult situation.
2 They are prone to making catastrophic misinterpretations of their symptoms, thereby making them more frightening and increasing panic.
Anxious people become acutely sensitized to their bodies, noticing minor bodily changes upon which they focus.
They are constantly looking for these changes, especially in situations which have previously been difficult.
3 Because people avoid these situations, they are unable to overcome their irrational beliefs since they are never proved wrong.
In the development of fears and other difficulties one thing is certain, thinking in these ways leads to avoidance of the problem situation.
If we avoid facing up to it we then make it more likely that the next time the situation, or a similar one, is encountered we will avoid it again.
Very commonly anxious and stressed people express thoughts of self-doubt and self-deprecation.
As anxiety takes over their lives they feel imprisoned and unable to break free.
They may say they've ‘failed’, they're ‘hopeless and helpless’.
The more people say such things to themselves the more these thoughts become automatic and fixed, and the less they are able to see a future for themselves.
They may adopt a generally negative outlook on life, tending to anticipate and see problems where none exist, finding things to worry about.
They may also become dependent upon medication, or other people, as they lose the confidence to cope for themselves.
Perfectionist and obsessional thoughts can also increase stress and cause loss of confidence.
Setting unrealistic standards means we can only fail, nothing we do is ever enough or exactly right.
We can never be satisfied, gradually eroding our self-esteem and confidence further.
THE TREATMENT PROGRAMME: TURNING OFF THE TAP AND DRAINING THE GLASS
Understanding What is Happening
Before we undertake any active treatment it is essential that we have helped the client to understand that excessive stress leads to symptoms of anxiety.
Anxiety is not a single entity but rather comprises three facets: first, the way we feel, meaning our physical sensations, including both acute and chronic symptoms; second, the way we think, including catastrophic, irrational and negative thoughts; third, the way we behave, including patterns of avoidance and stressful lifestyles.
Helping the client to reassess their difficulties in these terms helps to specify and clarify the exact nature of these problems and highlight the specific areas of change required.
The client must be helped to be able to rationalize and accept their symptoms as natural bodily processes — a signal to reduce stress, rather than a signal of impending doom.
Intellectual acceptance of what is going on is, however, rarely enough.
Many clients tell us that deep down they know a panic attack, or any particular acute symptom of anxiety, is not harmful but they are still unable to overcome their fears.
Having educated our clients in relation to the psychology and physiology of anxiety, the next step is to help them break any patterns of avoidance that may have become established.
Therapy teaches clients that feelings can be tolerated and will fade away if they stay in the feared or difficult situation.
Anxiety symptoms do not go on increasing indefinitely.
Let us reconsider the example of the person who is afraid of shopping in the supermarket (see Figure 4.8).
Figure 4.8 Levels of anxiety staying in the feared situation
The person avoided the situation at point A, believing that their anxiety was going to keep on going up along the dotted line.
We know however that what actually happens is that the anxiety only ever reaches a certain level and then levels off, forming a plateau.
This occurs because there is a limit to the amount of physiological change in the body that adrenalin can produce.
When the anxiety upper limit is reached it will remain at this  level for a certain time.
This time will depend largely upon what the person feels and thinks and how they behave.
If they allow themselves to continually think catastrophic thoughts, or focus too much on the symptoms themselves, or race up and down, or hyperventilate, the plateau time will last much longer.
If they are able to think positive coping thoughts, control breathing, distract themselves from their symptoms, and try to relax, other symptoms will quickly die away.
After some time, if a person stays within the difficult situation, the brain and body will begin to realize there is no real danger and the supply of adrenalin to the blood stream will be cut off.
Then gradually the person's level of anxiety will fall back to normal levels from point B in Figure 4.8.
Obviously a person who has spent all their life avoiding such situations will never have had the opportunity to learn about the plateau stage and the gradual fading away of anxiety.
Therefore, a very important part of the treatment programme must be helping the client to face up to their fear and stay in the difficult situation learning that they can control their anxiety.
Specifying the Problem Areas
During the assessment phase it is very important that the client must attempt to specify any particular situations or difficulties which create problems currently and which in the past may have led to avoidance.
This list is probably much easier to compile for clients who experience phobic problems, but people with more generalized anxiety and stress will often report avoiding certain situations.
A typical list of difficulties might be as follows:
1
Avoidance of all public transport, i.e. buses and trains.
2
Fear of flying.
3
Marital problems.
4
Difficulty talking to the boss.
5
Sexual problems.
6
Difficulty with social situations, e.g. going to parties.
The client may then be asked to re-order this list in terms of the most and least pressing problems.
In this way they may indicate a preference as to which particular difficulty will be  addressed first.
Allowing the client to choose in this way can often increase their motivation for the success of the treatment.
However, the therapist must be careful not to give the client an entirely free choice if it is believed that one, or a combination, of the client's difficulties are central in maintaining the others.
If, for instance, the therapist believes that the client's marital problems are undermining their confidence and feelings of security, and it is this that prevents the client from achieving other tasks, then the therapist's endeavours should be aimed at this problem first.
Figure 4.9 Anxiety related to buses
Constructing a Programme for Overcoming Anxiety — Gradual Exposure
Let us suppose the client suggests that they first wish to overcome their difficulties in using public transport, specifically  buses.
The therapist believes this problem is maintained independently of the client's other problems and thus accepts this as the first goal for therapy.
The principles for overcoming any of the six problem areas listed previously can be adapted to the following general format.
First, the problem is broken down into smaller targets or stages.
Usually around ten steps are constructed each one slightly more demanding than the former.
The final step or target is the eventual goal or level of performance to which the client aspires.
The earlier steps are gradually closer approximations to this goal (see Figure 4.9).
Figure 4.10 Bus programme for Mr Smith
The stages in this programme may be compared to the steps of a ladder.
A scale of anxiety or perceived difficulty is then established from zero (no anxiety) to 100 (maximum anxiety).
Each task is then rated on this scale.
Through careful negotiation with the client it is important that each stage on the programme is designed to be only approximately ten units of anxiety or difficulty greater than the previous stage.
Thus the stages of the programme may be spaced almost exactly equally, like the steps on a ladder.
The top of the ladder is the eventual target of the programme but we can never climb a ladder starting at the top.
Likewise we will not be successful if the client is sent away expected to achieve the most difficult target first.
With guidance the client will learn to climb the ladder gradually starting at the bottom one rung at a time.
The next stage is to make each step of the ladder a specific target.
It is useful for the client to keep a record of success and failure and this can be done as in Figure 4.10.
Each target is attempted five times in Figure 4.10 within a specific time period, usually a week.
It is hoped that initially the client will experience some anxiety with each target and learn to cope with this effectively, but that over five attempts of this target this anxiety will drop to a minimum.
This will only occur if the client stays with the experience of anxiety and does not  avoid the situation.
The client's experience of anxiety for each of the five trials of each target may be represented graphically as in Figure 4.11.
Figure 4.11 Target 1: Going to the bus stop to study time-table
The client is required to rate their anxiety on the programme chart after each trial on a scale of 1–100, where 1 is no anxiety and 100 is maximum anxiety.
The therapist must ensure that the client's ratings of anxiety are as accurate as possible by discussing them in detail with the client.
The client should not proceed onto the next target until anxiety levels are low, usually below 20 or 30 units on the previous target.
If necessary more than five trials can be used if the level of anxiety fails to come down on any one specific target.
Finally, if levels are still high it is probably because the target is too difficult and an intermediate, less difficult, target must be inserted and overcome first.
Re-negotiation of steps is very commonly required since theoretical assumptions of difficulty are often not mirrored by experience in practice.
As each target is completed the client encounters the next, until all targets are overcome.
Several programme sheets will be required.
As the anxiety for each target is overcome so the client is only ever raising their anxiety by ten units by going onto the next target.
Effectively, every time the client takes another step on the ladder this becomes the bottom step, only approximately ten units of anxiety off the ground.
Thus the ladder is sinking into the ground one step at a time as the client climbs on to it.
Gradually, the client's confidence grows as they regularly list their successes.
Early achievement spurs the client on; they are taught to focus on their success, and to cope with any difficulties rationally by altering the programme slightly until success is achieved.
For others of the six original problems mentioned it is possible to create stages to effect change in exactly the same way.
For instance marital problems can often lead to not talking, spending less time together, planning separate lives.
These can be forms of avoidance that make it impossible for the couple to look at their marital problems.
Getting the couple to write down targets, stating what they want to change in the marriage and negotiating these targets, can be an effective way of improving the situation Likewise, the therapeutic techniques for overcoming sexual problems often involve a graded series of targets  towards improving performance and technique one stage at a time.
The number of steps to the ladder and number of trials for each step is negotiable, but the general principle of graded systematic exposure, facing up to the difficulty and learning to cope with it, holds for each of these cases.
Self-Help Skills
In addition to the process of education and a negotiated programme for overcoming the chosen difficulty, the client is taught a number of specific skills which will assist them to combat and overcome their feelings of anxiety.
These skills include: teaching the client to relax; teaching techniques of distraction to help the client focus their attention away from physical sensations and negative thoughts; teaching skills of positive and rational thinking — also an important aspect of control; and teaching breathing control skills to offset the likelihood of the client exacerbating their physical symptoms through hyperventilation.
Anxiety is like a smouldering fire, a wind can come along and ignite the glowing embers.
When this happens, some people respond by pouring paraffin over that fire, turning it into a blazing inferno (i.e. panicking, hyperventilating, catastrophizing, avoiding, etc.), while others sensibly dampen down the blaze with a wet blanket (i.e. relaxing, thinking positively, goal planning, problem solving, and self assertion).
These self-help skills are dealt with in the next two chapters.
Changing Lifestyles
Nobody will be able to fully overcome their anxiety without changing lifestyles.
The way that the client has been behaving, thinking and feeling up until the point of therapy was dearly too stressful, therefore change is necessary.
If the client is overworking, has taken on too many commitments, has no fun or pleasure in life, or sets him/herself totally unrealistic goals, then these behaviours and attitudes must be changed.
No anxiety management techniques will work against these odds, just as aspirins will not control headaches if a person continues to bang their head against the wall.
Chapter 6 deals with changes in lifestyle in greater detail.
Common Questions About Anxiety
Advantages and Disadvantages of Medication
Sometimes clients will be offered tranquillizers in order to help them overcome their difficulties.
In relation to the tap and glass metaphor we can think of these as being something like a plunger that fits over the glass and which forces down the level of stress.
Unfortunately, as the tranquillizer wears off so the plunger gradually slides back up and the former level of stress returns.
Also, the more tranquillizers are used, the older and less effective the plunger becomes, therefore, gradually, the same dose of tablets becomes less and less effective.
Another way of looking at tranquillizer use is to think of the following analogy: you are driving along the motorway and suddenly your car oil warning light comes on.
Instead of pulling over onto the hard shoulder, opening the car bonnet and putting more oil in the engine, you take a hammer and bash out the oil warning light.
We must learn to see our anxiety symptoms as signals that we are under stress and learn to cope with and control these signals through our efforts and not simply mask or try to ignore them with tranquillizers.
Despite these facts there may be a case for a short-term course of tablets, or the occasional use of a tablet to help us through a particularly difficult situation and to help build confidence.
This will only happen, however, if such situations are approached subsequently with decreasing amounts of assistance from medication.
Why do I Feel Better One Day and Worse the Next?
Fluctuations in mood are perfectly normal.
However, if we are attempting to overcome fear using a specific programme of targets, these fluctuations make similar targets more difficult on some days than others.
Unfortunately, anxious and stressed people become acutely sensitive to such fluctuations making them worse by their own concern.
It is important not to let these experiences get you down.
It is more important to achieve a difficult target on a bad day than a good one because it will increase your confidence still further.
It is very important not to simply write it off completely as ‘a bad day’ just because things have gone wrong.
We must keep trying and looking for successes, however small.
It is also very important for you to reward yourself when you have had some success.
All of us are very good at blaming ourselves if things go wrong and feeling upset, but we must be fair with ourselves and take the credit when things go well.
So remember to treat yourselves, perhaps slowly saving up and buying a present for yourself or doing things you enjoy, as rewards for your achievements.
How Long Will it Take?
Nobody could possibly offer a definite answer to this and say how long it may take to fully overcome anxiety and stress problems.
We do know however that, with perseverance, every day can produce some success and that, by continuing to work one day at a time, we will be building up a very solid basis for renewed confidence and further achievement.
It will certainly not seem long if you work consistently toward daily targets, in a few weeks you'll be doing things you haven't done for years, or never thought possible.
However small these daily achievements may seem they are one more step up the ladder to freedom from your fears and problems.
SELF-HELP TECHNIQUES EXPLAINED
INTRODUCTION
There is no single self-help procedure which will act as a panacea in the management of anxiety and stress.
Rather, in addition to the important process of education and understanding, the combination of behavioural and cognitive techniques, together with the client's changes in lifestyle, will offer a cumulative process of management and gradual amelioration of anxiety.
It is important that some referring agents are dissuaded from a popular belief that anxiety management equals relaxation training or any single technique.
This belief may serve to minimize and underestimate the experience of anxiety in the eyes of the referring agent and the client, the latter becoming quickly dispirited, losing faith in themselves, the specific technique, or the skill of the therapist.
This chapter aims to offer the reader an introduction to the most common self-help techniques taught to clients in anxiety management training.
Though some theory is presented for each, the bulk of the information is the basic practical information and skills imparted to the client.
Much of this information is offered in the form that the authors give to their clients in written handouts.
RELAXATION TRAINING
The use of relaxation as a means of anxiety and stress management is not a new phenomenon.
Many Eastern religions have been using techniques such as yoga and meditation for many  centuries and both of these techniques hold much common ground with modern clinical relaxation methods.
Theoretical Basis of Relaxation Training
Relaxation induces physiological effects opposite in nature to those induced by psychological stress.
Specifically relaxation produces a decrement in sympathetic nervous system activity and causes an increase in parasympathetic nervous system activity.
Relaxation therefore serves to lower the heart rate, reduce blood pressure, reduce sweat gland activity, alter brain wave pattern, and reduce somatomotor activity.
Additionally, those relaxation techniques which incorporate muscle tensing exercises, aim to teach the client to become generally more aware of the experience of muscular tension.
The client is taught to self-monitor and become aware of, for example, gripping the car steering wheel too tightly, grinding their jaws, or feeling tense in the back of the neck.
In this way the client begins to realize that their former ‘resting state’ may have been fraught with muscular tensions serving to exacerbate the general experience of anxiety and stress.
Relaxation training is a skill, a learned response, which the client can use to combat the experience of stress and feelings of anxiety.
With practice people can become proficient at recognizing and turning off the tension within the body for themselves without drugs.
Progressive Muscular Relaxation (PMR)
Many of the current clinical methods of relaxation training are based upon the techniques of Jacobson (1938).
Modern routine clinical practice however offers something of a dilution of the original Jacobsonian relaxation techniques.
Constrained by time and numbers of referrals it is usual to teach relaxation techniques over one to three sessions, with occasional revision practice at later dates.
Practitioners vary in their technique but most use fewer muscle groups and exercises than the original procedures.
The authors' procedures, presented later, rely upon twenty muscle groups and involve hypnotic-type suggestion to enhance the physical experience of relaxation.
High  expectations are set up for the client to gradually learn to achieve deep feelings of heaviness and relaxation throughout the body.
PMR — Instruction Handout for Clients
Why Should I Learn to Relax?
Relaxation exercises are designed to help you learn how to reduce muscular tension and to become generally more aware of tension in your body.
By learning to produce muscular tension through tensing exercises and then releasing this tension, you will gradually find it is possible to release the physical tension from everyday stress in the same way, letting go.
Learning to relax is like pulling a plug at the bottom of your stress glass, gradually the tension and stress drain away.
Feeling relaxed will help you to think in a more relaxed way and this will help you to behave in a more relaxed manner.
Each of these things will assist in turning off the stress tap.
What Will I Feel from Relaxation?
As you tense a system of muscles, blood, containing oxygen, is selectively pumped into this area of the body to assist the use of the muscles.
On releasing this tension two things will happen.
First as the flow of blood is reduced the change in blood supply may produce a slight tingling sensation in this muscle group.
Second, as the tension is released and the muscles go limp they become effectively dead weight hanging upon the bones of the skeleton.
The exercises of relaxation then are gradually causing more and more muscles to act as dead weight, sagging down, hanging on the skeleton causing the weight and heaviness of the body to be seeming to increase gradually as we become increasingly relaxed.
High levels of tension can lead to rigid control; some people when learning to relax report being afraid to go too deeply into the exercises for fear of losing control.
It is important to understand that you will always remain in ultimate control when relaxing and that you can always stop the proceedings at any time should they become unpleasant or uncomfortable.
Realizing this will gradually help you to gain confidence to go deeper and deeper into relaxation and experience full benefit from it.
Conditions Required for Relaxation
Relaxation, like any skill, takes time and practice to learn.
Significant and lasting gains can be achieved by most people within a month with thirty minutes of daily practice.
The best time to practice relaxation is when you are feeling most under stress but often this is not convenient.
Don't stick to a single time each day but try to vary it to see if the time of day makes a difference for you.
Don't be put off if relaxation doesn't seem to work immediately for you.
Give it time, practice is essential.
You can perform relaxation exercises lying down but we would prefer if you try initially sitting in a comfortable armchair.
The seated position corresponds more readily to our body posture during the day when stress develops.
Make sure you won't be disturbed.
Sit in a warm quiet room and turn off all bright lights.
Close your eyes to perform the exercises.
This will reduce distractions and help you concentrate upon your bodily feelings.
Before the exercises actually begin, for a few minutes, close your eyes and breathe through your nose.
Breathe slowly and deeply trying to breathe from your stomach, lifting your chest to let more air in.
Do not strain.
With practice this form of breathing will come naturally to you.
Say the word ‘calm’ in your mind each time you breathe out.
By doing this your muscles will gradually begin to relax and feelings of calm and heaviness will develop naturally.
When you have finished all the exercises return to the word ‘calm’, saying it in your mind each time you breathe out.
Gradually in this way an association will develop between the word ‘calm’ and the feelings of deep muscle relaxation in your body, so that eventually just closing your eyes and thinking the word ‘calm’can induce these feelings.
The PMR Tensing Exercises
The exercises as taught by the authors focus on twenty different groups of muscles.
They begin in the person's dominant hand.
The exercises proceed up one arm and are then repeated for the other arm.
From here exercises focus in the top of the head and follow a logical course down the body finally to the toes.
The exercises are described for a right handed person as follows:
Area
1
Right Hand
2
Right forearm
3
Right  biceps 
4
Left hand
5
Left forearm
6
Left  biceps 
7
Forehead
8
Eyes
9
Mouth, cheeks, jaw
10
Back of neck
11
Front of neck, chin
12
Shoulders/back
13
Chest/back
14
Stomach
15
Right thigh
16
Right calf
17
Right ankle/foot
18
Left thigh
19
Left calf
20
Left ankle/foot
Muscular Exercise
Clench right fist
Bend back right hand at right angles to arm
Force knuckles of right hand onto right shoulder
Clench left fist
Bend back left hand at right angles to arm
Force knuckles of left hand onto left shoulder
Raise eyebrow up
Frown, forcing eyebrows down
Screw eyes up tightly
Clench teeth and stretch mouth in exaggerated smile
Gently force head back
Force chin down onto chest Force shoulders forward
Force shoulders backwards
Take in deep breath, hold it, force chest to expand
Suck in stomach muscles under rib cage
Straighten right leg, lift off ground
Bend down right foot, bend down toes
Bend up right foot, curl up toes
Straighten left leg, lift off ground
Bend down left foot, bend down toes
Bend up left foot, bend up toes
Each exercise is designed to create tension within a specific muscle group.
If you fail to experience tension you must try to develop your own exercise which serves to tense that particular muscle group.
Tensing the muscle groups
Hold each tensing exercise for approximately five seconds then release the tension immediately not gradually.
Just stop tensing and let the muscles relax with  gravity.
Repeat each exercise twice with a ten second gap in-between.
Focus on the feelings of tension and relaxation, learn the difference between these two sensations.
Try not to tense the muscles so hard that you produce cramp or pain.
Ease up if this happens.
Try to tense only the one specific area at a time, e.g. do not clench your teeth and contort your face if you're trying to create tension in the hand by squeezing your fist.
Finally, if you find your mind wanders on to other thoughts during the exercise bring it back to focus on the feelings.
If you feel tired do not attempt the exercises.
You will learn nothing if you fall asleep.
As each tensing exercise is released feel the heaviness develop in that muscle group.
A calm relaxing feeling flows throughout the body as though lead weights were slowly pulling the body down into the chair, heavier and heavier, more and more calm at every moment.
An Example Part Script for PMR Training In Vivo 'Settle back as comfortably as you can…and as you relax in the chair concentrate upon your breathing, breathing in and out through your nose and from your stomach…lift your chest to allow your lungs to fill…in and out…slowly and smoothly.
And now each time you breathe out think the word ‘calm’ in your mind…each time you think the word calm so the body will relax a little more, become slightly more heavy and sink down deeper and deeper into the chair…and just go on now in silence for a minute or so thinking the word ‘calm’and relaxing the body in preparation for the exercises of relaxation…’
[One to two-minute break]
'Now I would like you to stop focussing upon the word ‘calm’ and instead turn your attention to your right hand…we are now going to create a sensation of tension in your right hand by making a fist.
Do this now.
Squeeze your fist…study the feelings of tension this creates…learn what it is like now to have this experience of tension in the fist…[after approximately five seconds]…and now relax…let go of all the tension just allow your fingers to fall with gravity…you may experience a slight tingling effect as the muscles relax…feel the fingers and hand becoming heavier and heavier…feeling as though someone has  just placed a glove made of lead on your hand…causing the whole hand to feel heavy, heavy as lead…the muscles sinking down dead weight hanging on the bones of the hand…
[After ten seconds]And now we are going to create tension again in your right hand by making a fist…
Do this now.’
The procedure of tensing and relaxing follows this general form of  monologue for each of the twenty muscle groups.
The suggestions of heaviness, reference to lead weights, and the body sinking down under this weight continue throughout the procedure.
The client is also constantly reminded to study and learn the sensation of tension, to develop awareness in the resting state.
At the end of the exercise they return to the word ‘calm’ for approximately five minutes.
In total the full exercise will take approximately thirty minutes.
Finally, the client is told to stretch all of his muscles, as though waking from a deep sleep, to gradually open their eyes, and get up slowly.
Speeding Up the Process of PMR
As the clients relaxation skills develop the exercises may be combined so as to speed up the process of relaxation.
The twenty original muscle groups may be combined, as follows, into seven separate exercises.
Areas
1
Muscles of right arm
2
Muscles of left arm
3
Muscles of face
4
Muscles of neck/chin
5
Shoulders, chest, stomach
6
Right leg
7
Left leg
Muscular Exercise
Clenched right fist is forced onto right shoulder
Clenched left fist is forced onto left shoulder
Frown, screw up eyes, clench teeth, stretch mouth
Shoulders brought up head forced down
Shoulders forced back, chest expanded, stomach sucked in
Straighten right leg, force foot down, and toes down
Straighten left leg, force foot down, curl toes down
Finally, having practiced with the above procedure for some months, all exercises may be combined, contracting all muscle groups simultaneously.
Hold the tension for about ten seconds, and relax.
Repeat three times.
Variations and Additions to PMR
Comparing in Vivo and Tape-recorded PMR Training
 Almost all experimental studies have shown in vivo training to be superior to the use of tape recorded instructions.
As a bare minimum it is suggested that the therapist must talk the client through these techniques at least once before offering the client a tape.
In this way the therapist can observe and explain away any difficulties the client may have and reinforce the benefits of the technique.
Also the procedures may be tapered and modified at the outset to meet the needs of the individual.
The sole use of a tape may lead to ‘tape dependence’ the client being unable to I e lax without the tape.
The client must proceed at the speed of the tape rather than in their own time.
If possible the therapist should make their own tape of relaxation instructions which assists in the transfer of the skills from the therapy session to the home situation.
Biofeedback Apparatus
Biofeedback has been shown to act as a useful adjunct to relaxation training and can be particularly useful for focal areas of tension in the body.
There are a number of different possible ways of using biofeedback apparatus in assisting clients to relax.
Basically the procedure involves monitoring biological signals that come from the central nervous system, the autonomic nervous system, the musculoskeletal system and the cardiovascular system.
Different biofeedback apparatus is used depending upon which system is being monitored.
In relaxation we may wish to monitor brain wave activity using an electroencephalograph (EEG) and would expect to find a shift in brain wave pattern toward synchronized high voltage, low frequency waves as the client relaxes.
We may also monitor the electrical activity of the muscles using an electromyograph (EMG) and would find reduced activity as the muscles relax.
A slowing of the heart with relaxation might be monitored by an  electrocardiograph (ECG), and a reduction in sweat gland activity monitored using apparatus measuring skin conductance levels (SCL).
Each of these signals can be fed back either visually or, perhaps more usefully to the client, audibly.
Their task becomes one of being able to reduce the tone or number of audible clicks as they relax more and more deeply.
Other forms of Relaxation
There are obviously many and various different techniques for relaxation.
The authors have chosen to present PMR since it is this method that we use most often.
We do not imply that PMR is necessarily the most effective technique for any one individual client but the scope of this book does not extend to covering all possible relaxation techniques.
CONTROLLING HYPERVENTILATION
A sudden sensation of tightness in the throat, gasping for breath, rapid shallow breathing, feeling faint, dizzy, and hot.
This might be a typical presentation of acute hyperventilation caused by rapid shallow breathing during moments of high anxiety.
However, for others the condition may present in a far more insidious and subtle manner, the constant yawning or sighing, the one deep breath in three, excessive sniffing, each of these may account for the reduced levels of carbon dioxide in the lungs, which over time leads to the ‘chronic hyperventilation syndrome’.
This may produce a vast array of physical symptoms including numbness or tingling in toes and fingers, tinnitus, headache and severe chest pains.
The symptoms of hyperventilation can therefore mimic virtually all the symptoms also attributed to anxiety and chronic stress.
What Happens if I Hyperventilate?
(Client Handout)
Hyperventilation is a process of rapid shallow breathing from the upper chest.
It occurs fairly commonly during anxiety attacks because some degree of rapid breathing is part of the body's natural response to threat, to increase the intake of oxygen to supply the muscles.
If the extra oxygen taken in is not needed by the muscles for running away or fighting, the effects can be dramatic.
These may include:
Increase in heart rate
Sweating
Tingling or numbness
Muscle tension and rigidity
Feeling faint
Hot and/or cold flushes
Difficulty getting breath
Tightness of chest
Feelings of being suffocated
Rapid breathing causes the balance of gases in the lungs to alter.
Breathing in too much air effectively pushes out carbon dioxide which normally forms a reservoir in the lungs.
The physical symptoms occur as a result of too much oxygen and too little carbon dioxide.
How to Control Acute Hyperventilation
There are two aspects to controlling hyperventilation:
1
Stop the rapid  over breathing 
2
Replenish the carbon dioxide supplies in the lungs
You must learn to become aware of your pattern of breathing when you first start to become anxious.
Look out for the early warning signals of over-breathing like feelings of tightness in the chest, or feelings of being stifled — difficulty getting your breath.
As soon as you notice that you are breathing rapidly:
1
Stop whatever you are doing and try to find a quiet place to sit down.
2
Close your eyes and focus on the word ‘calm’ in your mind.
3
Try to release some of the tension in the upper body.
Sitting in a tense hunched-up position increases the possibility of hyperventilation.
Dropping shoulders in a sideways widening direction makes hyperventilation more difficult since the chest and  diaphragm muscles are stretched outwards.
4
Breathe slowly from the stomach not the chest — breathing in to a count of four slowly and out to a count of four slowly, or visualize your breathing-in as going up one side of a hill, experiencing the plateau at the top and then breathing-out as though coming down the other side.
5
It may help to place your hands with your fingertips together  on your stomach — make sure each time you breathe in your fingertips come apart and come together as your breathe out.
In this way you will be sure that you are breathing from the stomach.
6
Concentrate on breathing out.
If your symptoms don't go away after a few minutes it is probable that you haven't caught it quickly enough and in this case you will need to use the technique of ‘rebreathing’.
This involves breathing in the air you have just breathed out.
This air is richer in carbon dioxide and it will thus quickly replenish the carbon dioxide you have been blowing off.
In order to rebreathe, make a loose mask over your face with your hands (see Figure 5.1).
As you breathe out you will trap some of this air in this mask and slowly breathe it back in.
Breathe in through the nose and out hard through the mouth, both to a slow count of four.
A paper bag (not polythene) may be used instead of a hand mask if one is handy.
Repeat this four or five times, no more, and then take your hands away from your face.
After a minute or so repeat this procedure if necessary.
All the time try to stay calm and relaxed.
Practice these techniques at times when you feel fine so that you will become expert for times that you may need them.
Figure 5.1 The rebreathing technique
What To Do If You Are With Someone Who is Hyperventilating
1
Don't allow yourself to panic.
Keep calm because fear can be infectious.
2
Familiarize yourself with each of the procedures described above.
Encourage the person to use these procedures.
They may need reminding of what to do, so it may help to talk them through it.
3
Don't shout or raise your voice.
It should be firm but quiet.
Speak slowly.
4
Comfort them physically — a hand gently cupping the back of their neck, or placing your arm loosely around their upper back may be very soothing.
5
They may become very emotional.
Don't get into an argument by disagreeing with what they may be saying.
Just repeat calming and encouraging statements, e.g., ‘Just rebreathe your own air…you're going to be all right…that's it, just drop your shoulders…relax’.
6
Afterwards treat as if for shock with rest and a sweet drink.
Overcoming the Effects of Chronic Hyperventilation
The procedures for rebreathing described are just as applicable to those who experience chronic symptoms of hyperventilation.
It is important to find time for relaxation and generally winding down but also it may be helpful to ‘rebreathe’ four or five times a day to counteract any blowing off of carbon dioxide which may have occurred.
Learn to notice patterns of sighing and yawning and take steps to alter patterns of breathing from the chest to the stomach, taking slow breaths six to eight per minute, breathing deeply to the bottom of the lungs.
Practice breathing  in this way for twenty minutes each day until it becomes second nature.
DISTRACTION
Why is Distraction Useful?
Thinking about unpleasant symptoms will tend to make them worse.
It reminds us that we are feeling anxious and in doing so increases our fear that the symptoms may get worse as they have done in the past.
We begin the ‘fear of fear’ cycle.
This fear of fear will both provoke further symptoms as well as preventing the existing ones from diminishing naturally.
This in turn produces worry, further fear of fear, which leads to yet further increase in symptoms by further turning on your stress tap.
This vicious cycle is shown in Figure 5.2.
Figure 5.2 Fear of fear cycle
If, on the other hand, you do not let yourself pay attention to your symptoms, or worry about whether they are there or not, then it is less likely the vicious circle will be set up and so the symptoms will not get worse.
Since the fear of fear will not be so great you will not be so distressed and then the anxiety will fade away of its own accord.
As you know it is very difficult just to turn your attention away from unpleasant feelings, especially since these feelings are a signal of stress.
But you must learn to control these feelings by doing two things:
1
Be determined not to think about or dwell upon them.
2
Fill your mind with other things, distract yourself.
There are many techniques of distraction and it is very important that you practice with different methods to discover which one works best for you.
Practice is important.
Once the symptoms have begun we must act immediately, employing the specific technique of distraction which through practice we know works best for us.
Techniques of Distracting Yourself
Thought-Stopping Technique
This technique usually involves instruction from a therapist but may be learnt with practice and patience alone.
Solo practice is a modification of the therapist's procedure as follows.
Basically you are asked to concentrate upon negative and troublesome thoughts and deliberately rehearse the thoughts out loud.
As you gradually get more and more into the thoughts you suddenly shout ‘STOP!’ very loudly and clap your hands loudly simultaneously.
Immediately you should find this loud noise has interrupted your train of thought, often enough to make you forget what it was that you were thinking about.
You must practice this technique many times until you find that every time you shout ‘STOP!’ the thoughts are successfully blocked.
Remember to make a loud noise and vary the point in your thoughts at which you stop yourself.
After practising out loud the technique gradually shifts from speaking the thoughts to thinking them and shouting ‘STOP!’, then from there to thinking the thoughts and thinking the word ‘STOP!
‘. Try and think of the word as just as shocking, just as loud, and you find, after practice, that it will stop your thoughts just as effectively in thought as out loud.
Go through each of the stages about twenty times before moving on to the next stage.
Practice several times daily until you become proficient.
Creating Mild Pain
The sensation of pain is a signal to the brain to act immediately to prevent the body from being hurt further.
The signal of pain overrides any other signals that the brain may be receiving at that moment, any thoughts, ideas, or preoccupations are immediately swept aside so that the brain can attend to the pain and do something about it.
Most of us can recall just how difficult it has been to concentrate on anything else if we have a headache or any other ache and pain.
The physiological and psychological mechanism by which pain can override all other signals is complex.
Put simply, the brain is being constantly bombarded with signals from different sensory channels.
Pain effectively closes the gate on all of these signals, they are shut out and the signal of pain is received.
Therefore, one way of shutting off all negative and worrying thoughts, or shutting out any information to which we don't want to attend, is to create a mild sensation of pain for the brain to be occupied with.
Symptoms of anxiety may be controlled with practice using only a mild sensation of pain such as that created by digging your fingernails lightly into the palm of your hands, or pinching your earlobe, or gently biting your tongue or cheek.
Another technique involves placing an elastic band on your wrist and gently twanging it in response to worrying irrational thoughts.
It is important obviously that you don't go too far with these techniques.
Try different methods and use the one which works best for you.
Certainly if you have to create anything other than mild pain in order to stop your thoughts you must not continue but rather find an alternative technique of distraction.
Like the thought-stopping procedures the creation of pain as a means of distraction is only a short term means of interrupting intense, worrying thoughts which occur repeatedly.
You must then use these few seconds of relief from your negative thoughts to employ a more long term means of distraction to prevent the thoughts returning.
Attention Switching
In a sense all techniques of distraction are techniques of attention switching.
We have however created this sub-heading for those techniques which offer more long term distraction than  those mentioned previously.
There are very many ways of course to occupy the mind and the techniques we describe are only a few suggestions for practice.
As before, successful attention switching depends upon careful preparation, having the techniques and the subjects to which to attend at our fingertips ready to distract us from negative or irrational thought.
Mantra techniques
These techniques stem from transcendental meditation (TM) which is an extraction of eastern meditation systems.
It requires no special lifestyle, just fifteen minutes quiet meditation using a ‘mantra’ two times each day.
The mantra is a special word or sometimes a phrase given to the meditator by the TM instructor.
The meditator is required to focus their mind upon the mantra in an effortless, relaxed way.
Gradually as the person becomes more proficient, background noises and stimulation fade from attention, leaving the subject conscious and alert, but relaxed and calm.
This basic effect can be utilized for attention switching.
Select any word or sentence, for instance the word ‘calm’ or ‘my mind and body are calm’.
Close your eyes and practice thinking it over and over again in your mind until you become proficient at blocking out all other thoughts and ideas, and can achieve a level of deep calm and relaxation.
In this way heart rate, respiration rate, oxygen consumption, and muscle tension all reduce without conscious effort.
Practice daily for fifteen or twenty minutes and you will then find that this word can be an effective means of blocking out unwanted thoughts and relaxing the body.
Environmental focus
This refers to concentrating on and looking out for specific details in the world around you.
An example might be to focus on car number plates and seeing if you can make a word containing all the letters of the plate number, or in a supermarket look out for all items costing a particular amount of money, or in a crowded room noting the number of people with blue eyes.
In this way the mind is busy and active.
No opportunity is offered to rehearse any negative thoughts relating to how difficult a situation will be, or thoughts which focus on physical symptoms (and in doing so exacerbate these symptoms).
Make up lots of things on which to focus the mind and start the  process as soon as you set off, or start, whatever task you are attempting to achieve.
Use a ‘bridging object'
A bridging object is one which carries you from your every day thoughts to happy memories in the past.
A photo of a very happy holiday, a pebble or souvenir from a trip away, a ribbon from your wedding bouquet.
Any photo or object which can instantly remind you of a particular event, place, or happy feeling can be used to switch your attention to focus on this pleasant scenario.
Carry the item with you wherever you go and take it out and look at it to bring back these memories as a way of relaxing you, raising your spirits, and focusing your thoughts.
Mental games
Sometimes games which require concentrated thought can help distract you from your stress and anxiety.
Buy a puzzle book and take it with you on long journeys in the car, or on public transport, or to use in your lunch hour at work.
Games such as crosswords, mazes, find the hidden word, etc., can help prevent us from getting bored and allowing our thoughts to wander.
Another mental game which some people find effective is to try to think of a boy or girl's name for every letter of the alphabet, then an animal for every letter, and then an item in the kitchen, etc.
Or if you are sitting in a room, look around you and see how many things there are more than two of.
Other people use mathematical games to distract themselves such as adding continuously in threes, or counting backwards in sixes from 100, or learning and reciting poetry or a song.
The actual nature of the game is not important so long as it focuses your attention effectively, distracting you from your negative thoughts or your symptoms.
Don't try to think up games that are too difficult.
They will only lead to frustration.
Behavioural activity
Keeping generally busy and active reduces the time available for brooding over problems.
Plan ahead and get to know your vulnerable times when you are apt to have nothing to do and your mind begins to wander.
How often do we switch on the television, only half watching it, or get stuck into routines in the evenings that require no conscious thought  or effort, leaving the mind free to wander?
Going for a walk, arranging to meet a friend, or just getting on with some DIY, hobby, or relaxation exercises are all likely to occupy the mind more effectively.
COGNITIVE-BEHAVIOURAL TECHNIQUES
Introduction
We present a summary of the main therapeutic techniques of three of the leading practitioners of cognitive therapy discussed in theoretical terms in chapter 2.
Though you will note differences in the focus of their individual approach, as stated previously, all cognitive therapy techniques are based upon the premise that an individual's maladaptive behaviour is a function of distorted and irrational thinking and that altering these ways of thinking is an effective technique for changing behaviour.
For a more extensive review of cognitive therapies the reader is referred to Dryden and Golden (1986).
The Techniques of Donald Meichenbaum
Self-instructional Methods
This approach to managing anxiety was devised by Meichenbaum (1975) and is based upon the idea that self-speech, the way we talk to ourselves, exerts control over our behaviour in much the same way as might speech coming from another person.
Clients are often totally unaware of how negatively they may be talking to themselves, anticipating failure and minimizing success.
The aim of the training is to help the individual to think more adaptively and to develop and improve their performance in any particular task.
Basically these procedures attempt to teach the individual to talk to themselves in a confident and positive manner which anticipates success in the given task.
Clients are taught to initially monitor their self-statements in any chosen situation or task.
They learn to then shift from negative, self-defeating internal dialogue towards positive, more realistic, and confidence-building self-speech.
Tasks may be divided into three phases: preparation, coping, and praise.
Each  phase involves the clients saying a number of statements to themselves.
1 Preparation for difficul situation 
‘It's not going to be as bad as I think’
‘I've coped with this very well before’
‘I might enjoy it if I try’
‘If I do get bad feelings I know they won't last long and that I will cope’
‘Avoiding the problem will make it worse I know I can face it’.
2 Coping in the difficult situation 
‘This is just anxiety, I know it can't harm me’
‘Relax, thinking calming thoughts the feelings will go away’
‘In facing up to it, it won't beat me’
‘Be calm, concentrate on what I'm doing’
‘One step at a time, slowly does it’
3 Praise following success in coping 
‘Great, well done, I coped’
‘I'm getting better, I'm in control’
‘I did that really well’
‘I handled it — it will be easier next time’
At each stage the client is encouraged to recite either one or a series of these statements.
Initially this may be from a card containing the statements, but gradually the client will dispense with the cards as the statements come naturally.
Stress Inoculation Training (SIT)
These techniques are based upon the premise that anxiety results when a person perceives a discrepancy between the demands placed upon them and their personal resources for coping with those demands.
(Lazarus 1966).
Meichenbaum first developed these techniques in 1974 but they have recently been extended and detailed by Meichenbaum and Cameron (1983).
The basic procedure is to provide the individual with as much information, and as many methods, as possible of handling stressful situations and reactions to them.
This is detailed in three phases over many weeks of treatment as follows:
1 Conceptualization:
a thorough assessment identifying determinants of the problem, formulation of the problem and treatment plan, introduction of conceptual model and training the client to analyse problems independently.
2 Skills Acquisition and Rehearsal:
train in necessary skills, e.g., assertion, problem solving, distraction, relaxation, etc.
Develop range of coping skills to assist flexible responses.
Practise use of skills in role play.
Teach self-instructional methods to develop mediators to regulate coping responses.
3 Application and follow through:
use of graded exposure to practise coping responses and build confidence.
Role play use of techniques, different stressors practised, anticipated situations.
Client coaches others.
Develop startegies for recovering from failure.
Arrange follow-ups.
The Techniques of Aaron Beck et al .
In their entirety the cognitive therapy techniques of Beck and his colleagues offer a complete system of psychotherapy.
Only a broad outline of some of these methods is possible; the interested reader is referred to Beck and Emery (1985) for a more complete account.
Therapy may be broken down into five basic stages or aspects.
Developing Awareness of Thought Processes.
Having offered the client a cognitive model for their anxiety problems, the therapist asserts the need to identify the thinking or images behind the anxiety.
The therapist will initially focus on recent specific occurrences of anxiety symptoms and probe the client's recollection of their thoughts and fantasies.
Often this will be written down, if possible in a sequential manner, helping the client realise how one negative or irrational image or thought can lead to another increasingly irrational thought at each stage.
For example the lift phobic may say, ‘I don't like lifts — I might get trapped — no one might notice — I'll be stuck there  for ages — I'll begin to suffocate — I could be there for days — I'll starve to death.’
Once the person has understood what types of thoughts or images the therapist is looking for they are asked to keep a diary record of the daily occurrence of anxiety and related thoughts.
The record form is a single sheet of paper as shown in Figure 5.3.
Figure 5.3 Recording automatic thoughts
Client Learns to Restructure Thinking/Imagery
The therapist asks the client three basic questions:
1
What's the evidence?
2
What's another way of looking at the situation?
3
So what if it happens?
The client is now helped to begin to challenge their irrational ideas and images and to aim towards a more logical and positive interpretation, by identifying what type of thinking error they are making.
The double column technique may be used for this challenging process and to record further progress (see Figure 5.4).
Homework Target setting/Reality Testing
The client is encouraged, and initially assisted, in developing and carrying out strategies for testing thoughts and beliefs about what might happen, e.g. ‘If I ask my boss for a raise he'll sack me  or bite my head off.’,
‘If I go to the cinema I'll have a panic attack and everyone will want to have me thrown out.’
Figure 5.4 The double column technique
Analyse Results of Reality Testing
Detailed analysis of the written account of the homework is carried out, with emphasis on reappraisal and re-attribution of original negative thoughts and beliefs.
The client may be asked ‘percentage belief’, e.g. ‘I was 100 per cent sure any girl would reject me’.
The client's homework is to ring five girls to ask for a date.
‘I'm only 50 per cent sure now, as two said they'd think about it’.
Use of Role Play
The client may be asked to swap roles with the therapist who expresses a number of negative irrational ideas which the client helps them to correct.
Specific situations may also be role played prior to homework being conducted.
The Techniques of Albert Ellis
Rational Emotive Therapy (RET)
Ellis has written extensively about RET from 1962 onwards.
For a more complete account of this field of work the reader is  referred to Ellis and Grieger (1977), Dryden (1984).
The task of the RET therapist is to identify, challenge, and thereby help the client to modify core irrational beliefs (see p. 41).
This process occurs as a result of five stages, sometimes known as the ABCDE approach, which is illustrated with an example of a man whose girlfriend fails to turn up on their first date.
A = Activating Event
This refers to what actually happened — The girl failed to show up.
B = Beliefs both rational and irrational
These arise from the event —‘She doesn't like me…
I liked her…
She must like me…she has to…am I so awful?…
I'm unlikeable’.
C = Consequences
This refers to what the man's beliefs lead him to feel or do.
He feels very upset, angry, and tense.
He begins to doubt himself, lowering his self-confidence and self-esteem and making the next approach to a girl more difficult.
D = Disputing, Debating, Re-Defining
This is where therapy begins.
Having identified the ABCs, the person's thoughts at point B are challenged.
Assumptions are questioned, exaggerations tempered, and new and more rational alternatives are considered and discussed.
E = re-Evaluation toward a new Effect
Finally a new philosophy is established.
The client expresses and believes in different, more rational interpretations —‘There is no rule which says somebody must love someone else, it would have been great if she'd turned up but there are other girls I could ask out.
Because one person lets me down it doesn't mean I'm unloveable’.
Ellis would request that the client tests out his new hypothesis by ringing other girlfriends and arranging new dates.
Identifying and challenging core irrational beliefs in this way becomes a lifelong self-help strategy for the client, who gradually finds himself decreasingly prone to dysfunctional and automatic irrational thinking as RET itself becomes a way of life.
HELPING CLIENTS TO CHANGE THEIR LIFESTYLES
INTRODUCTION
Learning to understand and manage symptoms of stress and anxiety helps the client to reduce the stress, they are under.
However, alongside these measures, specifically directed towards the alleviation of symptoms, it is important to identify and change some of the external stresses that have caused the problems in the first place.
These stresses may be exacerbated by the way the client organizes life at home and at work.
They may be further exaggerated by the way the client communicates with others.
The following chapter introduces a number of ideas and strategies for altering an individual's long-term behavioural patterns, or lifestyles.
All of these strategies, education, specific self help skills, and life-style changes, aim to reduce stress by turning off the stress tap and draining the stress glass.
GOAL PLANNING
The Importance of Goals
Life may be construed as a series of ever growing accomplishments as we move towards a multitude of personal goals.
Achieving these goals is a key to high self-esteem, happiness and peak performance.
People who are unhappy are often people who do not have goals.
Without goals to strive for our lives can become empty, meaningless, and stressful.
Some people are more aware of the goals they are working towards than others and subsequently have a greater sense of direction and purpose.
In studies of survivors of the horrors of prison camps, those who  had a purpose in living, with well defined goals, were able to withstand greater deprivation such as starvation and torture.
The purpose for living could have been revenge, to build a new homeland, or to see their family.
Prisoners flexible enough to develop new goals also seem to cope better, even if those goals were something along the lines of becoming the world record holder for the number of consecutive push ups.
A more contemporary example is the man who finally retires after a lifetime of work, with no new goals or plans.
The emptiness can be devastating and very stressful.
Recent research provides further examples.
In one study a random group of residents in a home for the elderly and infirm were given a house plant to own and look after.
Results indicated that the ‘houseplant group’ lived significantly longer than a matched control group, perhaps simply because the plants gave them some extra purpose in life.
Goal planning is the act of deciding what you really want to do and then how you will go about doing it.
The goal is made concrete by writing it down and making a commitment to it.
Obstacles on the way to that goal must be anticipated, identified, and viewed as challenges.
There are of course reasons why people do not set goals: they may not realize the importance of goals; they may not know how to set about it; or more importantly, they may have a fear of failure.
Thomas Edison, the man who eventually invented the electric light bulb, said ‘failure is essential to success…you cannot succeed without failing…double your failure rate if you want to succeed.’
Planning our future gives us a greater sense of internal control and increases self-esteem.
Being able to anticipate the demands of the future makes us less vulnerable to stress.
The method of goal planning we will present here may be particularly helpful for clients with stress related problems.
The exercise consists of three steps:
1
The selection of goals
2
Deriving objectives from goals
3
Selecting activities for the achievement of objectives
The Selection of Goals
Ask yourself the question ‘What do I want out of life?’
Start answering the question in terms of broad, general categories.
Be  imaginative, brainstorm yourself, writing down all the ideas that come into your head.
Think about all the things you would like to achieve, obtain, or experience, within the next five years, in different areas of your life — work, home, leisure, personal — and then list them.
Include anything you feel you want even if it's not realistic or sensible.
A list from one of our clients had these items (not in order of priorities):
Home
1
To live in a nice house
2
To have a wife and children
Work
3
To get promoted
4
To get some research published
Personal
5
To travel around the world
6
To have an affair with Meryl Streep
7
To find peace within myself
8
To have a circle of good friends
Leisure
9
To beat Boris Becker at tennis
10
To create a work of art
Once you have generated the list go back and examine it in the following fashion:
(a) Look first for goals that are not within your power to achieve: from the above list, 6 and 9 are low probability items impossible to achieve for most of us.
Spending a great deal of time trying to achieve these goals will be unproductive and frustrating.
It would be like betting a large sum of money on a million to one shot.
Goals like a tennis victory over Boris Becker can, however, be changed to achievable ones, such as, improving your game of tennis.
If modifying the goal to make it achievable turns it into something you no longer care about, then drop the goal altogether.
(b) Try to make each goal as clear and specific as possible.
The clearer a goal is, the easier it is to decide whether the goal is attainable, and if it is attainable, how you would go about achieving it.
For example, on reflection, item 7 was changed to ‘being able to relax and unwind after work and at weekends’.
(c) Look for inconsistencies among your goals.
Working  towards  incompatible goals can cause a great deal of psychological stress.
Nobody can function effectively when attempting to move simultaneously in opposite directions.
Examples of some pairs of goals that are inconsistent in all but the rarest cases are: ‘have children’ and also ‘have a great deal of freedom’; ‘rise to the top of your profession’and ‘never work weekends or evenings’; ‘have strong opinions, speak your mind,’and ‘still have everybody like you’.
Finding incompatible goals may cause you to drop one or more from your list, or reduce the importance of some goals.
At the very least, spotting conflicting goals will alert you to potential problems.
(d) Decide which goals are most important to you.
Rank order them.
Deriving Objectives from Goals
Once you have analyzed and redefined your list of goals, you are ready to derive a set of objectives for each of your goals.
Objectives are specific, concrete outcomes, that further your progress towards a goal.
A statement of an objective must always refer to some publicly observable outcome occurring within a certain time frame.
For example, the goal ‘to create a work of art’, has the objective, ‘to write a 10,000 word short story by the end of the year’.
The goal of ‘achieving wealth’, has the objective, ‘to be achieving an income of £20,000 as head of my own department, within the next three years’.
Objectives perform an important function.
They enable us to break up the larger and more nebulous goals, into smaller, more manageable pieces.
They also help us keep tabs on our progress.
Selecting Activities for the Achievement of Objectives
Once you have clear precise objectives you will be ready to select activities for the achievement of each objective.
Well stated objectives often suggest the activity necessary to accomplish them.
Activities are the specific behaviour that leads towards achieving objectives.
Activities that would lead towards the objective of writing a short story might be, ‘clear the spare room out and set up a desk’, ‘ enrol on a weekend workshop on creative writing’, ‘set aside the next four Sunday afternoons for  writing’, ‘arrange to visit a friend in six weeks’ time with a completed first draft'.
Activities that might lead to the objective of promotion to head of a department might be, ‘ enrol on a management course’, ‘achieve at least four research publications within the next two years’, ‘join two committees and get involved with service planning’.
TIME MANAGEMENT
Sharper Not Harder
Once a person has established goals and activities, and has timetabled these projects in terms of dates of achievement, the effective management of time becomes important.
This does not mean that the person needs necessarily to go faster, but that they organize their time more effectively.
Charlesworth and Nathan (1982) tell a very poignant story about a young man who always wanted to be a lumberjack.
He wandered up to the logging camp on his eighteenth birthday and enthusiastically asked for a job.
Seeing that the boy was large, strong, and healthy, the boss quickly agreed.
The first day the lad chopped down ten large trees entirely by himself.
This was quite an accomplishment and the boss was very pleased.
The next day the boy seemed to work just as hard and just as long, but he only chopped down eight trees.
This was still quite respectable.
The rest of the week passed and each day the boy worked just as hard and just as long, but each day he produced less.
On Friday the boss called the boy into his office noticing that he had only felled one tree.
He was ashamed because he had produced so little and tears began to roll down his face.
'Sir' he said, ‘I'm working harder and harder, but I'm afraid I'm disappointing you’.
‘Why do you do so little?’ the boss asked.
‘I'm really trying sir,’ was the boy's response.
‘Have you taken time to sharpen your axe, boy?’ enquired the boss.
The boy answered, ‘No sir, I really haven't had time because I've been so busy working.’
The moral: work sharper, not harder.
The lesson to be learned is that taking time out of a fixed routine to stand back, and reassess the situation, is time well spent, and can create greater efficiency and productivity.
Taking Breaks to Increase Productivity
Productivity increases as we spend more time and energy, but only up to a critical point.
Past that point the productivity curve decreases.
For example if studying for an exam, it is well established that studying for long periods without a break is literally, a waste of time.
The human brain, particularly memory, works best for concentrated periods of about forty to fifty minutes.
Then after this time, a short ten to fifteen minutes break provides primary and recovery effects and helps consolidate previously learned material.
The student or executive who sits down and works non stop for two to three hours is not using their time productively, as, after fifty minutes, memory, concentration, and attentional skills decline.
A ten minute tea-break, a telephone call, a brief conversation, anything which breaks up large blocks of concentration, improves efficiency.
Deliberately changing tasks from writing to talking re-channels our mental energies, providing a break from one particular mental style, which again increases productivity.
Working through a lunch-break is usually not a very good idea.
Even a twenty minute walk across the park, and a sandwich in the fresh air, is an effective way of using time productively.
Similarly, after a week of hard stressful work, it is important to schedule relaxing and distracting activities for the weekend.
Having a relaxing hobby or interest, which takes us physically and mentally away from work can be an invaluable insulator against a build-up of stress.
It seems to help if the leisure activity is opposite in as many ways as possible from the work situation.
For example if you work indoors, at a desk, doing clerical work, a suitable hobby might involve being outside, doing some physical activity.
Holidays can also be a valuable source of relaxation and distraction.
Lists and Priorities
Taking five minutes in the morning, at the beginning of the day, to draw up a ‘things to do’ list is a useful way of planning time.
If large goals are broken down into small specified short-term tasks, a sense of purpose is created.
Meeting these attainable short-term goals and progressively crossing them off the list can provide an important sense of achievement and reinforcement.
Making a list also offers the opportunity to set priorities, assessing which tasks have to be achieved, which tasks can wait, and which tasks can be delegated.
A helpful strategy is to rate tasks in terms of A, B, or C priorities; where A is ‘At once’, B is ‘Best done today’, and C is ‘Can wait’.
Spending large amounts of time on ‘C’ items at the expense of ‘A’items is unproductive.
An eighteenth century economist named Pareto suggested the ‘Pareto Principle’ or the ‘80/20 rule’.
Simply stated, only 20 per cent of the tasks we do in a day produce 80 per cent of the rewards.
Remembering this principle will help you to concentrate your energies on the right 20 per cent of tasks, making these the ‘A’ priorities.
It will also help you to become more comfortable with not doing ‘C’ items.
The perfectionist is a person who has problems setting priorities, and often ends up spending equal amounts of time and effort on tasks irrespective of their importance.
Perfectionists end up working slowly, doing everything very well, putting themselves under pressure.
It is useful for such people to learn to vary the quality of their effort.
This might involve deliberately doing something quickly and poorly.
Attempting to do everything perfectly can lead to doing everything adequately, but nothing exceptionally.
Problem Solving and Making Decisions
Some people have great difficulty in solving problems and making decisions and waste a great deal of time ruminating on the same thoughts without ever coming to a clear conclusion.
In these situations help is needed to organize thoughts and separate ‘the wood from the trees’.
The following exercises can be useful to make conscious, clarify, and hopefully resolve finely balanced internal debates.
Exercise 1: Decision-Making
Take a sheet of paper and at the top write the decision at issue.
Draw a line down the middle from top to bottom.
Head the left-hand column ‘reasons for’ and write down all the reasons you can think of to follow a particular choice.
Similarly head the right-hand column ‘reasons against’, and write down all the reasons as to why you should not make that choice.
The choice is  now clearer as your thoughts are visible, being on paper (see Figure 6.1).
If still unable to make a decision, weigh the ‘pros’ and ‘cons’in terms of importance.
Assign a rating on a ten-point scale as to how important each consideration is.
If a choice is still problematic, put the piece of paper in a drawer and come back to it the next day.
Figure 6.1 Example of decision-making — changing job
Exercise 2: Problem Solving
Identify the problem, e.g. should I go on holiday to Australia to meet a friend — I don't know if I can afford it?
Try to list all the possible options without thinking about them too closely.
Brainstorm yourself, generating as many options as possible — just write down any option that comes into your head irrespective of how realistic or unrealistic:
1
I could borrow money to go.
2
I could work overtime to raise the money.
3
If I didn't go I could stay at home and work on the house.
4
If I didn't go, I could have a summer holiday in Greece and still afford a skiing holiday in winter.
5
I could visit my sister in Weymouth and buy a new car with the saved money.
6
We could arrange to meet halfway, say, Thailand or India.
The flight and cost of living would be less expensive in a third-world country.
7
I could stay at home and try to write a novel.
8
I could go around the country visiting old friends and relatives.
Look at each option carefully and consider the likely consequences of each course of action.
Decide which options are unrealistic and exclude them, for example:
I cannot borrow that amount of money because I'm already overdrawn and I don't know anybody who would lend me any.
I could not face the prospect of spending a long holiday in Weymouth, because I would argue with my sister, and it rains too much in Weymouth.
I want the sun.
I could not stay at home and write a novel because I feel too tired and run down, and need a break from mental activity.
Select from the remaining options.
Make a decision as to which option would be most rewarding and feasible.
If necessary use the decision-making exercise to weigh up the pros and cons of closely competing options as described previously.
Prepare and plan strategy for accomplishment of chosen option.
BEING MORE ASSERTIVE
What is Assertiveness Training?
The way we behave and communicate with others at work, home, or in public, can be an important factor in the development of stress.
Poor communication can lead to unhealthy relationships, and unhealthy relationships are likely to increase  stress.
At the heart of healthy interpersonal communication is the skill of assertiveness.
Individuals with poor assertiveness skills create a variety of problems for themselves.
For example, the person who cannot say ‘no’ to others' requests is likely to be overwhelmed by external demands; the person who fails to speak up for him/herself and express personal feelings and thoughts will not feel fulfilled and comfortable with his/her own identity; the person who can communicate only in an aggressive manner may fail to develop healthy trusting relationships.
Communication skills affect every area of life, from expressing feelings in intimate relationships to dealing with over-zealous shop assistants.
Assertiveness training is a structured form of intervention aimed at improving the effectiveness of our communication style.
The approach is not restricted to a clinical population, but has been used extensively in the commercial world particularly in the fields of sales and management.
An assertiveness training programme involves a number of stages: first, understanding the underlying principles of the approach; second, recognizing different styles of communicating (passive, aggressive, assertive), third, identifying specific situations where we would like to be more assertive, whether at work, in public, among friends, or at home; fourth, to prepare, rehearse, or role play a different, more assertive response; and fifth, to transfer that behaviour back into the real world.
The Philosophy of Assertiveness Training
The underlying philosophy of assertiveness training is based on the premise that we are all equal; nobody is more important or less important than anybody else.
Because we are all equal, we all possess the same basic human rights.
The goal of assertiveness should be to stand up for one's rights without violating the rights of others.
A good starting point for any assertiveness training is to remind ourselves of some of these basic rights (see Figure 6.2).
Any one of the rights on the list can be personalized.
For example, the stressed housewife may take rights 3 and 7 and decide that: ‘I have the right to suggest to my elderly mother-in-law that she enquire about the possibility of a home-help, as the demands she is making on me are wearing me out’.
Figure 6.2 Our rights
Communication Styles Passive/Aggressive/Assertive
We all display different degrees of passive, aggressive, or assertive behaviour, at different times, in different situations.
Problems arise when we get stuck in a particular style of response which is unhelpful and find changing to a more appropriate style of response difficult.
Assertiveness training is about extending and being flexible in our communication style so that we have more choices as to how we respond in different situations.
The three categories of passive, aggressive and assertive behaviour are a useful way of differentiating and describing interpersonal communication styles.
Passive Behaviour
This involves violating one's own rights by failing to express honest feelings, thoughts and beliefs, and consequently permitting others to violate oneself.
Passive or non-assertive behaviour can also mean expressing one's thoughts and feelings in such an apologetic and self-effacing manner that others can easily disregard them.
The passive responder allows others to ‘walk all over them’(doormat).
The non-assertive person feels they have no control over their anxiety: it controls and immobilizes them.
The passive person does not allow their needs to take precedence over or be as valid as, another's.
They allow others to make their decisions for them, even though they may resent it later.
They feel helpless, powerless, and inhibited.
Non-assertion  shows a subtle lack of respect for the other person's ability to take disappointments, to shoulder some responsibility, to handle their own problems.
Message communicated
I don't count, so you can take advantage of me.
My feelings, needs, and thoughts are less important than yours.
I'll put up with just about anything from you.
I'm not OK — you're OK.
Subliminal thoughts
Take care of me and understand my needs magically.
Will you still love/respect me if I am assertive?
I've got to protect you from hurt.
Goal
To appease others and to avoid conflict and unpleasantness at any cost.
Verbal and non-verbal characteristics
Rambling — letting things slide without comment.
Beating around the bush — not saying what you mean.
Apologizing inappropriately — soft, unsteady voice.
Being unclear — averted gaze.
Posture — backs off from others — slouched shoulders.
Wringing hands — winks or laughs when expressing anger.
Covering mouth with hand.
‘…if it wouldn't be too much trouble’.
‘but do whatever you want’.
‘I…er…um…would like…um…you…er…to do…’.
Payoffs
You are praised for being selfless, a good sport.
If things go wrong, as a passive follower, you are rarely blamed.
Others will protect and look after you.
You avoid, postpone, or hide the conflict that you fear.
Price
Others often make unreasonable demands on you.
When, by your lack of assertion, you have allowed a relationship to develop in a way you don't like, shifting the pattern becomes more difficult.
You crowd yourself into other people's images of a lovable, good person.
When you repress or bottle up so much anger, you simultaneously diminish other feelings, including love and affection.
Aggressive Behaviour
This involves standing up for one's personal rights and expressing one's thoughts, feelings, and beliefs in a way which is usually inappropriate and always violates the rights of the other person.
People often feel devastated by an encounter with an aggressive person.
Superiority is maintained by putting others down.
When threatened, you attack, aiming at the vulnerability exposed in the other.
Message communicated
This is what I think, what I want, what I feel.
What matters to you isn't important to me.
‘I'm OK — you're not OK’.
Subliminal thoughts
'I'll get you, before you have a chance of getting me'.
‘I'm out for Number One’.
Goal
Domination, winning, forcing the other person to lose, punishing.
Verbal and non-verbal characteristics
Body leans over the other's space intrusively.
Staring the other person down.
Strident voice.
Sarcastic or condescending voice.
Chilling cold and detached voice.
Parental body gestures (finger pointing).
Threats (‘You'd better watch out…’,
‘If you don't…’).
Put downs (‘You've got to be kidding’, ‘Don't be so stupid’).
Evaluative comments (‘should', ‘bad’, ‘ought’).
Sexist/racist remarks.
Pay offs
You get others to do your bidding.
Things tend to go your way and you like that feeling of control in shaping your life.
You are likely to secure the material needs and objects you desire.
You are less vulnerable in a culture characterized by struggle, hostility, and competition.
Price
Aggressive behaviour creates enemies, which can induce greater fear and a sense of paranoia, making it difficult for you  to relax.
If, through your aggression, you control what I do, it takes your time and energy to supervise me, thus creating a paradoxical self-imposed servitude.
You become alienated from others.
Assertive Behaviour
This involves standing up for personal rights and expressing your thoughts, feelings, and beliefs directly, honestly, and spontaneously in ways that are respectful of the rights of others.
An assertive person evaluates a situation, decides how to act, and responds without undue anxiety or guilt.
Assertive people respect themselves and other people and take responsibility for their actions and choices.
They recognize their needs and ask openly and directly for what they want.
If refused, they may feel saddened, disappointed, or inconvenienced, but their self-concept isn't shattered.
They are not reliant on the approval of others, and anchor their supports deeply within themselves as well as externally.
Assertive people teach other people how they wish to be treated.
Message communicated
This is what I think.
This is how I feel.
This is how I see the situation.
How about you?
‘I'm OK — you're OK’.
If our needs conflict I am certainly ready to explore our differences and I may be prepared to compromise.
Subliminal thoughts
I won't allow you to take advantage of me and I won't attack you for being who you are.
Verbal and non-verbal characteristics
General demeanour suggests assurance, caring, and understanding.
Receptive listening.
Firm, relaxed voice.
Direct eye contact.
Erect, balanced, open body stance.
Voice appropriately loud to the situation.
‘I’ statements (‘I like’, ‘I want’, ‘I don't like’).
Co-operative phrases (‘How can we resolve this?’,
‘What are your thoughts on this?’)
Emphatic statements of interest (‘I would like to work on this project’)
Pay offs
The more you stand up for yourself and act in a manner you respect, the higher your self-esteem.
Your chances of getting what you want out of life improve greatly when you let others know what you want and stand up for your own rights and needs.
Expressing yourself at the time of negative feelings means you will be less apt to hurt someone.
Resentment has not built up and feelings are typically at a low level of distress.
Being less preoccupied with self-consciousness and anxiety, and less driven by the needs of self-protection and control, you can see, hear, and love others more easily.
Price
Because you are not assertive in a vacuum, assertion can disrupt your relationships.
Your family/spouse/colleagues/ friends may have benefitted from your non-assertion and may sabotage your newly developed assertion.
There is pain involved in developing honest, caring confrontations.
You are re-shaping your beliefs and re-examining your values that have been closely held since childhood.
This can be frightening.
You must confront your fears and doubts and take risks again and again.
There is no ‘Tablet from the Mount’ to guarantee an elegant outcome of your efforts.
Identifying Situations to Work On
The next stage in an assertiveness programme involves identifying particular situations or activities where the client could be more assertive.
The ‘Rating Your Assertiveness Chart’, and the ‘Everyday Situations that may require Assertiveness’ lists provide a useful outline and examples of the different activities that make up assertive behaviour (see Figures 6.3 and 6.4).
It is important then to draw up a list of specific personal examples which create difficulties for the client.
Each situation on the list should then be rated on a score out of ten, and arranged in terms of difficulty.
Situations should then be rated in order, with the most difficult at the top and the easiest at the bottom, in the same manner as the hierarchical approach discussed in chapter 4 (see Figure 6.5).
Figure 6.3 Everyday situations that may require assertiveness
Responding Differently
The fifth step in an assertiveness programme involves preparing and rehearsing a different way of responding to the identified situation.
This involves discussing how the client could respond differently and looking at specific verbal and non-verbal characteristics of an assertive response.
The client might then be asked to close their eyes and visualise how they might respond differently, or to role play the new behaviour with the therapist.
Video feedback has also been used effectively in these types of training programmes.
To lighten what can be quite an anxiety provoking    experience, it is sometimes helpful to ask the client to role play a particular situation, but to do it at first, extremely badly.
So, the unassertive client can role play being even more unassertive than they really are, and then role play being gradually more assertive.
Assertiveness training can be fun as well as being an effective way of changing behaviour.
A number of key verbal and non-verbal assertive skills to remember include:
1
Establish good eye contact but do not stare.
2
Stand or sit comfortably without fidgeting.
3
Talk in a firm steady voice rather than shouting or rambling.
4
Use gesture to emphasize points (hands, facial expressions, body posture).
5
Use statements such as‘I think’, ‘I feel’.
6
Use co-operative words such as‘let's’ or ‘we could’.
7
Use empathic statements of interest such as‘What do you think’, ‘How do you feel?’
8
Be concise and to the point.
Clearly state the message you want the other person to hear.
If necessary use the ‘broken record technique’— repeating the core message over and over again.
Keep problem centred and don't be side-tracked by personal attacks or distractions.
Figure 6.4 Rating your assertiveness
Figure 6.5 Example of a personal list of assertiveness situations to work on
Transferring Back to the Real World
After the relative safety of role playing either with a therapist alone, or in a group, or merely imaging how to behave  differently, comes the transfer or generalization of training.
It is useful for the client to set him/herself specific homework assignments to complete before the following session — the notion of reporting back to one person, or a group, acts as an incentive for action.
Again the simple principle is to start with easier tasks and progress to more difficult ones.
Confidence develops through the accumulation of successes.
Aim for smaller success to start off with, rather than taking too large a leap which might result in disappointment and reduction in confidence.
For more details of assertiveness training see Smith (1975), Dickson (1982), and Alberti and Emmons (1970).
MANAGING TYPE-A BEHAVIOUR
As discussed in chapter 1, high scorers on Type-A behaviour inventories — people with ‘hurry sickness’— are more susceptible to symptoms of anxiety, and stress induced illnesses.
However, research suggests that most successful and satisfied executives show classic Type-A behaviours.
Friedman and Rosenman (1974) suggest that it is not a question of getting rid of Type-A behaviour, rather that we should learn to manage it.
They make a number of suggestions, or ‘drills against hurry sickness’.
After a client has completed the Type-A inventory, and identified areas for possible change, the following drills may be useful.
The therapist will be deliberately encouraging the client to ‘go against the grain', by negotiating specific behavioural homework tasks.
Try to restrain from being the centre of attention by constantly talking.
Force yourself to LISTEN to other people.
Stop finishing sentences for other people.
Ask yourself the question ‘Do I really have anything important to say?’ and ‘Does anyone want to hear it?’
Search out somebody that talks slowly, and deliberately have a slow conversation.
Try to control your obsessional, time-directed life by making yourself more aware of it, and changing the established pattern of behaviour.
Whenever you catch yourself speeding up in a car to get through a red light, deliberately penalize yourself by turning right at the next corner.
Circle the road and approach the same signal again.
Similarly, deliberately walk slowly and set yourself a specific time period for a relaxing  lunch-break .
See  how long you can take to eat a meal or a sandwich, chewing every mouthful as slowly as possible.
Take as many  stress-free ‘breathing spaces’ during the course of an intensive work day as possible.
Make sure you do something that relaxes you; it can mean reading the newspaper, taking a walk, talking to people you like, etc.
Include five-minute intense relaxation spots during both morning and afternoon, where you concentrate on relaxing muscles, slowing your breathing down and calming your mind.
Take time out to assess the cause of your ‘hurry sickness’ and ‘hostility’.
Is it due to a need to feel important?
Is it designed to avoid some activity or person?
Is this hostility the result of feeling threatened and insecure about the present situation?
Make a deliberate effort to develop enjoyable leisure activities and hobbies.
Look back on the activities you have enjoyed in the past and select one to develop.
Commit yourself fully to participate in such activities.
Don't allow all your energy to be channelled into work.
Try not to bottle up emotions.
Ventilate your feelings.
Talk to others about your problems and about how you feel.
Allow yourself opportunities to express anger, frustration, and sadness.
A problem shared is a problem halved.
INCREASE YOUR SOCIAL SUPPORT NETWORK
There is substantial evidence that social support, at work or at home, may provide an effective insulator or buffer against the effects of stress.
A number of studies (Marmot 1975 and others) have shown markedly reduced rates of coronary heart disease in Japan compared to the United States.
This seems to be related to certain features of Japanese lifestyle and working practices, such as shared decision-making, group affiliations, corporate identity, group counselling, etc.
Other research has shown that women with a confiding relationship are much less likely to become depressed.
Many clients falsely assume that an extensive social network, involving family, friends and colleagues, just happens.
This is blatantly untrue.
The maintenance of friendships and relationships requires a certain amount of deliberate effort and hard work: they have to be developed and cultivated.
The overall goal  of ‘increasing social contacts’, just like ‘having more money’, can be broken down into specific objectives and activities.
Homework tasks may centre around the client achieving specific behavioural tasks.
Examples of these tasks include, ‘chatting for two minutes to the man in the corner shop’, ‘inviting the neighbour around for a drink’, ‘enrolling in an evening class’, ‘joining a club or society’, ‘telephoning an old friend’, etc.
These homework tasks are negotiated between therapist and client.
It is important not to take on over-ambitious tasks or the client will feel demoralized.
Small achievable tasks increase confidence, leading to more difficult tasks.
The underlying principle of such homework tasks, in the form of self-help therapy, is that everybody can set themselves a task, however small, and achieve it.
A professional mental health worker should have access to information concerning local support and self-help groups.
These groups might range from mother and toddler groups, to specific self-help groups like Alcoholics Anonymous, Weight Watchers, or Open Door.
We would see it as part of the role of the mental health worker to encourage and support the development of such groups.
Self-help groups can be developed by interested clients who have completed structured anxiety management courses.
Group-based therapies like anxiety management groups have the added ingredient of offering clients an additional social network of others with similar difficulties.
Our research has indicated that clients find this ‘meeting others in the same boat’ one of the most helpful components of therapy.
A HEALTHIER LIFESTYLE
Physical Exercise
A healthy, strong body copes better with stressful situations and is a means, like relaxation, of draining the stress glass.
The 600 muscles in our body thrive on exercise and deteriorate without it.
Regular exercise produces a number of benefits:
1
Exercise provides a way of releasing a great deal of the muscle tension, and general physical arousal (adrenalin) accumulated in the body's response to stress.
An important benefit of exercise is muscle relaxation.
2
Exercise helps develop and maintain good circulation and lowers blood pressure.
3
Exercise improves immunization in the body's constant fight to ward off disease.
4
Exercise can be used to clear the mind of the clutter of worrying thoughts and anxieties.
Often more creative ideas and more effective problem solving occur after exercise.
5
Exercise improves self-image, appearance, and control of weight.
6
Research has shown that hormones are  released during exercise which act as natural anti-depressants (endomorphines).
Getting Fitter
Ideally exercise for general fitness should involve as many of the body muscles as possible.
Getting fit is about small amounts of physical exercise, starting slowly and gradually building up a regular routine.
There are three aspects to fitness: stamina, suppleness, and strength.
Stamina
It is the heart and lungs which provide a person with stamina.
Any exercises which increase the body's need for oxygen will be exercising the heart and lungs.
These specific types of exercise are called aerobic exercises.
The heart is a muscle and, just like any other in the body, it can become unfit.
Toning up the heart and lungs leads to a more effective supply of oxygen to the blood which in turn is supplied more quickly to the muscles, enabling us to stave off exhaustion.
Suppleness
Exercises ranging from yoga to vigorous swimming engage the body's muscles in regular and rhythmic movements.
This reduces stiffness, enables the person to move more freely, and will serve to reduce arthritic problems in elderly people.
Strength
This stems in part from both stamina and suppleness.
Most of us do not really aspire to developing huge muscles, enabling us to lift great weights, but, by developing extra strength, the muscles are then working well within their capability for most everyday tasks.
The therapist can encourage the client to introduce regular exercise into their weekly schedule.
Specific behavioural targets can be negotiated.
These might be  to: ‘go swimming for thirty minutes after work once a week’, ‘use the stairs rather than the lift’, ‘walk to the restaurant instead of driving’.
Nutrition and Weight Control
People respond to stress in different ways, some smoke, some drink alcohol, and some increase and decrease their food consumption.
All these behaviours are part of a vicious circle where a maladaptive response to stress produces more stress.
Consider the example of overeating.
The effect of overeating is weight gain, which in itself is an added stress.
A person 25 per cent over their normal weight range has a two and a half times greater chance of having a heart attack, hypertension, or a stroke.
The overweight person's self-image may also fall, causing a loss of confidence, which becomes another stress.
A healthy well-balanced diet containing proper nutrition can be used to help cope with stress.
People who eat properly feel good about themselves.
The following dietary guideline can be woven into therapy if it appears that the client has an unhealthy diet.
1
Avoid too much fat, saturated fat, and cholesterol — grill, bake, or boil rather than frying.
2
Eat foods with adequate starch or fibre (roughage) e.g., bran, wholemeal bread, fresh vegetables and fruits.
3
Avoid too much sugar.
Try doing without sugar in beverages or use a tablet or liquid sweetener.
4
Avoid too much salt.
Do not automatically add salt to a meal.
Avoid savoury manufactured goods and crisps.
5
Eat a variety of foods including fresh ones.
In this way you should receive all the nourishment, minerals, and vitamins you need.
6
Attempt to maintain your ideal body weight.
7
Avoid excessive amounts of caffeine (in coffee, tea, Cola drinks), especially before sleeping, as it is a stimulant which has a direct effect on the nervous system.
8
The recommended maximum weekly intake of alcohol is twenty-one units for men and fourteen units for women.
One unit is equivalent to one pub measure or glass of wine, sherry, or whisky, or half a pint of beer or cider.
When taken in excess alcohol causes liver damage, blood sugar problems, impaired brain function, and induces dependence.
9
There is no doubt that smoking is damaging to your health and impairs long term ability to cope with stress.
It is estimated that for every cigarette you smoke you shorten your life span by five minutes.
Sleeping Difficulties
For all of us getting a good night's deep sleep is important.
Sleep provides a restorative function within the body, slowing down bodily processes, and providing a much needed break from daily stress.
The pattern and exact nature of sleep that we get will vary enormously from one individual to another.
Some people can get by on three or four hours a night whilst others seem to need much more.
It is very important to realize that the body regulates itself very effectively in terms of its sleep requirements.
Though it is very disconcerting when we find we can't drop off or that we wake early, we must remember that we cannot do ourselves any physical harm by having difficulty sleeping.
Though we may become more irritable and find life's demands more stressful, loss of sleep is not physically damaging to the body.
Basically there are five stages to sleep.
Stages 1 and 2 are stages of light sleep, just drifting off and being asleep but easily aroused.
Stages 3 and 4 are the deep stages of sleep.
It is those stages that provide the real ‘quality’ sleep.
The shorter the length of time we are asleep the more the body will adjust so that sleep will be spent in these deeper phases.
This is why less sleep can be just as effective in restoring us physically, though we may be used to sleeping longer.
The fifth stage of sleep is known as REM (Rapid Eye Movement) sleep.
It is during this fifth stage that we dream.
Again there is marked variation from one person to another and from one week to another in the amount of dream sleep that we get.
Different theorists offer different explanations for dreams, but regardless of these, it is important to know that dreaming is not an indication of a good quality of sleep.
Also, having recurrent dreams is a very common experience and not necessarily indicative of any psychological problems.
Ten ways of Improving Sleep
1
Often a good investment towards better sleep is the purchase of new pillows.
Likewise, it is important to be comfortable in the bed itself.
Be warm with a good duvet or sheets with extra blankets if required.
Try to cut down on external noise.
2
Avoid cat naps during the day.
Any sleep that you have will detract from night-time sleep and reduce the strength of the bed as the sole stimulus for sleep.
3
Take regular physical exercise and get plenty of fresh air, but not last thing at night.
4
Avoid all stimulant drugs at least two hours prior to going to bed.
This includes coffee, tea, Cola drinks, all of which contain caffeine.
Switch to milky bedtime drinks such as cocoa.
Also avoid smoking prior to going to bed.
Do not take slimming pills.
Do not use alcohol as a means of getting to sleep, this will simply lead to alcohol dependence and there is evidence that alcohol has a detrimental affect on the quality of your sleep.
5
Try to keep regular hours, getting up at the same time however tired you may feel.
Don't be tempted to lie in and snooze if you've had a bad night.
Get up and you will more likely sleep better the next night.
Try to go to bed only when you're tired but do not stay up past a certain critical time, say one hour after you would normally go to bed.
6
Eliminate most other  unnecessary activities in bed apart from sleep — do not eat in bed, watch television, or read.
These reduce the impression of bed as the place to sleep in your mind and can therefore effect its potency as a stimulus for sleep.
7
Do not eat anything at least two hours before going to bed.
The body's digestive processes are less efficient when a person is lying down and indigestion may result.
8
Make sure that your pre-bedtime behaviours are as relaxing as possible.
A hot bath, relaxation exercises, or a non-taxing read can all help.
Don't go to bed immediately after a period of intense concentration, e.g. working late, playing cards, or following a difficult knitting pattern.
The mind may still be active and alert.
9
Don't lie awake for ages wondering why you are not sleeping.
It is much better to get out of bed and return after a short period when you feel more tired.
This breaks the vicious circle of worry, increasing physiological arousal, leading to further worrying, and so on.
10
Perhaps most importantly, try and determine yourself why it is that you're not sleeping.
Sometimes we may be able to identify a particular stress or problem which may be affecting us in our inability to sleep.
Take active steps towards eliminating or reducing this stress.
Your body will soon tell you if you were correct in your hypothesis and effective in your solutions.
RUNNING AN ANXIETY MANAGEMENT GROUP
INTRODUCTION
The material presented so far in this book offers an educational, self-help approach to clients' anxiety problems.
Such material can be delivered on an individual basis or in a group format.
Working in groups offers an enjoyable contrast to individual work and is also an effective form of therapeutic intervention, as well as being a cost-efficient use of time.
This chapter will attempt to convey some of our experiences, as well as describing a structured group programme.
CHARACTERISTICS OF ANXIETY MANAGEMENT GROUPS
There is no one way of running these groups or courses, and neither is there a fixed, inflexible agenda.
The way a group is run will be heavily influenced by the personal characteristics and style of the therapists involved.
However, from our practice certain common characteristics have emerged.
The groups or courses are closed and time limited, usually running initially for either six or eight weeks.
Later booster and long term follow-up sessions are arranged for one month, then three months, after completion of the structured programme.
Each session lasts approximately one hour and twenty minutes, and occurs initially on a weekly basis at the same time and place.
The final two sessions may be planned at fortnightly intervals to help the group ‘tail off’.
Each group or course consists ideally of six or seven clients, all group members having been individually assessed by one of the  therapists, using the structured interview and questionnaires described in chapter 3.
The group sits in a circle in a reasonably large room.
The course is based on a psycho-educational model so clients are encouraged to adopt the role of ‘active learners’ rather than‘passive patients’.
The course is based on the principles of self-help, hence clients are reminded that they have responsibility for their own problems and for changing their own behaviour.
Dependency on the therapist is discouraged.
The therapists take on the role of director, facilitator, organizer, reinforcer, and teacher.
A co-therapist can make the experience of running the group more enjoyable by taking some of the responsibility off the therapist's shoulders, and reinforcing and consolidating the information.
It is also a useful way of transmitting skills to other mental health professionals.
If the co-therapist is experienced each can alternate between running different sections of the programme.
Members receive a large amount of information in the form of printed handouts.
We prefer to distribute these on a sessional basis, rather than all together in a book form which is given out in the first session, as individual handouts seem to focus attention on the specific issue under discussion.
FOUR MAIN THERAPEUTIC COMPONENTS
Each session contains a mixture of four basic therapeutic ingredients.
Providing Information and Education About Anxiety and Stress
Information in the form of printed handouts and tapes is given out, during all sessions.
This helps clients learn to understand more about the processes involved in, for example, stress, or having a panic attack, or the development and maintenance of phobic anxiety, or the uses and abuses of tranquillizers.
There appear to be two main benefits from providing clients with information.
First, the more they understand ‘what is going on’, the easier it becomes to do something about it.
Very often the clients are unaware of their role in doing things which make  their anxiety worse (e.g. hyperventilating, catastrophizing, avoiding, etc.).
Once the processes involved have been understood, and a future plan delineated, clients can begin to make positive changes.
Second, when people do not know what is happening to them, they become frightened, feel out of control, and are more prone to catastrophic misinterpretations.
Simply knowing what is ‘going on’ reduces anxiety.
Teaching Coping Skills
Clients learn specific skills and techniques for controlling anxiety and reducing stress.
These include specific skills for coping with acute, situational anxiety, such as muscle relaxation, programmed physical exercise, respiratory control, distraction techniques, and other cognitive therapy methods.
Skills aimed at reducing general levels of stress, such as assertiveness skills, goal planning, and time management are also included in the package.
All these particular strategies or skills have the common goal of helping clients feel more in control of both their symptoms of stress, and their life in general.
These adaptive coping skills are differentiated from maladaptive coping skills, such as the long-term use of tranquillizers, abusing alcohol, food and drugs, avoiding situations, and behaving in a passive, non-assertive manner.
Setting and Achieving Specific Behavioural Homework Assignments
Expectations are set at an early stage: that the therapist can only offer education and advice, and the client is responsible for assimilating and applying this information.
In addition to the practice of self-help skills, all clients, in negotiation with the therapist, will set themselves specific homework tasks to be achieved before the next session.
Clients will announce their intentions to the group, and then report back the following week.
For individuals with phobic anxiety, these tasks include graded exposure to progressively more difficult avoided situations.
For non-phobic clients, homework tasks might include being more assertive in a specific situation at work, involvement in a relaxing leisure activity, or cutting down on prescribed tranquillizers.
As well as these individual homework tasks, all  clients, whether phobic or non-phobic, carry out the relaxation exercises, and go through a period of self-monitoring of their levels of anxiety.
Meeting and Sharing With Other People With Similar Problems
Clients often feel that they are ‘the only one in the world’ with this particular complaint.
By meeting others ‘in the same boat’, they begin to feel less alone and different.
This can be helpful and reassuring in reducing anxiety.
The group also offers clients the opportunity to share experiences and receive feedback from peers.
Membership of a group also offers an added social support system.
Members often meet up to carry out homework tasks together, and contact each other between sessions.
At the end of each course, members are invited to exchange telephone numbers and addresses, and small self-help groups often develop.
AN ANXIETY MANAGEMENT GROUP PROGRAMME
The following structured programme has been designed, modified and run by the authors on numerous occasions over the last five years.
We originally started with a six-session package but later increased its length to eight sessions.
The handouts referred to on the agenda are based on information discussed in chapters 4, 5, and 6 of this book.
Session 1
Therapist outlines plan for course and first session — self-help model, components of course emphasized — 3-system model of anxiety — explanation of a model of stress — Tap and Glass metaphor.
Introductory name-disclosing game.
Members then introduce themselves and briefly outline their problems.
Joint reading and discussion of ‘Coping with Anxiety’ handout (emphasis on introductory model, physical symptoms, benefits of relaxation).
Introduce relaxation training-therapist teaches exercises and conducts relaxation practice.
Homework — self monitoring/diary sheets — rate anxiety on 0–100 scale — relaxation tapes handed out.
Session 2
Review homework — individuals give an example from their diary sheets and report on relaxation exercises.
Joint reading and discussion of manual ‘Understanding and Coping with Anxiety’(introduces 3-system model of anxiety, anxiety is normal physical symptoms).
Joint reading and discussion of handout ‘Acute Hyperventilation’.
Demonstrate provocation test where clients deliberately over-breath — discuss catastrophic misinterpretation of symptoms — breathing exercises.
Homework — self-monitoring — relaxation — attempt to carry out disclosed behavioural target.
Session 3
Review homework — individuals report on targets.
Joint reading and discussion of manual ‘Understanding and Coping with Anxiety’(topics covered include — what maintains anxiety? the role of avoidance behaviour and catastrophic thoughts, panic spirals).
Look at handout on identifying ‘self statements’.
Individuals start to work out hierarchy of specific behaviours or situations for planned practice.
Homework — complete hierarchy — attempt to carry out disclosed behavioural target.
Session 4
Review — individual's targets and completed hierarchy sheets.
Joint reading and discussion of handout —‘Cognitive Techniques’—‘Distraction’ and ‘Positive Self-Talk’.
Joint reading and discussion of handouts ‘Positive Self-Statements for Coping with Anxiety’.
Homework attempt to carry out disclosed behavioural target — work out ‘Individual Self Statement Card’.
Session 5
Review homework tasks.
Read and discuss handout on ‘Thinking Errors — Looking for Rational Answers’.
Read and discuss handout ‘Irrational Beliefs’— individuals identify personal and most relevant belief.
Read and discuss ‘Stress Control’ handout.
Homework — attempt to carry out disclosed behavioural target.
Session 6
Review homework tasks.
Read and discuss handout on ‘Assertiveness’— differentiating between communication styles — assertive, passive, aggressive.
Individuals identify specific situations where they are not assertive.
Homework — attempt disclosed assertiveness task.
Session 7
Review homework tasks.
Read and discuss handout ‘Goal Planning’.
Individuals decide on own goals, objectives, achievements.
Homework — attempt specific behaviour task.
Session 8
Review homework tasks.
Read and discuss ‘Common Questions about Anxiety’— topics include — dealing with setbacks, uses of tranquillizers, keeping practice going, are you getting enough fun out of life?
Exchange telephone numbers — possibilities for self-help systems.
Homework — target to achieve by five-week follow-up group.
EXPERIENCES AND ADVICE ON RUNNING GROUPS
The following section contains some experiences and advice on how to run an anxiety management group.
The first session is the most important because if it is not run properly it also may be the last session for some clients.
The most noticeable feature of this session is that everybody is very anxious.
The therapist has to work hard to reduce the general level of anxiety and they should present as being relaxed, confident, and reassuring.
It is worth pointing out to the group that the first session is always the most anxiety-provoking, after which future sessions become progressively easier.
Make this point firmly, because the idea of anxiety-reduction with repeated exposure is one of the fundamental principles of the course.
Try to introduce some humour into the session, as there  is no better way of reducing anxiety than to have the group laughing together.
Offer an escape route, by pointing out the whereabouts of the toilet, if you notice a particular member is looking exceptionally bad.
We have found it useful to ask all group members to read, in turn, and aloud, sections of the printed handouts that have been distributed before they are discussed.
This is usually an anxiety-provoking experience and some members might try to avoid doing it.
It is important at this stage to stress the unhealthy nature of avoidance.
Explain that the whole purpose of the course is to learn how to control anxiety symptoms.
Reading a paragraph in front of others offers a great opportunity to both provoke and control anxiety.
Redefine the problem in terms of a challenge, ask them to take two steps backwards and treat it as an experiment.
Emphasize that it does not matter how badly one reads the paragraph as long as the situation is not avoided.
Make a joke of ‘who is the worst reader’.
In one group it happened that every week the same woman would say, ‘I can't read that, it makes me too nervous.
My eyes go all funny, I can't concentrate’.
We would always suggest firmly that she read her paragraph and reluctantly she would do so.
She was a warm, good-natured person with a sense of humour.
In the sixth session, on Assertiveness Training, she insisted in a very assertive tone that she was not reading her paragraph.
The whole group burst out laughing and agreed that on that occasion she should be ‘let off’ her reading.
It is important to avoid using jargon and complicated language.
The principles of the course must be made to seem very simple, and are best explained in everyday language and metaphor (see chapter 4).
At the beginning of each session review homework assignments.
Go around the group and have everybody in turn explain a particular example of their coping, or the task they set themselves during the preceding week.
Try to emphasize the positive; praise and reinforce achievements.
Use people's experiences to support the cognitive-behavioural model.
Encourage members to talk about their experiences in terms of the cognitive-behavioural three-system model.
A series of positive reports regarding homework tasks can set the tone of the group to follow.
The ‘domino effect’ is often very noticeable; one  person's comments, whether positive or negative, influence the person who follows.
It is sometimes a good idea to start homework reporting with a client who you recognize as a likely positive contributor.
Towards the end of each session when clients are setting themselves homework tasks, make a point of writing down on a piece of paper, in specific terms, what it is they are supposed to do.
Do not accept woolly generalizations, such as‘Oh, I'll try to do something next week’ or ‘I think, I'm going to a party’.
The homework assignment must be specific and concrete, requiring the deliberate confrontation of anxiety; this does not mean doing something that they are already going to do anyway.
The homework assignment involves setting a task that they would not normally do.
Some clients might put forward the excuse that there is really nothing that they avoid and so they cannot set themselves any homework tasks.
Don't accept this for one minute.
Everybody has situations that they are inclined to avoid because they provoke some anxiety.
Individuals with phobic anxiety are relatively easy; catching buses, going in lifts, and standing in queues are good examples of tasks.
The individual with generalized anxiety might set him/herself the task of reviving an old leisure activity such as horse-riding or swimming, or inviting a neighbour around for coffee.
The perfectionist who announces ‘I avoid nothing because of anxiety’ is again fooling him/herself as they strive to do everything perfectly all the time, because not to do so creates anxiety.
So, the perfectionist might be instructed to do something wrong at work, or deliberately blemish their appearance, or turn up to the group five minutes late.
All these situations create anxiety which the client then has to cope with.
One illuminating example of the usefulness of behavioural homework targets is that provided by a lift-phobic whom we saw.
A phobia of lifts often arises within the more complex agoraphobic syndrome and, with the right approach, is not too difficult to break.
Like any phobia, the lift phobia is maintained by avoidance and a network of catastrophic thoughts.
Encourage clients to identify their own personal chain of catastrophic thoughts.
In one recent group one woman had not been in a lift for twenty years.
With prompting, her chain of catastrophic  thoughts were identified: ‘The lift will get stuck’.
‘They will not be able to get me out’.
‘I'll be in there for days’.
‘I won't have any food or water’.
‘I'll starve’.
This bizarre image at the bottom of this chain of catastrophic thoughts has a little old lady, starving and thirsty, a human skeleton, huddled in the corner of a glass-fronted lift in a busy department store.
When this network of catastrophic thoughts and fantasies was exposed, it seemed bizarre and ridiculous.
The therapist and the group jointly answered those irrational statements, and everyone could see the funny side of the bizarre nature of her final image.
That lady successfully went into a glass-fronted lift the next week armed with instructions on relaxation, deep breathing, and an index card with positive self-statements in her pocket.
Her evident pleasure and pride in her achievement spilled over into the group, motivating others to follow suit and try out situations they had been avoiding.
This one simple example had shown the woman in question, and the group, that people could change and did not have to be slaves to their anxiety.
Another good homework task for some clients is to encourage them to go and try deliberately to provoke and control a panic attack.
Their recently acquired understanding very often prevents them from achieving a full-blown panic attack.
It seems that once people fully understand what a panic attack is, they are no longer frightened of the physical symptoms, and no longer have catastrophic thoughts: they find it almost impossible to have a full-blown panic attack.
The role of a positive mental set, i.e. deliberately looking out for a panic attack as an opportunity to practice self-control techniques, rather than running away from it, supports the school of thought that views a panic attack as largely cognitive — behavioural in nature.
Individuals will take on different roles within the group.
It is useful for the therapist to be aware of who their allies are, those who can act as a positive role model, and which members are going to be resistant.
The positive role models should be encouraged to help other group members by explaining ideas and concepts, and offering encouragement and confrontation.
The notion of asking ‘circular questions’ is a helpful way of developing these interactions, i.e. ‘Mrs Smith, you had a similar experience to Mr White, how did you cope?’, or ‘You've taken tranquillizers in the past and gave them up, what would you say to somebody like Mrs Jones?’
ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OF GROUP TREATMENTS
Advantages of Group Treatment
Cost effectiveness
For an eight-session course, with eight members, clients receive approximately twelve hours of therapist contact time.
This is at the comparatively small cost of three hours therapy time per individual if there are two therapists running a group (one and a half hours of therapy time per individual if there is one therapist).
Opportunities for sharing and reducing feelings of loneliness
Clients often report that they stop seeing themselves as abnormal when they meet others in a similar situation.
The group also offers support for individuals going through difficult periods.
‘Positive modelling’ and peer reinforcement
If a client has successfully carried out a difficult homework task the group can reinforce this success more powerfully than a therapist alone.
Similarly, positive achievements act as good models and encourage other members into action.
Opportunities for feedback
The group is an ideal setting for clients to test out assumptions they might have about themselves.
Feedback from peers can be a powerful mirror, showing clients how things are, rather than how they assume they are.
Opportunities for continuing support
The group can easily become a network of support during and after the course.
Self-help groups can develop out of such structured programmes.
A structured group
This offers a time limited contract and very definite expectations of therapist intervention.
These limits help to focus clients' motivation and endeavours towards self-help in the independent management of their problems.
Disadvantages of Group Treatment
Reduced time for the idiosyncrasies of clients' problems
Because of time restriction it is impossible to be excessively responsive to  individual needs.
Individuals with more complicated problems, that do not easily fit into the overall structure of the programme, may either be neglected or take up an inappropriate amount of group time.
This serves to emphasize the importance of a good early assessment to decide on the client's suitability for group treatment.
Effort of setting up a group
It is obviously easier to make an appointment with an individual than organize a group, although once a format programme has been decided, handouts printed, and a venue organized, most of the other organizational tasks can be carried out by clerical and secretarial staff.
Potential group members are interviewed, then placed on the waiting list for the next group, and contacted when the group starts.
SELECTION OF GROUP MEMBERS
All clients are individually assessed by the therapist running the group, before the course starts.
The semi-structured interview and the questionnaires described in chapter 3 are the main forms of assessment.
Further questionnaires are then completed at the end of the eight-week programme and at three months follow-up.
In our selection procedure we are looking for three main characteristics.
First, the problem presented by the client must be of the type that will be responsive to the structured group programme.
Clients with panic attacks, phobic anxiety, and generalized anxiety appear particularly suitable, because the programme has been designed to meet their needs.
Clients where anxiety is secondary to another major problem, e.g. a formal mental illness, clinical depression, major marital dysfunction, or an eating disorder are not suitable and, in our experience, do not do particularly well in this type of group.
Second, clients need to be reasonably well motivated to make changes themselves, and to accept the basic self-help principles of the group.
It helps if in the assessment interview, the client can delineate specific objectives and targets to achieve; this gives some indicator of clients' motivation and a target to aim for.
Third, clients may need to be prepared to wait until the start of the next course, which might not be for up to two months.
For  individuals with phobic anxiety and  long standing anxiety problems, this is often not a problem, however for those in a state of crisis, immediate individual sessions may be more appropriate.
Indeed, this type of group is not particularly suitable for those individuals in such a crisis, as they may not be able to concentrate on the material presented.
Our experience indicates that the majority of in-patients in psychiatric hospitals are not particularly suitable, even if their major problem is anxiety.
Admission to a psychiatric hospital usually suggests anxiety levels above the level needed to absorb the material in the group, a state of immediate crisis, and usually significant prescribing of anxiolytic medication.
The make-up of any one particular group merits some consideration.
In our experience mixed groups, for example, stressed business executives sitting alongside agoraphobic housewives, can work well, as long as there is at least one other person in the group with similar problems.
A group of seven female phobics with only one male with generalized anxiety or vice-versa can be problematic.
FINDINGS FROM RESEARCH
Anxiety management treatment packages delivered through a group format rather than individually have been described by Eayrs et al .
(1984), Jupp and Dudley (1984), Johnson (1975), and Powell (1987).
All four studies have demonstrated the effectiveness of these types of programmes and found that anxiety levels fell significantly.
When group treatment packages are compared with individual treatments the results are very similar, using similar psychometric assessments as outcome measures.
In the research carried out by one of the present authors (Powell 1987), forty seven clients in six separate structured group programmes were asked to rate which components of the package they had found most helpful.
Clients rated receiving ‘information about anxiety and stress’, and ‘Being in the group and meeting others with similar problems’ as the most helpful parts of the treatment package.
These two aspects of treatment were rated significantly higher than any of the other components such as homework tasks, or learning coping skills such as relaxation or positive self-talk.
This result would seem to have  implications for clinical practice.
Perhaps it is time we placed less emphasis on our role as individual therapists teaching specialist skills, and moved towards the position of educators and organizers of self-help services.
A further interesting result was that individuals' perception of the causes of their anxiety shifted significantly away from the belief that there was something physically wrong with them.
As we had hoped, clients' catastrophic thoughts, particularly misinterpretations of bodily symptoms, altered significantly.
Similarly, use of maladaptive coping strategies such as avoidance behaviour, taking tranquillizers, and visiting their GP, decreased, while the adoption of adaptive coping strategies, such as relaxation, increased.
A further unpublished project attempted to assess the anxiety characteristics of the type of client who benefited most from the treatment package.
During the initial assessment interview clients were rated by the interviewer on a number of four-point scales.
These scales included such characteristics as frequency of panic attacks, generalized anxiety, avoidance behaviour, psychiatric history, worry about anxiety, interest in the approach, use of anxiolytic medication, and recent life stresses.
Two scales showed a correlation with positive changes on an outcome measure — Spielberger State Anxiety Inventory.
These two scales were ‘worry about anxiety’ and ‘interest in the approach’.
This is only a preliminary finding, based on the interviewer's subjective assessment, but could be the basis for future research.
The notion that clients could be rated on a dimension of how worried they were about their symptoms of stress (physical, cognitive, behavioural) as opposed to how worried they were about factors which caused those symptoms (Stress's, Life Events, etc.) is an interesting and as yet unexplored area.