

zzap zone!
ZZAP!
ZOO!
Football.
Love it or hate it, everyone seems to have a favourite team.
Whether it's one of the top clubs like Liverpool or Leeds or a lesser side like Accrington Stanley or Man United, there's nothing like cheering on your team and screaming blue murder at the ‘blind’ ref.
So, who do the ZZAP! crew support?
(Apart from each other after lunchtime editorial meetings in the Frog & Ferret…)
LUCY HICKMAN — MANGLING EDITOR
Football?
FOOTBALL???
You cannot be serious !
At the risk of alienating most of our readers — I HATE THE GAME!('S' okay, I'm only joking — had you going for a minute there though, didn't I?)
I got really into World Cup '90 — I never can resist seeing a grown man cry!
I guess my fave team has to be Nottingham Forest (such attractive shirts, don't you think?).
But the main reason for this choice is my passionate, unwavering adoration of Brian Clough — wotta man!
I mean his charisma, charm and articulate manner are just too much…
STEVE SHIELDS — ON THE ED
Sung to the tune of Que Sera Sera (aren't they all?):
When I was a little lad, I asked my mother ‘who'll be my team?
Will it be Millwall, or will it be Spurs?’ and here's what she said to me: ‘Son, you're a West Ham fan and that's the way you'll stay.
You'll follow the Hammers wherever they play until your dying day!’
Odd really, since I've always favoured Fourth Division Cardiff City.
Just goes to show, life's a funny old game, innit?
PHIL KING — DEPUTY ‘DAWG’ ED
Being born and bred in Ludlow, my favourite team just has to be…
Leicester City!
Don't ask me why, I often ask myself the same question!
They've been yo-yoing between the First and Second Divisions for as long as I can remember — at the time of writing, they're well on their way to the Premier League.
City have had more than their fair share of great players: Gordon Banks, Peter Shilton, Gary Lineker, Alan Smith, Gary McAllister, Mike Newell — pity they sold 'em all!
Anyway, I'd always believed great minds thought alike, until I found out that SEGA FORCE's Paul ‘if the cap fits, it's a miracle’ Mellerick supports Leicester too!
MARK CASELL — OFF HIS ED
Nowadays I can't bear anything to do with football, kicking an air-filled pig's bladder up and down a muddy pitch ain't my idea of fun.
90 minutes of torture is what I'd call it, especially when you get the likes of Jimmy Hill (strokes chin in very sarcastic manner) commentating.
But when I was a nipper (about the time when football was invented), I did support my local team Slough FC, and Tottenham Hotspur.
Football, you can stick it up your…jumper as far as I'm concerned.
IAN OSBORNE — SPOT THE BALLS
For my money, the worst team in the world has to be Birmingham City — they're crap!
Rumour has it that last season their manager dressed a dozen tailor's dummies in Aston Villa strips for his team to practise their passing and dribbling sills.
By half-time the Villa were two-nil up!
They're planning to turn their ground into an all-seater stadium when they can find a three-piece cheap suite enough — the only way they'll raise the money is to turn their pitch over to growing cabbages and start a fruit-and-veg. stall on Birmingham market selling  rotten fruit!
MARK KENDRICK — ED CASE
What's football?
Oh, yeah that's it! 22 players kicking a leather sphere up and down a big piece of grass!
Personally I reckon it's a sport strictly for lager louts!
Having said that, though, my brother supports Aston Villa (Hi Stew you made get!), and he reckons they're brill.
Then there's little Jimmy Morley (Claire's little brother) who loves Liverpool to death.
It's sad, isn't it?…that people's heroes are just a bunch of pansies who get paid extortionate amounts of money for kicking in a poor ball who hasn't done anyone any harm!
Shame’
The ZZAP! 64 zzone!
over 'ere son, on the 'ead!
My old man said be a Swansea fan but I said bog-off, cobblers you're a fart!
Yep, the soccer season is well underway here at ZZAP!
Towers (Brian), with dozens of dodgy football chants being awarded near the drinks machine —‘Oi, did you spill my coffee?
Well stitch that, pal!’
And if the language has become a little colourful, well, it's only a reflection on the state of the mag.
Go on, have a flick through.
Full colour on every page!
Dazzling, hug?
What with the excellent Emlyn Hughes International Soccer on the Megatape, and ripping round-up of every footy game released for the C64 (not to mention a clutch of spiffing soccer videos to give away), we think we can be excused the odd cry of ‘Gooooaaaaa!’ though.
Yes, you've certainly scored a winner this month, folks, I hope you're over the moon about it!
The issue's not totally devoted to scorching soccer action however (huge sighs of relief from the two-left-feet brigade), as there are more than enough non-sporty releases coming out to keep any forty-fags-a-day fan happy.
From arcade games to text adventures and back again — via a handful of sims and the odd platform caper — we've got the lot between these hallowed covers.
So, that's enough from me (thank God!— the rest of The Team), I'll leave you to enjoy the rest of the issue.
Now for just one more go at beating Phil at that bloomin' MicroProse Soccer …
STUFF!
PUT YOUR PEDAL TO THE…
PLASTIC?
Fed up with playing footsie with your missus?
Tired of tiptoeing through your neighbour's tulips after a heavy night down the pub?
Then put your foot down and demand one of these funky Quickjoy Foot-Pedals for your next birthday!
Enabling you to allocate different joystick commands to the three coloured pedals, this nifty little piece of hardware will certainly add a good deal of realism to any driving games you may have in your collection (except Hard Drivin' , of course, as even a steering wheel and gear shift couldn't fuel-inject any realism into that!).
As well as this posh pedal thingie, Quickjoy also have a number of natty new joysticks poised for release — a good few of 'em looking pretty damn mean from the blurb sheets, too.
the bumper bundle of review samples they were sending hasn't reached us in time for this issue, though, so look out next month for further toe-tappin' details!
LO!
A LEMMING…?
Okay, alright, settle down.
No, this isn't an earthshattering announcement concerning the imminent release of Lemmings on the C64.
No indeedie.
It's just that we've received soooooo many queries asking ‘when’, ‘who’ and ‘…how much’that we've decided to give you the full story here (maybe NOW you'll stop inundating us with begging letters!)
Suicide is painful!
To begin with, then, ‘who?’.
Well, Psygnosis hold the rights to produce Lemmings on the C64 (that was easy!), but ‘when’ is a different can of bolted horses altogether!
Basically, the problem is this: due to the sprite limitations of the C64 nobody — as yet— has managed to come up with a routine that would allow more than ten Lemmings on-screen simultaneously.
Not much cop considering that the game requires a hefty one hundred of the little blighters to be meandering about at once!
A Direct result?
Help may be at hand, tough, in the shape of a small development team called Direct Designs.
We got a call from them recently and, apparently they've managed to come up with a program that WILL allow for a hundred Lemmings on-screen at once— although they would not be animated to any degree whatsoever.
Still sounds like it could be a winner though, so we put Direct Designs and Psygnosis in touch…watch this space for further details, and hang on to your postage stamps!
Just one more letter asking ‘when’ the game in question will appear and you'll see the entire ZZAP! team disappearing over the edge of the nearest cliff.
Aaaaaaarrrrgh!
MORE DATA REQUIRED
Many new readers of this illustrious organ have written to grumble about the unavailability of decent C64 datarecorders.
Commodore sold a staggering amount of 64s over the Christmas/January sales period, the majority of which being the Terminator 2 packs (which came with a T2 cart, but no cassette deck).
As a result, hundreds of would-be joystick junkies have been climbing the walls with frustration, as the only compatible datarecorders that have been available lately are of the decidedly dodgy import variety and won't work with many games — especially budget releases.
An Active Solution
Help is at hand though, in the shape of a West London company called Active.
They've just taken delivery of a whole load of high quality datarec's, which are retailing at the standard price of just £29.99.
If you'd like to get hold of one write your name and address to:.
But DON'T send him any money — as Active are merely distributing the goods not flogging 'em to Jo Public.
Rob's assured us that he'll let you know where in your area you can pick one up so you can wave bye bye to ‘Syntax error’, and say hello to ‘Now loading please wait’!
TURBOSOFT TAKE A TUMBLE
Following a series of complaints from readers, ZZAP! can now confirm that Turbosoft Distribution has ceased trading.
Details regarding the firm's demise are a little hazy, and the matter has now been referred to the Fraud Squad.
Turbosoft's proprietors left their trading premises and home address on 14 February, leaving no indication of where they could be contacted.
It would appear they carried on trading from a different address some time beyond that date, though exactly when they stopped has yet to be established.
According to Pat Hutchinson of Luton Consumer Services, Turbosoft was very successful at first but as the firm grew it couldn't cope with the volume of orders received — Trading Standards have had over 400 complaints to date, and they're still coming in!
Writs have been served for outstanding advertising fees amounting to £16,000, and it seems unlikely they will be paid — bailiffs were sent to the firm's place of trading, but nothing of any value was recovered.
As Turbosoft were not a limited liability company, the proprietors are personally liable for the losses and could be made bankrupt.
Going, going, gone!
The case is currently being reviewed by the Fraud Squad, who are preparing questionnaires for creditors in order to assess the extent of the problem.
According to DC Groves, up to the time they left the premises there was no reason to suspect fraud.
Though there were many complaints, there was no evidence of malpractice and several complainants had received refunds after intervention by Trading Standards officials.
It's not yet clear how long after leaving the premises the firm continued to trade, but a time-scale is being established.
If it's found that they continued to cash cheques after that date, criminal proceedings will follow.
Don't be so soft
So where does that leave the poor C64 owner with a big hole in his bank balance and no software to show for it?
Well, if you sent your money fairly recently, it's probably still sitting in their offices unopened — Turbosoft still hold the lease on the building, and until it's taken over by another company the GPO have no authority to recover and redirect mail.
If you paid by postal order, take the counterfoils to the post office for a refund.
Uncashed cheques can be cancelled, but not without your bank or building society making a hefty charge — make sure you're not paying more in charges than you'd lose if your cheque was cashed!
If your cheque or postal order has already been cashed, the chances of getting your money back are extremely slim — the firm's assets are unlikely to cover writs already outstanding, let alone compensate disgruntled customers.
If you're one of the aggrieved, address your complaint to;
Don't write to Trading Standards, there's nothing they can do.
At the time of going to press, Turbosoft proprietors Peter and June McClusky are unavailable for comment and their whereabouts is unknown.
THE JUNE WHITFIELD CHARTS
THE READERS' CHART
FAVE FIVE CORONATION STREET CHARACTERS
FAVE FIVE THUNDERBIRDS PUPPETS
Send in your chart votes on this simple form and you could win £30 worth software, like lucky Luke Croll of Sheerness in Kent.
His top game is Rainbow Islands and his fave Thunderbirds puppet is Scott.
MY TOP THREE GAMES ARE:
MY FAVOURITE CHOCOLATE BAR IS A  
Megatape!
Tape Worm
Those new-age prats think they can flush me out with a bit of colonic irrigation.
Pah!
Actually, I like a nice bath now and then, and I've got to be as fresh as possible for Tina, my childhood sweetheart.
I first met this pretty parasite in a string of pork sausages (how romantic!) and fell in love at first sight.
Okay, so she's gone down a few orifices in her time, but if anyone calls her a hookworm I'll burst their intestines.
I love her almost as much as this month's munchy Megatape.
For starters there's a special version of Emlyn Hughes International Soccer , the best footy game ever, according to Phil.
Then there's a cracking arcade adventure Hocus Focus , the concluding part of the epic adventure Black Knight , and a supersonic playable demo of Turbo The Tortoise .
Sadly I haven't got time to play right now, I've got to split for an urgent dinner date.
See ya, munchmates!
Emlyn Hughes International Soccer
(Audiogenic)
What a cooker…what a mega-stonking, super-scrummy corker!
Emlyn Hughes International Soccer is the best footie game ever released on the Commodore, and we've got a special version of it just for you!
Options are chosen using a menu system and there are LOADS OF 'em, so, moving swiftly along…
Unless you're suffering from an advanced case of schizophrenia, you can only control one player at a time.
He'll be the one in the funny coloured shirt!
If you're playing against the computer you'll play the first half kicking from left to right, changing ends at half time.
To send a player streaking across the pitch (don't get excited, Lucy — I didn't mean literally!), push the joystick in the direction you wish to go until he reaches the required speed.
Release the joystick and he'll carry on running — to stop him, pull it in the opposite direction.
To kick the ball, press and release the fire button.
The length of time you hold it down determines the strength of the kick.
NOTE — all actions controlled with the fire button are triggered on RELEASE.
STOP PRESS!
Last minute news…
Emlyn Hughes International Soccer is about to be released on the Touchdown label for the rather reasonable price of just £3.99.
Unlike our special Megatape version, Touchdown's will allow you to save tournaments to tape and play matches of a longer duration.
That's if you've got the stamina for it!
Player control for clever dicks
Now you've mastered the basics, it's time to polish your performance.
Turning
Just whack the joystick in the direction you want to turn.
Of course, it's a lot easier to turn through shallow angles than to completely change direction, and the slower you're going obviously enhances your rotation capabilities.
Sidestepping and barging
When you're trying to dribble the ball past opponents you might want to side-step him without changing direction.
To do this move the joystick from the central position at 90 degrees to your direction of movement — easy when you get the hang of it.
If your football is more ‘Vinny Jones’ orientated, you can use this method to barge an opponent.
Giving it some wellie!
Life would be pretty boring if you could only kick the ball straight ahead of you, so Emlyn Hughes allow up to five directions depending on the option chosen, and height control too!
Height control
You can kick the ball at three different heights.
Pushing the joystick in the direction of travel results in a low, grubhunting kick, slap it in the opposite direction to give a high lob, and leave it in neutral for something between the two.
Direction control
If you choose the ‘one direction’ option, you can only wellie it in the direction you're facing.
With three directions, you can also belt it at 45-degree angles by moving the joystick with the fire button depressed.
Most powerful of all is the five-direction option — again move the joystick at right angles to the direction of travel.
If you let go of it before the fire button is released, the ball is kicked at an angle of about 20 degrees to the direction of travel — ideal for shots at goal.
Release the fire button before the joystick and the angle increases to 70 degrees, which is great for crosses.
Of course, you can combine controls for direction and height — literally hundreds of kicks are possible!
Backheels
To backhead the ball, press the fire button and move the joystick backwards then forwards before releasing the fire button.
Choosing your player
The computer will automatically select a player for you to control, but if you're not happy you can change it by pressing the fire button and moving the joystick in the approximate direction of the player you would rather control.
Obviously you can't do this while you have the ball (you'd kick it instead), or when you're very close to it (you'd probably execute a sliding tackle).
Also, if two players are standing very close to each other, the computer might give you the wrong one — repeat until you get it right
Heading the ball
To head the ball, press and release the fire button.
If the ball is within your range, you'll nut it.
If it's too low, you'll attempt a diving header.
Impressive if you can pull it off in the box…
Sliding tackles
If the ball is too far away to trap normally, just press and release the fire button — as long as it's too low for a diving header, you'll execute a sliding tackle.
CAUTION — make sure you get the ball and not the player, or you could give away a free kick!
Free kicks, corners and throw-ins
These are taken automatically.
The ball is kicked or thrown to the highlighted player either after a few seconds or when the fire button is pressed with the joystick i neutral.
(if it ISN'T in neutral, the computer will assume you're trying to change players.)
If the goal is in view the player will sometimes make a shot.
Penalties
These can be handled automatically or manually.
Just hold down the fire button to determine strength, and position the joystick as for a standard kick.
Goalies
You can allow the computer to control the goalie, or (if the goal is under threat), opt to gather in the ball, press fire with the joystick in neutral — anything else will be interpreted as an instruction to your highlighted player.
Pause
Use the ‘caps shift’ key to pause and unpause the game.
Substitutions
During a match the players' level of fitness decreases steadily, or suddenly if injured!
To check on your players' health press Q while the game is paused and the ball is out of play to access the menu.
To make a substitution select the ‘pick team’ option.
Highlight the player you wish to remove, press fire, highlight his replacement and press fire again — returning to the menu and selecting ‘play game’ restarts the match.
Odds and ends
Press the ‘up’ arrow key to skip the presentation sequence where the players run on and off the pitch, or back to their positions when a goal is scored.
press ‘run/stop’ to abort the game.
Strategy and options
Changing names
To change (human) player names, move the pointer to the player you wish to change and press fire.
A cursor will appear.
Type the new name and press ‘cir/home’.
This is how you select twoplayer games.
Picking teams
You can do this either through the ‘pick team’ or ‘edit team’options.
(During a competition, only ‘pick team’ is available).
Select the player you wish to drop, press fire, select his replacement, press fire again.
Players 12 and 14 are the substitutes (13's unlucky!).
Skill factors
Each player (except the keepers) has three skill factors —running speed, defensive skills,and attacking skills .
Each of these can be set at 1, 2 or 3.
To change skill levels select the appropriate characteristic and press fire.
Fitness levels
If a player's fitness falls below 75% his performance is impaired — you may need to substitute him.
A player will recover somewhat between matches, but an injured player might need to be rested for longer.
Fitness levels don't count in friendly matches or when ‘equal skills’ is selected.
Exiting edit menus
Move the pointer to a blank area of the screen and press fire twice in quick succession.
A box displaying at tick, a cross and a question mark will be displayed — click on ‘tick’ to exit having made the changes, ‘cross’to exit without any changes being made — if you've mucked it up!— and on ‘question mark’to return to the menu.
Competitions
There are three options: A league in which eight teams play each other once or twice depending on whether ‘home and away’ is selection; a cup which is an eight-team knockout; and a season which gives both league and cup competitions.
When you start a competition any competition already in progress is abandoned.
Settings Menus
There are four menus: options, colours, game and display.
Options menu
Duration — In our special ZZAP! version, each match lasts two minutes.
1 or 2 v Computer — One or two humans can play against the C64.
Extra Time — Can be played if a cup match is drawn.
If not, a replay is needed.
View C + C — Matches between two computer-controlled teams can be viewed.
Home and Away — In a league competition each team can play each other once or twice.
If two games are selected, one is at home and the other away.
Practice — In practice mode the opposition stays in its own half and makes feeble attempts at winning the ball — just like playing Birmingham City!
Skill Level — There are ten skill levels for computercontrolled teams.
This is in addition to individual player skills.
Equal Skills — If you prefer, all players can have the highest skill levels.
Backheels — Can be toggled on or off.
Kick Direction — 1, 3 or 5 directions (see direction control).
Auto Goalie — Can be toggled on or off.
Auto Reselect — Selection of players can be manual or automatic.
Points For Win — In a league either two or three points are awarded for a win.
Substitutes — One or two are allowed.
Colours Menu
Pitch Colour — Initially green
Line Colour — Initially white
Flesh Colour — Initially pink
Shorts Colour — Usually black 
Goalie Colour — Can be swapped with one of the teams
Ball Colour — Initially white and black.
Team shirts are changed using the TEAM COLOURS option on the GAME menu.
Game Menu
Play Match — Starts the game shown at the bottom of the screen.
Arrange Friendly — Move the pointer to the home team and press fire, then same again for the away team.
This can be done at any time.
Postpone Match — If the (human) player needed for the next match has nipped out to the bog or something, the match can be postponed until the end of the week's fixtures.
Start Cup — Starts the cup competition.
Start Season — Starts (gasp! shock! horror!) the season.
Edit Team — Can change names of teams and players, and also their skill levels.
These cannot be adjusted during a competition.
Team — Shows which team is currently displayed.
Use the joystick to change.
Display Menu
Show Teams — A list of eight teams is displayed with their managers (ie computer or human).
Show Players — List of players in a particular team is displayed.
Team — Identifies which team is displayed.
Show Fixtures — Displays a team's fixtures for the week in question.
Change the week or team to the one your require.
Show Results — Shows results for a particular week or team — again, can be changed to suit yourself.
Show Table — Shows league table.
By Team — Fixtures and results by team.
By Week —…
Or by week
Week — Which week is displayed.
Hints And Tips
Be realistic when you fix the skill levels, eg forwards will need attacking ability, wingers seed, etc.
Learn to master the simple move before attempting more complex ones, and remember that because of the viewing angle the pitch doesn't seem as wide as it really is.
Getting you started
Having loaded your game for the very first time, the last thing you want to do is read an instruction sheet this size.
Here's a quickie guide to getting straight into a game…
1.
Push the pointer to the top of the screen, and click on OPTIONS.
A menu will appear.
Select KICK DIRECTIONS, and hold the fire button — push the joystick twice to the left to change the ‘five’ to a ‘one’.
2.
Still in the options menu, highlight and fire on both the BACKHEELS and AUTO-RESELECT options.
3.
Exit OPTIONS, and select the GAME menu.
Select EDIT TEAM, and change COMPUTER (top left of screen) to your own name by placing the cursor over the first letter then typing it in on the keyboard.
Double-click on a blank area of the screen, then select the tick to get back to the main menu.
4.
Select ARRANGE FRIENDLY, move the cursor over your own team, and press fire.
Then do the same for the team you wish to select — the tick box will then appear.
Press on tick.
5.
Still in the GAME menu, press on PLAY MATCH, and you're away (the lads!).
This will get you into a playable but ultimately limited game.
Here at ZZAP!
Towers we think Emlyn Hughes is one of the best footie games ever on the C64.
Limit yourself to a quick kick around and you'll never know what you missed!
Black Knight Part 2
(Mandy Rodrigues)
Everyone get through Part One okay?
Good!
For those daft enough to have missed the last issue,Black Night is a twopart text driven adventure game, in which a peaceful medieval village was brought to its knees by an evil warlord.
Your task is to deal with the tin-suited terror and return the village to its former tranquillity.
But beware — the Black Night's ghoulish cohorts are everywhere, and rumour has it that they've been dabbling in the dark arts…
Pass the word
If by any chance you DID manage to miss out on last months' issue, fear not!
To get stuck into Part Two you don't have to have completed the first instalment, but you DO need to have the password.
On loading this, the second part, just type ‘PICKET’ when prompted and you'll be away (if you've got school in the morning, don't stay up all knight playing it!).
I'm Mandy!
Mandy Rodrigues is the editor of Adventure Probe , the longest running multi-format adventure fanzine in the known universe, and proprietor of Atlas Adventure Software .
If it's more games you're after, or maybe just help with Black Knight , drop here a SAE at .
Order a copy of Adventure Probe while you're at it — at £1.50 a throw, it's a great read!
Hocus Pocus
(Grandslam Video)
At last, the real story can be told!
Don't believe what you read in The Scum.
The only thing that's true in that rag is the price on the front, which is a pity really — in this case the truth is stranger than the fiction…
The Scum's photographer was out harassing the royal family, so when a big assignment came in the editor had a problem — who could he send?
When Jeremy, a YTS trainee, was caught in the darkroom with Vicky from accounts, the editor decided to kill two birds with one stone.
Shoving a camera in his hand he sent him out to cover the story (and moved in on Vicky himself!).
Jeremy's task is to take pictures of a potty professor's crazy creations before any rival rags.
Trouble is, the prof is a very private individual who doesn't suffer journos gladly — if at all!
His underground hideout is protected by all manner of nasties whose sole reason for living is to tear Jeremy limb from limb or, failing that, pinch his film!
Needless to say, Jeremy has to keep returning to the darkroom for more film throughout the game.
As the only exits are through the roof, he must rise to the occasion — find a key that controls the fans that lie directly underneath them, and float up on a jet of fresh air!
To complete the game you need to photograph all 16 inventions, each of which takes over 20 shots!
Mammoth task, or what?
To make matters worse, all the inventions are hidden in the various objects scattered around the cave system, so you'll need all your wits about you if you're to do it.
One last thing — the caves are radioactive, and the longer Jeremy stays underground without returning to the darkroom, the more he gets contaminated!
A reading of 20 on his radi-gauge means he's in trouble, if it gets to 30 he's dead!
Controls
Keyboard
Joystick
Left
Right
Jump
Icon Mode
Scroll icons
Activate
C'm'dore key
Shift
Space Bar
/
: &/;
Space Bar
Left
Right
Fire
pull Back
Push & Pull
Fire
Screen display
A.
Playing area — this is where you do battle with the professor's perilous pests.
B.
Your photograph — not collected much of it, have we?
C.
Icon display — displays currently selected icon, funnily enough!
D.
Radi-meter — Not a new brand of soap powder, best keep your eye on this little device.
E.
Pictures developed but not yet positioned — slap it on the main piccie when you've worked out where it goes.
Developing your film
To get your film developed you  need to go to the extreme left of the upper level.
Each film contains 16 shots, and developing it automatically reloads the camera.
After development the shots appear in the left-hand window, and you can place them on the main picture by moving them around and pressing fire.
The picture will only appear if it's placed in the correct position.
Turbo Tortoise
(Hi-Tec)
Never slow to bring you the very best in dynamic demos, the ZZAP! 64 Megatape department proudly preeeezents —TURBO THE TORTOISE !
This first-level playable demo of Hi-Tec's highspeed hit is guaranteed to bring you out of your SHELL and send you HAREing to your local software emporium for a copy of the full game (Tapeworm, you're sacked!— Ed).
And the gameplay? it's a cutesy Op Wolf -ish platform game — no, a dynamic diagonally scrolling shoot-'em-up — or maybe it's an arcade adventure with puzzlie sub-levels…
Whatever it is, you'll have to load it in and find out for yourself, 'cos I'm not telling!
Ha ha ha!!!
(To use the cheat mode, access the preview on pages 20–21 — Ed)
A warning from BASH the BARBARIAN
All right, who's the idiot?
Who's the complete pillock who thinks he can send commercial programs and pretend they're his own?
Here at ZZAP! we're very good at spotting ripped-off software, but should one slip through the net it's the sender who'd be in trouble — this could mean a hefty fine and possible imprisonment if you're lucky, or being made to eat your own entrails if I catch you before the software company!
We've already had a couple of plonkers sending us demonstration games from the Shoot-Em-Up Construction Kit , but luckily for them we spotted the offending articles (not difficult).
Stealing other people's work isn't funny, and the next person who tries it will be dealt with — you've been warned!
BE A MEGASTAR!
Hey — you!
Wanna take a BYTE out o' the ZZAP!
Megatape?
If you've written a fun game and want to make your fortune, sling the tape and rob a bank!
If you'll settle for some decent dosh and a place on the world-famous ZZAP!
Megatape, fill in the form and send it in.
Reviewz!
Steg
Humans are really nasty to slugs, drowning them in beer (hic) and melting the poor little sods with salt (I prefer pepper on mine, yum!— Ed).
They really are cute and cuddly creatures, as proved by the new Codies game Steg (and ‘Hannibal the Cannibal’ is vegetarian).
MARK ‘HE SLIMED ME’ CASWELL tracked our sluggy hero to his lair for the full slippery story.
Being a parent ain't easy (not that I'd know from experience), and baby-sitting for other people is even worse (I know that from experience).
Young Steg is in both positions at the same time (a bit eye-watering if ya ask me), his hungry little T'yungunz — bless you!— are HUNGRY .
The mini-Stegs eat grubs ('orrible little squirmy things, a bit like Ian) which can be found wandering around the often huge labyrinthine levels.
Being a slug Steg isn't in possession of legs, in fact, he's completely legless (groan — the whole world), but he moves around exceptionally well.
 In addition to sliding along the floor Steg can cling to the walls and ceiling Spiderman -style.
I'm forever blowing bubbles
With no hands either, Steg can't seize the grubs in the conventional way, but being a resourceful sort of chap he finds a way to  catch 'em.
He actually blows slime bubbles that trap the grubs and bear them ever upward towards the cavern roof.
This is achieved by holding down the fire button until the meter below the energy bar reaches maximum, then releasing it at the right moment.
Beware though, if you leave the bubble meter topped up for too long.
Steg loses energy.
There are five T'yungunz in the nest to feed, but if Steg takes too long catching dindins the young 'uns die of starvation (as do I if I do without food for more than 15 nanoseconds).
As ever, life isn't easy (no siree Bob, you ain't just whistling Dixie).
There are various doo-dahs scattered around just waiting to obstruct the tortuous path of the grub filled bubbles.
The spherical objects are very fragile and must be guided by Steg, to do this he must either nudge them or give them a quick blow (erm…yes, fair enough — Ed).
In the way are spikes, fire and glass — all three pop the bubbles placing the enclosed grubs at gravity's mercy.
Be careful.
The programmers haven't been complete bar stools though, 'coz Steg does receive some help.
Apples replenish flagging spirits, while speed-ups, bellows, blowing devices (madam) and bionic parts (Six Million Dollar Man eat yer heart out) also help.
We have the technology…
A jetpack that allows our hero to fly, and a pair of bionic legs that give Steg the power to leap tall buildings with a single bound and super-slug speed-ups are scattered around.
Steg needs every trick in the book-worm to make sure that his sprogs are fed — at which point our horrid hero moves to the next level and faces the same problems again.
Well, maybe not exactly the same because although the basic pattern of the game doesn't change, it does get a darn sight harder.
The path to the nest soon becomes a real pain, with more and more obstacles to hinder progress and trickier puzzles to tax the old grey cells.
But I'm pleased to say that Steg isn't the hair-tearer I initially feared it to be.
Graphically the game is up to the Codies' usual high standards, the sprites being extremely cutesy (I hate that word, it's so barf-worthy).
CodeMasters have a habit of producing great games with the stars going on to bigger and better things (look at Dizzy, CJ and Seymour).
I genuinely hope that Steg is no exception (what say, Codies?).
Phil!
Let's get one thing straight: if anyone else points out a resemblance between Steg and myself, I'll eat their lettuces!
Ironically, Steg isn't remotely sluggish.
In fact, the little chap positively trailblazes along walls — when he's not bounding on his robo-legs or zooming skywards strapped to a jetpack.
Nevertheless, when you've explored a level and flicked the right switches, there can be a lot of just sticking in one place, bubbling up the countless number of grubs required to feed the sprogs.
Things get much more complicated on later levels, though, where you have to keep moving around to nudge bubbles in the right direction to avoid them colliding and dropping all the grubs.
It can get really frantic when your sprogs are on the verge of starvation.
Then there's the hidden bonus screens with stars to collect in the right order, while a level password system eases any frustration.
Just like Bob Monkhouse,Steg is slimy but highly entertaining!
TEST YOUR STRENGTH!
PRESENTATION
Neat title screen and handy level password system
GRAPHICS
Bold and colourful, especially Steg
SOUND
Phone Rich and ask him about the sound!
HOOKABILITY
You'd better find some oil for your lamp…
LASTABILITY
…'Coz you'll be burning it till midnight and beyond  
‘Feed me!’
Five little slugs sitting in their nest and the little one said…‘burp!’
Now that's what I call a back-pack!
Steg rockets into action…
CodeMasters, £3.99 cassette
I'm Jake the steg, diddle iddle iddle um — but I ain't got legs!!!
Competition!
ZZAP!
COMP Singalongasteg!
WIN A SUPER CD GHETTO BLASTER!
PLUS!
TEN SNAZZY STEG T-SHIRTS
Wear a slug on your chest!
(Well, it's better than your heart on your sleeve, innit?!)
A cool dude slug's slipped into town, and rocked ZZAP!
Towers down to the ground.
His name is Steg and he's one smart critter, at feeding nippers there's no one fitter.
The Codies crew are rockin' too, dishin' out prizes for a lucky few.
A ghetto-blaster with CD feature, will be awarded to the winning creature.
To be in with a chance of gettin' this prize, there's just one thing to realise — it's so simple here's what you do, grab a pen and a postcard too.
Then in fifty words (or less if you like), write a Steg rap then take a hike.
To the nearest post-box go, send of your entries…don't be low!
Address them to the usual place, which is known to the entire human race.
Then a ghetto-blaster you could win, or a smart Steg T-shirt to look neat in.
There's just one more thing before you're  dismissed : Make sure your rap is better than this!!!
Feature!
The Big Match!
For flabby footy fans like PHIL KING, computer soccer is the only way to get any kicks.
But there are so many C64 soccer sims to choose from you'd have an easier job selecting winning Spurs team!
So, to save you spending extravagant transfer fees on dodgy players, Foul Phil heads straight for goal with the round-up of the results…
MicroProse Soccer
One of the age-old C64 questions has been: ‘Which is the greatest,Emlyn or MicroProse ?
Well, personally I have to admit I prefer Emlyn for its realistic playability.
But to be fair, MicroProse is a completely different style of game and one all footy fans should have.
It's a funny old game, Saint, viewed from directly overhead with the cartoonesque players zipping up and down the scrolling pitch.
As with Emlyn the ball is glued to your foot, but again dribbling through the defence isn't easy, especially with intelligent computer-controlled goalies.
The best way of beating these is with a bendy ‘banana’ shot.
Banana power can be altered in the pre-match menu, along with team colours, match length etc.
As well as the obvious twoplayer option, there's the one-player MicroProse Challenge where you play a series of international teams, each one better than the last.
There's also a full World Cup tournament.
Frantic footy
Unlike Emlyn the football is hectic stuff with little passing, but the control system's a lot easier with the ability to do more exotic things like unbelievable banana shots and overhead kicks!
Two-player games are brilliantly chaotic with loads of goals, especially on the small enclosed pitch of the Six-A-Side game (sadly missing from the game on the Disk Co complication cartridge).
At the end of the day, it just goes to show that there are many different approaches to simulating various aspects of football.
MicroProse Soccer certainly captures the end-to-end excitement to a tee.
Over 'ere son, on the ead…
Emlyn Hughes International Soccer
Don't be put off by old ‘Crazy Horse’ Emlyn — he is of the high-pitched voice and cheesy grin.
This is my absolute favourite footy sim of all time (on the 64 that is boys and girls!).
You see, for me a good game of football involves lots of intricate passing.
Sadly, most soccer sims just involve hoofing it up the pitch and loads of chasing aimlessly after the ball.
Either that or using one player to dribble the whole length of the pitch.
Emlyn , though, is a totally different ball game.
Yes, the teams here like to play ‘football’, Brian!
An adjustable control system allows you to pass in a different direction to which you're running, enabling lots of teamwork between your players, including clever one-twos.
And you certainly need to play that way to score: although the ball sticks to your player's foot, it's very difficult to dribble right through the defence (unless your name's Roy Hattersley, of course! and then is a canoe you need to paddle your way through those defence players).
Crowd Pleaser
It's attractive football all right with well-animated players running along a horizontally scrolling 3-D pitch, complete with advertising hoardings and roaring crowd.
The icing on the scrummy cake is the brilliant pre-match options menu, offering the selection of your squad, any of the eight national teams, a full tournament, lots of control options, two-player games and, as they say in cruddy Christmas album adverts, much much more!
Brilliantly designed, very realistic and, despite being a tad tricky to master at first, incredibly playable.
Emlyn is in the top scorer of C64 footy games, but as this month's 'mazing  Megatape will testify, you won't have to wait 'till its budget release to find that out, Brian.
Manchester United Europe
As its predecessor, a hybrid of simple management (picking your team and formation etc) and overhead-view arcade action.
Man Utd Europe is much improved with better tackling; good passing is required to break down defences.
Realism is heightened by an incredible 170 European teams with loads of useful stats available and authentic player names shown during the action.
Five tournaments — European Cup, UEFA, Cup Winners, European Super Cup and World Club Championship — offer a substantial challenge.
International Soccer
Originally released by Commodore themselves on cartridge back in 1983!(good year for music) When  re-released on tape and disk five years later by CRL, it was still good enough to earn 86%.
Shortly after, it was superseded by MicroProse and Emlyn .
It's still a great game though, and was included on the cartridge bundled with the ill-fated GS console (Ha!
Ha!).
Well worth getting hold of.
Matchday II
I played this one to death on the Speccy.
On the 64 it's let down slightly by its slowness. the action's hardly end-to-end stuff, but it's very skilful, almost strategic.
One of the main innovations is the ‘diamond deflection system’ which produces very realistic rebounds depending on which way the ball and player are travelling.
Italy 1990
Released to coincide with the World Cup and totally outshone the official football licence,Italia '90 .
There's the full tournament with all 24 teams and their real players to choose from.
The action doesn't quite live up to the presentation: it's simple overhead-view stuff with no frills, but fun nonetheless.
Street Sports Soccer
Not quite up to Epyx's usual sporting standards, but a playable backstreet kick-around nonetheless.
There's not a lot of tactical depth with minimal player moves, but you can foul and even be caught offside (so watch out Phil — Ed).
There's even a choice of two ‘pitches’(the park or backstreet) and selection of streetwise players.
Not a serious simulation, but still fun to play for a while (but not with Phil 'cos he's a fouling so and so — Ed).
I Play: 3D Soccer
Another Italian football winner, it utilises a unique 3-D perspective from just behind your player.
As I pointed out in the original review, this causes a few problems like the inability to switch players.
One the plus side, it's more realistic as you can't see events out of your field of vision.
There's also a neat split-screen cooperative two-player mode.
Kick Off 2
A fair conversation of the legendary Amiga game.
There's the same overhead-view scrolling pitch, unique push-along dribbling method, plus all the match, cup and league options.
It all sounds great, but the pitch scrolling struggles to keep up with the action, while computer-controlled players are unintelligent, often running away from the ball!
Combine these two flaws and there's often a lack of players on-screen at one time — the scanner doesn't help matters as it's too small to be of any use.
Sadly the planned improved Kick Off 2 cart never came to fruition.
(Does that mean it was a bit a lemon, then?— Ed).
Super Cup Football
this overhead-view game is hardly brilliant but quite playable in a simple way.
I was particularly pleased to see it go on the ZZAP!
Megatape (issue £75).
Options include strip colours, pitch texture and nine difficult levels.
Match action is a bit like MicroProse,with banana shots and a huge flashing GOAL! message, but not as good.
Best with two players.
Manchester United
The real team improved dramatically after this was released (maybe the players practised on it!).
It's an  interesting mixture of management and overhead-view arcade action, and let down slightly by the latter.
Control of players is crude: you always hoot ahead and can dribble the ‘glued to foot’ ball all the way down the pitch.
A real shame, as the slickly presented management section offers plenty of options.
Gary Linekar's Superstar Soccer
It's a game of two halves: the disk version is much better than the tape, with the addition of management and league option.
Curiously enough, you only get to control one individual player for the whole of the match.
Lack of realism is the main problem, with both teams often scoring over 20 goals!
The computer teams are also too easy to beat
Gary Lineker's Hotshot
Not bad.
The overhead-view action is similar to MicroProse Soccer but not as playable.
Positive points include extensive match options, a league and the ability to foul (and receive yellow and red cards).
The pitch looks very bland, though, and the game's on the sluggish side.
Long-term challenge is lacking due to easy-to-beat computer sides, but two-player games are fun.
BBC BOOT BOYS COMP!
ZZAP!
COMP
BBC MATCH OF THE DAY
Relive those magic match moments!
They can't give 'em away, can they?
I mean, who wants a video of Nottingham Forest or Derby County?
Des Walker's only ever scored two goals in a forest shirt, and one of them was in his own net.
And as for Derby…if they fell any lower they'd drop off the pools coupon!
As you might have guessed I'm a very biased Aston Villa supporter (muffled titters), but even I have to admit this is a really mega prize.
These BBC Match Of The Day videos are brilliant, even if they are crappy teams (I'll print your address sin the Forest and Derby match programmes if you're not careful — Ed).
Over 70 minutes of fun-filled frolics from almost 30 years of Match Of The Day, and we've three of each to give away — all you have to do is slap a caption on this wee photo!
To enter, just send your name and address, together with your caption and choice of video — Derby or Forest — to: I'D RATHER WIN A VILLA VIDEO COMP, ZZAP!.
The ZZAP!
Crew's Feeble Efforts.
Steve —‘Now that's what I call a bogey!’
Phil —‘Watch it, son, or I'll give you a snog!’
Ian —‘Oi!
Who nicked my fingerbob?’
Corky —‘Buy East Midlands Electric, young man, or I'll poke your eye out!’
Non-league
Adidas Championship Football
Totally unplayable codswallop.
A shame Ocean didn't blow the whistle on it.
England Championship Special
Easy dribbling through defences by zigzagging, plus farcical free-kicks kill this sluggish overhead-view game.
Five-A-Side Football
Crude old game that can't compete with its successors.
Fighting Soccer
This chronic coin-op conversion features a ‘hazy’ monochrome overhead view.
The players respond so slowly it's like playing via satellite, and they jump about 300 feet into the air to head the ball!
Four Soccer Simulators
An interesting package including Street Soccer with cars and fences to hit the ball against!
Pity it plays like a dented tin can, really.
International 5-A-Side Soccer
The one with the Corky-style players; ie slow and jerky with minimal skill!
Gazza's Super Soccer
About as entertaining as ‘Fog On The Tyne’.
Confusing change of perspective for the goal-mouth is enough to bring tears to the eyes!
Gazza II
Better than the original, but that's not saying much.
Sluggish and crude horizontally scrolling action.
Kick off
Nothing like the Amiga game.
It even scrolls horizontally instead of vertically!
Peter Beardsley International Football
As sick as a parrot.
Almost as naff as Pete's pudding-bowl haircut.
It might as well go and play for Newcastle!
Peter Shilton's handball Maradona
Novelty value as the only ever goalkeeping sim, but even the ‘hand of God’ couldn't save it.
World Cup Soccer: Italia '90
Pathetic official licence with no proper World Cup tournament and zero playability.
World Championship Soccer
Farcical overhead-view game featuring incredibly thick computer goalies with a strange resemblance to the Pope.
Previewz!
International Ice Hockey Peep Show!
When Zeppelin told PHIL KING their next game was on ice, the rotund reviewer expected a long delay!
But when it popped through the ZZAP! letterbox, he was only too keen to body-check it out.
Brrr!
It's time to get your thermal vest on, never mind skates.
And a big stick comes in useful too.
Ice hockey's a rough, tough sport with all that zooming around the rink at lightning pace, bodychecking opponents into the barriers and whacking the puck at speeds of up to 70mph.
No wonder the goalies wear those protective face-masks (they also come in useful for protecting their identities when they go around hacking people up on Summer camps).
there haven't been many ice hockey sims on the 64 — the only two I can recall (Powerplay Hockey and Superstar Ice Hockey ) were a very long time ago.
So it's good to see another attempt at converting this exciting sport.
International Ice Hockey features a horizontally scrolling rink with a slightly raised (Emlyn Hughes -style) viewpoint.
Players skate around the ice with realistic momentum, ie you have to slow down to turn round.
Hit the rinkside at top speed (or get barged into it) and your man is left reeling in agony for a few seconds.
Watch the rough stuff, though: any dirty tactics are quickly spotted by the ref who sends you to the sin bin!
As the title suggests, the game features eight international teams (including britain!) competing in a knockout tournament.
Alternatively you can play a friendly, either against the computer or a pal.
Check out the stats on this iceblockbuster of a game when it's reviewed in the next cool issue of ZZAP!
Sod sonic hedgehogs, it's…
Turbo The Tortoise
What resembles a crusty meat pie and is totally lethargic?
Yes, PHIL KING comes out of his shell to chew on Hi-Tec's supersonic platform game…
The software world is gradually being taken over by little animals, and they're not the sort of cuddly, fluffy ones we're used to seeing.
The new starts are slugs (yuk!), mice, insects, aardvarks (Nobby , coming soon from Thalamus!) and now, just out of hibernation, Turbo The Tortoise!
This surprisingly speedy superhero was created by a freak accident in the lab of  Doctor Mullinger, world-renowned scientist and part-time pub singer.
His pet tortoise just happened to choose the ‘Matter Doesn't Matter’ chamber as a suitable spot for hibernation.
A few bolts of lightning and clouds of smoke later, Turbo was born!
Shakin' shells
As you can see from this month's fab first-level demo, this is classic platform action with loads of stuff to collect and different baddies to avoid, or jump onto.
Turbo can even grab some bullets to shoot 'em.
There's an extensive scrolling landscape to explore, with some cave entrances leading to special bonus screens (try finding the one in the demo!).
And, of course, each level climaxes with a big supervillain.
It all has the look and feel of a game you won't want to put back in its box of the winter!
See if it's worth shelling out for (£3.99 cassette, £5.99 disk) in the lettuce-chewing ZZAP! review next ish!
Rave on to the sound of…
DJ Puff
Yo dudes, it's time to chill out with DJ PHIL ‘DISCO’ KING.
Watch him wobble onto the dance floor as he goes looking for a decent record collection (ie no Alice Cooper or Frank Zappa) in CodeMasters' happenin' hit…
At last that shy retiring dragon, Little Puff (remember his first game?) has had the good sense to change his name.
DJ Puff is now one cool, chillin' dude who has turned his home island to DJ's sensational sounds (pop pickers!).
That is, until the non-non-heinous Captain Krip, a gorilla dictator, bans anyone from having a good time.
He's only gone and confiscated DJ's entire record collection.
Boo, hiss!
For some reason though, the evil Krip doesn't have the sense to smash all the records and has instead scattered them over the island.
Yes, you guessed it, DJ has to find them all in another epic arcade adventure:DJ Puff's Volcanic Caper .
There's platforms aplenty to jump on, and loads of collectable weapons to see off Krip's stormtroopers.
And despite being so cool, DJ still has a fiery temper and can summon up a useful blast of flame breath at any time.
He'll just have to be careful he doesn't melt his records!
Will DJ get a rave review and rock right into the top ten? tune in next month for the full ZZAP! lowdown-down-diggerydown!
Awards!
And in reverse redro…
Just like the General Election, our awards are won on a first-past-the-post basis.
Call it unfair if you like, but awarding 40% of an award to one person and 20% to someone else isn't really practical!
Anyway, here's the verdict of the ZZAP! electorate…
BEST GAME
Turrican 2 (Rainbow Arts) 40%
Speedball 2 (Imageworks) 14%
Turbo charge (System 3) 9%
Yep, the stunning Turrican 2 emulates its predecessor which took the Best Game award last year.
What a huge surprise!
BEST COIN-OP CONVERSION
Smash TV (Ocean) 55%
Super Monaco GP (US Gold) 11%
Red-Land (Storm) 7%
Not exactly a close contest for this category.
Smash TV sweeps away all other contestants to scoop an incredible 55% of votes, and the star prize!
BEST LICENCE (Not Coin-Op)
Terminator 2 (Ocean) 39%
Navy SEALs (Ocean) 27%
RoboCop 2 (Ocean) 13 %
Hasta la vista, baby!
Arnie may not win many Oscars, but the big guy's action-packed movies sure make great computer games.
BEST ORIGINAL GAME
Turrican 2 (Rainbow Arts) 30%
Turbo Charge (System 3) 15%
Exile (Audiogenic) 6%
Manfred Trenz's masterpiece picks up its second award of the night (applause)
BEST GRAPHICS
Turrican 2 (Rainbow Arts) 30%
Last Ninja 3 (System 3) 21%
Turbo Charge (System 3) 14%
Those incredible huge superbaddies and gorgeous scrolling backdrops earn Turrican 2 its third award.
BEST SOUND
Turbo Charge (System 3) 21%
Turrican 2 (Rainbow Arts) 19%
Last Ninja 3 (System 3) 12%
After several creditable runners-up spots, System 3's superfast racer wins a well-deserved victory for that splendid soundtrack.
BEST ADVENTURE/RPG
Ultima VI (Origin/Mindscape) 60%
Death Knights of Krynn (SSI/US Gold) 10%
The Magic Candle (Mindcraft/MicroProse) 6%
Origin's superb RPG gets the biggest vote of the night, and possibly ever in the history of the ZZAP! awards.
What a shame Ultima VII won't be released on the C64.
BEST SOFTWARE HOUSE
Ocean 56%
Thalamus 19%
System 3 13%
Look, I know they always win, but with quality products like Smash TV, Terminator 2, Navy SEALs and RoboCop 2 , is it any surprise?
BEST PROGRAMMER(S)
Apex (Creatures 2 ) 38%
Manfred Trenz (Turrican 2 ) 25%
Carl Muller (Speedball 2 ) 9%
Blimey, the Apex lads win this award even though they didn't actually release a game in 1991!
But they did work hard, didn't they?!
BEST ADVERTISEMENT
Terminator 2 (Ocean) 27%
Last Ninja 3 (system 3) 14%
Smash TV (Ocean) 11%
Old Spannerbreaker picks up another award for his moody performance in a series of popular ads.
BEST BUDGET GAME
CJ's Elephant Antics (CodeMasters) 31%
Turrican (Kixx) 15%
The New Zealand Story (The Hit Squad) 8%
CJ doesn't need to blow his own trumpet!
The best original budget game for some time fends off some classy  re-releases .
WORST GAME
Dick Tracy (Empire) 42%
Final Fight (US Gold) 19%
Teenage Mutant Hero Turtles (Imageworks) 6%
The chronic conversion of Warren Beatty's turkey film wins by a landslide.
Let's hope that buries it forever!
Letterz!
Lash ‘n’ Bash!
Miss Whiplash and Bash the Barbarian are still doing battle over the right to reply, and judging by the amount of mail each receive it looks to be about even at the moment.
If you want to load the odds in favour of one or t' other, then send your letters to either ‘Bash’ or ‘Lash’at ZZAP!
.
Just don't expect any mercy if you're a complete dimbo…
POSTERMAN PRAT!
Could you please, please please send me another poster as the one I got with my Zzap!(which  I've enclosed was only half completed.
By the power of Numbskull, Jason, thou truly art a few Brontoburgers short of a picnic!
The half-a-poster you sent to us was the FIRST half of a two-part poster which appeared in issue 79 of ZZAP!
Hadst thou only purloined Issue 80 thy poster would've been complete!
Even a self-addressed stamped envelope with your curt communique could have secured th' other half (yes, the ZZAP! crew are that generous), sadly though you neglected to enclose one.
Too late now, ninny!
Bash
SPANISH INQUISITION
I'm writing to ask lots and lots of questions:
1.
Have you every heard of a compilation called Arcade Classics ?
It contains four games called Mr Do, Dig Dug, Pole Position and Pac-Man ?
2.
Could you please tell me how to practise levels two and three on Back To The Future 3 , as I have tried everything.
Also does Corky have any tips for the game?
3.
Is Rick Dangerous 2 on cartridge?
4.
Which is the best cartridge game you have ever played?
5.
Who do I write to for pokes for old games?
6.
Why is it that the pokes never work for me?
7.
Could I say hello to  who likes to eat?
8.
Please make the tips section bigger.
9.
Are you ever going to produce a tape with lots of pokes on it?
PS Do you know where I can get a copy of Rick Dangerous 2 on tape?
1.
No, but it sounds ancient.
2.
Why not try writing to Corky and asking him?
3.
I think it appeared on one of those Disk Co cart compilations.
4.
My fave is WWF : I just love watching those hunky wrestlers grapple while I waggle the joystick.
It leaves me all in a sweat.
5.
Erm, Why not try writing to Corky?
Ever get a sense of déjà vu?
Ever get a sense of déjà vu?
6.
They don't always do much for me, Angus, but maybe you're doing something wrong.
7.
I take it the others are anorexic?
8.
Bigger is better, I agree.
But has Corky got enough material to fill the space?
9.
Well, my S&M educational video is still being censored (there's about a minute left)…oh, I see what you mean!
Yes, we're planning a pokes section on the Megatape.
Corky's taking an age typing them all in — even slower since I threatened to give him a good lashing!
Miss W
WHATEVER HAPPENED TO…
Let me tell you a little story.
There I was  chucking copies of a certain rival mag into the fire when my father entered the room brandishing the latest copy of ZZAP!
Was I in for a shock or what?
And do you know, the new look was the culprit?
Yes, you have to keep up with the times, but it's about as hop and happening as Liverpool's away kit — and as clear as the sprites on Shadow Warriors !
Now some demands…sorry, questions.
1.
What happened to that funky dude of a cover artist, Oliver Frey?
As I flicked through the glossy pages of ZZAP!
I found he had been reduced to painting pictures of a Slimfast-addicted woman wearing fishing waders.
2.
Come back Lloyd, all is forgiven.
3.
Where's my best pal Scorelord?
I looked for my favourite character, only to find he had been replaced by the same bitch who has taken over Lloyd's job.
What's happening at ZZAP!
Towers?
I now find that it's being invaded by ex-CRASH staff, and the mag is becoming more like Playboy with every issue.
I remember the old days when layouts were readable, ZZAP! cost under two quid and a packet of polos were still ten pence.
David Starling, Great Yarmouth
Oliver who?
Fear not, Frey fans, for thine most artful dodger WILL be back.
The reason that his brush has stroked not a lot on these pristine pages of late is twofold: firstly, he's been very busy providing illustrations for the soon-to-be-seen N-Force magazine (which Europress are launching for Nintendo fans = both of them!),and he's been sunning himself on the golden shores of beautiful Bali for the past three weeks!
Lucky beggar.
Point 2.
Okay, so he's gone — but not forgiven!
And neither are you…
The word from Scorelord is this; he's currently recharging his blaster batteries and will be beaming down to ZZAP!
Towers next month to do battle with Miss (that's a laugh, she's a proper little Madam!)
Whiplash.
Watch this space!
And I remember the days when readers had a bit more respect for us hard-working mortals!
And Polos are for girlie's — so such on that!
Bash
OH…
YOU DON'T SAY!
I own a Commodore 64 and this Monday I went down to the shop and bought Renegade III .
When I loaded in the game I hit fire, and once I got to the end of the screen I went to enter a hole that is there but I couldn't.
Please could you print the answer in the playing tips pages.
Luke Anonymous, Anytown
You own a Commodore 64, you say?
Well I never!
Who would have thought it?
And a ZZAP! reader too.
Unbelievable!
And you went to the shops on a, when was it again…a Monday? this is fascinating!
I gave your letter to Corky for his tips section, but the big lad says ‘Stuff off!
I ain't doin' any tips for THAT pile of poo!’
And there's no arguing with that, is there?
So all I can suggest is this: once you reach that ‘hole’ you mention, keep battling on.
It isn't, in fact, the end of the level — you just have to slay enough prehistoric monsters before the screen will scroll on again (and let's face it,Renegade III is a bit of a prehistoric monster itself!).
Bash
DON'T RAP ZZAP!
Dear Miss Whiplash (I praise the church of Whiplash)
You let those complete and utter prats have their say now let me have mine.
I read the letters last ish and was shocked to read the criticisms made about ZZAP! 64.
What a load of CRAP!
I have bought Commodore Format loads of times (because you mag had sold out) and it is completely useless.
Apart from the crap reviews and the spelling mistakes and misprints in the mag, you have to put up with pages of noncomputer-related crap!
As for the remarks about too much sexism in ZZAP!, that is also unreasonable.
Okay, so there is sexism but it goes both ways [oo-er!— Miss W].
Sometimes it is slightly strong but so what?, so is Cheddar cheese!
These are my views, and whiplash to anyone who disagrees.
Mark Ryan, Shadwell, London
PS.
Please may I have 20 lashes?
No, make that 40…no, I don't want to be greedy, 30 will have to do.
PPS.
One final point.
Your mag is the only one which would print such criticism about itself, and your mag is the only one which will respond to the criticism written about it!
I praise the church of ZZAP! 64, may it live for ever.
I think you deserve the full 40 lashes for sticking up fiercely for liberal values — I'm always liberal with my whip!
Miss W
Don't worry Vim suckers!
I shall return soon!
Then we'll see who eats the most Duracells!
NICE TO SEE YOU, TO SEE YOU…
Nice to see a man doing the letters page as well as Miss Tart-lash.
If you ask me, she should go back to her kitchen!
Anyway, here are my questions:
1.
My tape recorder used to load practically every game I bought, but now I'm lucky if it loads one game a week!
Hardly any Megatape games work, and games which used to load — like Lords of Chaos and Creatures — won't any more.
What can I do?
2.
I used to have a Spectrum (sorry) up until a year ago, and there were two really amazing games called Orc Attack and Car Wars which I loved and lost.
I am not sure if they have been deleted, or even if they were ever available for the C64, but is there somewhere I can write to get my dream games?
Lastly, I would like to congratulate you on the new look (suck suck), and I especially like the PD pages.
Is there any chance of making this column longer?
Mark Beese, Bristol
Seasons gruntings, Mark.
It's nice to be a man ‘doing’ the letters pages; that stroppy strumpet Whiplash had had it too good for too long, but how the two-headed blue-worm of Gulonkerb turns, eh?
Okay, to your questions.
Firstly, relax.
Tape trouble is a common problem that can (and does!) afflict anyone, of any age or gender, instantly and without warning at any time.
There's absolutely nothing to be ashamed of, and the very fact that you've confronted your fears, faced up to your problem and sough help on your own initiative shows that you're strong enough to make a full recovery.
What I prescribe is a C64 Cassette Doctor (honest!).
Trilogic, the  company that manufacture these little marvels of modern medicine have only recently stopped advertising the product (it's a special tape that helps you properly align your azimuth heads).
You can give them a call on  and, as ever, mention that ZZAP! 's Bash the Barbarian sent you, and you'll find them more than helpful.
(If you'd rather write, their address is ).
I can find no information regarding the availability of either of the two games you're looking for.
They've never been reviewed in ZZAP!, though, so unless they slipped out under assumed names I'm afraid you've had it.
Finally, like 'Lash's waist-line, the PD File will be expanding and contracting depending on what there is to put in it!
Bash
ZZAP!
NOT CRAP
Dear ZZAP!
I wanna deck some people!
Especially those who wrote in complaining about ish 82 and the new look.
Rubbish, childish, cluttered!
Those were the hypocritical (big word that) comments written by certain people.
All right, so the piccy of Miss W on the high-score page is a little bit ‘revealing’ but I'm sure it can be changed.
As for the other comments — I don't think so!
I recall someone complaining about those little cartoon drawings of you lot, I would just like to say that I think they are very comical and nowadays virtually every computer magazine has them (except for crappy ones like Amstrad Action!).
Overall I think ZZAP! is a very good magazine (much better than CF) and I will stand by it (roll patriotic music!) through rain, show and worst of all, the CPC becoming the best 8-bit!
As I've started writing to ya now, I might as well ask you some stuff that I've been dying to ask for ages.
First of all, what happened to the C65 (it sounds excellent)?
For a couple of issues all that we heard was C65, C65.
Lloyd even promised us an interview with Andrew Ball but we heard nothing.
What's happened?
Have Commodore totally scrapped the idea of the C65 in favour of the new Amiga 300/600 or what?
The C65 really does sound brill and even people that down Commodore reckon it sounds pretty nifty.
I well and truly hope Commodore haven't made the wrong decision yet again.
Just one more thing.
Why, oh why, when I say I have a C64 do people laugh?
It really gets on my nerves, especially when the person who laughed owns a CPC!
They don't seem to understand that the 64 is the best-selling 8-bit, so it can't be that bad.
Also, the people who laugh usually own a console which is in a totally different class to the C64.
So please, please could you tell the people concerned (Martin ‘I Down Everything’ Hill and Ross ‘I have An Extremely Big Head’Nicholls) that the C64 is not crap at all, in fact it's very very good!
PS.
Don't take the mick out of Fatty Phil, I'm fat as well!
Craig Ellis, Basingstoke, Hants
Ha ha, lard bucket!
But seriously I think some people overreacted to a few throwaway lines in the mag — you'd see far worse in many ‘family newspapers’.
The C65 is still a great mystery.
All Commodore will say is that there are ‘no new developments’.
So make of that what you will.
People who laugh at the C64 do it through sheer ignorance.
I be they've never played Turrican or Creatures otherwise they'd be gobsmacked, especially the console owners who pay about £40 for games that can often be completed in a few hours!
Some of the consoles aren't superior anyway: the C64 compares very favourably with the NES and Sega Mastersystem (both 8-bit).
As for the CPC, it's basically a slowed-down Spectrum — even Noel Edmonds won't give them away any more!
Miss W
MEGA YAWN
I have only just plucked up the courage to write to you after a year and a half of reading ZZAP!
At Christmas most of my friends received either Amigas or a console (mainly Mega Drives).
I myself received a Game Gear, and considered selling my C64 to buy a Mega Drive or software for my Game Gear.
Now I'm glad I didn't because after playing my mate's Mega Drive I'm not impressed.
When he plugged in —Sonic The Hedgehog I saw the fantastic graphics and nearly fainted.
But when I started to play I couldn't  believe how easy it was.
I have subsequently played more Sega games and have realised that they too are very easy to complete.
I think Sega are conning people who pay £45 for a game that the complete in a few days.
 Whereas I can spend £4 on a long-lasting budget game such as Turrican or The New Zealand Story .
The sooner 16-bit computer and console owners realise cracking graphics don't make a game great, the better off they'll be.
Now I've got that off my chest I have a few questions for you:
1.
You've probably had this question asked a hundred times, but is Lemmings going to be converted to the C64?
2
Instead of creating the C65, why can't Commodore release add-ons for the existing C64?
3.
When is the 3.5-inch disk drive due for release?
4.
Do you know of any good flight sims, and is there any chance of one being considered for the Megatape?
5.
Please keep up the accurate reviews and show the rival mags what a bunch of amateurs they are.
Andrew Imrie, Scotland
You know, Andrew, thou art correct.
In fact, the only thing me and that apology for a wench that I'm forced to share this column with can agree on is that the Sega games are just too flamin' easy.
Why, even Corky's completed a few of 'em!
Now down to your questions, and I'll let you get away with enquiring about Lemmings on the C64 this time — see the Stuff column — but anyone else asking the same thing will feel my steel.
Grr!
2.
Commodore have been quieter than an Orc in a dog-food factory regarding their plans for the C64.
If I can't get a response from them soon I'll force-feed 'em my old loin-cloths!
3.
Erm, about the same time as Terry Waite?
Yes, it's been available for months now — but I've been reliably informed that the 3.5-inch drive is going to be re -launched, hopefully with a sizeable catalogue of software titles to accompany it.
If you'd like to get your hands on one and don't know where, or simply want further details, Mr Vincent Maguire is the man to deal with.
You can write to Vincent at TIB Plc (that's the company who actually manufacture the drive),.
Oh, and tell him ZZAP!
Bash the Barbarian sent you to ensure a speedy reply!
4.
Having only just mastered the art of walking (let alone flying!)
I asked the ZZAP! editorial team to advise me on this one, but they replied ‘we're too busy’.
A few practice swings with the trusty old battle axe later (I swung Whiplash around by the ears!) and their verdict was soon forthcoming: MicroProse's Project Stealth Fighter is about the best the C64 has to offer on the flight sim front.
But getting it for the Megatape?
Unthunderouslylikely!
5.
Okay!
Bash
LLOYD MANGRAM…
RRIP
I have enjoyed reading ZZAP! since early 1987 (issue 25) and have seen many Editors come and go (I don't know whether I'm coming or going at the moment — Ed).
I haven't liked everything they've done, but at least they all did something positive.
Like bringing in much needed humour (Gordon Houghton), setting the mag back on track (Stuart, after Gordon and Co left abruptly) but not until now have I felt compelled to write to you.
When issue 82 dropped onto the mat I thought ‘Hurrah’.
First I looked at the contents page; 19 review, not bad in these recession-stricken times.
Then I turned over, and at least there was an editorial after a 31-issue absence.
Glancing at the ‘who duz wot’ bit has been my wont for many an aeon, I spotted an absence.
Where is Lloyd Mangram?
Calming myself I took it page by page, instead of going straight to the Rrap as I usually do.
It all seemed fine — a nice new review box and smart section titles, full budget coverage (all good stuff).
Then I got to my formerly fave section, the Rrap, but who's this?
Some bitch with a whip!
There was some tat about a cruise, paper bags and the good old Hermes typewriter…then enter you, Miss W.
With a lump in my throat I proceeded.
I found none of the double entendres in Whiplash Whispers funny, and the illustrations were a bit tasteless.
Back in '88 people were complaining about the Vixen and Psycho Pigs UXB adverts.
Mel Croucher wrote an article on it called ‘Software Sexism’, and Miss W is on the same level.
Now that you're down to an average of 68 pages, why not run back up to 84 with the features that made you great.
Challenges, charts (top 200 and music at least), and keep  up the PD file…it's great.
As for you Lucy, you seem intent on turning ZZAP! into another CRASH.
Bring back Diary Of A Game and leave us poor old 64 owners alone.
If you're so scary why don't you convince Martin Walker, Andrew Braybrook et al to return to the best 8-bit mag.
I hope you pay heed, you're still my favourite tome by miles…for now.
John Allison, West Yorkshire
Sorry you don't enjoy my double entendres, Johnny.
But thanks to ‘ideologically sound’ folks like you, we have to print Bash's disgusting portrait just to show we aren't sexist!
Miss W
BLOWIN' OUR TRUMPET
After reading some of the criticisms from readers in the past few months I felt that it was about time I wrote in.
Firstly, I have been buying this magazine on and off since the first time that Elite (by Firebird) was reviewed.
Now, if any of your other readers have been with you that length of time then, like me, they will have seen many changes in the magazine in terms of staff, reviews, layout and style.
They may even agree with some of my points!
1.
STAFF MOVEMENTS
If a member of staff can do a better job, give better results, and improve the quality of their work in another function within the office it is common practice in business everywhere to let that person move and develop their skills.
The day that ZZAP! stops moving people around is the day that they lose sight of supplying Customer Satisfaction.
Thankfully that day still seems a long way off.
2.
REVIEWS
A review is meant to give you a taster of what you can expect for your money.
It is not meant to be the Curriculum Vitae of everyone involved in writing the thing!
Therefore, if a reviewer starts going on about something other than the game s/he is obviously telling you that the game has not really got anything different in terms of game play to offer.
That doesn't mean that the game is rubbish, just that it has probably been done elsewhere before.
Remember that every type of game play has been — or is!— available for the C64 in one form or another…and new games are just old techniques in a different format.
3.
LAYOUT
Your younger readers should be proud that they are buying a magazine that is  leading the field .
If any readers also have the Japanese games machine ‘INueNDO’ they will probably buy that mag which is Total crap.
Are they aware that the layouts produced by ZZAP! are constantly being ripped off and copied by at least 40% of all other mag's on the shelves?!
No?
Well next time you go, look for yourselves!
4.
STYLE
Only by pushing the boundaries of moral judgment to their extremes are you going to get rid of sexism, racism, sizism and classism (along with all the other buzz-words that are used by pompous morons to build walls around themselves so they can validify their own judgments of other people).
(Woah there!
Calm down boy!— Ed).
ZZAP! to date has taken the mickey out of everyone without being prejudiced against anyone or anything.
The very fact that some of the critics got their letters published at all is a demonstration of ZZAP! 's commitment to  its readership.
Graham Pritchard, Eltham, London SE9
Strewth, what a pathetic little wimp you are, Graham!
Whittering on and on like that, you sound like a blooming Lefty!
Seriously, though, you made some valid points and you're right.
We at ZZAP! do not discriminate against anybody…no, we rip into everyone with equal vigour!
But at least we've still got the ability to laugh at ourselves, and face our critics with a smile.
Taking ourselves seriously has never been our objective — but, believe it or not, taking YOUR opinions seriously is our top priority.
Now beat it, will you?!
Miss W
Well, that's it for another month.
If we can keep 'Lash and Bash from  each others' throats for long enough there'll be another round-up of reader queries next issue.
A forty quid software voucher awaits the sender of the best letter — so whip out yer biros and get scribbling!
Address your mail to either of the two, and send them to ZZAP!.
Vrrooommm!
Dakka!
Dakka!
Dakka!
Dive bomb!
Dive bomb!
Hari-Kari!
Hi-Scorez!
Whiplash Scores (who could resist her?)
Hurrah!
At last, loads of you have sent in your photos.
Very good they are too: it's taken me a whole month to stop laughing!
Also, some cheeky oik (can't remember his name) asked me why I never put any of my personal scores in this section.
Well, chummy, my scores are so extensive there'd be no room for your pifling efforts.
Hmm, maybe that's not the bad idea…
But seriously you deserve a good smacking for putting such naughty thoughts in my innocent mind.
So sod off and keep submitting your scores and photos to Whiplash Scores, ZZAP!,.
GET IT IN THERE, KNOW WHAT I MEAN?!
Yes submit (if you don't submit you'll never score with me!) all your high scores now, AND DON'T FORGET TO SEND A PHOTO OF YOURSELF for me to impale, hang and chain!
Coin-Ops!
Corky's coin-ops Insert Coin!
Due to popular demand (a letter from Corky's mum — Ed)(nice one, ma — Corky), coin-operated Caswell has been allowed to take a pocketful of ten pees to the arcades again.
Once there, he's assaulted by a mad General, rides a phrrrt! -inducing rollercoaster and joins the Arabian Knights (size of an elephant).
But it's all in a day's work for the manmountain…well, in a day's lounging around, actually.
TOTAL CARNAGE
(Williams/Midway)
Original game plot number 125343: the year is 1999 and a massive war has decimated most of the world.
Peace reigns at last though, and everything in the smouldering remains of the garden would be rosy if it weren't for one little problem.
You guessed it, a maniacal madman wants to continue his game of ‘nuke everything’ and won't be happy 'till he's succeeded.
General Akhboob is creating an army of mutant characters, y'know), and he ain't afraid to use 'em.
Hostages have also been taken, and it's this fact that finally provokes the free world into action (you can mindlessly slaughter millions of our citizens, but try kidnappin' any of 'em and you're really in trouble!).
So enter stage left the Doomsday Squad: Captain Carnage and Major Mayhem are the guys to complete the mission at hand, so grab a pal, insert a few brass squids and press the start button.
The task is straightforward enough: rescue the hostages and capture the General (destroying the mutants in the process).
There are three battlefields to yomp through and, rest assured, plenty of the Generals minions are there to roll out the red carpet for Cap and the major (at least the blood stains won't show!).
But you aren't helpless; you start with an amazing arsenal and are able to pick up yet more weaponry along the way.
So good luck trooper, you'll need it (well luck and an understanding bank manager, that is).
I love ‘gung-ho’ blasting games, and Total Carnage lives up to its name.
But it's not all death and destruction, there is the usual Williams sense of humour there.
A great laff a well as a decent blast.
ARABIAN FIGHT
(Sega)
Remember the spate of Sinbad movies released in the 1970s?
Tales of magic, mysterious creatures and, above all, a great punch up?
Now Sega have released Arabian Fight , and ancient Eastern tale of truth, justice and the search for a beautiful princess (makes it worth every bruise and sword  slash).
Princess Lurana has been abducted by the odious Sheikh (Itallabout?— Ed) Sazabiss, who is also exerting every ounce of power to make a takeover bid (ah, he's Brucie in disguise) on the world.
Three fearless heroes (and one heroine) are on the case: Sinbat, Ramaya, Goldor and Datta.
Seven mysterious levels stand between the brave adventures and the Princess, and they're filled with plenty of opposition.
So what do our brave heroes carry for protection?
AK-47s?
M-60s?
Or even 10mm pulse rifles?
The answer is none of the above; in a time of magic and mystery they wield mighty spells (well it works for Sooty).
So izzy wizzy and get busy saving the Princess, she won't wait all day you know!
The first thing that strikes you about Arabian Fight is the stunning graphics.
Especially the zoom feature — utilised when casting a spell — or when an attacker walks into or out of the screen.
The cartoony atmosphere generated is first rate, almost like watching a animated Japanese TV show.
Brill.
HURRICANE
(Williams)
Cue loadsa windy sound effects from the rest of the ZZAP! crew as I type my review of the new Williams pinball table.
Hurricane places the player at the local Carnival, where you can sample the sideshows, risk life and limb on the big rollercoaster but not, unfortunately, stuff your face with mountains of hot-dogs and candy-floss.
Bah!
This is a pinball game in the classic mould, with plenty of flashing lights and many millions of bonus points to be clocked up.
The first task is to smack the ball up the ramp and enter the rollercoaster ride.
This is a perspex tube that runs round the outside rim of the table, leading to the big points (and what do points make?).
Hurtling around on the rollercoaster builds values to one million points, and helps to highlight letters in the ‘Palace’(light 'em all and you get the jackpot).
Streaking on the ‘Comet’(not literally, you fool) can score unlimited millions, and ‘Dunking The Dummy’ makes a big splash by advancing the bonus multiplier.
Riding the ‘Double Ferris Wheel’ awards its own bonus or a quick score and, as with most pinball tables around at the moment, there's a multiball feature that sends a multitude of steel balls singing around (you'll need three eyes and four arms to keep them all in play for any decent amount of time!).
There's plenty to see and do in Hurricane , it's a pinball freak's dream come true.
As with video cabinets, it's my belief that Williams are the technical masters of the steel ball.
There are thrills, spills and points aplenty in hurricane .
Are you a pinball wizard?
ZZAP! 64
‘LOVE IS THE SLUG’
FlashBack!
Money for old rope, or bundles of brilliant bargains?
The mail bag has been bulging with budget priced rereleases of old C64 games again this month and, as ever you can rely on us to sort out the wheat from the chaff, the men from the boys and totally t'riffic from the turkeys!
SKATE WARS
The Hit Squad, £3.99
Ice skating, what a load of old tosh, eh?
I mean, you slide around half the time on your bottom (just like Joanne Conway!).
I can hardly stand up at the best of times — which isn't surprising when the only ice I'm interested in is in my Scotch on the rocks!
And I couldn't tell a triple Axel from a double Salko in a million years, let alone perform one!
Mind you, ice hockey's a bit more like it — all that bodychecking and fighting.
But if you think that's rough, you haven't seen the future-sport of Skate Wars.
Not content with barging each other, the players try to knock each other into various deadly traps like spikes, holes and liquidisers!
The main objective, however, is to knock the ball into the opposing goal.
There's three players per team (chosen before the match), but only one gets to play at a time (plus a computer-controlled goalie).
Lose all three and it's game over, and five bonus points to your opponent.
Ironically, if you're more than five points ahead in a two-player game, you can deliberately kill off your team to win!
The solo game has you playing through no less than 99 levels, each played until five goals are scored by one of the teams.
Early levels are pretty dull, but as they get littered with more traps and obstacles, things get more interesting.
Well, not that interesting.
There's not a lot to the game really: just barge the other skater off the ball and race for goal — the computer-goalie is totally useless.
Solo games soon get very repetitive.
Solo games soon get very…
Add to this some very crude graphics (they were poor two-and-a-half years ago) and sparse sound FX, and you're skating on very thin ice.
Phil! 42%
PRO TENNIS TOUR
The Hit Squad, £3.99
I used to dream of being the next John McEnroe.
I'd practise my strokes against the garden wall for hours on end (and play tennis too!).
In the end, I never quite mastered the backhand, but I got the tantrums down to a tee (you cannot be serious!— Ed).
And I always watched Wimbledon on the telly, even if it was just to see the lady players in those short skirts (apart from old ‘muscles’ Navratilova!).
My particular favourite was Carling Bassett.
She wasn't bad, she was even seeded once (no comment!— Ed).
I hear she's got kids now.
But now I play tennis like a true professional.
And you can too!
Just buy my latest bestseller, ‘Play Tennis The Phil King Way’…
Erm, maybe not, but everyone can hit a cross-court volley in Pro Tennis Tour .
Mind you, hitting the fast-moving ball takes a bit of getting used to.
It's just as well there's a practice mode with a machine churning out balls in six different patterns.
There's also an option to practise serving: a tricky task involving quickly guiding a small cross into the service box.
When you've mastered the various  strokes possible (including lobs and smashes), you can enter any of the four Grandslam tournaments (including Wimbledon), taking on computer players of varying ability.
Alternatively, you can play against a friend.
Of course, the question you're asking is, how does it compare to the recently rereleased International 3D Tennis ?
Well, it may be simulating the same sport, but it's a totally different sort of game.
International is much easier to get into as it automatically positions your player for ever shot.
This leads to a more strategic game with long rallies.
Pro is much faster paced, requiring ultraquick reactions and snap decisions.
Personally, I have to say I slightly prefer International , but Pro is still a definite buy at this price — you'd probably pay as much for one strawberry at Wimbledon!
Phil! 86%
MICROPROSE SOCCER
Kixx, £3.99
'Ere, didn't I review this somewhere else in this ish?
Oh well, 'ere we go, 'ere we go, 'ere we go again!
MicroProse Soccer is one of my favourite games of all time, a superbly playable sim of that ‘funny old game’.
Like so many of its computer counterparts, it's viewed from overhead, the pitch scrolling to follow the action.
And what action there is!
It's end-to-end, thrilling stuff throughout the whole match (the clock even stops when the ball's dead — boo hoo, he'll be sorely missed!).
Skilful dribbling is easy 'coz the ball's glued to your foot, and you can soon zoom up towards the opposing goal.
Or quicker still, send a couple of nifty passes upfield — and you soon learn where your team-mates are.
Mind you, getting through defences ain't that easy: defenders can nick the ball off you by slid-tackling — although this has unpredictable results when it rains.
All that is basic stuff, though.
For real excitement, try a curling banana shot — in the pre-match options you can alter banana power; on the highest setting, the ball's like a boomerang!
You can even do a stunning overhead kick!
And when you score a cracker of a goal, you can watch it again on the slow-motion replay (this can be turned off).
Two-player games are great fun, of course, but playing solo can be just as good with a full World Cup tournament and the MicroProse Challenge — playing all international teams in order of difficulty.
It's not just the playability which is of the highest standard, though — graphics are excellent with fast smooth scrolling and superb cartoon player sprites.
Even sound is brill with good in-game FX plus optional music, and a infectious title tune.
What more do you want for four quid?
The six-a-side indoor game?
Yes, you get that too!
(And for those clever dicks asking why I've given it a higher rating here than in the footy feature, it's 'coz I didn't know it was on budget then.
And also, I've just beaten Steve about 20 times in a row!)
Phil 97%
ESCAPE FROM THE PLANET OF THE ROBOT MONSTERS
The Hit Squad, £3.99
Yes, it's the game that brought you big-busted blondes in bikinis, two hard-assed interplanetary SWAT men, the ‘Weetabix’ monsters and a jaw-cracking title.
The artificial planetoid unsurprisingly (and unimaginatively) called X has been overrun by a nasty race of aliens.
Called the Reptilons, these huge, scaly fiends have chained up the human inhabitants (these by happy coincidence are the blonde bimbos).
The Reptilons plan  to take over the Earth, and the bimbos are up for nasty experimental surgery.
So into the fray stride Jake and Duke.
Armed with plasma guns and smart bombs, they have a three-pronged mission.
First rescue the bimbos, then rescue the noted scientist Professor Sarah Bellum (sadly without bikini) and finally destroy the Reptilons.
When first reviewed in Issue 62,Escape From the Planet of the Robot Monsters received 68%.
I personally think this is slightly low, especially as the game is so playable.
Okay, the graphics are slightly ropey, but the urge to rescue the good Prof is strong.
Also the cartoony atmosphere is a big plus point in my books.
If you missed this game first time round, get it now.
Corky! 80%
CASTLE MASTER
The Hit Squad, £3.99
Sight — is it just me, or does anyone else think these 3-D Freescape thingies just don't work on 8-bit computers?
Sure, they look good, they're innovative and an unbelievable achievement technically, but they're so damned S-L-O-W.
Alas,Castle Master , though widely regarded as the best of the Freescape games, suffers from the similar snail-paced somnambulance as its soporific stablemates.
Magister is not a happy chappy.
In fact, he's not a chappy at all, he's a rather aggrieved demon!
A lazy git, he awoke from hundreds of years of slumber when someone built a castle on his resting place  (I wonder if that'd work with Corky?).
Swearing vengeance on all who dwelt there, he summoned every ounce of his demonic power, and…
LOST!
Weakened by his excessively long kip, the Castle Master easily overcame him.
Never one to give in, he rubbed the sleepy dust from his eyes and renewed his attack.
This time he trashed the joint, throwing the inhabitants into a deep coma and kidnapping a member of the royal family (prince or princess, depending on which sex you want to play as the rescuer — full marks to incentive on that score!).
You have just 24 hours to rescue your sovereign sibling, or he/she will be turned  into a ghost and be forever shunned in royal circles (a bit like Fergie).
Before you can reach him/her, you must destroy the spooks haunting the castle — their numbers are indicated by the (ugh!)‘spirit level’ at the bottom of the screen.
There are also three potions and ten keys to be found.
You begin your quest outside the castle armed with a weedy slingshot, wondering whether to swim the shark-infested moat or lower the drawbridge.
You eventually work out that if…on second thoughts, you can solve it yourself!
Castle Master is without a doubt the finest of the Freescape games.
The graphics are mean and moody, allowing freedom of exploration with the minimum of mapping, the setting is realistic and gives a real feeling of being there, and the puzzles — you'll be scratching you head for weeks.
Trouble is, the joystick response and running speed makes Lucy's clapped out Fiat look positively lightning-paced!
You plot along at a steady crawl wondering if you'll ever reach that far-off doorway, let go of the joystick as soon as you get there, then promptly take another pace!
Is the floor slippery, or what?
As a technical achievement Castle Master is a work of art, but at the end of the day you either like Freescape games or you don't If you're into this sort of thing, check it out — it's the best yet!
If you're not, it won't win you over.
Ian! 79%
DRAGONS OF FLAME
Kixx, £3.99
Let's face it, if you want in-depth, detailed games, then multiloads are something you can't avoid — 64K of memory just isn't enough.
Even so there are three unpardonable sins which no multiload has the right to commit, and Dragons of Flame is guilty of two of them.
It doesn't multiload presentation screens, but it does force you to reload Level One even if you died on it, and automatically restarts when loading is complete — if you go and make a cup of tea between levels, chances are you'll be greeted with a ‘game over’ message when you return!
Dragons of Flame , sequel to US Gold's first AD&D licence,Heroes Of The Lance , sees the land of Krynn in deep trub.
The Draconian armies swept down from his sleevies (think about it), and overran the Elven lands of Qualinost (try saying that when you've had a few!).
They already hold the Southern fortress of Pax Tharkas (I hope they change its name), and will soon crush the Elven folk between it and their devilish hordes.
Your job is to defeat Takhisis, the queen of the dark.
Exciting eh?
Alas,Dragons of Flame is far from gripping.
Again the AD&D licence is only for show, with only token attempts at roleplaying included.
Instead of preserving the statistics-and-dice method of combat, the programmers have opted for a tacky arcade sequence featuring blocky, sluggish sprites and no skill at all.
Character statistics play very little part in the proceedings, which is unforgivable for a product passing itself off as a roleplaying game.
Worst of all, your entire party becomes one sprite!
You can choose which individual member fights the monster, but forget about ganging up on him.
You can't even separate on the ‘map’ screens, so you're doomed to wander around together — does this sound like serious roleplaying, or does it sound like Golden Axe ?
On the plus side, the spells and weapons remain faithful to AD&D and a save game option is provided, but this isn't enough to rescue it.
Dragons of Flame is at best a weak beat-'em up, and could never cut the mustard as a bona fide roleplayer.
If you're looking for a painless introduction to computer RPGs, check out Heroquest or Space Crusade instead.
Ian! 58%
Ivan ‘Iron Man’ Stewart's Super Off-Road Racer
Tronix, £3.99 ( Re-release )
Have you got what it takes to be a champion?
When the chips are on the table, will you be found lacking?
Can you eat three Shredded What for breakfast and keep them down while reading these ridiculous clichés?
Then maybe — just maybe — you can handle Ivan ‘Iron Man’ Stewart's Super Off-Road Racer .
Still think you can cut it?
Good — hit that track and prepare to race!
A multi-player extravaganza in the Super Sprint mould, you control your sprite using the standard rotate/accelerate method — hit the gas with the fire button, and use the joystick like a steering wheel.
Tricky at first, but once mastered you wouldn't want it any other way.
Before lining up for the first race of the season it's off to the now-standard bits-and-bobs shop, where you can spend up to $100,000 upgrading your jalopy.
Cough up for greater acceleration, increased top speed, improved shocks for a smoother ride (pity — I hoped they'd electrocute your opponents!), and snazzier tyres for better off-road-holding.
You can also splash out on extra nitro-injectors, giving a short but effective blast of speed.
All power-ups can be upgraded a maximum of five times, and you get more money to spend after each race depending on your finishing position.
That's if you get that far — finish behind any of the computer-controlled racers and you're in for a permanent pit-stop!
Good job you start with three shared continues, isn't it?
Up to three human bods can compete (that's Steve out for a start!), with computer-controlled vehicles making up the numbers.
Being a super-duper well-'ard off-road jobbie, your machine can take a fair amount of punishment before falling to bits.
Treat it with respect through — hitting scenery and objects costs time, and eventually impairs your vehicle's performance.
I said it the issue before last while reviewing Iron Man on compilation, and I'll say it again — it's difficult to see how the game could be any better!
The graphics are superb, the tiny sprites bounce around magnificently and the dirt shading is so realistic you'll want to clean your shoes after playing.
With eight courses on offer you won't be finishing it in a hurry, and each course must be traversed in both directions, giving a grand total of sixteen levels.
Best of all (cue drum roll), IT'S ALL IN ONE LOAD!
Incredible!!
Unbelievable!!!
How the hell did they…
(Alright Ian, we get the idea — Ed.)
If you missed Ivan ‘Iron Man’ Stewart's Super Off-Road Racer first time around, there's no excuse for not getting it now.
Awarded a miserly 85% on Issue 66, on budget it's worth far, far more.
Great game!
Ian! 93%
Dizzy Down The Rapids
CodeMasters, £3.99
Good old Codies — if they can't rip off their own games, they'll rip off someone else's!
Instead of your usual CodeMasters arcade adventure or platform opus, what we have here is a ‘tribute’ to that ageing Tengen coin-op Toobin' , and a rather fab and groovy one at that!
Dizzy's in a spot of bother.
Hunting for diamonds on a fastflowing river may be a rewarding pastime, but he might have learned to swim first!
Floating down such a treacherous waterway in a barrel isn't my idea of fun, especially when it's full of watersnakes, ducks, cannon-wielding dragons and all manner of flotsam and jetsam conspiring to sink his fragile craft.
Luckily he has a stash of stones with which to protect himself.
Bung 'em at the baddies for all you're worth, but don't waste 'em — you've only got a limited supply!
Dizzy Down The Rapids is full of eggcellent touches (unlike your jokes — Ed).
The baddies are interesting and varied, some taking only one brick on the bonce to kill, other such as the  hippo (cue Corky joke) need a more liberal pasting.
Also, when you die you get to choose whereabouts on the screen to restart, avoiding the trap of landing you right in the middle of what killed you in the first place.
Best of all, that annoying Asteroids -style rotate-and-move control method has been dispensed with in favour of a much more playable system.
As you can see from the shots, the graphics are eggstremely good, eggcept for the main sprite which looks like an albino Pac-man having a crap.
The sound is more than eggceptable too!
(And there's worse to come — Ed).
If you've played some of the Speccy-ported Dizzy adventures, you may well have decided enough is un oeuf, and decided that eggs are best left in omelettes.
If so you should make the eggception — it's a good egg (honest) and a right good game to boot!
(Old Robin Hoggy quote!)
Ian! 82%
Seymour Goes to Hollywood
CodeMasters, £3.99
How Seymour ever made it as a film star is beyond me.
He's uglier than Corky, fatter than Phi and has less charm than Steve — in fact he bears more than a passing resemblance to Lucy!
Either the  movie director was blind, or wanted to do a remake of ‘the Albino Spud-U-Like From Hell’!
To make matters worse the dopey director's gone on holiday leaving the studios in right two-and-eight, with scripts scattered to the four winds, disgruntled stars stuck in the middle of filming and a very depressed receptionist sitting around doing nothing.
Seymour's task is to wobble his weary way through the studios, returning scripts, cheering up bimbos, and generally returning his Hollywood hell hole into some semblance of order.
Originally a Dizzy game, the Codies decided they didn't want to put our ovoid chum in a real-world adventure and created a new character instead — Seymour was born!
No wonder the gameplay's so similar — same 2-D platforms-and-ladders world, same puzzles, same character interaction, etc.
Unfortunately many of the Dizzy games were written on the Spectrum and ported across to the C64, slowing the action hideously and leaving it a cruel parody of its Speccy counterpart.
And guess what?
They've done the same again!
Seymour features brilliant humour and some of the best puzzles and animation even seen in the arcade adventure, but it plays with all the style and grace of a drunken elephant!
If you're mad keen on arcade adventures and don't mind ridiculously slow screen updates,Seymour Goes To Hollywood is for you!
If you're not blessed with the patience of a particularly well-disposed saint, look elsewhere.
Ian! 59%
Manchester United
GBH, £3.99 cassette, £5.99 disk
Manchester United — Ha!
What's wrong with an Aston Villa licence?
The only good thing you can say about Man U is that they lost the league championship this season (fancy getting beaten by Leeds!).
Resisting the temptation to rubbish the game on its license, let's slap it in…
Manchester United is a game of two halves, so to speak, mixing management and arcade elements within the same game.
A brave attempt, but ruined by the fact that neither of the elements are really up to much.
Thankfully the management bit is multiloaded in between matches, avoiding loss of depth, but lousy execution makes the game as a whole extremely Fourth Division.
The arcade section is hideous, featuring computer-controlled players running around like headless chickens and never attempting a tackle.
As soon as you get the ball you just run at the goal, the opposition making no attempt to stop you!
When you invade the penalty area and make that all-important shot you'll wonder why you bothered — the goalkeepers are so irritatingly agile it's almost impossible for either team to score!
If Man United's real keeper was half as good they'd have walked the league.
After the inevitable nil-nil draw it's back to the management section for some between-match spit and polish.
Although not my cup of tea, I must admit Manchester United is a whole new ball game.
Icon driven (hurrah!), it features all the usual bits and bobs, such as transfers, injuries, training and team selection.
 Re-released on its own it could've been a winner, but a dodgy arcade section that feeds in dud results makes the game unplayable — what's the point in managing a team that gets a goalless draw every week, whatever you do?
A management/arcade hybrid such as this could only really work if both sections are of a reasonably high standard.
Though the management section is championship material, the arcade game is amateur league only.
A brave attempt, but spoiled by poor execution.
Even at budget price, the 65% it scored an Issue 67 seems excessively generous.
Ian! 90%
Myth
Kixx, £3.99
What's this?
If you're going to rerelease a former Sizzler at a knockdown budget price, the least you can do is reprint the plot on the inlay!
The new, Kixx-produced packaging tells you all you need to know about the controls and special weapons; it even included a few tips on baddie bashing, but gives no idea as to how you came to be doing it or why!
Oh well, back to the old review…
The evil god Dameron has taken over Earth, and is making mincemeat outta the good guys.
While he spreads his malicious malpractice throughout time, you've been chosen to kick his butt.
Each level borrows from a different mythology, starting in Graeco-Roman hell (Hades to the classical scholars).
If you survive it's on to Nordic times to battle your way to Asgard (are you getting on this?
It's a real education, you know!).
The third level sees you walking like an Egyptian, braving the curse of the Pharaohs and cursing the tricks and traps liberally scattered throughout the tombs.
As for the fourth level…
I'm not telling, but watch out for Dameron!
Myth is a real cracker!
The graphics and animation are spectacular, and give a real spooky atmosphere — the ‘hell’ level is so hot you'll be opening the windows!
Gameplay is nothing new, but with presentation like this who cares?
You may have seen it all before, but there's always room for a game of this quality, especially at budget prices.
Difficult at first, but keep persevering — with four spectacular levels, there's enough here to keep anyone happy.
Ian! 90%
Playing Tipz!
It's Corky!
Greetings my most excellent time-travelling friends, it's the Corkster here again with some more hints, tips, solutions and maps for your fave C64 games.
You'll have to excuse me if I don't sound too lucid at the moment, but I have stinking cold.
There I was congratulating myself on surviving the winter without so much as a sniffle, when I was suddenly struck down without warning.
Now ‘I sound very much like dis’ and have spent a small fortune at the chemists on cold remedies that don't work.
What I need is a holiday somewhere nice, Florida methinks.
(Better than a 2nd class return to Dottingham — Ed).
Ever since childhood I've wanted to go to Disneyworld, I'm just a big kid at heart I know.
Maybe I'll get there one day, or I might take a day trip to EuroDisney sometime  in the summer months.
Knowing my luck I'll only be able to afford a weekend break in Bognor Regis, especially as my measly wage has only gone up by fourpence in the last two years.
But enough of the self-indulgent whingeing I have for you this month the rest of The Jetsons solution,Murray Mouse: Supercop and Biff maps, among with whatever you kind readers send in.
Let's get on with the show…
Warp factor one Mr Sulu, and don't forget to release the handbrake this time.
THE SIMPSONS
Ocean
I know I'm a bit late with printing tips for this fantabulous game (the Simpsons board game's pretty good too — Phil).
But as the old saying goes, it's better late than never (and better never late!— Ed).
Thanks go to Simon Thompson from Barnsley for his help.
Pity you're not called Simon Thospson, though, 'coz then you could make the anagram ‘Hot on Simpsons’ out of your name!
Level 1
Walk right away until you get to the first window of Moe's Tavern, collect the spray can and paint the cinema billboard (stand to the right of the three aliens to do this).
Now walk back to the starting position and spray the bin, then go to the phonebooth and jump onto the seat.
Put a coin into the box and phone Moe; this results in a verbal battle between Bart and Moe and Simpsons fans will be familiar with.
When Moe comes through the door spray him, then jump onto the washing line and knock the sheets onto the purple toys.
Jump along the window ledge, dropping down to spray the bin, now jump the three aliens.
Enter the hardware shop and buy the wrench, exit and walk over to the fire hydrant.
Spray it and then use the wrench on it, jump onto the window ledge then onto the door.
Go to the plant pot and spray it, then jump off the ledge.
Leap onto the ledge and then the door, and finally the plant pot.
Spray it and jump to the next ledge and grab the extra life.
Go back to the door and enter the shop, buy one cherry bomb and six rockets.
Then leap onto the window ledge of Toys N Stuff, then the door and spray the plant pot.
Collect the spray can then walk to Candy Most Dandy and spray the bin, grab the spray paint and let it rip on the plant pot.
Go on to the Pet Store, jump on the window ledge (under the pet sign) and get busy with a cherry bomb.
Go back to the bin and bounce to the right, spraying the plant pot on the way.
Fire a rocket at the statue of Springfields founder (but don't cut his head off again), then speed along on yer well froody skateboard.
Spray the fountain, then fire a rocket at the Bowlarama.
Avoid the aliens, a super long jump will get you over the other two.
Edge close to the enemy and fire a rocket, a 1-up should appear.
Spray the next fountain and fire rockets at the windows.
Not it just remains to kill Jock to complete the level.
THE JETSONS
Hi-Tec
I printed the first-level solution to this most unbogus futuristic game a couple of issues back, now Richard Beckett from York (he of Dizzy solution fame) provides the solutions to Level Two, Three and Four.
Level Two
Left, left, get dog, right, right, down, left, down, left, right, right, down, get hover-boots, up, left down, up (lift), up, left, turn off the taps, right, right, get remote control, left, left, down, right, down (lift), up, left, left, up down, right, right, right, down, get dog, up, left, left, left, up, down (lift), left, down, right, right, right down, knock over bottle and press button, up, left, up, up, hit right button, down, down, right, right, up enter car and go to Level Three.
Level Three
Right, get heart, left, left, get heart, up (lift), right, down, get heart, right, get heart, right, right, down, get heart, down, down (lift), left, get heart, left, down (lift), up, left, left, up  (lift), get heart, down (lift), right, right, right, right, enter car and fly to level four.
Level Four
Get key, right, down, down, left, get key, right, up up, up, right, right, down (lift), left, left, left, left, down, down, right, down, get key, up left, up, up, right, right, right, down, down, left, down, get key, up, right, up, up, left, down, down (lift), right, right, up, get key, down, left, up, left, up, crash into robot to be sent to start, right, right, down, enter car and fly to Las Venus.
YABBA DABBA DOO
Megatape 27
Colin J Annis (have to be careful how I spell that) has sent in a solution and map for Yabba Dabba Doo .
So all you budding Fred Flintstones can now build a house for Wilma.
First clear the six flat rocks from your plot and drop 'em in the tip.
Pick up the round stones and press fire until a block of the house appears, then get some more round stones and repeat the process.
Also drop flat rocks into the tip for points.
When you're ready to put the roof on, pick up the dollar sign at the quarry and take it to Dino Hire without getting killed.
Walk in the door and a dinosaur will follow you home.
When you pick up a round stone now, walk to the dinosaur's back and you'll automatically go up and put a piece of roof on.
If the dinosaur disappears you'll have to go and hire him again.
When the chimney is in place keep picking up Wilma, who'll be near the Burger Bar or somewhere down below.
When your heart is beating sufficiently fast, the next time you try to pick up Wilma she'll follow you home (wish that technique still worked today, it'd make my life much easier).
Hudson Hawk
Level 2 parts two to five
We promised you more of that Hudson Hawk map, and here it is courtesy of David Pitchforth.
What I want to know is Andie MacDowell's telephone number (get your hands out of your pockets, Corky — Ed).
Murray Mouse SUPERCOP
CodeMasters
Here's the second Richard Beckett solution of the month.
This time it's Murray Mouse: Supercop that comes up for a lump of cheese and a quick spin on the squeaky exercise wheel that keeps the whole house awake at night.
Go left, get the sewer key, go right three times, use the sewer key, go right three times, use the sewer key on the manhole (shouldn't that be person hole?), go down, get plank, go right, hit torch, get saw, go down, get mouse, get woodworm, go up, left, left, down, use plank to mend floor, up, get pick axe, down, right, down, use woodworm on wooden door, right, get cheese, get mouse, hit torch, up, up, left, left, down, cut through plank with saw, down, right, get mouse, left, use pick axe on wall, go left, hit torch.
Go left, left, give cheese to giant mouse, left, up, right, right, up, hit torch, right, get spider, down (when rock has fallen), get frog's legs, hit torch, get mouse, left, up, hit torch, down, get newt's eye, right, left, left, move the rock by walking slowly toward it, stand on the rock and jump left to hit the torch, get mouse, walk left on the rocks created by the torch, a door will appear, left up, hit torch, right, put the newt's eyes, the frog's legs and the spider into the cauldron, up, up, down, right, get telescope.
Go left, up, use telescope, down, right, right, right, right, right, down, right, right, right, right, take shovel, up, left, get password, right, down, left, left, left, up, right, up, up, walk right off the right-hand star, get keycard, left, up, right, right, right, up, right, right, down, right, get mouse, left, left, left, left, up, right, up, up, walk right off the right-hand star, get keycard, left, up, right, right, right, up, right, right, down, right, get mouse, left, left, use shovel on boulders, down, right, use keycard on door, get mouse, walk into right wall, right, get stone, left, left, left, walk into first door.
Use password on second door, left, get mouse, get leaf, right, down, right, right, down, right, right, right, right, up, left, give leaf to worm, right, down, left, left, left, up, right, up, up, up, right, throw stone at flat, stand on rocket, jump up/left, fall left off ground, jump up/left off star, get mouse, down, right, right, right, up, right, right, down, right, down, left, left, left, down, right, right, down, right, up, get mouse to win the game and get a cheese sarnie.
(Like, er, it's THAT easy it is Corky, eh?— Ed)
Biff
Beyond Belief
Thanks go to Richard Beckett from York for his Biff  solution.
1.
Collect the powercard.
2.
Collect the wirecutters.
3.
Go to the start screen.
4.
Use the powercard and the wirecutters.
5.
Get the rope.
6.
Go to the rope bridge.
7.
Use the rope.
8.
Get the old clothes.
9.
Put the clothes on the scarecrow.
10.
Take the choc seeds.
11.
Drop the choc seeds on the scarecrow screen.
12.
Take the chocolate to Mum's house and use it.
13.
Get axe.
14.
Use the axe to chop down the tree on the scarecrow screen.
15.
Take the planks from the tree to the small bridge and use them to complete it.
16.
Take the key.
17.
Take the oil.
18.
Go to the keyhold an use the key and the oil.
19.
Collect the explosives, batteries and torch.
20.
Go to the wall.
21.
Blow up the wall with the explosives.
22.
Use the batteries (put them in the torch).
23.
Go to the dark room.
24.
Use the torch.
25.
Collect the jewel.
26.
Collect the record.
27.
Collect the broken ring.
28.
Go to Mum's house.
29.
Make a ring from the broken ring and the jewel.
30.
Give the ring to Mum.
31.
Get the glass.
32.
Fill the glass with water.
33.
Go to Mum's house.
34.
Use full glass.
35.
Use record.
36.
Collect the matches, banger and coin.
37.
Light banger with matches.
38.
Go to the ice cream van.
39.
Use the coin.
40.
Collect the plant pot and the flower seeds (dropping the banger in the process).
41.
Go to Mum's house.
42.
Use the ice cream.
43.
Get the bug spray.
44.
Go to the scarecrow.
45.
Use the flower.
46.
Use the plant pot.
47.
Use the bug spray.
48.
Go to Mum's house.
49.
Give the flower to Mum to win the game.
NOTE , you must press SPACE to use an object otherwise you'll regret it believe you me!
SPEEDBALL 2
Imageworks
Following on from the tips printed last month, Ethan Dagg from Co Durham has sent in further help for Brutal Deluxe fans.
Powers
1.
Aggression (5 credits): This decides if a player will duff over an opponent or avoid him.
2.
Defence (10 credits): This protects the player against attackers; the higher the defence rating the less likely it is your guy will be tackled.
3.
Throwing (10 credits): This allows the player to throw the ball further (makes sense really).
4.
Intelligence (15 credits): Duhhh, this turns your players into brainy bar stewards, thus they move into excellent attack positions.
5.
Stamina (15 credits): If a player runs out of energy or stamina, he'll be carried off on a stretcher.
6.
Speed (10 credits): If you want a player to move like the proverbial off a shovel, this is the power-up for you.
7.
Attacking (10 credits): The higher the Attack rating, the more likely your guy will win in a ruck.
8.
Power (10 credits): Like the Attack power-up, the more Power you have, the higher the chances of an opposing player being taken off on a stretcher.
HOW TO POKE IT (AND RISK A BLACK EYE)
Ever since I took over the tips section in the hallowed pages of ZZAP! 64, folks have whinged that most of the pokes are for Reset and Action Replay carts.
How do you use Reset and Action Replay pokes?
I'll attempt to explain (this should be good for a laff — Ed).
Reset Pokes
To use a Reset poke it's vital that you possess a Reset cartridge or much cheaper Reset switch (if you can find one).
Once you've loaded a game and rest your 64, the start-up screen will appear: the game is still intact and you can now enter the POKE(s).
This is followed by the SYS number (a machine code version of the old RUN command) to get the game moving again.
Action Replay Pokes
These require…yes you guessed it, a small furry creature and a copy of ‘Guns And Psychos Monthly’(it's an Action Replay cart, you prat — Ed).
Oh yeah — sorry readers, again plug the cart in the relevant slot and away you go.
To use a POKE select ‘POKES’ from the menu, and enter the desired gadgi.
Now press the restart key (F3) and voilà, the game is ready to play.
No SYS statement is needed 'coz the cart restarts the game automatically.
Reset POKES can be entered by Action Replay owners, but not vice-versa.
MIDNIGHT RESISTANCE
The Hit Squad
Here is a listing for infinite lives, keys and weaponry from a young gentleman named Stephen McMullan who resides in Co Tyrone.
For info on how to use this listing, read the explanation printed elsewhere in the Tips section.
GOLDEN AXE
Tronix
Here are some general tips for this slice-and-dice extravaganza, again from Stephen McCullan.
1.
Running around will make enemies slow down considerably.
2.
Try to hold onto your magic for as long as possible, preferably till the later levels.
3.
When faced with the end-of-level bad guys, shoulder or headbutt (I said HEADBUTT!) them — autofire is very handy for this part of the game.
At the time of writing this outro it's about a week after Easter, and everyone (except Phil) is swearing off Easter eggs for life — or at least till next April.
It's been Huey, George, Ralph and Bert for the last few days, liquid laffs ahoy.
On a slightly more tasteful note, as of this month the £40 software voucher reward is being scrapped.
In its place though, one of you could soon be the proud owner of an Action Replay cartridge.
Yes, the top tipster of the month will be sent a brand-spanking-new cartridge enabling you to enter all those Reset and Action Replay POKES you regularly moan about.
The first lucky winner is David Pitchforth for his Hudson Hawk maps.
Congratulations!
If you already own an Action Replay cart, David, we'll always take it back and swap it for summit or other.
I still haven't heard back from the young lady who sent me the Valentine card; did you really mean it?
If I don't hear from you I'll know you don't care.
Well, the sun is out and so I'm off out to sunbathe for a while, if I can get past the Ed that is.
In the meantime keep sending your hard work to the usual address: IT'S CORKY, ZZAP!,
.
So until next month, true believers, Excelsior, 'Nuff said.
Subscription!
Subscribe to ZZAP! 64…and you'll be boxing clever!
Howdiedoodie, Zzaperoonies!
As the man in the manky mackintosh says ‘…have I got a treat for you!?’
Yes, it's the offer of a lunch, er, lifetime: Twelve terrific issues of the most happenin' C64 magazine in the known universe, a swish and swanky ZZAP!
T-Shirt plus — yes there's more!— a corkin' cassette case containing no less than TEN of our best-ever Megatapes!
All for the laughably ludicrous low low price of just £24 (for UK residents).
‘But that's an incredible saving!’ we hear you cry, ‘you've got to be completely bonkers!’
You guessed it, joystick junkies, we've gorn an lost our marbles big style — and have decided to offer you not one, not two, but twelve of tomorrows trendiest ZZAP! 64 mag's…at  yesterdays prices!
IF YOU'RE OUT OF YOUR BOX — THEN GET INTO OURS!
(We'll even give you the shirts off our backs)
It's trendy  'n' neat and comes complete with the bestest games that you'll ever meet; A stylish cassette box is what it is, and it's yours for nuffin when you subscribe to this!
Ten top Megatapes we'll also throw in, and a groovy T-Shirt for you to look cool in.
A years' worth of ZZAP! and freebies too — just twenty-four pounds is the price to you (guv'nor).
So don't be a 'nana, there's no time for delay…fill in your coupon and post it today.
Then sit back, relax, and just take it easy, you won't have to go out when it's all wet and breezy.
So Wordsworth we ain't, nor Tennyson either, but would you've got offers like this off one of those geezers?
(Gifts available to UK residents only)
Adventures!
Bash Yer Brains!
He's big, he's bad, he's a bit of a lad — he's lean, he's fit, he's a bloodthirsty git!
He's…
Bash the Barbarian and, from this month on, he'll be bringing you the very best in Commodore adventures.
Who does that Whiplash woman think she is?
Poncing around with that silly whip, cracking smutty jokes — I've read funnier gags in Christmas crackers!
She wouldn't know how to use a real weapon (fnar fnar), so they sent me a to sharpen my axe on this month's adventure offerings.
Judging by your letters, you loved Nythyhel — well 'ard, wasn't it?
For those bogwarts who're still stuck, I've thrown in a few tips this month.
Tony's sent me some more Commodore games to review too, so…let the slaughter begin!
DANGER — ADVENTURER AT WORK
Written by Simon Avery The Guild, £2.00 cassette and disk
At long last you've got a spare half hour to play that adventure you've been looking forward to!
Making yourself comfortable, you load it in and…the doorbell rings!
‘Hello, I'm from the Jehovah's Witnesses and have you ever felt that your life is going nowhere…
’ When you've finally got rid of them, you return to your game (damn God Squadders).
Aha — a problem!
How do I…damn, there goes the phone.
‘Hi, Dodgy Windows Inc here, we've got this great special offer just for you at the reduced rate of only…
’ AAAAARRRGGGHHH!!!!!
Sound familiar?
Then you'll have no trouble relating to Danger — Adventurer At Work , in which you must find a quiet room where you can play adventures all day long and not be disturbed — bliss!
Right from the start you're treated to huge dollops of Simon Avery's erm, ‘unique’ humour.
The first location has you trapped in a lonely, deserted pub called ‘The Nobody Inn’ where you meet a depressed dragon who complains there aren't any virgins to kidnap these days…(except Phil King of course, heh, heh!)
Much of the humour lampoons adventuredom in general, eg the rope is described as ‘standard adventure issue’, and even some of the adventure world's big names are there (look out for the Welsh lady on a motorcycle).
Just when you think you're in for a standard, clichéd problem the rug is pulled form under your feet with a hilarious twist of logic.
Even so, the humour's very accessible and shouldn't leave you scratching your head at ‘in’ jokes too often.
The parser is good, but not perfect.
On several occasions the ‘correct’ response was not the obvious one, so perhaps a wider variety of inputs could've been catered for.
You're not expected to input anything too obscure though, so frustrations in this respect are kept to a minimum.
All the usual commands are accepted, along with a few unique nouns invented by the author — LOUN for LOOK UNDER, LOBE for LOOK BEHIND, etc.
It sounds confusing, but keeps the game flowing brilliantly.
The trouble with QUILLed games is that because they only recognise two-word inputs there's a danger a problem could be solved by accident.
For example, imagine a locked safe that has to be opened with a crowbar.
If the player types OPEN SAFE while he hasn't got the crowbar, he might get the response, ‘you can't’.
If he has got it, ‘OK’.
The poor player might not realise that carrying the crowbar is the key to the problem, and be left wondering why his input sometimes works and sometimes doesn't.
Danger — AAW always makes it clear what's going on, but splitting a command into two by asking ‘with what?’ might have worked a little bit better but then again, you can't have it all can you?
Danger — Adventurer At Work is a quality product.
With a little more attention to the parser it could have been a Sizzler, but even as it stands it's well worth your dosh so get out there and part with it at once!
You will not regret it believe me!
OVERALL STRIKE! 81%
TIPS
Nythyhel
Can't get on the train?
The command is BOARD TRAIN.
When on it, WAIT.
Twice!
To kill the witch you need a silver bullet.
The bulletmaking kit is on the shop counter, and you melt the crucifix to make it.
Give the pawnbroker the brooch — to get it go E, SW after filling the van, and SAY TO WOMAN ‘HELLO’.
If you're still stuck, send a SAE to Tony at the Guild — his sacred parchment will reveal all and help you beat the brains outta this game!
Yeah!
Contact Points
Cheques payable to Glenda Collins.
Reviewz!
Over The Net
Genias/Soundware: £11.99 cassette, £15.99 disk
Going down to the beach is one of PHIL ‘DON'T KICK SAND IN MY FACE’ KING's favourite pastimes.
Sitting around in the sun all day, scoffing tons of ice cream is his idea of heaven, though he did get a bit miffed when Greenpeace tried to push him back into the sea.
Maybe a spot of beach volleyball will get him into shape…
If you want to impress those beautiful beach babes, there's only one way.
First, squeeze into a pair of trunks two sizes too small (and shove a pair of thick socks down there while you're at it!).
Then get a good tan (if you can't get to a sunbed try rubbing yourself with brown boot polish).
Finally, you can show off your prefect physique playing beach volleyball.
It's basically the same as normal indoor volleyball, but with only two players a size.
Over The Net 's extensive options enable you to play one or two players against the computer.
In one-player mode, your team-made is controlled by the computer — you can play against another human-and-computer team.
The number of sets can be altered, along with whether points can or can't be won on your opponents' serve.
On the volley
the game is a bit like playing tennis without a racket (can you keep it quiet, please!).
Using your hands and arms, you have to get the ball ‘over the net’ to hopefully land in your opponents' court.
To make things easier, your team can hit the ball three times before knocking it over, though neither team member can hit it twice in succession.
What usually happens is one bloke ‘digs’(see box) the ball up, the other guy ‘volleys it’ high in the air, then the first guy jumps up and smashes it down over the net.
All this isn't as complicated as it seems.
There's no fiddly control system here; you just press fire when the ball is near, and the computer chooses the most suitable move.
That's just as well, because judging where the ball's going takes a bit of practice — I didn't win a single point in my first few games.
Mind you, having Corky as a tam-made didn't help!
Hitting smashes is slightly more complicated.
The direction and power of the smash is affected by when you hit the ball, what direction the ball's already travelling, and how long you hold down the fire button!
The manual claims hundreds of different hits are thus possible.
Similarly, you can even do a smash serve.
Defending against smashes is even trickier — you have to press up and fire  to jump up at exactly the right moment to block the smash, and sometimes the other player will fool you by just tipping a weak shot over your head!
Some of the opposing teams are dead good.
You can play any of them in a single match, or contest the Sea Cup (not quite as interesting as the D-cup).
In the latter, three teams play each other in a mini-league (showing detailed player statistics) and the top two go onto the next round (and next beach!) with a better third team.
Smashing fun
As I said, play is frustrating at first, but you soon get the hang of blocking and doing smashes — and knowing what skills your team-mate's best at.
Playing with a friend as a team-made is even more fun — why don't more sports sims have a ‘teammakes’ option?
The game looks as good as it plays too.
The sun-bronzed players look cool in their coloured trunks, and there moves are smoothly animated too.
And I really dig those cute babes looking on!
The only dodgy graphic is the loading screen with a bloke holding his arms in the ‘dig’ position and a caption saying ‘Enjoy with us!’
Ahem…
A good loading tune makes up for this, although in-game sound is limited to sparse hitting FX — oh well, you can always take your radio down to the beach!
You're sure to spend a good few hours at the time playing this fun sports sim — so don't for get the suntan oil!
Phil 84%
The guilty parties
Program: Marco Corazza, Luca Zarri
Graphics: Marco Corazza, Andrea Pazelli
Music: Paulo Prendonzani, Stefan Roda
Mr Purple Trunks volleys the ball high in the air where Mr Red Trunks can smash it.
Now that's what I call teamwork.
Down on the beach and not a knotted hankie in sight!
Mr Yellow Trunks hits a powerful smash over the net.
Can you dig it?
The main menu enables you to play  a single match or the Sea Cup, change the number of sets and toggle points won on the service change.
BEACH BUMPH
Dig: Something you do with your spade to put sand in your bucket.
Also, hitting the ball with your arms stretched out in front of you.
Volley: Putting your arms up and opening your hands to hit the ball upwards with your fingers.
Used to knock the ball high so your team-made can smash it.
Spike: Another word for the smash, where you jump up by the net and whack the ball down with your hand.
Wall: What you use to deflect your opponent's spike.
No, it's not a load of bricks stuck together, just you jumping up with your arms in the air!
DISK DIFFERENCES
The disk version of Over The Net features different backdrops for the four beaches.
To avoid a heavy multiload, the tape version omits these and only allows you to access the options screen once.
TEST YOUR STRENGTH!
PRESENTATION
Good options, accessible only once on tape version 78%
GRAPHICS
Well animated player moves, different back drops on tape 79%
SOUND
Rocking loading tune, sparse in-game Fx 77%
HOOKABILITY
A bit tricky at first, but good control system 80%
LASTABILITY
Cooperative, competitive two-player mode is fun 82% 
OVERALL STRIKE! 82%
Reviewz!
Soccer Rivals
Cult, £3.99
Who always gets the blame in schoolyard soccer?
Who inevitably gets the sack?
Yep, PHIL ‘BUTTER FINGERS’ KING puts on his green jersey and stands between the anorak goalposts.
Cult/D&H Games are incredibly prolific: they've shifted more footy managers than Aston Villa!
And the latest addition to their repertoire is a little cracker.
Soccer Rivals is based on a board-game format with managers moving their counters around a Monopoly -style board.
Three managers get to play, any of them human or computer-controlled.
The three teams all start out in an eight-team Fourth Division.
With efficient management, you can be one of two teams promoted at the end of the 14-game season.
Landing on lucky squares helps, enabling you to win wodges of useful cash with which to buy better players (see box).
Before (and after) moving your counter around the board you can change your team formation and swap players around to get defence, midfield and attack ratings to match your opponents'.
A useful feature here is the automatic Team Selection which selects the best players for your formation.
Get results
At the end of the day, the results simply scroll on, but there is an option to view highlights of any match.
This is a simple, but amusing, sequence with a stick-man player flicking the ball up, chesting it down, etc, before shooting/heading it towards the unseen net — a ‘goal’ or ‘saved’caption then appears.
If this was all there was to Soccer Rivals it'd just be another mediocre management game, but the board-game aspect is a lot of fun, especially with three human players.
There's loads of realistic features like crowd trouble, injuries, training, various team crises and dilemmas, even players being killed in plane crashes!
Your footy fortunes can change overnight.
Presentation is excellent throughout with a clear, attractive board layout and easy-to-use menus.
There's a useful save game facility, and even an option to switch control of any of the three teams (human/computer), mid-game.
Invite a couple of footy-mad friends round and you'll all be over the moon.
Phil! 85%
Erm, give me two houses on Old Kent Road…
Agh, that sports car's run over my little Scottie dog!
TEST YOUR STRENGTH!
PRESENTATION
Save facility, simple menus, thoughtful join-in option 84%
GRAPHICS
Erm, good for genre with attractive board! 40%
HOOKABILITY
Dead easy to make your debut, son, so ‘on me 'ead’! 85%
More stamina than David Platt in tip top form 
OVERALL STRIKE! 83%
Corky!
I normally throw up at the mere mention of footy management, but Soccer Rivals is darn good.
I can even say I enjoyed it.
There's not too much mucking around with finances and all that palaver, and there's even automatic team selection to save time.
As some of the options (transfers etc) only come up when you land on the right square, I didn't have to wait eons for Phil to finish his turn.
Overall this is much more playable than the usual footy management mulch.
80%
Celebrity Squares
Landing on various board squares has the following consequences:
Utilities:
Allows you to purchase one of three items — Seats (initial ground capacity of 10,000 can be increased up to 40,000), Security Cameras (to avoid costly crowd violence), or a Coach And Youth Team (allows players to join your squad from the youth team, also helps with training).
Player For Sale:
A player is offered for sale to you and the other two managers.
His position, skill rating and minimum sale price are shown.
When playing with friends, they'll have to look away so you can enter your secret bid — no peeking!
Sell a Player:
Sell as many players as you like (apart from injured ones) until you refuse an offer.
Lucky/Bad Day:
You could win or lose thousands at the races, etc.
Squad Dilemma;
Pot luck again.
You could get a new player, someone could retire, or one of your players could have his skill increased/decreased.
Extra Training:
Put any of your players through extra training to hopefully increase their skill rating.
However, without a coach, it could also go down.
Crisis:
Several players are lost.
Definitely one to avoid.
Hit the Target:
Gamble on this nifty subgame.
Shoot the ball at the upwards scrolling targets.
Hit one and you'll win thousands, miss and you'll lose thousands.
There's three skill levels with more money at stake on the hardest.
G-Loc
US Gold, £11.99 cassette, £16.99 disk
G-Lock — Loss Of  Consciousness , through G-Farce, sorry, FORCE!
Is US Gold's conversation of the Sega coin-op a real high-flyer, or will it make you lapse into  unconsciousness ?
Chocks away IAN OSBORNE…
He flies through the air with the greatest of ease, that daring young man is his…top secret experimental jet fighter?
Strewth, Biggles was never like this!
Looking at the game, it's just as well…
The boffins down at War-U-Like have invented a new toy; a high-powered supa-dupa combat aircraft that can outfly and outblast anything in the air, and make a bigger noise doing it.
But no-one's yet sure how it will handle.
What's needed is a sucker — sorry, brave volunteer — to test it out.
The powers-that-be decide to send you on a suicide mission — nice peeps, aren't they?
Your task is to blast your way through 36 missions, creaming a set number of enemy FX85s to advance to the next level.
Armed with a limited amount of fire-and-forget homing missiles and a machine gun that's about as much use as Robert Maxwell's swimming instructor, you need to blast away for all you're worth to beat the ridiculously short time limit.
Ham rolls
The trouble with G-Loc is the software was originally designed around its arcade hardware.
Looping the loop and executing mid-flight victory rolls might be sensational on the coin-op, but without that gyroscopic cabinet thingie the effects are nowhere as impressive, and the thinness of the gameplay stands out like a Spectrum owner at a computer fair.
You can't turn the plane to any degree, you can't chase an enemy Afterburner -style, and there aren't even token attempts at flight simulation — you can't even crash the damned thing, however hard you try!
All that remains is a painfully sparse blaster involving very little skill.
Don't get the impression that it's easy though.
Coin-op cabinets don't come cheap, especially snazzy ones like G-Loc — to keep you putting the pennies in and cover the arcadeowner's costs, time limits were hellishly short.
Alas, US Gold have retained this irritating quirk, and you've only three credits to play with (I tried putting a 50p piece into my Commodore when I ran out, but it got jammed between the keys).
Also, by the time the first wave of baddies hit the screen, your time's half over!!!
No thrills, no frills
Game presentation is appalling, with no intro screens and non end-of-level messages.
When the required number of enemies are blown away, you're plunged straight into the next level with no celebration on respite.
The sound is pretty cruddy (Beep beeeep — Boom, Khrrr — Boom), and the graphics — I think I'll let the screenshots speak for themselves!
Presumably the programmers cut down on frills in order to cram it all into a single load, though I don't know why they bothered — no-one will ever get past Level Ten anyway!
G-Loc the coin-op only worked because of its fast, exciting graphics and stomach-churning gyroscopic cabinet.
Stripped of these elements, the gameplay's shallowness is all too apparent.
Samey levels, awkward controls and some of the most noninteractive flying ever seen on the C64 make G-Loc a game to avoid.
Lose Yer Lunch
G-LOC in the arcades broke new ground in flashy game cabinets.
The ‘pilot’ sits inside a spherical unit which can rotate through 360 degrees, allowing the player to roll and loop as if he were really inside the aircraft!
Of course such technology doesn't come cheap, so to make sure you spend all your dosh in it, game time was kept hideously short.
TEST YOUR STRENGTH!
PRESENTATION
There isn't any!
Probably due to the single load.
20%
GRAPHICS
Blocky aircraft, featureless backdrops, confusing FX.
35%
SOUND
Like R2D2 reciting Shakespeare.
39%
HOOKABILITY
Okay for a while, but its faults soon stand out.
45%
LASTABILITY
Too little depth, too little skill make this a bit dodgy. 20% 
OVERALL STRIKE! 35%
Flashback!
Turrican
The Hit Squad, £3.99 cassette
Turrican is such a hero, he defeated Morgul (a nasty three-headed demon) in the first game and now faces even greater odds.
Is he brave, is he suicidal, or is he just plain stupid?
MARK ‘THAT GUY'S A NUTTER’ CASWELL finds out.
Ol' Turry's back and this time there'll be trouble, 'coz he's what's known in the trade as a fruit-and-nut case (he needs a check-up from the neck up).
Give him a gun and he'll shoot anything that moves.
And this, the second journey into the world of evil bad guys, sees our hero lugging an unfeasibly large weapon around five worlds.
And bloody heavy it is too.
A little way into level #1 and our  tin-helmeted hero is already hard at it — duck, shoot, jump…cobblers!
He's not from around here
Y'see, on a planet called Landorin, the merciless minions of ‘The Machine’ are threatening to massacre the human population.
And as Arnie S is on his hols at the mo, Turrican is the man to help.
The scientists who designed Turry's remarkable suit have made a few alterations.
The main improvement is a more powerful laser gun.
Appearing when fire is held down, this long beam weapon can be swung in a 360 degree arc.
The gyroscope is still in place, but now Turrican is also able to roll around and go into psycho mode at the same time.
As with the original Turrican , our hero must leap and bound around the maze-like landscapes, shooting anything that even twitches.
And you can be your Granny's false teeth there are plenty of ugly mothers ready to stamp big T's hero licence.
Thankfully the floating grey pods which occasionally appear contain handy weapon power-ups and extra lives.
There are also diamonds strewn around the landscape: collecting 100 earns Turry a continue-play.
Once Turrican has fought his way past two end-of-level guardians, he moves onto the next section.
Most levels are land-based, but there's one brilliant part where Turry leaps into a spaceship and sips along,Denaris-style .
Turrican 2: The Final Fight received 96% and a Gold Medal accolade when first reviewed in Issue 70.
I don't think it deserves quite that high a mark now, but it's a darn good shoot-'em-up.
The graphics are stunning, with small but fast-moving sprites zipping all around the shop.
It's almost a shame to shoot some of the beautifully drawn and shaded creatures…almost.
It's a choice between you and them, either they die or Turry explodes in a spectacular fashion.
The game is huge, a veritable cartographer's dream-come-true in fact.
Five worlds split into several sections is certainly enough to keep you burning the midnight oil.
If you missed Turry 2 the first time round, four pounds is a small price to pay for one of last year's best games.
Corky! 92%
TEST YOUR STRENGTH!
PRESENTATION
Ace presentation screen, useful continue option.
90%
GRAPHICS
Colourful sprites zip around the screen at warp speed.
96%
SOUND
Excellent title and in-game tunes, a treat for your ears.
94%
HOOKABILITY
 Superglue on your joystick would  achieve the same.
95%
LASTABILITY
You'll be playing till you can find a can of solvent.
97% 
OVERALL STRIKE! 96%
Phil!
The official ZZAP!
Best Game of 1991 already out on budget?
Hold on a sec…
Ouch!
Just pinching myself to check I'm not dreaming!
For those new to the C64, let me tell you that this is the most technically stunning game ever to grace the machine.
I mean, I thought the original Turrican was great, but the sequel just blows it away.
Turry has to be the best-armed hero of all time and when he picks up a few power-ups you'd think he was invincible.
But then you probably haven't met the big baddies yet.
And when I say big, I mean BIG!
Some of these fellas are several screens high, yet they zip around at lightning speed!
Ace programmer Manfred Trenz certainly puts some of his peers to shame.
Turrican II is possibly the greatest technical achievement ever on any computer.
It's not just pretty to look at though, it's also incredibly playable.
There's pretty much every type of gameplay imaginable, packed into five huge worlds (comprising 12 levels), and accompanied by an epic thumping soundtrack.
What are you waiting for?
Get down to the shops now for the bargain of the century! 99%   
Reviewz!
Millenium Warriors
First Star/Software business, £12.99 cassette, £14.99 disk
Ian Osborne is the master of time — the way he sprints for the door at 5.30pm has to be seen to be believed!
Makes him a dead ringer for Millenium Warriors methinks…
Prince Kronos, first-born son of the Great Galactic Emperor Iridon I, has come of age.
According to ancient Iridani law he must undergo a test of courage and skill, overcoming earth warriors in five different aeons.
These comprise three beat-'em up levels and two blasters, each played on a single static screen.
The beam-'em-ups are very two -dimensional, allowing only simple left-right movement.
To get past your enemy you must crouch, jump or climb, depending on which time zone you're in. the shoot-'em-up duels take place in the air, allowing full-screen movement with wraparound.
Each pugilist has three statistics, displayed via a bar system.
ENERGY decreases each time you throw a blow, HEALTH is your ‘life’ rating, and WEAPON is a measure of how much punishment your trusty tool has taken.
If your energy or health bar reaches zero it's game over, but a knackered weapon soon reappears — you just have to take half a dozen blows while retrieving it!
Power-ups replenish energy and health.
The icons change from level to level, but the effect remains the same.
Samey skirmishes
Millenium Warriors is brilliantly presented.
The animation is full of great touches: for example, a victorious knight removes his helmet and bows to his stricken foe, and the pirate takes a swig from his hip flask.
Unfortunately the graphics are the most varied thing in the game — each beat-'em-up level plays almost exactly the same as the one before.
The two shoot-'em-up levels are also irritatingly similar.
Alas, this isn't the only fault — far from it.
The controls are very difficult  to master, especially on Level 5 where exaggerated momentum makes the sprites virtually uncontrollable.
Even when you've got the hand of it there's precious little skill involved — you just stand toe to toe and hit each other!
Also, the extra energy and health power-ups appear with alarming regularity, making fights ridiculously long.
As soon as you've battered your opponent into near-submission, a power-up appears (which the computer-controlled player appears to anticipate) and you're back to square one!
Like most below-par beat-'em-ups,Millenium Warriors is better in two-player mode, but this isn't enough to save it.
Shallow, samey gameplay ruins what should've been a really rad game.
Ian 51%
TEST YOUR STRENGTH!
PRESENTATION
Excellent and well thought out presentation.
87%
GRAPHICS
Exciting backdrops, wild animation make this a ripper!. 80%
SOUND
A pleasing little ditty that could even be Chesney!. 76%
HOOKABILITY
Too many power-ups make fights last too long.
60%
LASTABILITY
Too little there to hold your attention for long.
51% 
OVERALL STRIKE! 60%
No heavy shagpiles here, these carpets are lighter than air.
Knock that other geezer off with your fireballs.
Oo ar, Jim me lad, it's cut-and-thrust duelling onboard the pirate ship
Corky!
On first loading Millenium Warriors , I was strongly reminded of the old Palace classic Barbarian .
Graphically the game is top-notch, the character sprites are large and nicely detailed while movement is fluid and looks very believable.
Game content is very close to my heart: bash your opponent's brains out in the shortest possible time.
The pain in the proverbial ass that hampers an otherwise good idea is ‘Mr Gameplay’.
I've played Millenium Warriors umpteen times and have yet to beat the Captain Caveman lookalike when controlled by the computer.
However, in two-player mode the game really comes into its own: you can beat yer mates up and still take 'em for a pint afterwards! 69% 
Steve!
My first reaction to Arnie was ‘yeah, yeah.
Been there, seen this, done that’ but, after just one go, my opinion changed (a little!).
Okay, so it's not the most original concept for a game but addictive it certainly is.
Graphically the game compares well with many full-price releases; clear, easily identifiable sprites move realistically against a detailed background, while the scrolling is both swift and smooth.
I hope Zeppelin don't run into any kind of copyright problems with the title, though.
I guess they figured calling their game Arnie was the next best thing to having a blockbusting movie title.
Anyway, the game's a riot!
Taking out one of the choppers before it gets chance to launch any missiles is stupendously satisfying, and the difficulty level is set exactly right.
My only gripe is that it could have been bigger.
A LOT bigger.
Oh, sure, it'll take long enough to complete, but another couple of levels — not difficult to program once the initial stage has been coded — would have pushed it into another league entirely.
Arnie chance of sequel, guys? 81%
Arnie
Zeppelin, £3.99
He's big, he's bad and he said he'd be back.
From Conan The Barbarian to a Terminator with a heart of gold, he's a deadly foe.
And the big man of the silver screen now stars in a C64 game…
Hang on, it's not that Arnie at all, it's another big-muscled psychotic killing machine.
MARK ‘NO PROBLEMO’ CASWELL says ‘hasta la vista baby’to the marauding enemy troops.
My, my.
What an original plotline.
I'm sure this one was around when Moses parted the red sea (sarcastic, moi?).
A lone mercenary thinks he's tough enough to take on a bunch of macho gun-toting enemy soldiers (who are probably so 'ard they eat shredded wheat, box and all, for brekky).
Yer archetypal mad-dictator is threatening the world, so our rock-'ard, square-jawed hero is dropped into the danger zone by chopper (he fell on his head, so he should be okay).
He's initially armed with an Armalite AR-15 rifle; this is the least powerful of the  weapons available but it still cases loadsa damage.
I swear I will not kill anyone
The welcoming committee is already at the landing site, the only problem is they greet you with a hail of lead rather than a red carpet.
But don't just stand there looking brave, press the trigger of yer gun and spray some slugs around.
The enemy attack from all sides, so follow the arrows around the scrolling 3-D play area to find your final target (the dictator's HQ).
Many of the soldiers are dressed in brown uniforms (very quickly turned red by you), but some wear a fetching little pink number.
Blow these guys away to reveal (pink undies?— Man Ed) more powerful weaponry, including an M-60 machine gun, an RPG rocket and a wicked flamethrower.
Ammo for these megaweapons is limited, though, and once it's been exhausted the Armalite reappears.
Come with me if you want to live
All these weapons come in handy as you yomp through the mad dictator's base, because along with troops come various other hazards.
These include homing-missile-firing choppers, lowflying aircraft, armoured vehicles and fast-firing sentry guns.
One of the best things about this game is the fact that there's only one level; no annoying multiload.
But don't start moaning that one level isn't a lot, 'coz it's hugh (madam).
There's plenty of enemy ordnance between you and the end-ofgame congratulation screen.
The graphics are another plus point, they're small but by gawd are they detailed.
Arnie and the enemy troops are all wonderfully animated, and the death sequences for both are hilarious.
Arnie turns into a pile of bones, while the enemy perform their own version of the ‘dying fly’ dance (made famous by a certain Saturday morning kids show).
Even though the title is slightly misleading for Arnold S fans, at a budget price Arnie is a must buy.
Corky 85%
TEST YOUR STRENGTH!
PRESENTATION
Single load with a high-score table make this cool.
80%
GRAPHICS
Small sprites thunder around colourful backdrops!. 86%
SOUND
No title tune, but adequate sound effects.
70%
HOOKABILITY
As soon as Arnie starts blasting you're hooked.
84%
LASTABILITY
You won't stop until the mad dictator is dead.
80% 
OVERALL STRIKE! 83%
Reviewz!
Strip Girl Poker
The Sales Curve, £11.99 cassette, £15.99 disk
Personally, we at ZZAP! prefer a nice quiet game of dominoes, but we do confess to having played a few of these strip poker games on the 64 before.
MARK ‘HUBBA HUBBA’ CASWELL denies ever playing one in his life (that's my story and I'm sticking to it — Corky), but he volunteered for this job quickly enough…
Oh yes, this is your chance to undress five of the horniest women on the face of this planet (and Maria Whittaker).
Cover Girl Poker ) or should that be poke her?) is the latest in a long line of attempted trouser-arousers to appear on the C64.
After you've chosen your mother tongue (from a list of four), you can pick (and slobber over) the six models.
There's gorgeous Ginny, amazing Amanda, terrific Trine, marvellous Maria, stunning Sophia and juicy Jane (how fruity!— Ed).
Each selection is accompanied by a blurry black-and-white digitised photograph, a great turn on (I don't thin).
Gerremoff!
So choose an opponent and prepare to play five-card poker: the incentive to win is a sequence of (very blurry) digitised photos of your chose model in various states of undress.
But to get to that birthday-suit piccy that ends the game, you have to become a card shark.
The game is played to normal poker rules: five cards are dealt and each player bets loadsa cash.
The worst hand contains only a High Card, slightly better is a Pair (phwoar!), two Pairs, a Full House (Bob's?), a flush, a run, four-of-akind etc.
But you should really go for the ultimate: a royal Flush.
As the foxy model's cash drops to zero, so does a layer of clothing.
This continues until the final greenback is lost and she's in the buff (huff, huff, hyuck, hyuck, etc).
Is she worth it?
I've played a lot of these poker games in my time as a computer own, and none of them have been any cop (especially bad was Maria Whittaker's Christmas Box ).
Let's face it kids, you ain't likely to get very excited by a badly digitised, flickery screenshot.
Even if your parents did see Maria Whittaker in the buff, they wouldn't be able to recognise the blobby mess as human, let alone a nude woman!
The poker game is fairly challenging, but even an amateur player like myself managed to defrock all the models in a single two-and-a-half hour sitting.
And it wasn't worth it in the end, I was well miffed.
Personally I'd rather buy a pack of cards and play the game for real, or buy one of those magazines you find on the top shelf of the newsagents.
My advice is to keep your cash (and hands) in your pockets!
Corky! 20%
Ian!
Ever wondered why 98% of Commodore gamers are male?
A good, hard look at your software collection could well provide the answer — game after game casts men in the active, go-get-'em role and reduces women to a passive, decorative function.
Look at the presentation screens in games like Continental Circus, Ivan ‘Iron Man’ Steward and Smash TV .
Look at the plot for Double Dragon , where the big, butch males are sent t rescue the helpless female who does nothing but scream — is it really any wonder that home computing has become an all-male preserve?
Never is this more evident than in Cover Girl Poker .
Sexist concept, lousy gameplay and some of the worst digitisation I've ever seen make this puerile excuse for a game every bit as bad as that offensive little rag The Daily Sport .
If some sexually frustrated dickhead wants to waste twelve quid on this tripe that's his problem, but I'm sure ZZAP! readers will have more sense.
10%
TEST YOUR STRENGTH!
PRESENTATION
Digitised close-ups of models' faces, neat title screen.
70%
GRAPHICS
Badly digitised photos that you have to squint at.
25%
SOUND
Decent title and in-tine to have a dance to.
75%
HOOKABILITY
Okay for a quicky game of cards but that's all.
25%
LASTABILITY
About as brief as all the models' clothing.
12% 
OVERALL STRIKE! 15%
Blimey!
It took Corky all day to get this far and then he fainted in front of the C64!
What a wimp out or what fans?
Black Hornet
Hi-Tec, £3.99 cassette and £5.99 disk
MARK ‘OOPS SORRY!’
CASWELL isn't very stealthy at the best of times: stand him within ten feet of a fragile object and he'll break it just by looking at it.
But sit him in the cockpit of a Stealth Fighter airplane and he'll whup anyone's ass (it's the rest of the office's fault for telling him he looks like tom Cruise).
The Black Hornet awaits…
The product of umpteen years research has just been revealed: The Black Hornet.
An advanced Stealth Fighter that's so fast, and deadly, it can be in and out of enemy airspace so fast they barely hear the sonic boom before they're up to their necks in explosive ordnance.
And so it's no surprise that at this point there's a plot twist to introduce the villains of the hour.
They've apparently done some very nasty things, so the free world has decided to send Black Hornet in to kick some enemy backside.
As a brave pilot who doesn't flinch in the face of adversity (ie three episodes of Coronation Street on the trot), you're on your way to meet the enemy troops.
Bombs away
The game is a vertically scrolling shoot-'em-up where your aircraft zooms up the screen to greet the enemy troops zooming down to kill you (surprise, surprise).
At your disposal is a permanent machine gun, and four optional payloads.
These are fitted with missiles, smart bombs, homing missiles and ordinary ‘thickie’ bombs.
Points are scored for destroying both airborne and groundbased objects (whether mobile or stationary).
When an airstrip is spotted land on it (whether it's a friendly or enemy base), and you enter the option screen.
Here you get the choice to shell-out on weapons, repair damage, refuel or buy speed-ups (handy to doge enemy bullets).
Dakka, dakka, boom
There are four samey levels to battle through, and as soon as you've waded your way through the current one you're whipped away to the next.
I'm a great fan of blasting games but Black Hornet isn't very good (and that's putting it mildly).
The sprites are small and terribly blobby with poor colouring, virtually no animation.
Even with the speed-ups, the Black Hornet moves as sluggishly as a man in a pair of jelly-filled fishing waders.
And there are no collectable power-ups to help you in the battle to shoot first and ask questions of the flaming wreckage later.
I'm sorry, Hi-Tec, but Black Hornet 's a good example of how NOT to produce a shoot-'em-up.
Ian!
A vertically scrolling shoot-'em-up,Black Hornet would appear to have been developed on the Shoot-'Em-Up Construction Kit and tweaked for commercial release.
Sadly, if it was produced using the SEUCK utility it wasn't tweaked enough — there's no excuse for baddies that use such boring attack patterns.
The graphics are awful (especially the stomachchurning backgrounds), and worst of all the game suffers from the ‘disappointing bullet syndrome’, the ever-present landmine that's sunk many a promising shoot-'em-up.
On the plus side, the multiload is well thought out and the game doesn't auto-restart once later levels are reached (HURRAH!) but when each level is exactly the same as the one before it, except with a different background it hardly matters.
Black Hornett ?
Buzz off!
39%
TEST YOUR STRENGTH!
PRESENTATION
Nice range of weaponry, no two-player mode.
65%
GRAPHICS
Small and slow sprites, eye straining backdrops.
48%
SOUND
Unimpressive title tune and bog standard FX.
55%
HOOKABILITY
There is a small amount of initial interest.
56%
LASTABILITY
…which soon flies right out of the window!. 40%   
OVERALL STRIKE! 42%
Boom!
Bang!
It's fast, it's deadly, it's Black Hornet!
It's been hit by a dose of fly spray!
Secret Agent Sly Spy
The Hit Squad, £3.99 cassette
What a complete and utter basket-case James ‘shaken and stirred’ Bond is.
Still, he gets to shoot loadsa bad guys and snogs all the girlies, so he must be doing something right.
With Walther PPK in shoulder holster and a lifetime enrolment in the Roger Moore school of eyebrow wiggling, MARK ‘Q’ CASWELL investigates.
The life of a secret agent is full of excitement, with highspeed car chases and death-defying falls from airplanes top of the agenda.
But the secret agent is only as good as his or her arch-rival, and the evil organisation in this game is a doozy.
The council For world Domination (hereafter referred to as CWD to save my poor fingers) are threatening to detonate an atomic bomb.
So, into the fray leaps Sly Spy, the western world's last hope when it comes to terrorist bashing.
The game opens with Sly (ie the player), jumping from a plane and obeying the laws of gravity (ie plummeting toward the ground at warp speed).
Pay attention, 007
Our valiant hero, is, of course, wearing a parachute (I hope that ain't a rucksack on your back), and carrying his trusty pistol.
As the ground rises up to tap Sly gently on the bonce, CWD henchmen drop in for a quick cuppa…well they actually want to blow his brains out but I was being polite.
He starts out with a full clip of ammo, but watch out (Beadle's about), it's limited — make sure you hit 'im first time.
Once the airborne adversaries are playing their little golden harps.
Sly lands in Washington and enters a short horizontally scrolling blasting bit.
Level Two shoves Sly onto a motorbike, he's chasing after one of the CWD bosses travelling in a black Cadillac.
Again, the limited-ammo rule applies but extra ammunition, along with more powerful weapons, is available.
Included is the devastating Golden Gun, the pieces of which (five in all) are scattered around.
Later levels take our hero to the harbour, and even Jacques Cousteau-style to an underwater base.
The safety of the free world is in your hands Sly, don't let it end with a bang (though that's what I'll be doing if there's a nuclear holocaust!).
Shaken not stirred
I've not idea why Ocean didn't release the C64 version of Sly Spy as a full-price game.
Okay, the first few levels are easy to complete, but later on our lad really does have to hang onto his life with both hands.
The angst created by the rapidly decreasing ammo level is great, as is the fun derived from blasting seven shades of brown out of the minions.
On the graphics front, the game is a birrova mixed bag, the excellent in-game presentation screens sometimes clash with the occasional blocky sprite.
In all,Sly Spy is just about worth the four brass beer tokens asked for by your friendly computer shop.
'Nuff said.
Corky! 77%
Ian!
Oh woe is me, another potentially terrific game scuppered by an irritating multiload!
Don't get me wrong, multiloads aren't always a bad thing.
If you want a great game with loads of depth and spooky animation, you'll never get it all into 64K of memory.
I don't like it when presentation screens are multiloaded before each level though — that's just waste of time, and there's certainly no excuse for it in a game like Sly Spy .
Multiload moans aside,Sly Spy isn't a bad game.
Fastpaced, exciting, and easy enough to get into even if you're not Mr Shoot-'Em-Up 1992, this is one of those games you have to keep playing to get that little bit further.
On the negative side, the graphics are a little simplistic and the animation is sparse (so why the multiload?), but that doesn't prevent Sly Spy from being a very good game.
76%
TEST YOUR STRENGTH!
PRESENTATION
Annoying multiload, neat presentation compensates. 80%
GRAPHICS
Colourful, but slightly blocky sprites in places.
79%
SOUND
Decent loading and in-game tunes to gig along to.
70%
HOOKABILITY
It's easy to start playing with  your spy set-up.
77%
LASTABILITY
You won't put your weapon away til the job's done!. 73% 
OVERALL STRIKE! 76%
Neat back-drops on this stage but you'll have no time to enjoy them; duck, shoot, duck, it'll quack you up!
Abe ‘The Babe’ Lincoln looks down disapprovingly as our hero blows the crap out of anyone who moves.
Puzznic
The Hit Squad, £3.99
With all the intelligence of a mouldy pea, IAN OSBORNE stretches his grey matter just trying to remember his name.
What a perplexing puzzler like Puzznic'll do to his brain, then, is a mystery.
It may well explode — fingers crossed!
The Hit Squad are back, and back with a vengeance with this great conversion of Taito's cracking coin-op!
Puzznic is destined to become an all-time classic in the Tetris/Klax mould, and no serious puzzle-player should be without it.
As with most puzzlies, your task is  stupefyingly simple.
Push the pictured tiles around the playing area, matching like with like and making them disappear — when two similar designs are placed adjacent to each other, they're destroyed.
Smash 'em all and it's on to the next level.
Tiles can be pushed right or left, but not up or down — should they be pushed into mid air, gravity takes affect and they fall.
Easy, eh?
Don't you believe it!
On the early levels the tiles are offered in obvious pairs making them easy to vanquish, but as you progress tiles are offered in odd numbers, forcing you to bring three together simultaneously.
Later still, immobile blocks intrude on your playing area, and moving bricks can (must?) be used as lifts.
Worst of all, some tiles are inaccessible without forming a bridge with others — think on your toes and pair them off in the right order, or it's back to the beginning.
Carry on playing
In the lastability stakes,Puzznic is, erm, lastable — with 144 screens covering 36 stages you won't be contemplating it in a hurry!
To confuse things further, those 36 stages are laid out into seven levels, each offering a choice of two to move on to once completed.
Confused?
Look at the screenshot, twit!
(Looks like the FA Cup schedules to me, but what would I know, I'm a Villa fan — we're always out after the first round!)
The presentation and graphics are superb, interesting to look at yet still preserving the minimalistic simplicity of the coin-op.
No eye-burning colour schemes and irritating backgrounds here!
Puzznic is an absolutely splendiferous game!
More addictive than 0898 chat lines to a sad, lonely halfwit, larger than said sad cases's phone bills, and more playable than a Dead Kennedys album, this is one game no self-respecting tiletrasher should be without.
Buy it and it'll ruin your life — the dog will crap on your carpet 'cos you forgot to take it walkies, you'll lose three stone in weight 'cos you can't stop playing long enough to eat (load it in — Fatty Phil), and your next electricity bill will be bigger than Gazza's pay packet.
Suicide will inevitably follow, but think of all the fun you will have getting there!
Corky!
Puzzle games usually tee me right off.
Exactly 3.7 nanoseconds after play commences, I'm usually hurling abuse at the game, the C64, my fellow ZZAP! reviewers and anything that moves within a ten-yard radius.
But I remember Puzznic very fondly as a game that I could actually get my head around (it's very flexible you know); even a thicko like me can understand the concept of joining corresponding icons together.
this is all fine and jim dandy when you have just two blocks to fit together: the fun starts when three, four and even five have to be whammed together simultaneously.
Yes folks, if you want to reserve your place in the local funny farm (bibble, bibble, polka-dot flamingo), go out and purchase a copy of Puzznic today.
Help, Captain Night Nurse!
Mind out for that halibut, the aliens are peeling my duvet!
91%
TEST YOUR STRENGTH!
PRESENTATION
With a game this simple, it's harder to get it WRONG!. 89%
GRAPHICS
Stonkin' — this is ideally suited to the C64. 90%
SOUND
Fair effects but the tune is a little irritating.
79%
HOOKABILITY
Grabs you by the throat and refuses to let go.
92%
LASTABILITY
Will go on longer than Coronation Street.
94% 
OVERALL STRIKE! 90%
Like a constipated mathematician, you may need an old pencil to work this one out!(© Old jokes dept. 1934)
Right, that's two of the little beggars dealt with.
Now should I go for the yellow diamond, or…
PD File
There's more to demos than meets the covertape…
IAN OSBORNE investigates the latest Public Domain material, and ends up with dots before his eyes.
(Oh, those dots are his eyes!)
Ever wondered where computer programmers come from?
No, I don't want a lecture on the birds and the bees, I was just wondering where software companies find them, and how they learn their art in the first place?
Perhaps demos are the key.
Demos are an excellent way for amateur programmers to hone their skills as they can set themselves any task they wish to perfect, be it exciting text scrollies, explosive FX, multiple sprite animation (mention sprite masking and you're a dead man!— Ed), rotation, scaling or just about any other facet that makes Commodore games so wild ‘n’ wonderful.
Having created their masterpiece, they're hardly going to just sit on it (and spin)— putting it into the Public Domain is a very cost-effective method of bringing their work to the attention of leading software development houses (Ashley Routledge and David Saunders of Poseidon and St Dragon fame started out this way).
Who knows, maybe their works of art might inspire commercial programmers to new heights of creativity…
Unlike the demos you get on ZZAP! 64 covertapes, PD demos tend to illustrate what the programmer or the host machine can do rather than try to sell you a game.
There are exceptions of course— the sample game produced using Domark's 3D Construction Kit was put into the Public Domain as well as being packaged with the utility.
Presumably Domark wanted to show off the abilities of their creation in the same way that demo programmers wish to make a name for themselves in the programming world.
But, as any PD librarian will tell you, these are the exceptions to the rule.
Only a few demos have a specific product in mind — most are just like these…
Dutch Breeze — BML Promotions
The BML logo appears in a blaze of fire, introducing the credit sequence.
This is followed by a horizontally scrolling scene featuring a dragon flying over a rocky landscape (it would look a bit silly if it were cycling over it).
Animation is fair, but the scene where the dragon flies into a storm cloud and is electrocuted is positively brain-bending!
Dutch Breeze 2 — BML Promotions
This features a range of static screens set to a pleasing little ditty.
Atmosphere's the order of the day, each picture having a flavour of its own (my  favourite being tomato and pineapple, yum!).
Also worth a mention is the impressive update effect — instead of just disappearing, pressing the space bar and causes the screen to melt away, its replacement lapping onto the screen like waves on a beach.
I could've done without the naughty words in the scrolly, but this is a minor niggle (prude!— Ed)—Dutch Breeze 1 & 2 are mighty fine demos.
C64 Starballs
Now here's a strange one!
C64 Starballs features some great animation, but it's damned difficult to explain exactly what's going on.
Oh well, here goes…
A series of dots sits in the middle of the screen, set out to give the impression that they're painted onto an invisible ball — the dots ‘nearest’ to you are thus larger than the ones on the back of the ‘sphere’.
This is then rotated and scaled, making the ‘ball’ appear to bounce in the out of the screen (Sounds like you've been at the loony juice again to me — Ed).
Confused?
You will be when the background is drawn, and several of these creations appear at once!
No amount of waffle or screenshots could do this demo justice — it really does have to be seen to be believed.
A superb technical achievement, I'm sure  its programming team will go far (if they haven't already!).
Okay, on a static screen like this it looks like an airborne elephant bogey — but that green elephant smudge is, in fact, a snazzily animated dragon!
Oh balls!
We've looked and looked at this still from the StarBalls demo and STILL can't think of anything to say about it.
Bah!
So there you have it — we'll be back next month with some terrific PD games.
In the meantime, if you've any material you think we should look at send it in.
If it's any good we'll nick it and make a fortune, and if it ain't…we'll call you.
Okay?
Contact points
Coming Soon!
MEGATAPE BUSTS!
ZZAP! wishes to apologise in advance, and unreservedly, for the boobs on next month's Megatape.
They're a couple of big 'uns and no mistake.
And they just happen to be attached to a saint!
Ooh yes!
It's…
Insects In Space!
Cor!
Sensible Software's classic shoot-'em-up stars the upfront Saint Helen, rescuing babies from all manner of nasty, buzzing, stinging insects.
Also on next month's Megatape…
Glider Rider
This innovative classic has you riding a motorbike that converts into a motorised hang-glider (what a way to beat the traffic!).
Superb 3-D and a Dave Whittaker soundtrack make it a real high-flyer.
Subsonic
A never-seen-before two-player blast'-em-up by ex-Software Creations programmers, Mike Ager and Haydn Dalton!
And…
At least one playable demo of one of the hottest new releases!
In your Sizzling July issue…
WRESTLE MANIAC!
In the blue corner, Phil ‘Blue Whale’ King takes on allcomers as he grapples with a host of wrestling games and performs his famous belly flop!
SEARCH FOR A MEGASTAR!
Ian ‘2-bit’ Osborne takes a critical look at potential Megatape games sent in by readers, and advises how to make a good one.
WATCH OUT FOR THE JULY ZZAP!
ON SALE THURSDAY 25 JUNE!
Phew, it looks like being a scorching summer.
And brainy boffins have at last discovered the main cause of ‘global warming’.
It's the hottest mag around, it'll give you a suntan just reading it — it's a Sizzler, it's ZZAP!!
ZZAP! 64
Dear Newsagent, I would be Judith-Chalmers-ly indebted to your good suntan if you could find it in your deckchair to reserve me my very own monthly copy of that phew-missus-it's-a-scorcher gamesplaying bible, ZZAP! 64, starting with the July issue, on sale Thursday 25 June.
COMPETITION TIME
WIN AN AMAZING HOLIDAY TO DISNEYLAND PLUS £300 spending money.
WIN £1500 CASH
FANCY A SEGA MEGADRIVE PACK?
ITS GREAT FUN TO USE
HOW WOULD YOU REACT WITH A NINTENDO NES ACTION SET COMPLETE WITH LIGHT GUN AND GAMES?
Own a computer or console already?— why not call our fantastic computer game review line or our cheat and tips computer line — IT'S TOTALLY MEGA!!
HAVE A CHANCE TO ‘BEADLE’ AROUND WITH THE STATE OF THE ART JVC ELECTRONIC CAMCORDER
WIN A CRUCIAL AMIGA 500 PLUS FIVE TOP SELLING COMPUTER GAMES!
YOU SIMPLY MUST CALL
Just dial any of the above numbers, the more times you enter the better chance of winning!!
Calls charged at 36p per min cheap, 48p per min peak.
.
Competitions vary but normally last only a few minutes.
Please ask permission of person who pays the bill before calling.
JUMP AT IT!
Get ready for some finger-searing action as BUB & BOB blast their way onto your computer screen.
Use four kinds of elements — Fire, Water, Lightning and Star to overcome wave upon wave of nasties bent on ending your quest to rid the universe of the evil mastermind Chaostikahn!
Whether you play alone or with a friend, stay alert!…
Your only hope of reaching the final showdown is to unlock the secret of PARASOL STARS!
‘Both graphically and sonically this is a highly impressive product…well worth buying’ GAMES X 19/20 GAME OF THE WEEK
‘Sheer brilliance, and no mistake…an easy contender for Game of The Year’ CU AMIGA 95% SUPERSTAR
‘The playability is what sets it apart…teasingly addictive and enthralling, PARASOL STARS deserves all the praise it gets.
Place an order now!’
ST ACTION 92%