

6
THE BRONZE HANDLE OF ROMANO-BRITISH BUTTERIS
THIS bronze handle (fig. 6.1) was picked up in April 1967 by Mr J. A. Hadman from the surface of a field half a mile to the north-east of Oundle, Northants., on the east side of the River Nene (Nat.
Grid Ref.
TL 048890).
Here and in the surrounding fields there is an extensive scatter of Roman pottery and building materials, the only objects of dating significance being a coin of Elagabalus and colour-coated sherds.
The handle consists of bronze sheathing over a lead core.
Its grip is in the form of an eagle's head with the beak turned down, and from the top springs a curved piece of solid bronze, in the shape of a Minerva head and bust.
Projecting from the handle is an iron bar, somewhat twisted and corroded, which is curved at the broken end to form part of a semicircle.
It has been possible to identify and reconstruct the object from similar examples.
One was found in 1900 with a mass of iron tools in Well No. 2, Insula XXIII, at Silchester.
This clearly shows that the functional end was expanded into a gouge-like tool, in this case ¾ in. wide.
It was a tool used by farriers to Pare the hoof of a horse and known as a butteris, buttress or buttrace.
The classic study of this tool is by M. Charles Robert in which he compared the Roman examples with the modern equivalent known to the French as le boutoir .
M. Robert illustrates an example from Pompeii, now in Naples Museum, in which the handle was decorated by the figures of a farrier and a horse, clearly demonstrating the use of the tool.
The shape of the tang and the curved projection are obviously designed to protect the hand against the gouge slipping on the hoof.
The use of the bust of Minerva gives further protection from the goddess of crafts.
An example very similar to that from Oundle is also illustrated by M. Robert, from Nasium in Gaul, in the Museum of Bar-le-Duc; this shows that the eagle held a small ball or pellet in its beak.
A handle without the iron part is known from Wiesbaden.
These elaborate bronze handles have attracted attention, but there are probably far more humble iron forms which have the same general form with the curved projection, like the one in a hoard from Eckford, Roxburghshire, another from Seebruck in Bavaria, and possibly an even simpler version from Alesia which has no protection piece.
Doubtless many  more exist in museum collections.
The butteris was in use until a hundred years ago in Britain with local variations in form, as seen in the examples from Oxfordshire and Sussex (fig. 6.2) now in the Museum of Rural Life at Reading.
The former is almost identical with an illustration in a veterinary book of 1900, although there are also examples of paring knives which had by then, presumably, almost replaced the butteris.
7
SMALL TOWNS WITHOUT DEFENCES
IN the past, attention has been focused on the problems of the chronology of civil defences and less thought has been directed at the reasons for these defences and why some settlements were chosen in preference to others.
These are the questions offered for consideration in this paper.
Attempts have been made to link the main periods of construction with known historical events, such as the bid of Clodius Albinus for the purple, first proposed by Dr Philip Corder in 1955, developed by Professor Frere and now accepted, with reservations, by Mr Wacher following earlier doubts.
If one accepts the needs for a general state of preparedness for the whole province, as would have been the case with Albinus before he removed the greater part of the army to Gaul, then clearly the most important centres would have been included.
These would have been the coloniae , tribal capitals and London; tor this reason, these towns have been disregarded in the argument.
Another group which can be isolated and excluded is that of the fortified posts (burgi) along Watling Street from Uxacona (Red Hill) to Bannaventa and which will possibly be extended eventually to the south-east.
This series of strong points has been shown to have been established by Constantius Chlorus as part of his campaign for the recovery of the Province in AD 296.
When the remainder of the known fortified sites are plotted on a map (fig. 7.1) most of them are seen to be distributed along three routes:
1
The road from Brough-on-Humber to London and includes Ancaster, Great Casterton, Water Newton, Godmanchester and possibly Cambridge, Great Chesterford and Braughing.
2
The Fosse Way from the Humber to Ilchester and includes apart from Lincoln, Brough, East Stoke, Margidunum, Chesterton, Dorn and Bath.
3
The road from Silchester to Durobrivae and includes Dorchester-on-Thames, Alchester, Towcester and Irchester, assuming there is a gap in the road yet to be filled between the last two places.
Some of the defended sites which remain outside this network could be considered an extension of this system.
Thus, Mildenhall, Wiltshire, is halfway between Bath and Silchester, but to complete this line defences would be required at Staines; while Rochester is on the important link between London and the ports of Richborough and Dover.
This leaves Kenchester on the north-south route along the Welsh Marches which passes through Leintwardine to Wroxeter, thence to Chester.
The status of Leintwardine is not clear, although Dr Stanford considers it to be military throughout its history; the area of 14 acres, however, is too large for a fort, and the presence of civil buildings may indicate otherwise; it may have changed its status with the pacification of Wales and the redistribution of troops, caused by troubles in the north.
In any case, the road from Chester to Caerleon was an important strategic line and always partly, if not wholly, under military control; and if it was fortified, Whitchurch would have been included, and there is no evidence as yet of civil defences there.
The two sites in east Lincolnshire at Caistor and Horncastle may well be connected with a defence system of the east coast, associated with the Saxon Shore forts.
Both have walls and bastions normally associated with fourth-century defences, but in the only recent excavations at Caistor, later disturbances have been found to have removed any opportunity of establishing the presence of any earlier period of defences.
These sites would repay more detailed investigation.
Another exception to the proposed pattern, is the 34 acre town at Caister-by-Yarmouth; this is the only town apart from Brough-on-Humber, which occupied an exposed position on the east coast, vulnerable to sea-raiders and it probably required this protection, but it must also have had a special relationship with the nearby Saxon Shore fort at Burgh Castle.
The same reasoning could apply to Clausentum on the Solent on the south coast, if this is not actually another Saxon Shore  fort, and possibly also to Gatcombe on the Bristol Channel.
There are other defended sites like Rocester and Littlechester, but they have been excluded since they are in a zone which was under close military control during the greater part of the occupation.
There still remain three sites, all north-west of the Fosse Way — Alcester, Droitwich and Worcester, and these could be seen as part of the fortified road network round the rich agricultural lands of the Lower Avon.
The defences at Alcester have only been found at one point on the north-west side by the river, and are of two periods with a wall supported by timber piles, close enough to the river bank as not to need a ditch system at this point.
Marshy land to the south and north-west restricts the area considerably and Alcester appears to be a good  example of a small carefully selected defended enclosure in a much larger settlement (fig. 7.2).
There is some doubt about Droitwich, where recent excavations have uncovered buildings of a large establishment which is probably part of the salt-extraction industry.
The defences could have been protecting an Imperial establishment rather than a small town.
Information about the defences of the Roman town at Worcester is at present limited, but a considerable ditch has been found similar to those associated elsewhere with the late fourth century, and there are indications of earlier systems.
There can be little doubt that the main, if not only purpose of these civil defences was for protection.
The concept of grandiose municipal display can no longer be accepted; doubts have even been cast on the Balkerne Gate at Colchester, long regarded as ‘the largest monument of its kind in Britain, unmatched in size and preservation…’
It is now seen as a gate built onto a free-standing monumental arch.
In selecting the area to be defended, those responsible, presumably military engineers, chose the most convenient and economical line, and where there was a well planned core of gridded streets, this was not too difficult; the real problem was the case of settlements which were long strips of ribbon development along a road.
The officers under Constantius Chlorus had no qualms about the rights of private property, as excavations at Mancetter have shown; a small area straddling the road was chosen and any buildings in the way ruthlessly destroyed.
This has the appearance of an emergency military operation which may not apply to the other civil defences, but these too must have been commissioned for a specific occasion, but where the emergency may not have been too critical.
Also, had it been in the first instance the officers of Albinus, there was a need to consider the townspeople since it was they who must have supported him for his bid for the purple on the expectancy of rich return on his success.
Even so, there were often areas of development which could not be accommodated with the enceinte , as has been shown at Silchester.
Archaeologists have tended in the past to be mesmerized by the presence of walls and regard them as enclosing the only areas worthy of study.
It has often been a surprise to discover the presence of an extensive spread of buildings well beyond the enclosure, this lack of awareness has led occasionally to their discovery all too late, whilst they were being ravaged by development.
It was only the devoted work of a small team of amateurs under the late Harold Hughes of the Birmingham Archaeological Society which established the existence  of an important area of buildings well south of the known town at Alcester.
Part of these suburbs, if this is an applicable term, was subsequently excavated by Miss Mahany and Mr Steven Taylor and found to be largely industrial.
Another example, but on a larger scale, is at Castor and Water Newton in the Nene Valley, where to the north of the walled town there are about two square miles full of buildings and sites associated with the extensive pottery industry with a centre of some kind in Castor village (fig. 7.3).
When one considers those settlements left undefended, it becomes evident that the choice was dictated by military and administrative considerations, rather than the protection of communities, however considerable in size and number.
Serious work on this kind of site has    hardly begun.
They have generally been found by the chance of fieldwork and aerial reconnaissance and many are awaiting discovery; when they are studied in detail they are often found to be much larger than thought at first, covering areas, in some cases, of over 100 acres.
The sites now considered to illustrate undefended settlements have been chosen at random since it would have required much research and fieldwork to have presented a comprehensive list in time for this Conference; attention is merely drawn to a number of sites with the hope that they, and others like them may be studied in more detail by local efforts.
The mining town at Charterhouse on the Mendips may be considered to be in a special category of its own, the sporadic nature of its growth has been demonstrated by Professor G. D. B. Jones through air reconnaissance and ground survey.
An excellent example of a site which has been discovered by field work is that at Kingscote, Glos.
This was found by the staff of the R.C.H.M. (England) in their survey of earthworks of the county for publication in a special volume which is now in the press.
I am much indebted to the Commission staff, in particular to Mr Collin Bowen, for allowing me to show plans in advance of publication of this, and of the other sites in the county.
At Kingscote there are some 50 to 60 acres of  buildings, many with stone foundations, apparently in the middle of an area previously devoid of Romano-British development.
Pieces of military equipment and mid-first century pottery found on the surface indicate the possibility of a military origin, but trial trenches merely confirm the period.
Another extensive Gloucestershire settlement is that at Wycomb, near Andoversford, first investigated in 1864.
Excavations carried out recently on behalf of the Cheltenham Museum have revealed structures from the first to the fourth centuries, an irregular street pattern and a ditch with fourth-century coins in the lower filling which may have been part of a defence system.
One of the largest settlements in Gloucestershire is that at Bourton-on-the-Water, which has spread westwards from the Iron Age fort at Salmonsbury towards the Fosse Way, which it treats almost as a secondary feature (fig. 7.4); but it is here, where the road bridge crosses the Windrush, that Mrs Helen O'Neil has found a Posting.
house with stabling.
The area is known as ‘The Chessels’, a significant   name, and a distance of two miles to the north-east along the Fosse is another spread of material; there are thus at least two detached centres of occupation.
The Fosse Way is one of these defended roads suggested above and the question raised here is why the small settlement at Dorn was chosen as the one to be provided with defences and not the much larger one at Bourton.
This decision can only be based on the spacing between the sites chosen rather than the importance of the sites themselves, ignoring even the cross-routes.
The development of these large Cotswold settlements may be connected with the evident wealth of the area reflected by the large and richly appointed villas and the same could apply to Oxfordshire where there are at least two sizeable settlements and no apparent defences.
Lower Lea or Swalecliffe lies under the shadow of the Iron Age hill fort on Madmarston Hill and the one must have succeeded the other.
It is a compact area of buildings, many with stone foundations and in an area of about 60 acres (fig. 7.5), but it has suffered from plough damage.
Another Oxfordshire site associated with an Iron Age precursor is Wood Eaton, while a possible third site is that now covered by the northern part of the City of Oxford.
Discoveries in the latter, along the ridge of gravel between the Thames and the Cherwell during the course of building work, indicate a spread of occupation of possibly 100 acres and which may extend even further to the north and west.
Elsewhere in the Province there are other settlements worthy of consideration and one of the largest and most interesting, is that at Braughing.
As a site in a key strategic position where so many roads join, it is very difficult to understand why no defences have yet been observed.
A site of 70 to 80 acres was found in 1967 by a field group and confirmed by excavation and air survey on the eastern fringe of Oundle, Northants.
The other sites included in the very brief survey are on roads in the south-east.
Stane Street, from London to Chichester, has along it three settlements, Hardham, Alfoldean and Ewell.
Investigations by S. E. Winbolt showed that the first two had small rectangular enclosures of about three acres and these are so like the burgi on Watling Street that it is not impossible that they represent part of the fortified system established by Constantius Chlorus, although the dating evidence indicates an earlier origin.
Logically there should be a third such site at Ewell but modern development has blotted out almost all hope of proof; chance finds, however, suggest a settlement (fig. 7.6) of some 70 acres spreading along Stane Street.
Another road, from Canterbury to London, has one fortified site at    Rochester with two stretches of road between of 28 miles each; but there are large settlements at Ospringe, Springhead (Vagniacae ) with its religious and industrial associations and Crayford (Noviomagus ) where chance finds appear to indicate a considerable occupation spread (fig. 7.7).
Similarly, there is a large occupation site at Maidstone on the road south from Rochester, but another sadly lost by development (fig. 7.8).
The main conclusion to be drawn from this brief random survey of a number of undefended settlements is that their size and importance appear to have been disregarded when decisions were taken as to the places to be fortified.
These decisions were based on military and administrative factors which affected the Province as a whole.
They must also be considered in a wider context since the need for defences in the civil zones throughout the Empire arose out of the great pressures on the frontiers by barbarian migrations.
The army itself changed radically as the mobile units developed and became paramount, with the garrisons, even those of the legions, being relegated to a role of static defence with troops recruited on a hereditary basis.
The mobile units needed positions of strength where they could encamp and draw on supplies.
This alone may well explain the presence of walled areas with a few buildings within, as at Margidunum.
The growth of bureaucracy led to the proliferation of officials with functions as police, tax collectors and customs officers who might have had their offices in such places.
The division of the provinces led to a great increase in extent of the boundaries between them and the imposition of duties on goods passing through them.
Some of these sites may well represent the result of this reorganization, which in Britain produced by a process of sub-division four provinces by the early fourth century.
This vast reorganization of the Imperial defences from the late third century onward produced defence road networks as well as a massive re-fortification of the frontiers themselves.
The defended sites in Britain have to be studied in detail against this development and I can only hope that this short contribution may help to inspire more thought and action along these lines of research.
8
REFLECTIONS ON ROMANO-BRITISH POTTERY STUDIES
IT is a great privilege and pleasure for me to honour my old friend and colleague John Gillam, with whom I have worked and argued over the last thirty years.
I have chosen to do this by reviewing the present position of the study of Romano-British coarse pottery, some of the processes by which it has been reached, the unsatisfactory nature of our present state of knowledge, and some thoughts directed towards the future.
The first extensive studies of Romano-British pottery were by Thomas May, who died on 28 October, 1931 at Stratford-upon-Avon, where he had taken up residence to be able to work on the nearby site at Tiddington,(Fieldhouse, May and Wellstood, 1931).
His many years of work on and publication of pottery included the large collections from Silchester (1916), Colchester (1930), Carlisle (1917) and York (1908–11), and from the excavations at Hengistbury Head (Bushe-Fox, 1915), the Ospringe Cemetery (Whiting, Hawley and May, 1931), Swarling (Bushe-Fox, 1925), Richborough (Bushe-Fox, 1926, 1928, 1932), Warrington (May, 1904) and Templebrough (May, 1922).
No one before or since has published so much from so many sites in quantity and variety.
Much of his work was on pottery already in museum collections, or as a pottery assistant to Bushe-Fox, but at Templebrough, he was director of the excavations which had been made necessary by the extension of the large steel works at the end of the Great War.
The decorated samian was illustrated by means of rubbings, but the descriptions are carefully detailed with full references and dates clearly derived from Knorr and Déchelette.
The report on  the coarse wares is very illuminating for the views at that time of a man who had spent a lifetime handling pottery.
May's comment on oxidized wares seems to us today to be quite astonishing: ‘common flower pot red, or tile-red wares were as offensive for domestic purpose to the Romans, as to ourselves and should generally speaking, be regarded as ‘wasters’— overbaked and distorted specimens which accumulate in heaps besides kilns as one sometimes made use of in their own locality’.
He evidently considered that all pottery of that period was intended to be reduced black or grey, and thought that black burnished were actually coated with bitumen.
Nor did he appear to have any conception of a dated sequence.
Of the 69 coarse ware vessels described in this Report, only 12 have been given any indication of date and most of these refer to Wroxeter and Newstead parallels.
It is significant that under imitation forms, he states that ‘the above, i.e. Nos. 170 — 178, are dated by the Sigillata forms they imitate, which are of first century type.
They are no doubt products of a potter's kiln in the vicinity of the Roman fort’, yet at least three (Nos. 176 — 178) are fourth century red-coloured wares.
After the publication of Heywood Sumner's New Forest Wares , in 1927, May was able to make ample amends in a short paper of 1930 (May, 1930b).
Thomas May's earlier assumption would have been a perfectly natural one had he been dealing with a museum collection, but here at Templebrough, the sherds came from his own excavation, and the only conclusion to be drawn is that he had very little conception of the significance of stratified deposits.
This may seem strange since he had worked so closely with Bushe-Fox, whose ideas and techniques were far in advance of his day.
At Wroxeter, as early as 1912, Bushe-Fox clearly appreciated the need to arrange coarse pottery in a dated sequence.
He must have learnt a great deal from Thomas May, and from him also acquired an enthusiasm for pottery, but he was quick to grasp the crucial principle that the changes in the form of some vessels was due to a chronological development, an idea that had eluded May, who never rose much above the level of that of ‘an indefatigable draughtsman’, as his Antiquaries' obituary rather dismissively calls him.
This must not detract from the enormous value of May's pioneer work in publishing such large collections, and he can hardly be blamed for being the victim, as we all are in turn, of the limitation of the knowledge and ideas of the day.
It was, after all, an advance to see pottery as worthy of study and publication.
The excavators at Silchester and Caerwent had found great quantities, but regarded it as merely so commonplace and  ordinary, that they hardly bothered even to mention it, thus ignoring the important principle laid down earlier by the great Pitt-Rivers, who attempted to record everything he found ‘however small and however common…common things are of more importance than particular things, because they are more prevalent’(1898, 27).
It was May's enthusiasm for pottery, which he communicated by publication, and Bushe-Fox's perception of its importance for dating deposits that helped towards the artefact-orientated reports so common in that first half of this century.
Even today excavation reports treat artefacts as separate entities neatly divided up according to material from which they were made, i.e. gold, silver, lead, bronze, tin, iron, ivory, bone, jet, shale, stone, then followed by coins, samian decorated, samian plain, samian stamps, amphora stamps, mortaria stamps and coarse wares.
Little attempt, until quite recently has been made to relate all this material to the site-stratification, or to consider the social and economic evidence these artefacts could give us if related to particular periods or parts of the site.
Surely, as prime evidence of date and function the artefacts must be integrated into the excavation report itself and the artificial division into materials replaced by objects grouped according to function and deposit.
This kind of arrangement may be possible in the more flexible reports of major excavations now being planned, and will be a great advance on the old-fashioned set-piece type of report which seems to be designed only for those wanting to study particular types of artefact, rather than the history and significance of the site itself.
Although Wheeler was never particularly interested in Roman pottery, he demonstrated the way it could be used to date construc-tional sequences on the Welsh forts, and it is unfortunate that this was not developed in his work at Verulamium, where what must have been a very small proportion of the pottery was published in the Report of 1936 (Wheeler and Wheeler, 1936).
There is a very useful collection of 111 vessels of the first half of the first century under ‘Belgic Verulamium’; a group of 18 vessels from the filling of an unfinished well-shaft dated by a coin of Pius (145 — 161)‘lost in fair condition’, and a stamp of the samian potter GERMINVS who is also found on the Antonine Wall (142 — 163); a pit group (Pit 6, Insula V) of 14 vessels with a coin of Pius (154 — 155); 9 vessels from Triangular Temple, from the filling between two floors of the courtyard; there follows 9 more vessels, from different places, and 15 predating the S.E. gate, and finally, there are 7 from Pit 5 in building IV, considered as late fourth  and possibly fifth century.
Clearly an attempt has been made to select key groups, but they are not used very effectively to date major sequences and odd conclusions were drawn, which were to have far reaching effects.
For example, the defences were firmly dated to the reign of Hadrian, although Antonine pottery was found in the rampart, but dismissed with the remarkable statement ‘the overwhelming pre-Antonine character of the mass of associated pottery suggests the earlier, rather than the later of Dr Oswald's limiting date for the exceptional sherd’, i.e. AD 130 — 50.
The problem of residual pottery was obviously not fully understood at this time, and a return must be made to this point later.
Dr Corder was able to demonstrate just how selective the pottery in this report had been, when he published a full account of the material from Pit 6 in Insula V (1941).
It included a great quantity of local pottery, classified into 14 types, stamped mortaria of two makers (the two stamps ROA and PETA are not helpful in reconstructing the actual names of these potters), and a remarkable carinated bowl with stamped decoration, all of which were surprisingly omitted from the 1936 report.
Comparison could be offered, although perhaps unfairly, with Professor Frere's Report of 1972.
Although dealing with a much smaller area confined to Insula XIV, an Insula which is half the size of most of the others, nevertheless, as many as 1293 well stratified vessels of coarse ware are published.
The area of the city which was dug by Wheeler was about nine times as large and his report, if published today, would, on the basis of Frere's, have included over 11,000 vessels, instead of the 183 which appeared.
Perhaps the time has now come for specialist monographs.
Fortunately, Kathleen Kenyon took pottery a little more seriously than her mentor, and her Jewry Wall report (1948) is one of the first serious efforts to use it on a large scale to date the main sequences.
At the same time, she was at pains to attempt a type series from the site, an idea started hopefully by Bushe-Fox at Wroxeter.
Kathleen Kenyon's notable effort was not wholly successful for two reasons: firstly, it was not appreciated at the time that there was only one major construction phase and not two; secondly, the knowledge of pottery dating was then inadequate.
The concept of a forum converted into thermae depended on the presence of floor levels associated with the former, but those identified as such are very thin mortar lines which are far from level, and they can be more reliably interpreted as layers marking stages in the construction.
Considering the pottery from the pre-forum levels  illustrated, with the advantage of hindsight, one would date some of the vessels later than 120, possibly 130 — 140 would be a better terminal.
This would also fit the pottery associated with Forum I which is hardly surprising since it comes from the make-up levels and  includes residual material, as in the reeded rim carinated bowls, a rustic jar and flagon tops.
The upper make-up levels associated in the Report with the Baths could have been brought in from other parts of the town, and contain material contemporary with the construction, with coins of Pius, but very few of the coarse wares show developments later than the forum deposits, and there are still residual pieces: for example, the reeded rim carinated bowl is still there, two early flagon types and the mortaria of G ATTIVS MARINVS which probably date to c .
AD 100, the fabric is not of his late Mancetter period of production.
The large quantity of residual material from the thick make-up levels seemed to the excavator to support her contention that there were two different public buildings on the site, one replacing the other and although John Wacher corrects this, he in turn is persuaded by this evidence to suggest two periods, i.e. the work started about AD 145–50, to be subsequently discontinued, and ultimately the building was completed in about AD 155 — 61 (Wacher 1974, 342).
A similar chronology can be seen at Wroxeter, whereas as at Leicester the Forum is Hadrianic and completed in AD 129 (Atkinson, 1942), the baths were not in use until the Antonine period, although there are definite traces of an earlier public building (Kenyon, 1940, 189), but its date and function are by no means certain.
The presence of residual pottery in stratified deposits has for many years bedevilled structural chronology, and has also affected the dating of the pottery itself.
The outstanding examples have been in the dating of town defences, as demonstrated by Philip Corder in 1956.
As noted above, Wheeler dated the rampart at Verulamium to Hadrian by deciding that historical grounds were sounder than the evidence of the pottery, which included Antonine pieces.
There has also seemed to be a tendency among excavators either to cling rigidly to the date of a coin, or in the case of a pottery assemblage, to aim at an average date; perhaps in some of the excavations of the thirties, the methods used were not refined enough for a director even to be sure that all the pottery came from a particular stratified layer, and if, therefore, a few sherds appeared which were out of dating context with the main assemblage, they could be put aside as ‘intrusions’ and ignored.
The movement of the quantities of spoil for ditch digging to form a rampart  includes the artefacts from the excavated areas, and their period of occupation could be quite unrelated to that of the construction date.
An impressive demonstration of this was given at Great Casterton in the first section across the town rampart in 1950 (Corder, 1951), excavated with meticulous care as part of a training school; every sherd was collected and recorded, totalling in all about 100 from the bank.
They were all equally carefully examined by Philip Corder, John Gillam and myself, and there was a unanimous verdict that every sherd belonged to the first century.
We could at that moment quite justifiably have concluded that the date of the bank was most probably in the early second century, like Verulamium, but we were saved from making this serious error by the presence in the trench of a small hearth immediately below the first load of rampart spoil.
In this hearth were seven sherds of pottery (fig. 6 of the report).
Five were colour-coated beakers, but with different colours and similar to those made at South Carlton AD 140–160 (Webster, 1944).
No. 6 was a typical Nene Valley product and No. 7 a fragment of a hunt-cup.
These vessels could have been in use from any time from c .
160 to the end of the second century, and it meant that these defences could not possibly have been erected before AD 160.
It was clear that the Great Casterton defences had been planned and carried out in an unhurried manner and with military precision.
This lead to the proposition that it was the work of Clodius Albinus, in putting the Province in a state of defence, while he took most of the troops to Gaul in his unsuccessful bid for the purple, and this theory has yet to be seriously challenged.
Once this chronological sequence had been established, a review of the excavation reports of similar work elsewhere showed quite clearly that in a good proportion of cases, town defences had previously been dated far too early, on the basis of residual pottery and coins.
It was perhaps ironic too, that six more sections were cut at Great Casterton, and none of them produced a scrap of pottery from the rampart later than the early second century.
This makes one wonder just how many other kinds of excavations have depended for their chronology on similar evidence.
The other serious trap for the unwary is the presence of coins in key stratified positions.
Since most coins give a very close mint date, it is always tempting to place too much reliance on it, especially if one is unsure of the pottery; but coins can be residual too, and a careful analysis of over 600 coins found during the excavation of a Romano-British farm at Barnsley Park, Glos.
(Webster, 1967) has shown that only 10 per cent had any reference to the actual date of the deposit in  which they were found.
There is, however, another important factor.
Pottery has a limited life, determined by the function of the vessels, and thus store jars kept secure in a pantry may remain intact for several generations, while cooking pots, if in constant use, have a very short life.
Table ware is carefully and, perhaps, infrequently handled, while kitchen wares suffer losses as they are cheaper and roughly used.
On the other hand, the life of a coin is determined by quite different criteria, dependent on the type of coin.
Gold and silver coins tended to be used as bullion and their metal value was an important consideration in a time of inflation, but a base metal coin could have a very long life.
The proof of this can be seen at Verulamium in the theatre excavation (Kenyon, 1934) the orchestra of which was used as a rubbish dump at the end of the fourth century, probably a deliberate act of desecration by Christians.
Kathleen Kenyon, the excavator, recognized two deposits, but since there were coins of the House of Theodosius in each, it can be assumed that they accumulated over a fairly short period, perhaps as rubbish from the nearby forum.
The coins, therefore, should give a good indication of examples in circulation at the very end of the fourth century.
They can be listed as follows:
From this it can be concluded that only 1.4 per cent of this large number of coins establishes the date of the deposit but in this case, since there are no later Roman coins found in Britain, it could be even later; a  salutary lesson for all excavators.
Although a great quantity of pottery was found in this deposit, it is typical of the time of the Report, that only 16 examples were published (fig. 11 of the Report).
If, as one can hope, this pottery still exists in the Verulamium Museum, it would provide a useful study of the types in use here at this period and the very quantity might offer the possibility of useful statistical analysis.
One could, with a little research, produce quite a number of examples of dates of important deposits based on residual coins, but I will limit this to my own experience with the Swanpool kiln material when I was a novice in these matters.
When I published this group, with an enormous amount of help from Philip Corder (Webster, 1947), I was confident that it fell well into the fourth century.
However, it was  necessary for a beginner to be cautious and rest his conclusions firmly on sound evidence, and there were useful parallels from a well at Margidunum published in 1926 by Felix Oswald.
This group had been dated by Oswald to c .
AD 300 on the presence of two coins, of Tetricus I and Carausius.
Similarly, at Brough-on-Humber in his 1936 Report, Philip Corder had dated a group associated with a phase of reconstruc-tion to the Constantian revival, this time on the basis of two coins of Carausius and one of Tetricus II, and parallels from the Margidunum well.
Even Philip Corder felt inhibited by this evidence, although there was one sherd in this group (no. 141) which caused him some concern, being obviously a Signal Station type, which should have belonged to the end of the fourth century!
So between us, we felt we could not place the Swanpool kiln too far into the fourth century, and my very hesitant suggestion was a bracket — AD 280 — 350.
Had I to do this all over again, I would ignore the coins as quite irrelevant, like the samian in the Margidunum well, and place the date in the second half of the fourth century.
Thus the two radiates in a well filling had a serious effect on the dating of fourth century wares for two or three decades.
This in turn had important consequences in the current historical view of the period, in perpetuating the proposition laid down by Wheeler in his Verulamium Report, that the decline of urban life in Britain in the third century was so catastrophic, that it was followed by only a partial and short-lived revival under Constantius Chlorus, and then by a steady decline into the Dark Ages.
Even today there are those who have doubts about the great burst of prosperity and splendour in the first half of the fourth century manifest in the great villas.
This was arrested not by coastal raiders or financial collapse, but by the fall of Magnentius, so disastrous for the British magnates.
It is not the purpose of this paper to attempt to redress this historical balance, there are others at work already far better qualified to do this.
I merely wish to draw attention to the long chain of wrongly dated groups of pottery, each in turn dependent on the other, all the result of the false assumption that a few coins were contemporary with this deposit, whereas they were either residual or still in circulation, and in neither case have a relevance in establishing a terminus post quem .
The redating of many major groups in publication prior to 1960, would be a considerable undertaking, but the time may have to come when this should be considered seriously, though the rather tentative suggestions made in the CBA Student's Guide (Webster, 1970) do not  go very far in meeting this need, so badly felt by those now beginning in this study.
It is unusual to find a large deposit containing pottery the whole of which can be grouped into a narrow date bracket, and the most obvious examples on occupation sites are caused by the destruction of a building which has pottery in it, in store or in use at the time.
The Great Casterton villa excavation produced a good example (Corder 1951, 24 — 40), but it was carefully noted at the time that this destruction by fire involved only one building and was, therefore, an accident and had no relevance to any historical event.
The destruction of the forum at Wroxeter c .
AD 165, a much larger and more dramatic event, led to the so-called ‘gutter find’, the residue of a potter's shop in the front colonnade (Atkinson, 1942).
This always offers an opportunity for someone to attempt to see these serious conflagrations in a wider context, and this has been taken by Dr Grace Simpson as evidence of an uprising of the tribes of Wales (Simpson, 1964), although the archaeological support from other sites is very tenuous.
There are of course large fires recorded from other towns.
It has been estimated that over 50 acres of Verulamium were laid waste c .
AD 155 and one earlier in the second century seriously affected London (Dunning, 1945 and Merrifield, 1965, 90).
These three fires are each at different times and well dated by samian burnt in situ and they can be attributed to accident.
In the crowded town centres with most of the houses built of timber, mainly with thatched roofs it is not surprising that such widespread devastation occurred.
The town's fire services were never adequate to deal with major conflagrations as classical sources well remind us.
It is, therefore, unwise to try and see this kind of evidence in association with rebel or enemy activities.
The Victorian antiquaries had few such inhibitions and readily saw any trace of ash or burning, however small, as belonging to some great catastrophe.
Their favourite was the great Barbarian Conspiracy of AD 367, and had the Great Casterton villa been dug in the nineteenth century, this would certainly have been considered a victim whereas, of course, the pottery is certainly not earlier than AD 375, and maybe much later.
There is only one civil destruction which can be accepted with certainty, and that is the effect of the sacking of Camulodunum (Hull, 1958, 152 — 156, 198 — 202; Dunnett, 1967, 48 — 54; 1971, 18–23 and probably 54–56), London (Marsden, 1974) and Verulamium (Frere, 1972, period I) in AD 60, and already useful collections of pottery have been recovered from two of these.
One of the most difficult problems yet to be elucidated in the civil zone relates to the conquest period itself.
It is still not clear whether certain groups are pre- or post-conquest, and this tends to bedevil work on many sites in the south-east, such as Fishbourne.
There is also the problem of the material from the Sheepen site at Camulodunum (Webster, 1973).
When this was first published (Hawkes and Hull, 1947), Period I was placed in the bracket AD 10 — 42, on the basis of Tiberian sigillata and Arretine wares, and one interesting result of this was to date the Roman pottery from Bagendon to the pre-conquest period (Clifford, 1961, 257).
This leads to a further conclusion that these wares were brought to the site by the Catuvellauni, who had at that time embarked on westward expansion.
In the train of this idea theories could be rapidly developed on the balance of power between the chief tribes, prior to the invasion.
Later, problems of the Arretine wares were brought to light when factories producing these wares well into the Claudian period were found in Central Gaul, and the terms ‘provincial Arretine’ or ‘proto-South Gaulish’were invented.
Immediately, the basis of dating this pottery is in question.
In his classification of the ‘Arretine’ assemblage from Fishbourne (Cunliffe, 1971, ii, 260 — 266) Geof.
Dannell throws doubt on the import of these wares into Britain prior to AD 43, but with trans-continental trade already well established in pre-conquest times, it seems unlikely that fine pottery should not have come to Britain.
From the recent work of Clive Partridge at Skeleton Green, Herts, it is clear that a trading post had been set up c .
AD 10 at this particular place; it seems to have had a brief existence; it may have been a Political embarrassment to Cunobelinus at some stage in his early career, or the traders may have just moved elsewhere.
This discovery does make the point that trade had been established and there is no reason to think that in the closing years of his reign, when Cunobelinus was showing strong pro-Roman tendencies these commercial links with the Roman world would not have been fostered.
It is a subject which needs a great deal of detailed study in close association with work on the production centres, especially in Gaul, and the distribution of their wares.
The civil zone still poses many difficult problems of chronology in the framework of what is known of the historical narrative.
John Gillam was one of the first to appreciate that in the military areas it was possible to be far more precise since many forts and frontier works were dated not only by historical sources, but by inscriptions, and he exploited this rich vein of information in his ‘Types’(1957), a major contribution to  our studies.
While the key date of this study is the construction of Hadrian's Wall, there are two crucial earlier groups, one from the forts of Agricola and the other from the Trajanic Stanegate sites.
The difficulty is that the sites which have been extensively excavated, and so produced the largest quantities of pottery, such as Corbridge and Newstead, are multi-period, and the stratification of the excavations early in the century, consequently suspect.
This explains the wide brackets (e.g. 70–110 or 80 — 130) suggested by John with wise caution, but it is unfortunate that adequate groups were not available from sites with brief periods of occupation.
There is now a real hope that all the hard solid work John Gillam has put into the pottery of the northern frontier, will soon begin to shape into a much more reliable and closer chronology.
The magisterial pronouncement of Sir George Macdonald on the Antonine Wall has now been overthrown by the brilliant study of the samian by Brian Hartley (1972), and the work at Carpow and other Severan sites will help to stabilize the dating of the pottery of this period, so with more revisions and adjustments, we may eventually have a framework which will endure, but only possible since all the groundwork had been so carefully prepared.
The main trouble with John's northern types, not of his making, is the indiscriminate use made of it by students in the south.
This has been due to the lack of understanding of the origins of this pottery.
There are late Flavian-Trajanic military works depots on the frontier which produced pottery, but from the time of Hadrian onwards, a different supply system was introduced.
It is not known exactly how this operated, but it is presumed to have been on some kind of contract basis.
The result is clear enough.
An enterprising firm of potters anywhere in the Province could supply batches of their wares, so crates of vessels arriving at the quartermasters' stores could have come from any available source.
There is a rough division between east and west which became apparent in Peter Webster's study of Severn Valley wares found on the Wall (1972), for, although there is not a great quantity it has a definite western bias, which suggests that the means of transport was by the sea.
This would help to explain the extraordinary success of the Dorset producers of the black burnished wares, which, as John has demonstrated (1973), is one of the most dramatic events in the history of the coarse industry in Britain.
All the construction levels of Hadrian's Wall produce these vessels in quantity, yet they are totally absent from the Trajanic forts.
This can  only have come about by a high level decision on the military products and supplies.
The Dorset industry must have continued from its Pre-conquest days up to the moment of expansion; its potters had been supplying the army in the middle of the first century, as is evident from Waddon Hill (Webster, 1960, 93, 95; 1965, 142).
One must, however, be careful to distinguish the wares used by the legions from that of the auxiliary units.
This is clearly brought out by Maggi Darling, who has been successful in classifying the wares of different legions in the first century from the excavations at Gloucester, Usk and Wroxeter, where, in all three cases, there is a significant absence of black burnished wares.
The products of the Dorset potters were probably intended only for the auxiliary forts, as the evidence from Waddon Hill and Nanstallon (Fox and Ravenhill, 1972) suggests.
The change at Wroxeter is as evident as on the Wall, although in a purely civil context.
A large Hadrianic group from the macellum includes examples of all the forms in a great variety of detail, but the quantity is about equal to that of the hard grey wares it was soon to replace.
The achievements of the Dorset industry, which must have been under very astute management, were due to the presence of Poole Harbour, where the pottery must have been crated and shipped for its journey on the western route with its useful points of entry, the Bristol Channel, the Dee and Mersey, the Solway Firth and the Clyde.
But pottery industries elsewhere had a similar advantage of transport (fig. 8. 1).
Those in the Thames Estuary were moderately successful, but the Nene Valley industry did even better and, later, the Humber provided the same means for the E. Yorkshire potters who gained an eventual monopoly of the military market in the fourth century.
On the other hand, Kay Hartley has demonstrated that the Mancetter and Oxfordshire mortaria makers were equally fortunate in gaining the military market (Hartley, 1973, fig. 7).
Although few of the wares are found on the Wall itself, to the south of it they have a wide distribution pattern over the central and eastern parts of the northern garrisons;, presumably the western sector was firmly under the control of the Wilderspool potters.
Both Mancetter and Oxfordshire are well inland for convenient harbours, but this may not have prevented them from using water-borne transport.
Southern Britain abounds in small rivers all flowing eventually into larger ones and the sea.
The River Anker, flowing through the middle of the Mancetter pottery area, joins the Tame where Tamworth now stands, and thence to the Trent, while the Oxfordshire potters were never far away from the Thames and its  tributaries.
It is probable that we are not yet aware of the extensive use made of the river system for bulk transport at that period, but there are indications which should alert us to it, such as the wharfage on the River Ver discovered in the 1954 — 7 excavation at the Park Street villa (Saunders, 1963, 118 — 123).
By this means, all the major industrial centres could have been brought into reach of the sea.
This brings me back to my main theme, the need for more concentrated and co-ordinated work on manufacture and distribution, for without it, we will never fully understand the history of the development of the coarse wares, stylistically or chronologically.
This was fully understood by Philip Corder and amply demonstrated by his extensive excavations and reports on kilns in Yorkshire and elsewhere  (1928, 1930, 1937, 1943, 1949 and ed. 1950).
No one has advanced our studies so far in this direction, although one must not forget the valuable work of M. R. Hull on the Colchester industry (1963).
After a considerable lull, there has been a return to this basic approach with the work on the New Forest industry by Mike Fulford (1975) and Vivien Swan (1973), and that of Oxfordshire by Christopher Young (1972 and 1975a; with Harris, 1975b; and a major study forthcoming).
Another very significant breakthrough has been made by Dr David Peacock with his studies of the minerals in the clay, and which has begun to uncover new, and in some cases, totally unexpected information on the distribution of pottery.
So far, apart from his basic research in black burnished wares (1973), his work has been confined to peripheral aspects such as imported amphorae (1971) and the Malvernian wares (1968a and 1968b) which may be important for future work on the major salt extraction at Droitwich.
What is now required is a large scale, well co-ordinated research programme on the products from all known kilns, many of which have been excavated but never published.
This should give us the key mineral signature which could, if necessary, be refined by the technique of selective quantitative element analysis developed by the Oxford Laboratory by X-ray fluorescent spectroscopy which has achieved such notable success with mortaria (Hartley and Richards, 1965).
Only when this has been done, can any serious attempt be made to analyse any crucial stratified groups from civil or military sites, since we have no knowledge of the origins of the pottery, nor can we give a proper scientific description of the fabrics.
The attempts to describe pottery at present are totally inadequate and highly subjective in all aspects such as colour, surface finish decoration and above all, fabric and the effects of kiln control, or lack of it, and the critical cooling temperature (Curie point).
It may be possible to devise a system for including greater objectivity into descriptions, and Dr Peacock has been very helpful in laying down guidelines, which it is hoped will be published before long, but this is only a step in the right direction towards a fuller understanding of manufacturing processes, marketing and distribution, and the size and historical development of each industry.
Much more is also needed towards the building of a full chronological sequence of the main wares and vessel types.
It would be helpful if a selection of the published close-dated groups was to be made available in microfilm or microfiche.
This would at least save hours of research in pursuing vessels through a vast number of published reports, with only  a frail memory for a guide.
To this should be attached a revised, up-dated consideration of the date bracket for each group, and a list of residual pieces.
This would be an invaluable rapid guide for all students writing reports on their own pottery.
In the past, most of the pottery workers have been individuals working virtually unaided, and it says much for the hard work and devotion of people like John Gillam, that so much has been achieved.
With the establishment of Excavations Units, especially in the cities, the situation has changed drastically, for now that the specialists can operate as members of a team, there may not even be the need for those responsible for pottery to have to draw it all themselves.
This means that publication of excavation reports, as the Frere Report indicates (1975), will also have to be transformed, since large pottery reports may now have become too expensive to print in the traditional manner, and may have to be available in microfiche sheets.
There is a danger, if this is done, that it may be forgotten that pottery is not only a fascinating subject in its own right, but that it offers vital dating evidence for the chronology of the site, and the key sherds must appear in the body of the main report, with similar critical evidence.
The limitations in the work and conclusions of those of us of the older generation, may soon be painfully obvious if, in the future there will be an increase in the scale of the work and more opportunities for effective scientific study.
But this is the penalty all pioneers must suffer, for we all operate within the narrow confines of the knowledge and attitudes of our day, and before condemning us entirely, it is to be hoped that future students will appreciate that their own work would be that much more difficult, but for the solid foundations so meticulously laid down by John Pearson Gillam.
9
THE BRITISH UNDER ROMAN RULE: A STUDY IN COLONIALISM
ONE has to go back to Julius Caesar to understand Rome's interest in Britain and the attitudes of the tribes of south-eastern Britain to Rome.
Whatever may have prompted Caesar to carry out his expeditions, their partial success was accepted in Rome as a definite conquest.
The effect in Britain was a polarising into allies and enemies of the tribes with which Rome had been in contact.
Caesar lists among his allies the Trinovantes of the Colne peninsula and the Iceni of Norfolk, while the anti-Roman forces were the tribes of Kent and a tribe on the north bank of the Thames, the name of which is lost but whose chief, Cassivellaunus, was given command of the British forces against Rome.
This division of the tribes cut across their earlier affiliations and origins since most of those on both sides of the Thames Estuary had been Gallo-Belgic migrants crossing the Channel and settling in these areas, mainly as a consequence of Caesar's advance into Gaul in 39 BC and possibly earlier.
Thus, the Trinovantes, with their tribal centre at Camulodunon and their neighbours to the west nucleated at Verulamion and Braughing, appear to be recent arrivals to Britain, and more or less contemporary movements had brought others into north and eastern Kent from the Seine Valley.
The tribes that had emerged from much earlier migrations were the Iceni and that of Cassivellaunus, who was clearly hostile to the newcomers, seeing them as a threat round the northern borders of his kingdom.
There were, of course, many tribes in the Midlands and south-west that had no direct contact with Caesar and this also applies to the  Atrebates and the Regini on the south coast of modern Sussex and Hampshire.
Yet there was early trade with the Continent, as the evidence from Hengistbury Head has demonstrated.
The Gallic chief, Commius, who had been a friend and ally of Caesar, turned against him in the great revolt of Vercingetorix after the Roman invasion of 55 and 54 BC.
Commius was forced to flee to Britain and he established himself as King of the British Atrebates which were presumably an earlier migrant group of the Gallic tribe of the same name.
This broadly is the pattern now emerging from a study of the British  coinage and pottery, both native types and imports of this period.
The territories of the allies of Caesar were opened for trade with Rome, and the Catuvellauni and the Trinovantes, in particular the former, acquired a taste for Italian wine and the fine silver vessels for straining and drinking it.
There is evidence of Roman traders setting up a depot near Braughing, using the River Lea as the transport link with the Thames.
As soon as Cunobelinos, who had established himself as ruler over both tribes, moved his capital to Camulodunon (Colchester), no doubt the traders followed and established a new depot on the River Colne.
The tribes of the hinterland were affected to a varying extent by this trade.
They copied the Gallo-Belgic coins, soon developed their own styles, and, by the decade prior to the conquest, Rome's official assessment of Britain, according to Strabo, was a healthy balance of trade.
In exchange for wine, pottery and silver vessels, Rome received slaves and commodities like hides, grain, silver and, oddly enough, hunting dogs; for even at this early date, the British were showing their canine obsession.
The area influenced by this development of trade can be marked in geographic terms by drawing a line from the Humber to the Bristol Channel.
None of the tribes to the north and west of this divide minted coins or appears to have had any contact with Rome in the pre-conquest period.
The lack of coins deprives us of the evidence to form any assessment of their dynastic histories or tribal boundaries.
There was another important political factor affecting the south-eastern tribes which created serious problems for Rome; the insidious but powerful influence of the Druidic priesthood.
This primitive religion, with some quite sophisticated beliefs common to most of the Celtic peoples of the west, was the single unifying link between them.
Its priests were drawn from the ruling houses of the tribes, many of whose sons became Druids, and sometimes even the kings themselves, as in the case of Diviacus, the friend of Caesar.
As revered advisers to the tribes, the Druids had a very strong political influence, and they clearly saw the advance of Rome as a serious threat to their power and a challenge to their authority.
It is likely that some of the chief Druids fled from Gaul at the time of Caesar's invasion and took refuge in Britain where they initiated and developed a strong anti-Roman feeling among the most susceptible British chieftains.
The policy of Augustus towards Britain was to maintain Caesar's conquest together with the alliances made for the development of trade, and also to ensure that the coastline vital to a successful Roman landing remained in friendly hands.
This assumption makes it easier to  understand some of the sudden political changes in south-eastern Britain.
The greatest Roman triumph was to secure the allegiance of Tincommius of the Atrebates, whose father, Commius, had had a pathological hatred of Rome.
The coastal tribe probably called itself the Regini (‘The Proud Ones’, but later Romanized to the Regni), with Bosham Harbour as its chief port, and was also probably an ally of Rome.
We know nothing about its rulers, except for one about the time of the conquest, whose name began with the letter ‘A’.
Cunobelinos was a great statesman, and managed by his powerful character and diplomatic skill to maintain a balance between the pro-and anti-Roman elements in his household.
He was able to extend his sphere of influence over a large area of south-eastern Britain.
The proud and independent people of East Anglia, the Iceni, were also allies of Rome and this was carefully respected by Cunobelinos.
He evidently also had friendly relations with the tribe on his western boundary, the northern section of the Dubunni under their ruler, Bodvoc.
Here he may well have acted as a diplomatic go-between in introducing them to the Roman traders, whose imports have been found at their main centre, the great oppidum at Bagendon near Cirencester.
The death of Cunobelinos c .
AD 40 precipitated a political upheaval.
The anti-Roman faction in the royal household seized power and totally upset the careful arrangements made and fostered by Rome.
The chief agent of this dramatic coup was Caratacus, one of the sons of the great King.
Its immediate effect was the flight of Adminius, another son of Cunobelinos, and who had been installed as King of the north-east tip of Kent to control the main port of entry at Richborough and the Wansum Channel which provided a short-cut to the Thames.
Adminius fled to Caligula and begged him to intervene, but that strange un-balanced Emperor toyed with a plan for invasion but suddenly changed his mind.
Meantime, from the scanty evidence of his coins, Caratacus established himself in the territories of the Atrebates and Regini, the other Roman allies.
Verica, King of the Atrebates, was forced out of his kingdom and like Adminius appealed to the Emperor, now Claudius.
Togodumnus had succeeded to his father's kingdom and was also hostile to Rome.
The overall effect of these dynastic upsets and sudden reversal of political alignment was disastrous from Rome's viewpoint.
The whole of south-eastern Britain was now in the hands of her enemies.
The only allies left were the Iceni and possibly Bodvoc of the northern Dubunni.
Claudius was forced to decide between giving up Britain altogether, abandoning the conquest of Caesar and the unfulfilled hopes of Augustus, or an armed invasion to secure the island and transform it into a province.
There were many good reasons for adopting the latter course as Claudius badly needed to be certain of the loyalty of his army, and there was no better opportunity for obtaining this than the prospect of a great victory.
There was also the prospect of silver and the natural wealth of Britain in its lands and people.
Our concern here, however, is to follow the changes in the attitudes of the British tribes to the invasion and the later consolidation.
The well-tried Roman policy of divide and rule had been the basis of Augustan diplomacy and continued during the conquest.
The main British force to oppose the advance of the army consisted of the household warriors and levies of the combined kingdom of the tribes of the Catuvellauni and the Trinovantes.
The anti-Roman forces were probably aided by the peoples of Kent and the reluctant levies raised by Caratacus from his newly conquered lands.
The attitudes of the more distant tribes are difficult to assess, but we know that the Dubunnic contingent immediately surrendered to Plautius.
The Durotriges, with most probably the southern branch of the Dubunni, gave the Romans serious trouble, so it can be assumed that they may have supplied a strong detachment to help oppose the Medway crossing.
From subsequent events it seems probable that two tribes gave Rome considerable assistance during the landing and fighting that followed.
The Iceni may have harried the northern boundary of the Trinovantes, with freedom to raid and loot, and the Regini provided the Roman fleet with an important haven in Bosham, from which the army launched its attack along the coast to the west.
After Claudius had ridden in triumph into the British capital, Camulodunon, he received the submission of eleven Kings of Britain, according to the inscription on his triumphal arch in Rome.
It is impossible to list all these since some of the smaller tribes were later absorbed into the civitates organized when the provincial administration was established.
A strong case could be made for the boundary of the new province to have been based on a line from the Humber to the Bristol Channel, probably following the lower Severn, the Warwickshire Avon and the Trent.
Rome had at this time little interest in the lands beyond, which lay mainly in the highland zone and were inhabited by the earlier and less civilized peoples.
It was normal practice for Rome to establish buffer states on her frontiers in the form of client kingdoms, an arrangement which held only for the lifetime of the chosen ruler.
In Britain the tribes of a vast area of the Pennines were brought together under the name of the local deity, Brigantia, as a client kingdom, and placed under the rule of Cartimandua, a powerful but devious queen whose loyalty to Rome never faltered.
It is likely that attempts were made to create similar kingdoms on the western frontier along the Severn Valley, but these were frustrated by Caratacus, who had established himself as the head of the anti-Roman forces in the region now known as Wales.
No doubt he had the active help and encouragement of the Druids, who had been forced to abandon their sacred groves in south-eastern Britain and settled on the Isle of Anglesey off the coast of north Wales.
Claudius made two other arrangements which seem at first sight to be highly anomalous.
After the hard fighting of the initial campaign Rome could have felt satisfied with the rapid conquest and prepared to stabilize and consolidate her new addition to the Empire.
Such intentions were shattered by the sudden attack launched by Caratacus and his newly recruited allies.
Tacitus tells us that this incursion was into the territory of Rome's allies, and this could place it in the lower Severn, where Caratacus could have linked up with the other group of dissidents in the south-west still smarting from the operations of Vespasian, who with his sea-borne mobility swept right along the south coast, taking the Britons by surprise.
Such was the state of affairs when Ostorius Scapula arrived to take over the governorship from Aulus Plautius, that it was seen as a serious crisis.
In the light of what was to follow, it could be argued that Scapula was panicked into rash measures, excusable only as military necessities, but their effect on the Britons was to be as deplorable for them as for Rome.
As Tacitus informs us, all the tribes occupying that territory on the Roman side of the Rivers Trent and Avon, which was effectively the new province, were disarmed.
According to Roman law, no one could bear arms except those entitled to do so, the only exception being hunting weapons and utility knives.
The help given to Caratacus by his allies inside the province must have revealed the secret caches of arms still available to the Britons, who had probably been required to surrender all their weapons on defeat or under treaty obligations.
Scapula was determined to seek out and seize all hidden arms by a show of force and sheer terror tactics to stun the Britons into immobility, while he led his forces forward to deal with Caratacus.
The search operation implies units of soldiers taking a village apart, over-turning haystacks, looking under floor coverings and making themselves a  thoroughly unpleasant nuisance; any Protest would merit instant reprisal.
A section of the Iceni revolted and had to be  suppressed by a dismounted cavalry regiment.
Anything more calculated to create anger and resentment cannot be imagined, but worse followed.
The advance to the west to find and destroy Caratacus meant stripping much of the eastern part of the Province of its garrisons.
To secure his rear Scapula used the device of founding a colonia of retired veterans at Camulodunon and giving two British rulers the responsibility of maintaining the peace in their areas.
To achieve this, Claudius set up two client kingdoms in the south-east, one with Prasutagus as King of the Iceni, and the other with Tiberius Claudius Cogidubnus as King of the two tribes, the Regini and the Atrebates.
It is possible that the latter held lands to the west also, taken from the hostile Durotriges after their defeat by Vespasian.
This would certainly help to explain the later grouping of the civitates in this area.
Cogidubnus was made a Roman citizen, taking the names of his patron.
The creation of these two kingdoms seems quite anomalous at the earlier conquest phase, as has hitherto been assumed.
The royal estates of the house of Cunobelinos, already forfeit, would have been used to provide the land allotments for the veterans.
This was very unfortunate for the Trinovantes, the oldest allies of Rome in Britain.
After being taken over by the Catuvellauni they had a right to expect some restoration of their territories.
For some of their land to be handed over to the Roman soldiers was a bitter pill to swallow, for it meant the loss of the Colne peninsula and much else, which left them only the Essex marches and lands to the north and the area round modern Chelmsford, which probably became their tribal centre.
It was convenient for Rome to use confiscated enemy estates to install a strong military reserve in freshly conquered lands.
But there was another idea behind it, surprising in that it stemmed from the pragmatic Roman mind: it was actually thought that the veterans would become model citizens whom the newly conquered barbarians could observe and emulate.
This attractive theory was too often proved untenable by the harsh realities.
The troops of this period were mainly recruited from the frontier zones, and the thin veneer of ‘civilization’ acquired in their army service did little to change them.
They were now expected to settle down with the very people with whom they had been fighting and who had been responsible for killing some of their comrades-in-arms.
It is hardly surprising that they regarded the Britons as the defeated enemy to be despised and kicked around.
Similar attitudes of troops of occupation of  all ages and in all places, from South America to India, help us understand the revulsion now felt by many Britons, some of whom may have been sympathetic to Rome and hopeful of recognition of their natural rights and dignity.
Any goodwill built up by careful diplomacy and treaties was swept away by Scapula's savage reprisals, and any shreds left with the Trinovantes by the brutal contempt displayed by the veterans at Camulodunon.
This is the backcloth to the dramatic events that were soon to follow.
At least for the moment, Scapula was able to concentrate his forces on the western frontier, which now extended to the Wye and the Severn.
He sought out Caratacus and stormed the strong defensive position he had chosen, but the British commander escaped, as did many of the British warriors, and attempted to win Cartimandua to his cause.
The wily Queen, knowing that her position was totally dependent on Rome, handed him over as a prisoner, giving her ally more cause for gratitude and reward.
With his main enemy removed, Scapula might have cause for congratulation, but this was soon forgotten in the savage guerrilla-type tactics of the untamed Silures, whom Scapula had unwisely threatened to exterminate.
The Roman army was now committed to establishing a frontier in difficult terrain and their losses steadily mounted until Scapula, worn out with bitterness and frustration, collapsed and died.
This seemed a great victory for the undefeated Britons and since those living within the Province also now had cause to hate Rome, this gave them a real hope of a military success.
This may have been the time when Nero and his advisers were concerned about Britain.
The Emperor is supposed to have considered giving up the Province, and Seneca, who, as one of his advisers was well informed, is said to have been calling in his, or the Imperial, loans.
This act is hardly likely to have endeared the chiefs to the Roman cause, especially if all the money had been spent, and could have been a deciding factor in the hardening of the changing attitudes in some of the royal households.
The third governor, Didius Gallus, managed to stabilize the military position, but there remained the crucial decision on the future of Wales.
By now it must have been obvious to the Romans that the power and authority of the Druids was in the ascendancy and that sooner or later their inimical influence had to be removed.
The decision involved the total reduction of this large hilly area, and one can understand the arguments and counter arguments among Nero and his advisers; was Britain worth yet further military effort in the face of growing hostility  and bitterness?
After a few years of indecision Nero finally chose military glory.
He may have been reluctant to give up a conquest of his illustrious forbear, Julius Caesar.
The decision was crucial to those Britons who had now resolved to take up arms against Rome if necessary, but for the Druids it was now simply a matter of life or death.
At any moment the Roman army could arrive at the narrow strait which separated their holy island from the mainland of north Wales, and they had no protection, except the super-natural powers they felt they could command.
But they could still depend on their hold over many of the British chieftains and their families.
There seemed only one way for the Druids to prevent their imminent destruction, and that was to ensure that the army never came within reach of them; this could only be achieved either by strong enough resistance in the mountains of north-west Wales or by a serious insurrection deep within the Province.
While the Silures and their allies had fought a long and successful guerrilla-type campaign, they did not possess the strength or ability to stop a large Roman force from advancing into their territory, nor had they command of the sea.
The only other possibility was a large-scale uprising in the eastern area of the Province, while the Roman army was concentrated on the western frontier, but for this to be effective in diverting the Roman plans, timing was of vital importance.
The man chosen by Nero for the new advance was Quintus Veranius, who had been carefully selected for a senatorial career from an early age, and had distinguished himself as governor in Pamphylia, which is now in Turkey.
There he had gained experience in mountain warfare against the tough hill-folk; there is also evidence that he evoked strong feelings of respect from the people of his province, so he was probably also a skilful diplomat.
We know nothing of his campaign, except that it was limited to a single season and that the Silures did not appear again as a fighting force.
He died within a year of taking up his new office, but by then he had successfully completed the first stage of the reduction of Wales which, according to his will, he expected to complete within his three-year term of office.
His successor was Suetonius Paullinus, the best general immediately available.
He had gained his reputation in the mountains of North Africa, but he was what the Americans call a ‘hard nose’ with little respect for civilians.
Suetonius rapidly completed the subjection of south and central Wales, and then turned to the mountain massif of Snowdonia and the centre of hostility it screened.
The Druids may have calculated that the  difficult terrain would have delayed the advance.
If so, they may have reckoned without the fleet, which provided the Roman army with its mobility.
Most invaders of north Wales have grasped this essential strategy, except the hapless William Rufus.
There is evidence of a Roman presence at Chester by this date, and clearly this harbour on the Dee Estuary held the key for a rapid and unopposed advance.
A year's preparation may have gone into the assembling of a fleet of warships and transport vessels.
While the Roman preparations were proceeding with their usual rapidity and efficiency, Prasutagus, the client king of the Iceni, died.
Precisely when this occurred is not clear, but from the sequence of events it was probably in 59.
The unhappy effect of this event in the royal Icenian household presented the Druids with just the propaganda weapon they needed to foster British discontent.
Most historians have assumed that it was the aftermath of Prasutagus' death alone that caused the Revolt and that the Druids were not involved, but I have always taken the view that it was the threat of their imminent extinction which concentrated all their efforts on arresting the progress of the army, with the probability of a great British victory.
They would have exploited to the full every real and imagined grievance.
Here one is dealing with the balance of probabilities, and readers must decide for themselves, since there is no direct evidence one way or the other.
The death of the King ended the client relationship which was always between the Emperor and a particular ruler, and the presence of such a kingdom within the Province was now a political anomaly.
To ensure that his widow and her family were well provided for, Prasutagus left half his wealth to the Emperor, which is also what was expected of a dependent ruler.
To claim his inheritance, Nero would have instructed the chief financial officer in Britain, the Procurator, Decianus Catus, to make a full inventory of the royal estates and possessions.
This was all legal and proper, but in the execution of this work things went sadly wrong.
One can only assume that the Roman officials exceeded their authority and treated the royal family with disrespect.
One of the Queen's bodyguards may have intervened and blows been exchanged.
Such an incident could have been handled with tact by a sympathetic procurator, but one who was weak or self-seeking could have panicked or exploited such an incident to his advantage.
Whatever may have happened, it was treated as an act of war and in these circumstances the perpetrators forfeited all rights.
The flogging of Boudica and the raping of her daughters followed, together with the seizure of the royal  treasury and all goods on behalf of the Emperor.
If the Procurator was looking for his own pickings, it would have been in his interest to provoke a reaction that could be construed as hostile.
The Druids by their widespread influence in high places were able to make Boudica the focus and figurehead of all anti-Roman feeling.
The rage of the Iceni spread through the south-east, affecting first the Trinovantes who had been simmering in discontent for some years.
Soon others were gathering their weapons together, eager to settle scores against those who had exploited them, especially while the army was far away.
The dreadful results are well-known and this is no place to trace the course of the events to their bitter culmination on a Midland plain.
The purpose of this brief article is to consider the attitudes and reactions of the British tribes, and here several points of significance may be noted.
Some of the areas of hostility and loyalty to Rome can be identified.
Cogidubnus held his groups of southern tribes aloof and survived in honour and respect.
He may have provided an escape route along Stane Street to Bosham Harbour.
Cartimandua, Queen of the Brigantes, also remained loyal; had she turned against Rome she had the resources to turn the balance with a sudden thrust from the north.
On the other hand, the old enemies, the Durotriges, possibly with their allies the southern Dobunni, were soon on the rampage and pinned down Legio II Augusta in its fortress at Exeter and prevented it from joining Paullinus in the Midlands.
How the other tribes lined up against Rome it is impossible to say, but the presence of army units in their territory probably kept the Corieltauvi and the Cornovii quiet, and this would also have applied to the northern Dobunni with a cavalry regiment at Cirencester, but their allegiance was to Rome anyway.
So Britain was split down the middle and if one includes the tribes of Wales, which were battered into submission, the possibility is that less than half played an active role in the Revolt.
Had more Britons revolted, it seems doubtful whether the Roman recovery would have been so rapid.
Paullinus pursued a vigorous policy of revenge for his heavy losses into the winter season.
The new Procurator, Julius Classicianus, began to fear that the devastation might have a serious lasting effect on the rebel areas.
A commission of enquiry confirmed this assessment, and the Governor was withdrawn, though his period of service had in fact ended in the winter of 60/61, so Tacitus would appear to magnify a grievance to make a political point in favour of his hero whose memoirs he may have used for his Annals .
Some have argued that the lands of  the Iceni suffered so badly from this act of destruction that the tribe remained economically backward.
But this view is probably due to our imperfect knowledge of the remains of this period in East Anglia, bearing in mind, too, that with the shortage of good building stone most of the buildings would have been in timber, the excavation and interpretation of which has only recently become a normal archaeological technique.
One can assume that the leaders of the Revolt were eliminated, removing the upper levels of tribal society, and also that the lands and possessions of the tribes would have been seized by the state to be retained as agerpublicus , sold off to speculators or given as rewards to loyalists.
Such lands would certainly have been subject to reorganization under new management.
The effect of such a drastic change of ownership, especially of tribal lands, would have been to bring new capital into the area with development programmes to exploit the land for profit.
Rather than any  devastated areas remaining derelict for any time, quite the reverse may have been the case, and archaeology, especially from the air, is now beginning to produce evidence for development on a much larger scale than appreciated hitherto.
The most important aspect of the Revolt was its effect on the attitude of the Roman Government towards Britain.
Resentment of this magnitude was a clear indication of the failure of the avowed policy of pacification and Romanization.
In the first decades of occupation it was now evident that far too much effort had been concentrated on the stabilization of the Province in purely military terms and too little attention paid to the feelings and aspirations of the Britons, except through the few carefully selected agents, and there had been a tacit acceptance that the rest would come to accept Rome.
A real attempt had now to be made to change the political climate under which the Roman way of life could be accepted and economic development could prosper.
The two Governors after Paullinus were diplomats and administrators and not like the military men who had caused so much havoc.
For the next three centuries there was no further trouble within the Province of Britannia, and all the military problems were confined to the northern frontier, except that in the late second century the Brigantes seem to have been in a state of unrest, but the historical reference is far from clear.
By the end of the first century all the tribal capitals had their gridded street plan laid out and work had started on the public buildings.
The urban model was extended by Hadrian in the areas beyond the original  Province to the cities at Wroxeter, Carlisle and Caerwent.
The foundations were now securely laid for a long period of prosperity rising to a peak in the early fourth century, if one can judge from the mansion-type houses in the towns and countryside.
The bitter lessons of the early years were learnt and digested; crude though it may have been, Rome's attitude towards its conquered peoples was far more effective than that of the nineteenth-century imperialists.
It is a sober thought that had our colonial administrators studied early Roman Imperial history, instead of the gang warfare of the late Republic, a few useful ideas about the problems of subject people might have seeped into their thinking.
10
THE POSSIBLE EFFECTS ON BRITAIN OF THE FALL OF MAGNENTIUS
IT is a privilege to be able to pay tribute to Sheppard Frere whose published works have set a very high standard for us all.
Few know of the hard and unremitting labour of editing he has always been prepared to do, and for which there is so often so little proper recognition.
Our debt to him, in advancing our studies and placing them in their proper imperial framework, is enormous.
One of the more fascinating aspects of Roman Britain is the interweaving of the evidence recovered from archaeological discovery and that from the surviving historical accounts.
The written word always has a special sanctity and more so if it is from a contemporary source, but it needs to be examined with the same ruthless and objective scrutiny as given to the archaeological evidence.
This has not always been the case in the past when antiquaries have often blindly accepted accounts as offering established facts and forcing an interpretation of their discoveries to fit.
It has even led in extreme cases to a few excavators being so certain of what they would find before they put a spade into the ground, that evidence was selected and rejected in accordance with their predetermined thinking.
It is not difficult to interpret archaeological material to fit into a preconceived pattern if one has the determination and mental agility.
In 1969, a paper was published which gave some examples of this unfortunate practice.
It was my contribution to The Roman Villa in Britaini and optimistically entitled ‘The Future of Villa Studies’.
It introduced an attempt to assess the truth of the often reiterated statement that the Great Barbarian Conspiracy of 367 virtually destroyed the villa system in  Britain.
A clear and detailed historical account of this event is given by Ammianus Marcellinus, who has always been accepted as one of the more reliable of the ancient historians, although it has been recently pointed out by Professor Malcolm Todd that Theodosius I was the patron of Marcellinus, who can hardly be blamed for enlarging on the achievements of the father of the Emperor.
It is thus possible that the effect of the Great Conspiracy has been magnified in order to give Count Theodosius greater credibility in his programme of restoration.
There is certainly very little archaeological evidence of any serious destruction of property in the countryside at this time.
The examination of the evidence from villas was not as thorough as one would have liked, as in most cases it comes from old accounts and is of extremely poor quality, with very little attempt, if any, at a stratigraphical analysis.
The evidence for destruction of buildings is almost non-existent and the human remains of ‘the victims’ in the majority of cases clearly belong to organized burials in small cemeteries, post-dating the occupation of some of the villa buildings.
There are few exceptions where human skulls have been found in wells and which could suggest violence at a later period.
The only evidence which seemed at the time to offer any reliable dating was that of the coins which were of sufficient interest to the nineteenth-century antiquarians for them to be recorded, although rarely in detail.
But even here it was surprising how few coins were found in extensive clearance and in some cases scarcely more than half-a-dozen were recorded.
Whether this is the result of the ‘coarse’ digging of earlier decades, or that the proportion of coins varies considerably, is a matter which deserves study.
A suitable break-point was taken on the death of Magnentius in 353, and of the reports examined from 334 buildings, no less than 199 offered no satisfactory evidence and it could be argued that the remaining 135 hardly offer a sufficient quantity for any serious statistical study.
It could be improved by including all the results of excavations since 1961, but this has not been possible for various reasons, the most important of which is that it is no longer the intention to study the results of 367, but to turn to another event recorded by Ammianus which can be illuminated by this old study and by more recent work.
The one fact which seems to emerge was that changes were taking place in British villas round about 360 and this was reflected in the two maps, figs. 6.1 and 6.2, included in this 1969 study.
The event which affected Britain at this time was the fall from power of Magnentius.
His origins are obscure, but he seems to have been a  German from one of the tribes which were allowed to settle within the Empire, and for which privilege they were liable for military service, a practice going back to the late third century.
His promotion through the army ranks had been rapid and by 350 he commanded a select corps of Ioviani and Herculiani , the new type of legion earlier created by Diocletian.
Constans, the emperor of the west, had become unpopular in the western provinces through his oppression, and he had neglected to maintain that essential bond which bound the army to him.
A conspiracy between Magnentius and Marcellinus, the comes rei privatae , overthrew Constans, who fled towards Spain, but he was sought out and killed by Gaiso, dispatched for this purpose by Magnentius, now established as Augustus .
A clash with Constantius II was inevitable and Magnentius prepared for this immediately by raising a large army with substantial aid obtained from and freely given by the provincials, especially those in Gaul and Britain.
But he also had strong support from the barbarian peoples, the Franks, Saxons and Germans.
An attempt was made to secure the acceptance of Constantius to the fait accompli , and if accepted, it was to be followed by dynastic marriages.
But the Emperor remained steadfast in his determination to avenge the murder of his brother, urged, as he told his council of advisors, by his father, the great Constantine, who appeared to him in a dream.
The eventual battle took place at Mursa, where the River Drave joins the Danube.
It was a long and bitter struggle with great losses on both sides, causing a serious weakening of the imperial army.
Magnentius was forced to flee, but he attempted to hold the Alpine passes, failed, and, after admitting defeat at Lyons, committed suicide.
It is the aftermath of these events from 353 which is recorded by Ammianus.
He reveals the character of Constantius, his cruelty, his instant acceptance of any vague suspicion whispered by his numerous spies and court sycophants.
The narrow-minded and mean-spirited Emperor was specially severe on any who injured the name of his father, or any member of his imperial family.
Magnentius had caused deep offence in the first place merely by being a barbarian and a pagan, but above all, by murdering Constans, also, no doubt, for receiving such widespread popular support from the peoples of the western provinces.
Constantius set out on a determined course of retribution, seeking out all the followers of Magnentius and exacting punishment by execution, imprisonment and confiscation of their estates and wealth.
The imperial treasury had been seriously reduced by the war and substantial funds were needed to fill the depleted ranks in the army as  rapidly as possible.
The Emperor had many Precedents to follow from earlier times.
But there was an additional element; Constantine the Great had embraced the Christian faith and his sons followed with blind intolerance.
Magnentius may have been a pagan, but it was his acceptance and tacit encouragement of paganism which Constantius regarded as an offence against the imperial house.
Behind the mean, suspicious mind of the Emperor, there was a total conviction tenaciously held, of a trust descended upon him from Constantine.
He raised the status and majesty of the royal household beyond even the limit set by Diocletian, which included an acceptance of Christianity in a purely formal sense, since it is very doubtful if he understood its true meaning.
Any outward indications of paganism in the form of monuments and shrines were natural targets for attack, as symbols of the barbarian pagan world of the usurper.
The retribution exacted by Constantius on the Britons is recorded by Ammianus.
The agent selected for this task was a Spaniard called Paulus, a trusted servant of the Emperor, described as a notarius .
Although this rank was that of a clerk, in the Constantian period it was applied to those officials who were responsible for the minutes of the imperial consistory and some of them rose to the highest ranks.
Constantius found them useful as informants and spies, not only in the Court, but also to send on special confidential or delicate missions.
Paulus had acquired the soubriquet,Catena : the chain, not only for his wanton use of this means of fettering large numbers of suspects, but also for the tangled web of intrigue and innuendo he wove round his victims.
He was, according to Ammianus, especially skilled at extract-ing information by forced confessions by torture or any other means.
Nor was he concerned with justice, but treated the innocent and guilty alike, until he had collected together a large number of wealthy suspects, who could have been associated with Magnentius, to satisfy the suspicious-minded Emperor.
He seized the assets of all those he held, doubtless exceeding his authority in cases of the very wealthy.
His progress in Britain was marked by slaughter, destruction and imprisonment, putting many freeborn men (ingenuorum ) in irons and handcuffs.
This impious crime, wrote Ammianus, forever stained the reign of Constantius.
The vicarius of Britain was Martinus, serving in a temporary capacity, the officers under Magnentius doubtless having been quickly removed as collaborators.
Martinus, a just man, protested to Paulus, who promptly threatened him with instant imprisonment for his  interference.
The governor, fearing for his life, drew his sword and attacked Paulus, but his aim was either too feeble or misdirected to be effective, so he plunged it into his own body.
Paulus delivered his large batch of suspects to Constantius.
After further torture and forced confessions, they were tried, which in effect meant execution, imprisonment or exile.
As Ammianus ironically remarks, there are few who can remember any acquittals under Constantius.
Allowing for a certain amount of exaggeration, it would be reasonable to assume that most of the wealthy landowners and business men would have suffered in this ruthless purge.
Their estates and assets were seized for the imperial treasury, and one can only speculate on the possible consequences.
Surrounded as he was by flatterers and sycophants, Constantius may have disposed of some of the land as rewards for service and information, but he needed money to recoup the heavy losses in his army.
One can only assume that some estates and businesses were sold to his wealthy followers.
The general effect must have been a serious breaking-up of the great landed estates of Britain and their redistribution to absentee landlords, apart from those who preferred to move to Britain and take up residence.
There is little doubt about the richness of the British countryside in the first half of the fourth century.
The large villas with their elaborate pavements reflect a degree of ostentation, which could only be associated with a well-to-do land-owning or farming class.
How such prosperity came about, however, cannot easily be explained.
Britain has always acquired its wealth, until the Industrial Revolution, through its agriculture.
There are important by-products such as wool and flax, leading to cloth production, milling, tanning, etc.
It is possible also that viticulture was practised in the southern limestone and chalk areas, and this may help to explain the particular wealth of the Cotswolds and North Oxfordshire, although secure evidence is still lacking.
However the wealth may have been produced it is evident that it had created a rich landowning class.
It may be that their number was small and their holdings large, but excavations are needed on a selective basis before it is possible to isolate the houses of the owners from those of their tenants or agents.
At present it is only possible to guess that the largest of the villas, such as Woodchester, Bignor and North Leigh may have been owner occupied.
Size is not the main criterion, however, as has been shown by Winterton, the buildings of which occupy a large area, with no apparent country house; it is essentially a working establishment with enough barns to suggest grain as one of its main products.
Yet when compared with the much larger and more luxurious villas of the Rhineland and Gallia Belgica, Britannia seems a very poor relation.
Many survived the depredation of the barbarian incursion of the late third century from which Britain was spared.
Ausonius in his remarkable poem Mosella presents a glowing picture of a prosperous countryside, although how much of this is poetic licence is difficult to judge.
Other sources indicate in Gaul the presence of landowners of the curial class with vast holdings and little interest in trade or contemporary events.
Often their estates were not concentrated in a single province, but scattered over a number.
Arguing on the basis of income, A. H. M. Jones has estimated that some of the more wealthy land-owners in the western provinces must have held ‘several thousand square miles’.
Nor must one forget the imperial estates, which could have accounted for as much as fifteen per cent of the 1and, ii for which there is evidence in Britain.
Large well-run estates confiscated by Paulus could well have passed into imperial hands and continued to be managed for profit, but it depends on whether the Emperor needed capital more than income.
It would be reasonable to assume that the considerable changes that took place in Britain were a result of these large-scale confiscations.
Some estates may have received new owners with little change, or they could have been divided and redistributed; others may have been enlarged with the addition of adjacent lands or groups of estates under a single owner.
The amalgamation of properties would, perhaps, have had the greatest effect since the main purpose would have been economy of management.
A new owner, or his agent, may have found too many properties to maintain, at the same time new premises would have been needed for managers in a central or more convenient position relative to the estate, or within reach of an important market.
Large estates also allow for specialization, replacing the general purpose farm with a balanced plant and animal husbandry.
Where different soils allowed, some parts of the estate could be given over wholly to sheep, others to crops, all creating a need for different types of farm buildings and yards; those no longer required would then be demolished if building materials were needed elsewhere.
If not they would have been abandoned and merely allowed to fall down.
The evidence for such changes from past excavations is rarely satisfactory and is almost entirely based on the coins, which, in many cases, is far too slight to offer more than a hint.
Many excavators have reported the collapse of buildings with roof tiles lying where they fell, and only rarely is there  any evidence of demolition.
This desertion and decay could, of course, have occurred at any period.
There is, however, another element which has been frequently misunderstood, as indicated in the 1969 paper: the continued occupation with a serious lowering of living standards.
The evidence of hearths over tessellated pavements and trampled black earth accumulated over floors has often been interpreted as ‘squatter occupation’, as if casual wanderers had found temporary refuge in the ruins of the buildings.
A more likely suggestion would be that it is evidence of the estate workers continuing to live on the site and work the land long after the owners, managers or bailiffs had departed.
This may be confirmed on a few sites by the presence of a small cemetery over the site of the original house, after it had been thoroughly demolished, since some of the graves have been dug into the wall foundations, showing an ignorance of their existence.
Unfortunately, our present evidence does not permit any refinement in interpretation.
The best we can expect is destruction, or a sudden running-down of an establishment or extensive rebuilding on a different plan or scale.
The number of establishments which were subjected to a sudden change at this period is considerable, but as can be seen from the map (fig. 10.1) there are two main areas, one in parts of Gloucestershire, Somerset and Hampshire and the other in Hertfordshire and north Kent.
These, however, include the richest concentration of villas of all periods.
If one could select those areas where there appears to be the largest proportion of sites which seem to have been affected, they are in Hampshire, Hertfordshire and north Kent, possibly indicating that they suffered the greatest disturbance.
Refinements in the dating evidence could easily change the pattern, and there are examples well outside these areas: in Sussex, for example, at Chilgrove, where there are several sites.
At Chilgrove 1, the coin series ends with Magnentius, and Alec Down, the excavator, suggests an amalgamation with Chilgrove 2 which could represent the kind of reorganization to be expected.
At Rapsley, near Ewhurst in Surrey, occupation appears to have ceased by c .
350, and may be another which underwent a change in ownership.
Another site, some distance from the main concentrations, where a major change has been dated to 350 — 60 is the villa at Great Casterton.
Here an aisled barn was converted into a dwelling, involving also the demolition of a large circular corn-dryer and a rectangular building, making a complete transformation of the site.
In areas which appear to show the greatest change the probable effect  of the fall of Magnentius has been recognized by Professor Keith Branigan, who has drawn attention to the evidence from Boxmoor, Latimer and possibly Welwyn, High Wycombe and Harpsden.
The possibility has also been accepted by David Neal, as a lowering of standards; Gadebridge, however, deserves special consideration.
In the south-west, Professor Branig can detect changes only at the villas at Chew Park, Whateley and Star; a significant change is apparent from recent excavations at Littlecote (Wilts.) with a new building of architectural interest c .
AD 360.
But in fact, the best evidence comes from Barnsley Park, Cirencester.
On this site there was a small farm with a succession of timber houses and farmyards occupied up to c .
360, when they were all demolished for the erection of a stone corridor villa and a large barn.
Two coins of Constantius II were found in the foundations of the stone building, which indicates a radical change taking place on the site.
The building was not for the new owner, but for a manager, or a bailiff.
The site is only four miles  from Corinium and this has led to the speculation that the establishment may have had a special function in a large estate.
Surrounding the farm area were some eight acres of yards and corrals, suitable for sheep and cattle.
The excavation also produced an unusual number of ox-goads and styli and all this may indicate the use of the establishment as a place where animals were brought from farms on the estate and prepared for market.
Another discovery, was the name FIRMINUS carved on a building stone.
Professor Applebaum has drawn attention to the high-ranking officials of the imperial household in Gaul of this name, one of whom was the comes rerum privatarum of the West and he has suggested that Barnsley Park was part of an imperial estate.
The owner of the estate in the fourth century would thus have been a Firminus, since it is reasonably certain that this building stone belonged to the house built c .
360, but any connection with imperial officials is highly conjectural, the more so as Firminus was a very common cognomen .
It is thus evident that the fall of Magnentius and the subsequent zeal of Paulus had an effect on the Britons and their estates, but its extent is difficult to quantify, since there is not yet enough large-scale excavation of villas and other rural establishments using modern refined techniques.
It is, therefore, worth calling the attention of villa excavators to these possibilities with the hope that they will eventually produce more and better evidence which will help to elucidate changes in this period.
Another consequence of the re-establishment of the authority of Constantius in Britain could well have been an attack on pagan monuments and practices, which had been tolerated under Magnentius.
The narrow-minded and mean-spirited Emperor may have been specially severe in Britain and Gaul, and one must consider the evidence from possible destruction of pagan buildings at this time.
There are two aspects of this problem, the monuments themselves and their wealth, lands and estates.
It is evident that the larger and more popular temples may have played a considerable part in the economy of any province.
They represented the only equivalent of our modern banking system and those possessing medicinal springs of great renown accumulated wealth and acquired lands by dedication and purchase.
The great spa-temple at Bath would almost certainly have come into this category.
These temples and their priestly organiza-tions came under serious threat in times of anarchy and economic recession and they probably suffered from serious depredations in the  late third century.
Constantine, late in his reign, demolished some temples and confiscated their estates throughout the empire, in-corporating them into the res privata , but keeping their accounts in a special category as fundi iuris templorum .
Not all of these lands remained in imperial ownership.
Some were given or sold to favoured high-ranking officials and court favourites, a practice developed by Constantius II.
Had wealth or estates belonging to temples in Britain survived by 350, Paulus would almost certainly have seized them on behalf of his master.
However, not all the healing springs and spas were under priestly ownership.
Enterprising landowners may have developed such valuable assets and erected health resorts similar to establishments of recent centuries.
The health-giving waters themselves could become commercial products and there is evidence in parts of the Roman world, of their bottling and distribution.
Any landowners who had been successful in this kind of enterprise would certainly have been of immediate interest to Paulus in his search for enemies of the State, as exploiters of pagan superstition.
It is possible that the Gadebridge villa in Hertfordshire was an establishment of this kind in the middle of the fourth century.
The site had a feature which is difficult to identify as part of a normal villa.
This is a large pool, 6.5 ft by 39.5 ft, with a wide flight of steps entering it from one end.
The excavator, David Neal, could not explain this as merely for domestic use and concluded that it must have had a public function.
Furthermore, he was informed that the water may have had medicinal properties.
No less than 173 coins were found at the bottom of the pool together with a large number of rings, bracelets, brooches and other objects: evidence which strongly suggests a votive deposit.
He also pointed out in the report that the excavation produced a disproportionate number of cosmetic articles, although the significance of this evidence is not clear; the case for the site having had a religious function is strengthened by a consideration of the other buildings.
Connected to the pool is a large anteroom with a sophisticated architectural design and the elaborate bath-house would appear to have been too large for the modest size of ‘house’.
Two wings of the latter were each divided into small apartments with long, narrow, heated rooms on the east side, the layout of which suggests the existence of internal timber partitions, with the large room on the west side (No. 20) apparently remaining a kitchen.
Add to this the large heated dining room at the north-east corner and the whole assemblage  resembles a hostelry, rather than a private house.
Gadebridge probably began life as a small farm, but from Period 4, during the third century, it began to take on the additional characteristics, even to the extent of a gatehouse, or porter's lodge.
Healing spas were based on a local cult figure and the devotees underwent rituals which included bathing and communal eating.
Cubicles for accommodation were also needed and Lydney Park provides an excellent example of these provisions.
The absence of a temple or shrine in the near vicinity and of any obvious religious objects or inscriptions, casts serious doubt on this suggestion, but a shrine may be found at a nearby sacred spring.
One fact is quite certain, the establishment was totally demolished c .
AD 360, an event which the excavator himself has associated with the fall of Magnentius.
Another temple site where a drastic change took place in the mid fourth century is Nettleton Scrubb (Wilts.).
This remarkable shrine built in a narrow valley was closely associated with a water cult, inscriptions name the deity as Apollo, linked with a Celtic counter-part.
The functions of the buildings in their tightly packed site are difficult to determine.
The excavator suggests that No. 11 and its successor, No. 12, was a hostel for visitors, that adjacent (No. 10), was a shop for selling votive objects and that No. 26 in a small compound was a workshop, where these objects were probably made.
Several of the buildings were destroyed by a fire at a date given as c .
AD 350.
Unfortunately, neither the coins nor the pottery are directly related to the chronological horizons in the report, although Group A, associated with the destruction of Building 28, ends with a coin of Magnentius.
Clearly the site suffered a sudden change in the middle of the fourth century, although there is evidence of a decline before this.
Whether the destruction was accidental or deliberate is impossible to determine, but the pagan shrine was not rebuilt.
The later occupation was of a specialist technical nature, the manufacture of pewter vessels with the use of limestone moulds and lead from the local Mendip ores.
It could be suggested that the workmen who had made the trinkets and votive objects for visitors continued to use their technical skill for profit, or that a new land-owner was exploiting the commercial potential of the local labour.
There are two other villas with unusual features which could possibly be associated with pagan cults.
One at Lufton (Somerset) is distinguished by a remarkable octagonal building with an anteroom, an ambulatory and massive buttresses, which has been identified as a cold plunge; and it is clearly the main focus for whatever activity took  place there.
It has the appearance of a shrine and an association with a water cult is indicated by the aquatic creatures in its mosaic.
There is a small room (No. 15) at the back suitable for housing a cult statue.
As at Gadebridge, the Lufton villa is attached to a bath-house and possible heated dining-room (Room 5).
Fifteen coins are recorded from the site; some of them are of Valentinian and show that occupation continued to the end of the fourth century.
The second site, at Chedworth, has for so long been accepted as the typical Romano-British villa, that one hesitates to question its function.
Yet there are serious difficulties in accepting it, either as a working farm or well-appointed house.
This is hardly the place to set out any argument to the contrary in detail, but attention should be drawn to the nearby temple, the altars, the cult-figures, the so-called nymphaeum and Christian monograms carved on its stone surround.
This last piece of evidence was regarded by Sir Ian Richmond as a necessary attempt by a Christian owner to counteract any remaining pagan influence.
The planning of the buildings is very strange if it is merely a dwelling-house, since so much space is taken up with the two baths and the dining-room.
The north wing with its range of rooms has more the appearance of a hostelry than a house.
Unfortunately, the dating evidence for this building development has not yet been fully established, nor is it known if the pagan shrine was dismantled in the middle or later years of the fourth century, when presumably the site became purely agricultural, maybe as part of a vine-growing estate.
The most famous and important health resort in Britain was undoubtedly Bath, but its late history is still far from certain since the earlier excavations removed most of the evidence in their large-scale clearance.
Professor Cunliffe, has, however, been able to examine small areas where remains have survived.
The dating evidence is extremely slight; a small group of pottery from the mud sealing the temple precinct has been published by him.
It is a late-third to mid-fourth century group and none of the vessels need have belonged to the second half of the fourth century.
Professor Cunliffe's conclusions were that it was the rising water-table and neglect of the drainage system which caused serious and periodic flooding, so leading to its abandonment.
It may seem strange that such an important and renowned healing centre should have been given up so easily and so early, and this may reflect the despoliation and depredations by members of the House of Constantine.
If the temple had been stripped of its wealth and its income from land, then the priestly college would have been unable to  maintain such a large establishment, since the rising level of the water-table would have necessitated major engineering works.
The excavator noted that domestic rubbish had been tipped inside the precinct because, either it had become a convenient dumping ground, or there had been an attempt at deliberate desecration, as happened at a later date in the orchestra of the Verulamium temple theatre.
The sacred spring, however, continued to attract visitors as the latest votive object found to have been cast into it is a penannular brooch with enamelled terminals of late-fourth- or early-fifth-century date.
A temple at Wroxeter, on the west side of the main north-south street, was excavated by Bushe-Fox in 1913.
It is evident from his report that the temple was deliberately demolished and the bronze statues and internal fittings broken up, but the only comment on the date comes in a brief account of the discovery of a ‘large number of bronze and iron objects including fragments of broken statuary’.
Associated with this destruction deposit were coins which ended with Carausius and this could place the desecration under Constantine, rather than in the middle of the fourth century, but better evidence must survive in the unexcavated areas of the site.
The dating evidence of the final period of the temple at Brean Down (Somerset) presented its excavator A. M. ApSimon with problems, since there was what is described as ‘squatter occupation’.
A large number of coins was found in ‘the mortary destruction layer’ of the vestibule and in ‘robbing pits’in the cella, and the assumption was that they came from hoards buried in the temple floors or structure and were scattered when demolition took place.
But, unless some of the coins had mortar still adhering to them, it would be more correct to assume that they were lost either during the demolition or in the occupation which followed.
The matter is obscured by the fact that many of the coins were small barbarous copies of FEL TEMP types.
While George Boon rejected the suggestion that the very small coins were votive objects and may thus be found in some quantity on temple sites, he sensibly adds that there could have been a tendency for poor quality coins ‘to gravitate to these shrines as easily as to the offertory of a country church’.
If the coins were associated with the temple while it was still functioning, it must have survived the effect of any efforts made to destroy pagan sites.
The matter is, however, far from conclusive and the presence of the southern building on a different alignment, much nearer to an east-west axis, with the entrance at the west side, raises the possibility that a small Christian shrine was built to sanctify the site;, but this, according to the rather tenuous argument over the coins, did not take place until the end of the century.
The evidence presented above does not make a strong case tor substantial changes in Britain following the episode of Magnentius, but there is a sufficient number of indicators, at least, to suggest that the proposition cannot be dismissed.
The main purpose of this paper, apart from saluting a distinguished colleague, is to alert excavators to the possible existence of evidence which could help to refine and clarify this present vague outline.
In excavations of the past ephemeral traces of occupation were rapidly swept away to uncover the more substantial structures.
Fortunately, this no longer happens and it is these latest remains on many villas which may help to determine the character of life and the decline from earlier standards.
But, above all, more intensive studies need to be carried out on the pottery of the second half of the fourth century to ensure a greater refinement in dating.
11
THE FUNCTION OF THE CHEDWORTH ROMAN ‘VILLA’
THE word ‘villa’ in Romano-British terminology has been much abused.
The eighteenth- and nineteenth-century antiquaries created the vision of a luxurious country house, seeing it no doubt as an early precursor of the great houses, standing in their splendid parks, of their own day.
There were certainly some large buildings with central heating, mosaic pavements and architectural pretensions, like Woodchester and Bignor, but the great majority of Roman villas in Britain were quite modest structures functioning as farms, some doubtless occupied by the landowners and others by tenants or bailiffs.
When I began to visit Chedworth many years ago, often with a party of students, I well remember the difficulty I had in explaining the buildings in these terms.
The site lies in a narrow valley on a severe slope and the courtyards and ranges of buildings have been carefully terraced to provide level areas.
These sudden changes of level could not have been conducive to the movement of carts and animals about the establishment.
One asked the question: if the ‘villa’ had been a working farm, why was it not sited nearer the valley floor, where there were suitable arable areas and meadows?
It is possible that the ‘villa’ may have been planned for viticulture, with the use of steep valley sides for vine terraces; however, no traces have been found.
Wine production in Britain has always been possible, though the evidence for it in the Roman period is almost non-existent.
Had this been a function for Chedworth, one might at least have expected to find suitable tools.
No  examples of the specially designed vine-dressers' knife (falx vinitoria ) have been found in Britain, but other types of small hooked tools with cutting edges (falcula vineatica ) were in use.
Sian Rees has illustrated a wide range of small pruning-hooks and some of them (types 1 and 11) approximate to the pattern.
However, no finds of this type are known from Chedworth, although a number of agricultural implements were found in the excavations, including a plough-tip; some other tools such as the spade-iron and mattock could have been used for gardening.
The excavations of villas in Britain have in the past concentrated on the living quarters and almost entirely ignored the farmyards, barns and byres.
This may be why the earlier antiquaries thought of them as country houses.
The least one expects to find is a well-appointed house with interesting decorative features.
Chedworth has claims for the latter, with its stone finials and balustrade, demonstrating architectural details of some pretension, but some of the stones are of monumental proportions.
The most striking fact remains that Chedworth is not a house of the normally accepted type.
The west wing, where spacious living quarters should have been sited, consists of a bath-suite, dining room and kitchen, while the north wing has a large bath-suite and a long range of rooms, most of them quite small, all entered from a corridor.
The stair-well in this wing indicates an upper storey which presumably would have been much on the same plan.
This kind of accommodation would have been more suitable for the servants than for the owner and his family.
Unfortunately, little is known of the south wing, but it has a very similar appearance to that of the north side and suffers from the disadvantage of facing north, which precludes any possibility of the best accommodation being situated there.
This leaves the possibility of a splendid house being found in the east courtyard, where the museum and custodian's house now stand; but had any substantial remains survived, traces of them would surely have been found when those buildings were erected.
The plan of the ‘villa’ thus exhibits unusual features, the main focus apparently having been on bathing and eating.
There is, however, another important factor, as one becomes aware when standing in the courtyard.
This is the presence in the north-west corner of an impressive shrine or nymphaeum and it raises the question of the possibility of the supply to a fountain in the centre of the courtyard.
The erection of a large shrine as an imposing architectural feature is not unusual in the Roman world, although the only other example in Britain appears to be the extraordinary octagonal structure at Lufton, identified as a ‘cold  plunge’ but more likely to have been a shrine associated with a water cult.
Had this been the only evidence of any religious aspect of Chedworth, one could have considered the nymphaeum merely as an unusual feature.
There is, however, in the site museum a remarkable collection of stone statues and sculptured reliefs, bronzes and altars (listed in the Appendix), all of a religious nature and involving at least five different deities (Lenus-Mars, Diana Venatrix (?),
Bacchus, Silvanus and Sabazius), some of whom were associated with water and healing.
Although there is no precise information about the provenance of all of these finds, it is reasonable to assume that they came from the original excavation of the ‘villa’ or from adjacent sites.
The buildings in the vicinity
The clear association of religious cults with the buildings at Chedworth can be much strengthened by the existence of other structures in the vicinity which would probably have been part of a large establishment.
About half a mile downstream on the south side of the valley of the River Coln (fig. 11.1) a massive square-shaped building at a place called ‘The Old Quarry’ was first noticed in 1864 and investigated in 1925 — 6 by St Clair Baddeley.
In the initial notice of the site it is described as ‘a large platform of stones of four courses…of quite Cyclopean character’ and also mentioned are ‘traces of buildings…at a distance of 200 yards higher up in the wood’.
When this square building was excavated in 1925–6, it was found to have been much reduced by stone robbing and only the south-west corner of masonry had survived.
The internal dimension of the structure was found to be 41 × 39½ ft.
The surviving corner showed that it had at some stage been thickened to 7½ft or possibly, as the plan suggests, extended to form a buttress or column base.
The thickness of the walls is 5ft and the surviving building stones are truly massive.
Fragments of stone voussoirs from an arch, a capital (Tuscan?) and of column drums, 1½ ft in diameter (indicating a column height of c .
12 ft), were also found; the latter may have decorated the facade of the building.
The excavations of the interior produced traces of opus signinum and a scatter of roof tiles, but near the north wall a circular pit, 5 ft deep and lined with undressed stones, was excavated.
Near the north-west corner a small bronze male figurine holding a patera was said to have been found (Appendix, no. 22).
On the north or river side an artificial terrace about 40 ft wide is still visible, as are parts of the revetment wall on the east side, but the west side has been badly damaged by the excavation for the entrance to the quarry.
Baddeley trenched the terrace to a depth of 6 ft and found it to be entirely made-up ground.
A further trench at right angles to the first (i.e., now on a north/south alignment) appears to indicate sudden changes of level, which were interpreted as wide steps.
It seems evident that the structure had been built on a shelf cut into the steep hill slope and a terrace added on the north side.
Mention is also made of a small attached building heated by a hypocaust at the south-west corner, suggested as a possible priest's house, and this may account for the so-called ‘hypocaust’ tiles found on the site, presumably box-flues.
The coins found are listed on the plan and date from Hadrian to Maximus (probably Maximianus, AD 286 — 310, Maximinus II, AD 309 — 13, or Maxentius, AD 306 — 12).
The square plan (fig 11.2), although without either the outer or inner walls, and the massive nature of the structure would suggest agreement with the excavator's conclusion that this was a Romano-British temple, and this has been accepted by Dr M. J. T. Lewis.
The complete plan, however, should have a surrounding portico or ambulatory, as would have been normal in temples of this type.
The thickness of the walls should imply that they carried the cella in the form of a tower.
Dr Lewis, however, has assumed that these walls belong to the external portico (his Table 1) and that their great size was necessary to support the solid podium.
He argues that the walls would have reduced in thickness above the platform, and have acted as the stylobate for the columns of the portico and this could account for the comparatively small diameter of the column drum found on the site (his p. 16).
The main difficulty of this interpretation is that all traces of the actual cella have been lost (his p. 18).
The 1925 — 6 excavation was poor, even by the standards of its day, but it is difficult to understand how the walls or foundations of the main structure could have been so totally overlooked.
Unfortunately it is not clear from the report whether the podium extended beyond the walls, or was contained by them.
If the walls belong to the cella , the surrounding portico walls could have been of much slighter construction, even to carry columns 12 ft high.
Such walls could have been overlooked in the excavation, since their existence was not even suspected, and any surviving traces may have been lost in the extensive stone robbing and disturbance by tree roots (see excavation report, fig. 4) with subsequent soil erosion.
If one  allows for a surrounding portico, 10 ft wide, the overall dimensions would have been 71 by 69½ ft, giving an area of 4934.5 sq.ft, making it the second largest temple in Britain.
Only careful ground survey and excavation would determine the true plan and character of this remarkable building.
There is another building about 50yds to the east on the same level, not included in the R.C.H.M. Inventory.
There are clear indications of walls and a levelled or terraced area, occupying a space about 22 yds (north/south) by 12 yds (east/west).
One must also consider other buildings mentioned by James Farrer ‘200 yards higher up in the wood’.
This is site No. 5 in the R.C.H.M. Inventory (and fig. 11.1), described as ‘traces of walls and a scatter of occupation over 100 yards on a natural shelf in the hill-side’.
It is quite evident, however, on a cursory examination of this area that it is much larger and there is visual evidence of buildings on the shelf over at least 200 yds and other buildings can be seen about 50 yds to the south.
In the whole of this area the earth is dark and there is much surface pottery tile and evidence of burning and metal working.
It appears to be bounded on the west side by a considerable ditch running down the hill slope.
This spread of buildings and occupation may represent the dwellings of the temple servants and the workshops where the votive objects were made.
Another building was found in 1864 by Farrer 170 yds to the north-west of the ‘villa’ and called by him the ‘Capitol’.
He cleared several rooms and found the fine niche with a scallop-shell canopy (Appendix, no. 4).
This was evidently a shrine and, in the absence of burials, not a ‘mortuary columbarium’ as pronounced by Mr Lysons.
This building was destroyed when the railway was constructed in 1890 — 1 and widened in 1901.
There are yet further buildings between the river and ‘villa’, one about 230 yds due east of it.
This is No. 3 in the Inventory (and fig 11.1) and is described as an artificially raised area, associated with a scatter of debris over 100 yds.
It has been cut on the south side by the modern lane approaching the ‘villa’.
This building was probably the gate-house to the hostelry.
Another site (No. 6), marked with a cross in the Inventory is worthy of careful survey and planning; it lies c .
980 yds due north of the ‘villa’ in a bend of the Coln to the east of the lane to Withington.
This is an extensive site with clear indications of buildings and levelled platforms.
Roman remains, including tesserae have also been found in Chedworth village (c. 140 yds south of the ‘villa’), but whether these sites were associated with the temple could only be determined by excavation.
Chedworth as part of a tempelbezirk
The association of Chedworth with the cult of Lenus-Mars (Appendix, no. 1) is of significance when related to the information about the temple and other buildings in the valley, though our knowledge is at present very limited.
The main centre of this cult was at Trier and the ‘mother’ temple was on the left bank of the Moselle in a steep wooded valley of a small tributary, a very similar situation to that of Chedworth.
The temple itself had a large classical cella , with a solid columned portico which served as the pediment.
Along the road leading to it were many altars and shrines and there are also remains which could belong to a theatre.
It is evident from the Gallic and Rhenish religious sites that some were very large and comprised many shrines and small temples.
The site in the Coln Valley could be expected to have been on much the same pattern, though a smaller scale.
The ‘villa’ buildings have to be seen in this context and not in isolation.
The elaborate provision of baths, dining-room and range of rooms with a corridor access strongly suggests a healing spa associated with ritual meals and bathing and simple hostel-type accommodation.
The best-known example in Britain is that at Lydney Park, excavated by Wheeler in 1928.
The buildings of this remarkable site included a large and elaborate bath-house and a guest-house with rooms round a courtyard and a fine pillared fore-hall, which was presumably the communal dining room serviced from the detached east wing and, as Wheeler suggested, based on the classical hostelry (his p. 48).
On the west side, fronting the temple, is a long narrow building with ten or more rooms approached by a corridor.
This was identified by Wheeler from Greek parallels as an abaton where the devotees retired for the ‘holy sleep’ after the long and elaborate healing rituals in the temple.
Another possible healing spa in Britain may be the villa found in Gadebridge Park.
The most significant feature of this site is the enormous open-air bathing pool (40 by 68½ft) entered by an impressive flight of steps.
The pool, which produced a large number of coins and items of jewellery, suggestive of votive deposits, was approached through an imposing ante-room, given sophisticated architectural treatment.
The house itself consisted of ranges of narrow rooms and a large heated dining room, all very reminiscent of accommodation for pil-grims visiting a place of ritual healing.
The absence of a temple in the vicinity of the buildings need not negate this hypothesis, since on most sites of this nature the buildings are spread over a considerable area.
Another site which bears comparison with Chedworth is Nettleton Scrubb in Wiltshire.
Here there are a number of buildings tightly packed into a narrow valley, including a temple of Apollo Cunomaglos, a hostel and even shops and factory for the making and selling of the metal votive offerings.
The villa at Lufton, Somerset, with its outstanding octagonal shrine supported by narrow buttresses, could also be said to have similar characteristics.
Chedworth may not, therefore, be so unusual in Britain, though much larger and more elaborate examples of this type of site occur in the Rhineland and Gaul.
Christian destruction and sanctification
Chedworth contains a feature which appears at present to be unique in Britain.
This is the evidence of a number of Christian symbols, in the form of the Chi-Rho monogram cut on some of the stones (fig. 11.3).
These are no idle scratchings but have been carefully and purposefully incised, and the reason is self-evident.
It is a quite deliberate attempt to depaganise the site by someone who wished to use it for other functions.
Christianity became the official Imperial religion by the Edict of Milan in AD 314, and thereafter several attempts were made to despoil and eventually destroy pagan monuments.
In most cases this was an outright destruction, though the wealthy pagan institutions had first to be stripped of their treasuries and revenues.
Only on pagan sites converted into other uses by Christians would it have been necessary to carry out a purification ceremony involving the use of the Chi-Rho symbol.
Although Professor Charles Thomas illustrates a number of examples of this symbol found in Britain, only two apart from those at Chedworth have been cut on stone.
This practice can, however, be seen in a later context in the life of St Samson of Dol, the earliest version of which is a copy dating to c .
AD 600.
Although some doubt has been cast on the authenticity of this  account , there are many vivid details which have a ring of truth about them.
While he was staying in Cornwall at the monastery of Docco at St Kew, the saint is said to have dispersed a gathering which was conducting rituals round a pagan standing stone near Trigg; he then carved a cross on the stone with his knife.
Although there are no known examples in Britain, it is interesting to note the number of stones bearing the monogram built into the churches, suggesting that they could have been taken from the pagan  monuments and re-used.
There are also churches built on pagan sites which have standing stones in the churchyard.
Some of the beautifully carved crosses could originally have been re-shaped pagan monuments.
However, crosses are found on pagan stones in Brittany.
The Chedworth crosses were all cut on the stones which came from the octagonal basin of the nymphaeum .
These stones were removed when this monument was demolished and built in steps in the east wing of the   villa.
When exactly this act of depaganisation took place is impossible to say, but the crosses would have been made much easier to carve before the removal of the stones, which show no sign of damage and were, therefore, meant for re-use.
It is this factor which may be significant; otherwise the act of breaking and defacement, common to most of the sculptured stones, may have been considered effective in destroying the pagan influence.
The crosses were cut on three of the stones and consist of two well-formed Chi-Rho symbols and four simple crosses (fig 11.3).
Another seating stone has a games-board (1 by ¾ in.) of nine parallel lines on it, presumably carved in Roman times.
The date of destruction
The problem of dating the destruction of the pagan monument and the changes in use of the ‘villa’ with any precision has been made difficult by the way in which the site was originally excavated, at a time when stratification and careful recording were unknown.
Although some progress has since been made by the meticulous work of the late Sir Ian Richmond and Roger Goodburn, it has been on too small a scale to support any attempt at a chronology of the history of the site.
The indications are that the site may have been started as a small unpre-tentious building.
The expansion, with the building of the baths, was not before the early third century, with further extensions in the early fourth century.
This could be interpreted as a conversion of a modest farmhouse to the hostelry of the healing spa,c .
AD 200 or later.
There were further changes in the late fourth century, but their precise date and extent is not yet known, though this could be the time of change back to domestic or agricultural use.
The period for the major destruction of pagan monuments in Britain is most likely to be c .
AD 360 when Constantius II took his vengeance against the followers of Magnentius, who had challenged the Emperor for the purple and caused Constans to be murdered.
The dreadful effects of this on the wealthy landowners and merchants of Britain is well documented by Ammianus Marcellinus, and have been the subject of a recent study.
Constantius was determined to exact retribution, not only on those who attempted to usurp his authority, but also on paganism, which he regarded as the root of all opposition to the Imperial House and its Christian tenets.
While his father, the great Constantine, had been content to confiscate temple treasuries and  revenues, allowing the practices to continue, Constantius felt he had a pious obligation to destroy paganism, root and branch.
Archaeology has provided direct evidence for this devastation on a number of sites in Britain.
Gadebridge was totally demolished and the site used for farming; the shrine of Apollo at Nettleton was destroyed, partly by fire in AD 350, and the site turned into a small factory for the manufacture of pewter vessels; and the temple at Uley was demolished and desecrated and the materials used for a new stone building with possible Christian associations.
Evidence from Brean Down, Somerset, is not so clear, but there were drastic changes, and evidence of demolition was followed by what the excavator, A. M. ApSimon, depicts as ‘squatter occupation’.
There is also a small late building on a totally different alignment (almost east-west) which could perhaps have been a small Christian shrine, erected to counteract pagan influence.
Even the great temple spa at Bath was suffering decay by the mid fourth century, due to the rising water level.
Had all the treasure and assets of the temple cult been sequestered, the expensive main-tenance of the drainage and heating system could no longer have been met.
Perhaps such a renowned centre of healing was allowed a quiet death by financial strangulation, though the dumping of domestic rubbish in the holy precinct may indicate desecration.
The late-fourth century rebuilding at Chedworth, with the use of stones from the nymphaeum , and associated coins up to the House of Theodosius, clearly indicates a continued occupation of the site, presumably as a small farm.
This would account for the agricultural implements, which include a plough-tip, the other tools being used by carpenters and gardeners.
The implications of this paper could be regarded as being of considerable significance and must, therefore, be viewed with caution until further corroborative evidence can be produced by large-scale excavation on the site of the ‘villa’ and a detailed ground survey of the large area of the suggested tempelbezirk .
Other religious centres in the region
From the evidence presented above it is clear that there may be doubts about the designation of the term ‘villa’ for some of the buildings in the countryside.
The problem is intensified by the undoubted presence in many villas of domestic shrines and nymphaea , like the one at  Lullingston which was converted into a Christian house-chapel.
Nor can mosaic pavements offer any guidance, since their themes are commonly drawn from classical mythology.
Only in a few cases, as at Brading, do they reflect any deeply held beliefs or cult practices.
One needs to study the planning of the buildings, and sculptures and objects normally associated with religious ritual.
A villa of doubtful function is Great Witcombe.
It was built on a steep slope with copious springs; both factors caused the builders great difficulties in dealing with the water and securing structural stability.
Not a site, one might think, to choose for domestic or agricultural use.
The basic problem in the layout is precisely that of Chedworth — finding the house where an owner who could afford such engineering could have lived in any style.
The north range consisted of a wide heavily buttressed, terraced corridor and a remarkable central octagonal room, which, by its position and height, would have dominated the site.
The south-west wing, 6′ 6″ lower than the north terrace, was entirely occupied by two large and elaborate bath-suites.
One turns hopefully to the north-east wing, but the remains are very difficult to interpret, as there appear to be two main floor levels, with as much as 8 ft between them.
The massive sub-structure implies an upper floor or a sequence of floors which could have comprised a substantial house.
All that survives, however, has been identified as kitchens in the north part and store rooms and a barn in the south.
In the south-west bath-wing there was a central room with a small cistern and niches for presumed ‘ritual usages’; from this room came a pottery model fir-cone, which could have been a votive offering.
A small bronze of Flora has been found near the villa.
Another noteworthy feature from the site is part of an elaborate balustrade similar to the Chedworth example.
The extraordinary octagonal shrine at Lufton, in Somerset, has been mentioned above.
Another site which needs consideration is the Box villa, in Wiltshire.
The general layout and fine pavements give the site all the appearance of a rich villa, but it has been built on a levelled shelf of tufa, through which flow vigorous streams from nearby springs.
Such a copious supply of pure water would have been beneficial to the occupants, but it could also have been the centre of a water cult.
Evidence of religious aspects comes from a sculptured relief of a hunter god, of which Professor J. M. C. Toynbee has written: ‘even in its mutilated state,(it) is one of the most satisfying extant pieces of Romano-British sculpture known to us’, though it consists only of the torso.
Another fragment from Box shows a left hand gripping a trident, probably from a Neptune panel.
Among the objects in Devizes Museum is an un-inscribed stone altar, a full-size silver eye from a bronze head of a cult statue and a length of iron rod sheathed in bronze, which may have been part of a sceptre.
The presence of springs and these finds appear to suggest the centre of a healing cult, rather than a purely domestic villa.
The considerable number of sculptures and reliefs of Celtic deities discovered in the Cotswolds is indicative of the strong persistence into late Roman times of belief in, and reliance on, the older British cults.
They indicate, too, the existence of many rural shrines in addition to the major centres, such as Bath, Nettleton, Uley and, we may now add, Chedworth.
12
THE GREAT CASTERTON SUMMER SCHOOL
THE experience of this summer school was of enormous value and benefit.
It was a significant archaeological enterprise advancing into unknown territory in the small towns of Roman Britain.
It improved my techniques and skill in interpretation, but above all it gave me confidence in teaching and training students.
I doubt very much if I could have started the Wroxeter School without Great Casterton.
Yet it all began in a very casual way.
In 1948, a piece of tessellated pavement was found by a local farmer, F. H. Healey, when he ploughed a field east of the village.
As soon as he learnt about it Ted Bolton, the headmaster of the nearby secondary school, persuaded the farmer to allow his school children to clear the pavement.
Ted was a great character, a teacher of the old school, a gruff, no-nonsense character, but he was a man of great kindness and concern.
He regarded himself as ‘a bit of an antiquarian’ but excavation was beyond his experience, so he called in John Barber, Classics Master at Oakham School who had dug in Greece with the British School at Athens.
John is sparse of frame and comment but had a very dry humour.
Later, in a casual conversation during the School, he was asked what he would do if, one night, one of the young female students happened to wander into his room by mistake.
‘Oh,’ he said, at once, ‘I would probably give her eight hours to quit.’
With a squad of boys from the school he uncovered the rest of the pavement which appeared to be a corridor of a building.
John asked me to help him the following year as I often came to Stamford to see my mother.
This suited me very well as I could stay with her, only two miles down the A1, as part of my annual leave at    Chester.
So, I took my bicycle and was able to ride to and fro daily.
News of the discovery spread to Maurice Barley at Nottingham University, where he was the tutor in archaeology in the Extra-Mural Department.
Although Maurice was not a Romanist nor an archaeologist — his interest has always been in medieval and later houses — he had set up a training school at Lincoln with Philip Corder as director.
I knew both of them very well from my Lincoln days and had agreed to lecture at this school.
It was a useful occasion for an outing to visit the Casterton dig.
But it was soon apparent that there was far more at stake, as I was to hear.
The site of the Lincoln excavation was a pottery kiln on the Racecourse which had very limited possibilities in the days before magnetic prospecting.
Also it appeared that the accommodation was very unsatisfactory.
Maurice had only to look around at Casterton to see the ideal place for his school.
The archaeological site was there, with a tessellated pavement already and even greater potential — in the north-east corner the defences of the small Roman town showed as a bold earthwork.
This had been identified by the great antiquary, William Stukeley, in 1724, when he was vicar of All Saints Church, Stamford.
He drew a fine panoramic view for his great book Itinerarium Curiosum , where it appears on P1. 14, ii, Vol. ii (fig. 12.1).
Stukeley's brief description (p. 84, Vol. i) reads ‘Brigcasterton…was fenced about with a deep mote on two sides, the river supplying its use on the other two; for it stands at an angle, and the Romans made a little curve in the road here on purpose to take it in, as it offered itself so conveniently, then rectified the obliquity on the other side of the town; it consists of one street running through its length upon the road; the great ditch and banks are called the Dikes.
I saw many coins that are found here, and one pasture is called Castle Close at the corner; they say the foundation of a wall was dug up there.’
It was undoubtedly this conspicuous earthwork which attracted Philip Corder, who instantly saw the great challenge and possibilities it offered.
Also, and much to the point, it was farmed by the same obliging farmer, Mr Healey.
So began in 1950 the first season of the Great Casterton Training School, which was to continue until 1958.
Maurice had organized a well-integrated programme of lectures, practical demonstrations and excavations, as the details show.
It was a memorable experience for all of us.
Philip was a remarkable teacher, able to command instant respect, and established that rapport with students, so essential in all teaching.
I could not have had a better  tutor in extra-mural teaching.
There was still much shyness to break down and the warmth of the school was very helpful, for I was still prickly and gauche.
My social education would have advanced rapidly too, had I lived in with the school.
So I missed the fun and companionship of the evenings with the long sojourns at the local pub, talking to the villagers.
Such behaviour was still rather sinful to my innocent mind: many years were to pass before I gained a taste for traditional ale!
The other member of staff was John Gillam, lecturer in Archaeology at Newcastle upon Tyne.
Somehow he had been persuaded to leave the northern frontier and venture far to the south to take part in a non-military dig.
A most extraordinary ebullient, character, he was one of those lovable teddy-bears, but highly charged with emotion which spilled out at the slightest touch.
There were some astonishing shouting matches over trifles, but we soon realized that this was his way of life.
We got used to it, and he was accepted as one of us.
He was great company anyway, with an endless stream of anecdotal experience.
All this vociferous exuberance disguised one of the sharpest minds in the business, and he cut through ambiguities and loose thinking with great precision.
He was our greatest authority on Romano-British pottery, gained mainly from his work on the northern frontier.
Philip boldly decided that the school in its first season should undertake two projects simultaneously.
A section was cut through the best preserved length of defences (fig. 12.2), and work on the villa was extended.
It amazes me just how much was achieved, with such positive results, especially as we only dug from 2.15 to 6.00 P.m.
(P. Corder ed.
The Roman Town and Villa of Great Casterton, Rutland , 1951, University of Nottingham).
A section 55 ft long was cut across the rampart, and the tessellated pavement of the villa corridor was excavated, together with a small but complete building attached to it.
Cutting sections through defences is always an arduous and often frustrating experience, and this one was no exception.
The reason for this is that ramparts are normally of dump construction, consisting of spoil from the ditches cast inwards to form the bank.
It was a simple matter to strip off the layers of spoil from the stages in the construction.
Over a hundred sherds of pottery were recovered from the rampart.
Washed and marked by the students, they were spread on a table for examination.
The unanimous consensus was that every single sherd fitted into the first century, except a mortarium rim found in the uppermost layer.
The conclusion justifiably drawn, was that the date of    the rampart was late first, and certainly not later than the early second, century.
At this stage we were not aware of the full significance of the movement of the spoil to form the rampart.
Coming from the ditches, it could have in it material from an earlier phase of occupation.
At that time, ideas about town defences were dominated by Wheeler's conclusions at Colchester and Verulamium.
The great man had stated that, apart from some very early examples, the towns had been given their defences by Hadrian (c.
AD 125 — 30).
Great Casterton appeared to conform.
But by a remarkable stroke of fortune we were saved from falling into error.
At the very bottom of the rampart, and totally sealed by it, was a small hearth.
In it was a handful of small sherds.
Most of them were small colour-coated beakers with barbotine decoration, typical of the Nene Valley; on one animals were being chased by a dog.
The date of these vessels was thought to be late second century (although, as I write this, a more accurate date is from c .
AD 150).
This was staggering new information, and all kinds of ideas were flashing through our minds.
Was Great Casterton such a small place that it was low in the list of priorities?
Or, very tentatively, and with much temerity, could Wheeler have been wrong?
The Verulamium report was to hand, as Maurice had included it in the School library.
Its pages were scanned with eagle eyes.
Philip found the critical line in which Wheeler stated that the samian from the rampart was ‘Hadrianic-Antonine’.
The critical sherd was a piece by the central Gaulish potter Cinnamus, which Felix Oswald had dated as from c .
AD 140.
It was immediately obvious that Wheeler had chosen the earliest possible date to fit his hypothesis.
We gazed at each other in stunned silence.
The great man had stumbled.
But even if the Verulamium defences were post-Hadrianic, it may not have been the same operation which provided for such an in-significant place as Great Casterton.
So we began to ponder on the circumstances which might have made it necessary for such a tiny place to be defended.
I suggested, as a possibility, the events of AD 196, when in an Imperial civil war the governor of Britain, Clodius Albinus had made a bid for the throne.
The historian Cassius Dio, a contemporary of that period, related how Albinus had taken an army to Gaul to face Severus.
He had depended on the Britons for support, and may have felt obliged to provide defences: so I argued.
In later seasons, it became evident that the very straight alignment indicated a military precision.
Philip accepted my idea, and incorporated it into a memorable paper he gave to the Royal Archaeological Institute in 1955 (published in  Arch.
J .
112, 1956).
Nearly 40 years on, I still feel that this basic theory has yet to be superseded, although anomalies have been found.
This first season with its dramatic results, provided us with a working demonstration of the trap presented by residual material in any earth shifted from one place to another.
The word ‘residual’ is given to artefacts earlier than the actual date of the earth movement and only gives what is called a terminus post quem .
This is a Latin phrase meaning the ‘date after which’, and only means that the artefact could not have been put into the spoil after it had been dumped, but of course, could be many years earlier in date.
This has to be applied to most archaeological deposits.
In fact there are very few containing contemporary artefacts; the most common is a fire, the ashes of which have not been disturbed.
After this archaeological digression, we must return to the critical section.
In spite of the great advance in knowledge, we made a grave error in assuming that the stone wall was built with the rampart.
We came to think that the two features were of the same date, as there was no construction trench cut into the rampart front for the insertion of the wall.
It was only in 1960 that I saw the flaw in the argument.
I then had another section to study, one cut at Viroconium (Wroxeter).
Although the wall foundations had been totally removed it was possible to see their ghost in the place where they had been.
What immediately struck me was that the rampart continued below the base of the foundation.
Any contemporary wall would have had foundations much deeper.
What had happened was that the wall had been built much later and from a higher ground level.
Also we were lucky in finding the actual front of the rampart in front of the wall.
This clearly showed that the rampart and wall were of two periods of construction.
Looking at the drawing of the Great Casterton section through new eyes, I could see that here also a thin depth of rampart remained under the wall foundation.
We should have realized at the time that in the emergency of AD 196 there would not have been time to build walls round town defences.
Just when these walls were later added remains a vexing question as so little positive evidence has even now been recovered.
The villa
The contrast between the town defences and the villa was striking.
The former was on a grand scale, needing an immense effort, but the  rewards were immediate and of some wider significance for Roman Britain.
The villa was no palatial country-house but a small working farm — at least, that is how it appeared until the final season.
The structures were minor, many of shoddy build.
It needed careful trowel work, and the structural sequence became increasingly complicated and difficult to understand.
It was the difference between a vast public enterprise, and a local farmer making a living as economically as he could.
The very first season did produce a totally unexpected bonus, however.
The paved corridor had already been cleared, so work was directed at a building attached to it.
It was completely covered by a thick layer of ash, debris and roof slates, clearly the result of a disastrous fire.
Thoughts turned immediately to a known historical event, the Great Barbarian Conspiracy of AD 368 recorded by Ammianus Marcellinus, when an unusual combination of barbarians destroyed a Roman field army and overran Hadrian's Wall and the whole province.
It took two years for Rome to recover Britain and repair its defences.
The natural assumption had been that the countryside and its villas never recovered.
Was Great Casterton yet another villa destroyed by the barbarians?
Fortunately, the debris was rich in finds, including carbonized wheat, cabbage seeds and a piece of rope with a knot in it.
Also a hoard of 327 small coins was carefully sieved from the ash, most of them dated to the mid fourth century.
Once more we were spared the fate of drawing a wrong conclusion thanks to a single coin of Valens dated to AD 375.
This meant for certain that the fire was after that date, and had nothing to do with the disaster of 368.
There was also a large collection of some 3000 pottery sherds, representing about 350 different vessels, which was studied in detail by John Gillam (1950 Report pp. 24 — 40) and remains one of the most important late groups ever published in Britain.
The pottery was as late as any in Roman Britain and even included one sherd thought to be ‘Romano-Saxon’ since it had impressed on to it a Saxon type of stamp; however, the vessel was wheel-turned and clearly of Romano-British manufacture.
J. N. L. Myers, a great authority on Saxon pottery, added a delightful speculative note (1980 Report, pp. 20 — 1).
I had always felt that the term ‘Romano-Saxon’ was an unwise invention.
A much earlier tradition of decorative stamps on pottery existed free of any Germanic influence.
The only vessels under the ‘Romano-Saxon’ label should be those in a Saxon fabric but of Romano-British form, and there are extremely few of these.
In subsequent seasons, coins as  late as AD 388 — 400 were found.
We began to realize that the period of greatest prosperity and rebuilding was after AD 380.
This led to very serious debate.
At that time in the fifties, it was heresy to extend the Romano-British period beyond AD 400.
An invisible curtain descended on this precise date.
From then on it was the ‘Dark Ages’ when nothing seemed to happen at all.
One almost had the feeling that the population must have withered away and vanished.
Some medieval historians have even depicted the Saxon invaders as coming in to a completely unpopulated landscape.
I had often wondered why they chose to settle in the thick woodlands on heavy clay.
At Great Casterton we began to consider quite seriously the possibility of continuity of life from the late fourth century into the darkness of the fifth.
With great daring Philip actually wrote in his third Report that occupation of the villa ‘certainly lasted until the very end of the fourth century, and possibly well into the fifth century’(p. 60).
This was to remain a problem to bedevil Romano-British studies for many years.
I suffered it again at Barnsley Park, when our main building period was post-AD 375, after which there were substantial changes compressed into three periods.
But this was far too much activity to be squeezed into the last quarter of the fourth century.
Even in 1982, I felt I could hardly substantiate a fifth-century occupation without a scrap of evidence.
This problem has been forced upon us because, when the Britons withdrew from the Empire c .
AD 400 as no protection was given for their taxes, all Imperial money stopped coming here.
Without datable coins, other artefacts like pottery cannot be dated.
Life went on, and pottery and other artefacts continued to be made for several decades at least.
The economy and marketing had been based on barter from way back in the fourth century, so this was not new.
But everything was on a smaller scale since production by capital investment was no longer possible.
A kind of feudal system developed, but this had been present in much of rural Britain throughout the Roman period.
The inhibition over fifth-century occupation has, and still does, clamp our thinking, except for the urban communities where evidence is a little more solid.
One of our more perceptive archaeological historians, Malcolm Todd, could write in 1981 in his survey of Roman Britain 55 BC — AD 400: ‘Archaeologists are now much more confident of their ability to demonstrate urban occupation until well into the fifth century in many of the cities and towns of Britain than they were twenty years ago’, but hastily adds  ‘though this confidence is not shared by all historians of the period.’
If such an extension can be openly discussed for the cities, then why not for the countryside?
Land is never derelict while there are people to feed.
Of the other farm buildings on our site, apart from a small bath-house, only barns and rural out-buildings were found.
It was the construction details which fascinated me.
So much time and thought was spent in working these out and building up a satisfactory order of phases.
This led to a sudden crisis.
On the very last day of 1953, an unexpected wall was uncovered.
But a new wall in that particular place spelt trouble for my carefully nurtured hypothesis.
I was not prepared to contemplate such an inconvenient find, so I busied myself elsewhere.
Eventually the students virtually had to drag me to their find and I was forced to gaze on this horror.
It was certainly there, and was very wide, and at the wrong angle to fit the building to which it belonged.
In no way could it conform to my carefully constructed logical building sequence.
It was a disastrous intrusion.
Such was the shock that I walked off the site in a state of mental turmoil after all the farewells at the season's end.
While everyone else departed, I stayed over the weekend with my mother.
I well remember that night, as I tossed and turned, unable to sleep; for try as I could, that length of wall refused to fit into my jigsaw.
It was clear long afterwards that I had suffered a serious mental shock.
But the problem had to be resolved and my mind put at rest.
By dawn I had resolved to face the problem and return to the site, scrap my hypothetical jigsaw and re-sort the pieces.
I cycled out to a completely deserted field, with the trenching left open, as the farmer kindly filled-in every year with a machine.
I sat on the edge of the area all the morning until a solution was found.
The new wall turned out to be a blocking to fill a wide opening in a store-building (1954 Report, fig. 13 and this is how it appears on the plan (Pl.
V)).
It was, however, a bodged job, probably by the farm labourers, and failed even to fit the opening properly.
This disturbing event proved to be of great significance, since it taught me never to allow ideas to become rooted in the mind.
I had not, of course, realized this happens when one puts so much effort into working out answers to complicated problems.
Any discovery which later may threaten it is rejected by one's mental defences and could upset the balance of the mind.
Years later I discovered that this process had been studied by a distinguished scientist, Beveridge, and described in a book The Art of Scientific Investigation .
He explains how necessary  it is to have these mental filters to exclude or devalue events which may be too disturbing.
Thus our mental balance is Preserved.
What had happened at Great Casterton was that the discovery of a wall in a place where it could not possibly exist, according to my ideas of the site, had set in motion all my mental defences.
The effect was to create the idea that either the wall did not exist or, if it did, it was of no possible significance.
For several hours I accepted this absurdity.
The effort to face up to the fact and its consequences demanded all the will-power I could muster, and left me in a mental turmoil.
It was then that I began to understand how archaeologists could be led into serious error if they decided in advance what they were going to find.
They would then fail to observe any evidence to the contrary and see and record only that which fitted their preconceived conclusions.
This would have been so easy had they dug narrow trenches, the practice of the past, as this method can produce only scraps of unrelated evidence.
The diggers chose the bits to fit their preconceived picture.
I began to wonder how much of our knowledge of Roman Britain depended on such figments of the imagination — a depressing thought!
It was much later that I realized my subconscious tendency towards preferring complicated solutions, merely to demonstrate my clever mental logic.
The obvious solution was suspect and rejected.
Fortunately, my persistent ‘need to know’ was to get me there in the end.
On an excavation this means a need to know what had happened, by whom and when.
This can be reached only by an impartial examination of each piece of evidence as it is uncovered.
At Great Casterton I had suddenly discovered that this process held a hidden danger and that in the future this had to be avoided at all costs.
I exorcized the mental terror by talking about it, using the experience as a demonstration to students of the mental attitude one must try to adopt on an excavation.
I began to teach the danger not only of the closed mind, knowing all the answers in advance, but also of the completely open mind.
One always had to start with some ideas based on the available information.
The main problem is never to allow any interpretation to harden into a fixed idea which could prevent any further evidence being given its full value or not even noticed.
It is a difficult process, since it has to be directed against one's mental processes, which are designed to protect us from an alien world.
It is a great struggle to maintain this kind of mental attitude, but how successful it has been is difficult to assess.
That is why it is vital always to have an advocatus diaboli , another mind with you with which to  argue, and another pair of eyes with which to observe, to ensure a constant dialogue.
But this was all to come later.
There is, however, another and even more serious aspect of the closed mind which has had a profound effect on British archaeological thinking.
This may be an opportunity for discussing it.
It concerns the major archaeological monuments applying to all periods in our sessions with the students.
Those most in mind are the northern Roman frontiers of Britain where new ideas have been inhibited sometimes for years by premature conclusions based on minimal evidence.
The Antonine Wall is a remarkable example of this.
In the early years of this century its study was dominated by a man of great learning and erudition, Sir George Macdonald, who had conducted his own excavations.
His magisterial work The Roman Wall in Scotland (second edition 1934) has stood as one of the great classics of archaeological investigation, backed by sound scholarship.
Sir George stamped his conclusions so firmly on the subject that no one had the temerity to question them until the sixties.
One of his dicta was that all the forts had three periods.
In 1956, the Glasgow Archaeological Society celebrated its centenary, and at the time a new fort at Bishopton, discovered from the air, was being investigated.
We visited this and were told that the timber buildings were of three periods, of course.
But I well remember the shock of amazement to hear from the excavator that the trench dug to hold the vertical posts of the building, in the typical military method, was of one period and the vertical posts of another.
I was so outraged at this preposterous suggestion, that I got excited and was in danger of making a scene, but Philip Corder and Ian Richmond quietly took me away until I had cooled down.
It demon-strates the lengths to which a sensible person, as I took the excavator to be, was prepared to go to fit into a standard accepted hypothesis sealed by a great tradition.
It is like digging with a text-book which tells you exactly what you are going to find.
If you value your career, the argument would go, you find what you are supposed to.
Fortunately, archaeology breeds rebels who care for nothing but ferreting out the truth.
This is how progress is made.
On wet days at Great Casterton we took it in turns to lecture, and on one of them I offered to talk about the Fosse Way as a Roman military frontier, a subject which had intrigued me from my work at Lincoln.
I think the rain and I went on for about three hours.
This marathon forced me and the bored students to examine the subject very closely.
My thoughts on the subject became a long-term research project.
Years later it became a survey of the Roman military conquests and depositions in Britain from AD 43 to 60, summarized in three books.
This long involvement with the Roman army deserves a separate consideration elsewhere.
So Great Casterton was an important training ground for me and, one hopes, most of the students.
I probably learnt far more by talking about it.
Another incident demonstrated the unexpected element in excavating.
The main house of the villa had two heated rooms with a tessellated pavement, part of which survived.
It had a guilloche border round a geometric pattern with an eight-lozenge star as the main feature with a swastika pelta in each corner.
There is something about pavements which creates a great stir, and it became the focus of attention.
It was carefully cleaned, photographed and drawn, all taking most of the season.
Towards the end I argued we should remove a section to recover what dating evidence was available below it.
This was met with dismay and objection, but the logic could not be refuted.
So, two days before closing down I removed a thin strip at the edge and duly exposed a layer of dark occupation material.
Whether this provided any dating evidence I cannot remember, but at the bottom of this deposit was an earlier pavement which proved to be of much greater interest, as it was a most unusual pattern of a scroll of trumpet-shaped leaves.
We had the greatest difficulty in cleaning and recording it in the very limited time available, and in fact there was no time to draw it.
But by good fortune I was able to take a series of coloured photographs from which David Neal was able to make one of his skilful drawings many years later.
There was one more lesson to be learnt at the villa.
In 1958 we had managed, largely through contact at the village pub, to persuade the tenant of the field to the east to allow us to do a little work.
For years he had refused, as it would have upset his hens in their rough pasture.
The Roman barn projected into this field and we needed to complete the plan and to follow the wall of the south range.
The first of these was accomplished with the discovery of a corn-drying oven but the second produced a severe shock.
We followed the wall 160 ft, at which point it doubled its width and was continuing and we had no time to go further.
An even greater surprise greeted us when the wall was plotted on the plan (1961 Report, fig. 20).
It was obvious that our seven strenuous years had been spent in the south-west corner of a very large establishment, the main house of which was probably well to the north-east on the rough ground supporting the hen huts.
Great Casterton taught me much but it also encouraged me towards directing my own training school.
It was obvious that to base it on a villa one would need to have full access to the whole site and many more seasons — I imagined at least 15.
This proved to be a serious mis-calculation when the opportunity came at Barnsley Park in 1961, which also will have to be told elsewhere.
The Great Casterton School closed in 1958 as its chief participants had developed other commitments.
By then I had started my own Summer School at Wroxeter in 1955 and was also busy elsewhere.
This was the Claudian fort found by Professor St Joseph, and Ian Richmond was anxious to examine it.
So excavations were arranged in 1960 and 1961 with the school students.
It was most unfortunate and ironic that I was unable to assist as my main project, the Claudian conquest, was well under way.
Even worse was the realization that we had cut an oblique through the outer ditch in our extended town defences section.
But we had failed to appreciate its significance.
13
LADY GODIVA AND A CELTIC FESTIVAL
ANCIENT festival rituals, such as Shrove Tuesday football, horn dancing, bull-running, pace-egging and pancake racing, have persisted in England despite attempts by Puritans of all periods to suppress them.
In many cases, one may trace them back to a very ancient past, though often the present-day festivals — surviving in the face of what is euphemistically called ‘progress’— retain only a vestige of their former meaning and complexity.
A case could be made for such a ritual being enshrined in the legend of Lady Godiva of Coventry, riding through the city on a white horse (fig. 13.1), though this idea has been dismissed by Hilda Ellis Davison in her otherwise full and admirable account of the legend.
This eminent folklorist, however, has not given a full consideration to the Celtic background.
For the Celts, female nudity held a very powerful magical significance, and this is nowhere better illustrated than in the Irish saga of the great semi-divine hero, Cú Chulainn.
When only seven years old, he was given arms and went out to do battle.
He was greatly aroused by his victories and, when he came to Emain, thrice 50 women, all naked, went out to meet him.
They lifted him from his chariot and placed him successively in three vats of water to quench his ardour.
The first vat burst open, the water in the second boiled, and only in the third was his temper restored to normality.
It is interesting to note that the Christian Celtic monks who translated the legend from the bardic account introduced their own Biblical morality, noting the sin of the women's nakedness before a boy of seven.
The idea of the sinfulness of  nakedness and sexuality has haunted generations of Christian believers, and still persists.
The vernal equinox was the greatest of all the Celtic seasonal festivals, since it signalled the rebirth of vegetation in the cycle of death and rebirth.
(The festivals marking the crucifixion and resurrection of Christ were adapted to this ancient scheme.)
One of the commonest rituals was for men and women to go into the fields and couple, as imitative magic, enabling the crops to germinate and flourish, followed by leaping dances to encourage them to grow.
These are described by Ovid in his great festival poem,Fasti .
This would also have been the time for naked women on horseback to lead the community out into the fields, bearing symbols of fertility to ensure a plentiful harvest.
The horse, too, had a special significance for the Celts.
They were wonderful horsemen and gloried in their skills, much as the Cossacks did in later times.
The horse was a symbol of potency and fertility, as was their horse goddess, Epona.
(Note the similarity with the Greek hippos , horse.)
The colour white is also significant, representing the purity and innocence appropriate to the New Year, as yet unblemished.
Unfortunately, we do not know the time of year when Lady Godiva is supposed to have ridden out.
Coventry's Great Fair was part of the festival of Corpus Christi at midsummer, and included a large procession, but it is unlikely that such a pagan feature as the nude ride would have survived the Church's hostility.
However, in France the infamous Festum Asinorum — the Ass' Feast — during which a live ass was present at the Mass and the congregation brayed like the animal, survived almost to the Reformation despite efforts to stamp it out.
The association of Lady Godiva with a spring ritual is more likely, and not difficult to explain.
The fusion of ritual and legend was common and, if a suitable historical figure could be used, it would seem more convincing.
In this way, the unfortunate Guy Fawkes became linked indissolubly with the autumn solstice and its fire-lighting rituals, which were imitative magical ceremonies designed to keep the power of the sun from waning.
The Godiva story was probably concocted in the thirteenth century, because the first account is that of Roger of Wendover in 1236, while Florence of Worcester, writing about Leofric and Godiva in 1118, fails to include any reference to the story.
So, the appearance of the story during the period when many legends were being interwoven is 200 years after the time of Godiva and her husband Leofric,c .
1035.
The tale is inherently a most unlikely one, uniting a pious lady with a pagan fertility ritual.
The inference is that the ritual remained as a memory in the Middle Ages, if not in actuality, and was linked with historical personages to give it a little more authenticity.
It is at least one possible explanation of a garbled fable, nicely spiced as an entertaining story to be recounted, no doubt with gusto, at the great feasts.
13
ROMANO-BRITISH SCENES AND FIGURES ON POTTERY
ARCHAEOLOGISTS investigate the material remains of antiquity in the form of structures and artefacts.
These are capable of being subject to interpretation and identification, and also provide answers to the question of ‘when’ by examining sequences and dates.
But the questions of ‘why’ and ‘how’remain insoluble.
To be able to answer these one needs to question the people themselves.
Archaeologists can reveal only very fragmentary glimpses of how people lived at any period, but what they imagined and thought is beyond recovery — the meagre scraps of records are useless or, at best, tantalizing in that they provide details torn from their context.
Even curse tablets are limited to the human reactions to theft and perjury and the instant demand for painful retribution, echoed throughout the primitive world.
This paper may be seen as an attempt to achieve the seemingly impossible in posing the question of why the Romano-Britons purchased vessels of local manufacture decorated with religious and other images in the third century.
What criteria did the purchasers employ in buying pottery?
The most important would obviously have been the particular use of a vessel in the pantry or kitchen, on the dining table, or for drinking.
It was vessels employed in the last of these uses which were most commonly decorated with religious figures and scenes.
Some table wares were also decorated, especially the glossy red samian bowls.
But did their purchasers examine the profusion of figures and chose those with particular meaning to them?
At one time in the recent past, willow-pattern plates and dishes were very popular, but did people buy them for the sad story of the elopement they depicted, or only because they were fashionable at the time?
There is often a clear element of choice in the case of modern pottery displaying horses, dogs and flowers, which arouse very personal feelings of like or dislike.
But how far can this be applied to the people of Roman Britain?
This is the question this paper seeks to investigate.
The barbotine and painted wares
The Romano-British potters, especially those at Colchester and in the Nene Valley, produced their figures by the barbotine method of applying thick slip to the surface of the vessel by squeezing it from a funnel, very similar to the modern technique of decorating and icing a cake.
The potters inserted details with a thin coloured slip applied with a brush.
Another method, used especially for figures, was to pour the clay into a mould and when dry apply them to the surface of the vessel.
Also, more rarely, the wall of a vessel while in a plastic condition was gently pushed into the mould held against the surface.
That the potters devoted so much time and care into applying these techniques would appear to indicate the existence of willing purchasers.
The hunt-cup
By far the most popular theme was the hunt (venatio), not in the open country but as staged in the arena.
For this purpose a large stone built amphitheatre was not required.
Any oval space, providing it was well fenced to prevent animals from leaping into the spectators, would have served.
It seems evident from the widespread popularity of the enactment of the hunt that simple timber arenas were provided in all large and probably even in small settlements, for they were part of the activities at the seasonal festivals.
The significance of the hunt
Man is distinguished from the other animals by the growth and development of the brain with its extraordinary intricate mechanism, which even today is scarcely understood.
This cranial development was an extremely slow process over many thousands of millennia.
Man evolved from the higher apes and, while in this animal state, acted by group instinct binding a kin group together; so, like a flock of birds, all members were in perfect concert.
Such hominoid-type creatures were hunted by stronger and swifter animals for food.
Through the early growth of the brain these ape-hominoids developed greater fluency in the use of their hands and began to fashion tools to protect themselves against the powerful hunters.
A defensive tool need be little more than a pointed stick, or hands could pick and hurl rocks at the animal predators.
More sophisticated weapons like throwing sticks and bows and arrows came only after a further long period of brain development.
The digging and concealing of pits into which animals could be lured was an even greater mental triumph.
So, by slow and painful steps, man learnt to become the hunter instead of the hunted, killing animals for food.
It was an enormous step for man to cease to be reliant on vegetation, and to add meat to his diet.
The improved brain made this possible by careful observation of the animals they pursued.
Changes in climate may have forced the hominoids to move from their earlier forest habitat into open country and to eat flesh to survive.
By the palaeolithic period, man was a highly developed creature capable of shaping tools and even depicting his activities on the walls of caves.
These vivid lively scenes are not art in the modern sense of self-expression, but the deliberate exercise of imitative magic to ensure success in the hunt.
Man had come a long, long way from his hominoid ancestry.
The image of the hunt, brought into sharp focus by the cave paintings, remained in song, dance and saga long after the basic need to kill had passed.
The basic concept of the act of killing and the flow of blood remained as an image of the life force and the continuity of the kin group through conception, pregnancy and birth.
Death and renewal were accepted as part of an ever-continuing cycle.
The enactment of the hunt and the practice of imitative magic to ensure success at the kill became fossilized as a widespread and regular feature of the seasonal festivities.
Continuity was assured by the performance becoming enshrined in a religious ritual which could never be broken for fear of offending the gods.
In the classical period, especially under Rome, it became an accepted means of satisfying the blood lust of the plebs by the chase and slaughtering of animals in the arena.
In the late Republic and early Empire, political figures (and later the Emperor) attempted to increase the number and variety of  creatures, even including criminals in these vast, bloody spectacles so horrific and disgusting to modern man.
The provincial spectacles were always on a much smaller scale since governors and wealthy patrons could never attempt to emulate the extravagant shows in Rome for fear of arousing the suspicious jealousy of the reigning Emperor.
The hunt was accepted as a symbol of resurrection on Christian tombstones in the late Roman Empire.
It has miraculously survived to the present day when the hunt has become a social ritual, demanding special dress and even to the ‘blooding’ of the tyro, an obvious piece of symbolism.
The venatio has survived into modern times in different forms.
In Spain it has become fossilized in the corrida de toros , the bull fights highly ritualized by centuries of performance.
In southern France young bulls are let loose in the towns and sported by the youths.
Until recently, similar bull-running was an annual festivity in many towns in Britain and prohibited by Parliament only early in 1835.
But still an active event at Stamford, Lincs., said to go back to 1209, the citizens deliberately flouted the new law and a squadron of yeomanry was despatched to suppress this minor rebellion.
The venationes
The seasonal ritual hunt in the arena (venatio) was preceded by a religious ceremony which included a sacrifice suitable to the season and the particular deity.
This having been accomplished, the assembled populace could ‘enjoy’ the hunt, staged by the venatores and their assistants, the bestiarii .
The animals, shown on the hunt-cups, are hares and deer chased by hunting dogs.
These creatures usually form a continuous frieze on the vessels, but the larger and more elaborate beakers include the venatores and bestiarii .
There are occasional variations of animals.
Sherds from the Nene Valley found at Bedford Purlieus, and published by the Rev. G. H. Hartshorne, include an animal with a snout, resembling a wolf, facing a venator holding a whip with his left arm in a sleeve buckler (fig. 14.1).
It is, however, possible that this animal is a hunting dog similar to the types on Colchester vessels.
There are other animals also from Colchester, like the two with ‘starry’ eyes and applied dots (fig. 14.2), which Hull has identified as fur.
The hind-quarters and thick tail of another Colchester animal are similarly dotted, as is a complete animal in an oak wood with a strangely-shaped snout, appearing to be tied to what is a    bridle-bit and rein (fig. 14.3); this very strange creature may represent a boar in captivity.
Exotic animals would probably have been rarities in the British arenae and even then used only for exhibition, as they would presumably have been too expensive to have suffered damage.
Also news of such extravagance might have perturbed a suspicious Emperor.
There are, however, examples of lions on British vessels.
A fine example was found in Lincoln in 1866 and is now in the British Museum (fig. 14.4), i others came from Richborough (fig. 14.5) and from a grave at Colchester on a Castor Box on which a lion appears in a venatio and being held at bay by a nude bestiarius with a long hunting spear.
Another creature commonly found on the beakers is a dolphin.
The barbotine technique allowed the potters to display these with a fluid eloquence, although the addition of triple tails of imaginative and flamboyant form clearly shows that these creatures were rarely if ever seen by the potters, or the artists who provided their models.
They are important symbols of rebirth since they escorted the souls of the dead across the water to the Isles of the Blessed.
Models of them are also used at the circus marking the finish of each lap, just as eggs indicated the start.
Dolphins on Nene Valley vessels were first shown by Artis (fig 14.6) and they were also produced at Colchester.
Other arena activities
Closely associated with the venationes were gladiatorial combats.
On the ‘Colchester Vase’ the two are shown together (fig. 14.7).
Above the figures of the secutor and the retiarius who had lost the trident, the owner of the beaker had scratched their names Sac (er ) and Valentinus and the unit —Legio XXX.
This legion was stationed at Xanten on the Rhine, and it seems evident that a team of its highly-trained gladiators was on tour in Britain, an interesting reflection on the kind of entertainment available in the arena at the festivals.
The circus
Another form of festival activity was to be found on the race-track, then known as the circus , of elongated shape with sharp rounded corners at each end.
There were probably a number of them in Britain, but they  must have left very little archaeological trace, needing only a flat piece of ground, probably outside the towns, marked out with wood rails and probably a stand at the finishing post for the local dignitaries and wealthy citizens.
The only evidence from Britain apart from the pottery, is a small piece of sculpture from Lincoln and an inscription at Chedworth (Prasina Factio ) the green company, referring to one of the four colours of the chariot races.
There was great rivalry between the colour factions, often with political implications.
Circus scenes were very popular at Colchester and there is an almost complete vessel, now in the British Museum (fig. 14.8).
Fragments from Colchester have been published.
The sherds found in London were illustrated by Roach Smith, one showing three horses and the other a charioteer (fig. 14.9), and the arm of a charioteer appears on a sherd from Verulamium.
Other aspects of the seasonal festivals
Apart from the venationes and races in the circus , there were other forms of religious ritual and public entertainment during the festivals.
Some of these continued into the Middle Ages and beyond and have been well recorded.
Their character encourages comparison with seasonal festivals of yet earlier periods.
The centre-piece of the medieval festivals was always the great religious procession when the images of the saints were taken out of the churches and cathedrals and paraded round the town, as still happens in Catholic Europe.
However, associated with the festivals were great fairs attracting traders from afar to display their wares.
The word ‘fair’ originated in the Latin feria (a holiday), the anglicized word itself a corruption of ‘holy day’.
The sacred and profane are therefore being inextricably woven together, as they always have been.
Added to these was another important element, for the period of the festival was a time of licence: this was a necessary outlet in the community for the tensions repressed after the long period of hard physical toil.
The release took the form of prankish behaviour with a sexual bias, accompanied by heavy drinking and eating.
In the rustic humour there were opportunities for poking fun at lords and masters and oppressive authority, both civil and military.
A mild example of this from antiquity was the Roman Saturnalia at the time of the winter solstice.
This festival was linked in the East with the birth of Mithras and later taken over by the Christians by conveniently  moving the birthday of Christ to this date.
We still celebrate it much in the same pagan tradition with a heavy indulgence, in gift giving and illuminating Christmas trees in an imitative magic to help the Sun regain its strength.
There were medieval survivals like the Feast of Fools, the election of a boy bishop and the scandalous Festum Asinorum , when an ass was led into the church or monastery and a parody of the Eucharist performed with the monks braying the Kyrie.
Such practices outraged the leading churchmen of the day, but they were so popular that they were not completely  suppressed until the fifteenth century.
It took the puritan fanatics to destroy these high spirits and mockery, which led inevitably to long periods of repression with its back-street prostitution of women and young boys, one of the many ‘hidden’ elements in Victorian society and, what was equally lamentable, the denial of the rightful place of women in society.
There are scenes on pottery which may relate to periods of licence and mockery.
A sherd found in the 1958 excavations on the route of the A1 at Water Newton shows a small creature with a long tail riding a horse and holding in a hand, with long slender fingers, a standard (fig. 14.10).
From the shape of the body, its long tail and thin arm with prehensile fingers it would appear to be a monkey, with what could be a crested helmet on its head.
It is suggested that this was intended to represent a Roman cavalry standard-bearer, as the insignia is not unlike an imago , similar to that held by Flavinus of the Ala Petriana , found near Corbridge and now in Hexham Abbey.
The idea of such a crude and offensive parody of the stiff, powerful heavy cavalry of the late Roman Army would appeal immensely to the peasants who could vent their feelings of resentment in bawdy mockery on those monuments of authority.
A better known scene from the Colchester factory may be viewed in the same light.
There is a venatio with dogs, a hare, a stag and what is probably a bear with a bestiarius holding a whip in his right hand while his left is covered with a sleeve-buckler.
But mixed up in this melée are four dwarves, or children dressed as cucullati , being chased by an assistant bestiarius in a loin-cloth and holding a stick (fig. 14.11).
The cucullati were strange twilight creatures flitting about in the under-growth and the skirtings of a house, but seen as a potent element of the life-force with their phallic hoods and the garments usually worn by small children.
The mockery of such spirits would seem to us today to be capable of attracting their spiteful revenge.
Jocelyn Toynbee restricted herself to the comment that they (the cucullati ) were ‘a  comic element like the clowns’.
But we should see clowns as reflections of ourselves.
If the cucullati could be depicted as objects of ridicule, other religious images could have suffered too.
This may explain a strange scene on a beaker from Stanwick, Northants.,(fig. 14.12) which shows a satyr leaping forward with his typical thin elongated arms stretched out in front of him.
He appears to be trying to escape a pursuer who has seized the long hair at the back of his head.
The Cult of Bacchus is one of the most difficult to understand, as there are so many varying aspects of the god.
The Cult had a public face, as demonstrated by the remarkable inhabited capital at Cirencester, and was widely accepted in Britain.
His more intimate followers met secretly in small closed groups, probably in the large villas of the wealthy landowners, and indulged in orgiastic rituals enhanced by drugs and alcohol.
Whether or not this happened to any extent in Britain we cannot know, but any hint of it would undoubtedly have started wild rumours, fired by imagination which always accompanies sexual matters.
So many Britons whose lives were little more than hard unremitting toil would have used the licence of the festival to make fun of these imagined orgies, especially if they occurred in the great houses.
These could have been gross bawdy parodies in the arena to the great delight of the multitude.
There are fragments of some other scenes on British pottery which appear to reflect aspects of the seasonal festivals.
Some of the most remarkable have been found at Colchester and published by M. R. Hull.
One is a scene apparently in a vineyard, since grapes are growing on the vine stems.
There are four men wearing animal and bird masks (fig. 14.13), two are each holding a hooked stick, the lagobolon , used for hunting hares.
It is a scene reminiscent of the palaeolithic cave paintings and the much later Hodening and Horn dancing which survived until recent times, but today only at Abbotts Bromley, Staffs.
The presence of vines is more difficult to explain as viticulture has yet to be proved positively in Roman Britain, although it would seem logical after the Edict of Probus.
Vine scrolls were, however, a common decorative feature on barbotine vessels and were probably copied from those from Gaul and Germany.
A remarkable scene on a Nene Valley vessel (fig. 14.14) in the Peterborough Museum shows a scene more likely today to be found in a modern circus.
A female in a long pleated dress is leaping over two animals, the neck of one of which is heavily covered with barbotine dots, perhaps intended to identify it    as a leopard.
Such a performance can only have been intended for entertainment in a programme of venationes and gladiatorial combats.
This suggestion is supported by the scene on the rest of this large vessel separated from the acrobat by columns decorated with trails of coloured slip.
The scene on the other side of the beaker includes two armoured men facing each other, only one is complete, wearing a helmet and sleeve-buckler, but appearing to have only a whip, while his opponent seems to be wielding a short spear (fig. 14.15).
The flagellum (whip), if this is the weapon shown, was used by gladiators in the arena.
An important aspect of these festivals was the offering of gifts to the gods.
The Celts performed this ritual on a tribal basis.
The king or chieftain would make the offering on behalf of his people and they were thrown into the sacred lake or pool with appropriate ritual ceremony.
The gifts were tokens of the wishes of the tribal chiefs and took the form of gold and silver bullion, reflecting their need for more power and prestige, and weapons to gain greater martial success against other tribes in the annual border affrays.
Few of these deposits have been found, since the Romans regarded them as booty when in hostile territory, and systematically cleared all likely pools.
The most remarkable example of such a deposit in Britain is that at Llyn Cerrig Bach in Anglesey, found by a contractor during the last war when he was digging for peat.
This amazing collection of Celtic metalwork was mainly war gear including enough pieces of chariot to enable the late Sir Cyril Fox to produce a convincing reconstruction.
The offering of gifts by the tribal chiefs and kings on behalf of their people was not only to demonstrate their obligation to the gods, but also to show the gods what the tribe needed from them; usually greater wealth and greater victories over their enemies.
To this extent the gifts were tokens, and this basic concept remained, although under Rome, it was possible for individuals to make their own approaches with votive offerings.
It was also common for groups of people, organized into trade guilds (collegia ) to make corporate offerings, as they continued to do in the Middle Ages.
These latter offerings took the form of the Mystery Plays staged and enacted by members of the guilds.
In Roman times there is little doubt that guilds and other bodies would have carried their offerings in procession behind the images of the gods.
Some of these offerings could have taken the form of wooden effigies, an idea supported by the discovery of many such figures in sacred pools in Germany and France.
These figures are mainly human beings, but also include animals, presumably tokens of living ones.
Wooden  objects have not, alas, survived in Britain except in very exceptional waterlogged conditions, such as the figure of a goddess, identified as Epona from the bottom of a well at Winchester in 1947.
The carrying of a wood effigy may be the subject of a scene on a Nene Valley vessel found at Grandford, Cambs.
(fig. 14. 16).
This shows two men holding aloft a small boar by gripping its legs, which would be totally impossible had the animal been alive or dead.
The only possible explanation is that they are holding a wooden effigy.
A similar scene is shown on the Gundestrup Cauldron (fig. 14. 17).
Although this vessel is of Thracian origin, Celtic elements are included in the scenes.
A scene on another Nene Valley sherd in the Peterborough Museum may depict a similar event (fig. 14. 18), this appears to show men carrying an effigy of some kind, but the interpretation remains uncertain.
Deities
The scenes on pottery described above belong to a very small minority, but they have been singled out for their outstanding interest and significance in the study of religious practices.
By far the most common features are the gods and goddesses, usually in groups.
What may be thought surprising is the absence of Celtic deities which are so well represented in stone sculpture and reliefs, especially in the west.
A possible explanation is that the Celtic tradition remained in these areas longer than the south and west, the people of which with their close Gallic links had been subject to greater Roman influence before the conquest, this region too was where the vast majority of the figured pottery was made.
Not even the Mother Goddesses are represented on pottery although they were extremely popular as pipe-clay figurines made in the Rhineland and found in Britain.
There is to date only a single example of a Celtic deity known to me, apart from the cucullati depicted in debatable circumstances on the Colchester vessel described above.
This is an Epona seated with a foal on each side from Ashton, Northants.
(fig. 14.19) similar to a group in bronze in the British Museum possibly from Wiltshire.
The smith-gods
There are clear Celtic influences in the various smith-gods normally identified as Vulcan.
The Celts were fine metal-workers and their    products were in great demand, especially by the Army.
The smiths formed very close groups based on strong family ties and carefully retained the secret of their craft, including the mystic rituals and the name of their gods.
The name of the hero warrior craftsman Goibniu in the Irish saga simply means ‘smith’, a handy ‘cover-all’ word.
A Celtic deity associated with their craft was Tanaris (or Taranis), the sky god, responsible for lightning and thunder and equated by the Celts with Jupiter.
This deity has been found on a pottery mould (fig. 14.20) at Corbridge, the great military works depôt and supply base, where local craftsmen would have been working.
The mould shows an old bearded figure with a conical hat, the classical pilleus worn by artisans, carrying a rectangular shield and a crooked stick representing the lightning flash (fulmen), at his side is a wheel, a solar image.
When found, he was immediately christened ‘Harry Lauder’, after the celebrated Scottish comedian who was popular at that time.
Hardly surprisingly, Corbridge has produced other smith-gods on pottery and these have been linked by Ian Richmond with Dolichenus (fig. 14.21).
On the basis of an altar and sculptured reliefs, he suggested the presence of a Dolichenum and a cult for the worship of this powerful eastern sky god.
He was normally shown, holding a double axe and thunderbolt, standing on a bull, thus linking him with this important fertility image.
Richmond also identified the Tanaris pottery mould with this god, and an appliqué bearded figure on a sherd in grey ware brandishing a double axe and wearing a blacksmiths' leather apron.
The potter has signed his name Alletio on a raised panel.
The cult of Dolichenus was introduced into Britain by high-ranking officers of the army and it was especially popular under Commodus.
It seems unlikely that the officers responsible for the cult would have used crude pottery vessels of this type.
Also a very similar figure has been found on a Nene Valley sherd (fig. 14.22).
Although in profile and painted, rather than in relief, it bears a striking resemblance to the Alletio sherd from Corbridge.
In the absence of any military presence in this area in the third century, it would be more sensible to identify this figure with a smith-god.
The pottery figures show the smiths wearing the conical cap (pilleus), also worn by Dolichenus, and this may have given Richmond the idea that the Corbridge figures were of this eastern god.
This sky god is shown on a votive plaque found at Doliche, the original cult centre, in eastern dress and with a kind of turban on his head.
The Nene Valley has produced other smith-gods and scenes of their  craft.
The most significant of these, in the Peterborough Museum, is a painted sherd showing a blacksmith's bench supporting a typical triangular anvil; an angle-iron for bending strips and bars and, on the edge of the sherd, the forge itself with curls of smoke rising from it.
The smith stands at the side but only his arm survives on the edge of the sherd (fig. 14.23).
There is also, in the Peterborough Museum, another scene which includes what is probably the lower part of a similar bench with the forge at the side, a figure facing the bench wears the heavy leather apron, carefully incised with a finely-pointed tool, below is a pilleus on a stick.
(fig. 14.24).
A third, but much cruder version in the Wisbech Museum, shows the smith working at his bench although what task he is actually performing is not clear (fig. 14.25).
That the Nene Valley potters were capable of much finer work than the Wisbech example is clear from a fine figure on a large vessel from Bannaventa (fig. 14.26a).
This smith-god wears the leather apron and holds a pair of long-handled tongs, from which a small billet has fallen;, and it is held in his left hand, presumably the right held a hammer.
On the same vessel there is the foot of Mercury, identified by his winged shoe, and the feet of a female with what appears to be a spindle (fig. 14.26b), possibly identifying her with one of the Fates, an unusual theme.
The classical origins of these deities would indicate an identification of the smith-god as Vulcan.
Hercules
Of all the classical deities it is surprising to find that Hercules was the most popular in Britain, if this can be gauged by the 17 dedications listed in the RIB Index, although most of these are military.
There is also the great hill-figure, the Cerne Giant, which has been identified as Hercules and may have been one of many such figures.
But perhaps a more significant indicator is his appearance on the British pottery vessels.
Hercules was a great hero-god and, as such, may have appealed to the Celts whose tribal sagas, like those of other peoples, abound with similar mythical figures.
The concept stemmed from a great warrior of the past and tales of his valour and achievements becoming adorned with colourful details and highly magnified by constant telling.
At some stage in the long period of hero-making, he became semi-divine, the progeny of a tribal king and the female titular deity.
Once this was accepted, his deeds assumed a magical character; his skills, cunning  and physical powers were greatly enlarged, and all his tasks, however impossible, were accomplished.
But it was his semi-humanity with which people, as groups and individuals, could identify.
Other peoples had, and may still have, semi-divine heroes.
One of the earliest was Gilgamesh, the Sumerian King of Uruk,c .
2600 BC, who is known from the fortunate survival of his Epic.
Another, from our mythical Celtic past was Cú Chulainn, whose heroic deeds are related in the Book of Leinster.
His father was the god Lug, and his mother Deichtire, a mortal.
The father of Hercules was Zeus himself and his mother, Alcmene, a mortal queen.
The origins of the myths of his labours are lost in remote antiquity, but they represent the deep tribal need for saviour heroes with divine powers who could offer success when the tribe was threatened by external forces.
The miraculous tales were set down in writing at the very beginning of literacy, even before the Homeric poems of the eighth century BC.
The Labours are typical of the dangerous and impossible tasks imposed on a folk-hero who is forced into obligations in varying circumstances, always with the expectancy that he would be killed.
According to the legends, Hercules was driven mad by Hera, the wife of Zeus, and he killed Megara, his own wife and his three sons.
To cleanse his blood guilt, he was put into the service of Eurystheus, who ordered the Labours to be undertaken, one by one.
Scenes from the Dodekathlos , the canonical selected number of Twelve Parerga or Labours, to which can be added the Praxeis or Deeds, often incidental to the performance of the Parerga.
Scenes from both appear as early as the eighth century BC, and, with constant copying, take a stylized form, even by the late sixth century on Attic black-figured vessels.
The groups of figures remain in their fixed poses with little variation into Roman mythological scenes, and were in turn copied by provincial craftsmen, including potters, even in Britain.
As befitting his role, he was in appearance a large muscular figure, normally shown naked.
He carried the skin and mask of the Nemean lion, the victim of his first Parerga , and his mighty club, a living olive tree torn from the ground, a symbol of the Tree of Life.
To accomplish his Labours and Deeds, Hercules was obliged to travel to far-off places to destroy ferocious creatures which were ravaging the countryside and creating terror among the inhabitants, such as the Lernaean Hydra and the sea monster, to which a Trojan damsel had to be annually supplied.
These monsters of antiquity were compilations of known creatures, putting together into one body the most dangerous and fearsome aspects of each.
They can be understood as mental projections of all those mind-searing fears mankind has all too frequently suffered.
A case could be made for a deep psychic need in people the world over for the manifestations of monsters in varying horrific forms.
They appear even today as can be shown by the many supposed sightings of such creatures as the North American big-foot and its distant relation, the Yeti, and even the Loch Ness Monster, which has prompted an exhaustive scientific survey.
Also to be considered are the many strange accounts of werewolves, vampires, apart from ghosts and ghouls.
To all this, modern man has now added creatures from outer-space which can be grouped under the general category of UFOs (Unidentified Flying Objects), some of which have reputedly landed and disguised themselves as human beings.
Monsters were being created as early as the fourth millennium BC in Mesopotamia and Iran.
Of two examples carved on steatite seals dated to 3500–3200, the older one is a highly stylized figure with a triangular body and thin arms and legs.
It has a head but a vertical line joins a simplified line with down-curved ends, identified as moufflon (wild sheep) horns.
Associated with it is a pair of snakes, their heads directed at the armpits.
This figure is identified as a demon, but it could be a deity or semi-divine hero, who were often shown with a horned head-dress (see below p. 146 and fig. 14.28).
Snakes were universally powerful fertility and rebirth symbols.
The second figure is of human  shape with an ibex head and the body covered with spots, probably indicating an animal skin.
This figure is reminiscent of the Palaeolithic hunters of Western Europe, who dressed in untreated animal skins and wore antlers to enable them to approach the animals they were hunting (see p. 131 and fig. 14.13).
A fine example is the antlered hunter in the Grotte des Trois Frères.
The fine pottery of ancient Sumeria with pointed ibex friezes is not too dissimilar from the British barbotine Hunt-Cups.
However, one has to be cautious in drawing such general conclusions, since it is also apparent that it became a practice in the early period (c. 3000 BC) to depict animals in human positions.
This idea may even have developed from the hunting practices and rituals, in which men dressed as animals to be able to approach near enough to use their short-weapons effectively.
Although the two early seals may possibly be interpreted as hunting rituals, there are undoubted monsters of more complicated structure facing hero deities.
These include several examples of snake forms very similar to the Lernaean Hydra which caused even Hercules some difficulty.
One of the earliest is a shell plaque from the Early Dynastic period,c .
3000 BC, illustrated by Donald P. Hanson (fig. 14.27).
This shows a seven-snake-necked monster with animal heads and a long spotted body with four legs, suggestive of a leopard, and in addition to the thick tail there appear to be eight more, rising from, but not attached to the back and neck.
It is moving towards a crowned deity, a hero kneeling and holding a curved implement, presumably a knife.
One of the snake's heads droops and three curved lines have been carved over the neck, representing either the severance of the neck or the actual curved blade used.
The other heads advance in a menacing manner towering over the kneeling deity, identified as such by his head-dress.
Similar features to the ‘tails’ on the back of the shell plaque monster, described above, have been given different interpretations.
According to Dominique Collon, they are solar rays and are thought to represent the destructive aspect of the sun.
This suggestion appears to be supported by the description of the demon monster Asakku, with his single-eyed solar head in the epic LUGAL UD ME-LÁM-bi Nir-GÁL.
This primitive image would have been appropriate to the fierce power of the sun in the eastern deserts.
However, a similar manifestation on an unprovenanced cylinder-seal illustrated by Machteld J. Mellink is shown in a cult scene in which Teshub is driving his chariot, and in the procession behind him is a deity, crawling on hands and knees, identified as ‘the nude goddess bringing  rain’.
There are eight long rays emanating from the head; but without a text, uncertainty remains as to their precise identification.
Another and very similar monster on a cylinder seal of c .
2500 BC from Tell Asmar was published by Dr G. Rachel Levy, who has indicated its relationship with the Lernaean Hydra.
This seven-headed, four-legged monster also has long tails or rays attached to its back (fig. 14.28).
It is being driven forward by a horned deity at the rear, armed with a long spear.
The figure facing the monster is also horned and is thrusting his spear into a snake-like head, three arms droop down having been similarly despatched.
Dr Levy published another snake monster, also from Tell Asmar, which is closer to the classical versions of the Hydra.
This is a seven-headed coiled serpent facing the hero, who may be horned, holding aloft two heads he has cut away (fig. 14.29).
A significant detail is the forked ends of the severed heads which may have been intended to suggest the immediate growth of two replacements, as in the classical version of the myth.
The popularity of hercules in Britain
The reason for the popularity of Hercules in Britain may be sought in the spread and growth of the Salvation Cults from the late second century.
The concept of personal salvation was not new to Rome since the cults of Isis and Dionysus had taken root in the city in the early first century.
The spread was helped by the Army since the idea appealed to soldiers facing possible death in battle.
The interest in these cults among the civil population was enhanced in times of political unrest and an increase in central authoritarian presence.
In Britain such was the period following the defeat of Clodius Albinus in the civil war of AD 196.
The Britons were strong supporters of Albinus who had been the Governor of the Province, it follows that Severus would undoubtedly have dealt with them severely.
Sheppard Frere has suggested that some villas may in consequence have been deserted, but evidence of this nature is difficult to assess.
There are certainly indications of confiscation of property in Gaul and Spain and similar measures would undoubtedly have been enacted in Britain.
The removal of a large section of the landed and business sections of the community would have had a devastating effect on the province as a whole, and especially its economy.
The ordinary people, the peasants, craftsmen and industrial workers would all have suffered.
The severe disruption  to the samian industry in Central Gaul caused an immediate diminution in high grade pottery production.
The effect of this may have been beneficial to some of the British potters, especially in Oxfordshire where good quality imitations of provincial samian vessels were produced.
The earliest production date of these wares has not, however, yet been determined, due to the lack of closely-dated deposits of the early mid third century.
The opinion of one excavator, Dr C. Young, is that c .
240 is the earliest possible date and their appearance at Verulamium has been dated to c .
250 — 80.
This would appear to indicate a gap of c .
50 years between the collapse of the central Gaulish industry and the first appearance of British samian forms copied, most probably from the products of the factories of East Gaul.
The British figured pottery took the form of colour-coated drinking beakers, the earliest products dating to the second half of the second century.
From a study of closely-dated deposits on Hadrian's Wall, John Gillam did not date any of these vessels earlier than c .
180.
The earliest beakers were small, and, apart from a few early hunt scenes, all the figures on the larger examples came into fashion in the third century.
A suggestion may be offered that the appearance of the figures on drinking vessels may have a significance.
This is supported by the large range of so-called ‘Motto beakers’ produced in the Rhineland, and especially at Trier where they are known as Spruchbecher .
The words usually take the form of toasts, such as VIVAS, AVE, VTI ME FELIX.
Others have a bawdy touch, although AME ME, AMO TE may refer to the beaker and its contents as in the ditty ‘Little Brown Jug’.
Most of the words and phrases are obviously toasts and are part of the conviviality of a drinking party, but some of the Trier vessels also bear painted portraits of deities, demonstrating a link with the gods.
They are also often found in cemeteries suggesting that the spirits were toasted on their journey to the Isles of the Blessed.
The association of the beakers with the gods and the spirit world could support a further idea that their purchasers might drink to their chosen deity either in thanks for a favour granted or for one to come.
The beakers could also have been used for pouring libations on an altar in the act of making a vow.
At its lowest level, the beakers could be seen merely as souvenirs bought at the markets, which sprang up round the arenas and race-tracks at festival times.
A further factor possibly bearing on the popularity of Hercules in Britain is the discovery made in 1857 at Willingham Fen.
This consisted of a carefully buried wooden box containing a collection of bronzes which appear to have been associated  with a religious site.
These objects were the subject of a study in 1923 by Michael Rostovtzeff.
He singled out as the most significant object, a bronze mace 13½ ″ long in the form of the club of Hercules surmounted by a panel of figures in solid relief.
Rostovtzeff identified the head he thought had been the top of this object as that of Commodus, and that it was associated with the cult of Commodus-Hercules.
He drew the conclusion that this cult was popular in Britain, although it would seem more likely that it was restricted to the Army.
However, had there been a shrine to this cult in the Cambridgeshire Fens on the edge of the Nene Valley one could consider a connection with pottery scenes.
However, A. Alföldi has identified the head as that of Antoninus Pius and shown also that it did not belong to the club.
The finds from this interesting hoard are basically Celtic and include, above the club, the figure of Taranis and the wheel and eagle, as well as a three-horned bull.
It may be of some interest that the club of Hercules should be so thoroughly integrated in a Celtic religious assemblage, but this requires a specialized and more detailed study than could be attempted here.
The Parerga (Labours) and Praxeis (Deeds) on the British Vessels
THE PARERGA OR LABOURS
The First Labour , the slaying of the Nemean lion, was a common theme for samian potters, but, unusual in Britain, only one example is known and this is by no means certain.
This was found on a Romano — British settlement at Kettering during development from 1903.
The published drawings are not very satisfactory: and the two depicting the vessel do not match.
Unfortunately, it has not been possible to trace these sherds in the museum collection.
The drawings show two creatures, one obviously a lion and the other an animal facing a man of muscular appearance (fig. 14.30).
Sadly, the crucial area of their juncture is missing, but from the surviving fragments of the scene there is a strong resemblance to the typical stance adopted by Hercules in strangling the lion.
The Second Labour was the destruction of the Lernaean Hydra.
The origin of this unusual monster has been shown to be in Early Dynastic Sumeria (see p. 146 and fig. 14.29 above).
This strange creature was a    many- (often seven-) headed serpent, but when a head was cut off, two more immediately appeared to replace it.
Nor did Hera assist by sending a giant crab to divert the attack.
Hercules needed the help of his cousin, Iolaos, who plunged a burning stake into the central head.
The blood of the creature was highly poisonous, so the hero dipped his arrows into it.
This scene would have been difficult to show in its entirety and the one example is a very poor copy found at Welney Fen, Norfolk.
This shows Hercules holding the Hydra by the neck of the only visible head with his club raised (rig.
14.31).
It is a slender wraith-like creature with a long tail.
A better example is on a small sherd from Colchester but it includes only a single head, in full face view with tentacles like a radiate crown, supported on a thin writhing neck (fig. 14.32).
Another possible Hydra scene is on a collection of four non-joining enigmatic sherds from Plants Farm, Maxey, Cambs.
One of the sherds (fig. 14.33c) appears to be an arm with the skin of the Nemean lion draped over the shoulder and another sherd (fig. 14.33b) shows a hand holding a staff or rod being thrust into a creature only the head of which survives on the sherd.
It is possible that this could represent the killing of the Hydra by Iolaos, but the third sherd (fig. 14.33a) is undoubtedly a female and difficult to associate with Hercules unless, by a remote possibility, she is the Queen of the Amazons!
The Third Labour was the capture of the wild Keryneian Hind with golden antlers.
It took the hero a year to find the creature, taking him beyond the boundaries of the world, but he captured it by swimming across a river, and brought it back alive, as was his instruction.
In the normal scene for this Labour, Hercules is shown kneeling on the back of the animal gripping the antlers, but the British example on a large vessel from Lincoln is a much more vigorous view of the capture with the hero springing onto its back with his club raised aloft (fig. 14.34a).
Other sherds of this large beaker show the arm of Jupiter grasping the fulmen (lightning flash)(fig. 14.34b) and a hand grasping a purse which may belong to Mercury,(fig. 14.34d) and the top of a Bacchic thyrsus of grapes and vine leaves (fig. 14.34c).
For size and quality this is a most exceptional vessel.
No examples of the Fourth and Fifth Labours have yet appeared on British vessels, but there are several versions of the Sixth Labour , the Stymphalian Birds.
In the marshy lake of Stymphalos in the Peloponnese were flocks of enormous stork-like birds.
They shot at the inhabitants with their steel-tipped feathers and befouled the fields  with their noxious droppings.
Hercules acquired through Athena an enormous bronze rattle made by Hephaistos, and with this he scared them from their coverts, then shot them down with arrows, the tips of which were poisoned with the blood of the Hydra.
The scenes on the British vessels mainly show the birds in the background of the hero holding his bow.
Such an example has been found in excavations on the large rural site at Stanwick, Northants.
There is only the lower half of the hero on the sherd but he is identified by the club, an unusually thin example, and with a cross hilt one expects on a sword, on his right hangs the lower part of the lion skin, behind him on the left are two long-necked birds, identifying this Labour, although there is no evidence of the bow (fig. 14.35).
On sherds of a beaker found at Verulamium, Hercules is standing with his bow in his right hand which is thrust forward and presumably his left is drawing an arrow from a quiver, the lion skin and mask are draped over his outstretched arm (fig. 14.36).
Although no birds are in evidence, it is assumed that this Labour is indicated.
There are other deities on the vessel; Mercury identified by his winged feet, and Attis, another salvation god, with his eastern bow, Phrygian cap and star-studded tunic.
The suggested identification in the report is that of Mithras.
Attis, was, however, more popular in Britain than has hitherto been supposed.
A small sherd also from Verulamium (Ver.A.Bd.1) shows only a leg but the trails of the lion skin identify it as Hercules (fig. 14.37).
Another figure of Hercules with a bow appears on a beaker from Godmanchester (fig. 14.38) Only the top of the bow survives but it is clear from its shape that it is of the eastern type.
The arrow with a large tip is placed across the right shoulder of the hero, but it is not clear how it is sustained in this position.
Another sherd of this beaker depicts a stag (not drawn) either as part of a venatio or, possibly, the Third Labour — the Keryneian Hind.
None of the remaining six Labours has yet been identified on British pottery.
An example of the Eleventh Labour — the stealing of the Golden Apples of the Hesperides may be seen on an altar from Whitley Castle (fig. 14.39), although it has been identified as the Hydra, however, a tree with apples is clearly visible on the edge of the stone and also the head of the protective snake.
This Labour is highly reminiscent of the Babylonian myth of the Garden of Eden brought back by the Hebrews from captivity and incorporated with modifica-tions into Genesis, as the apples of the Tree of Death, with Satan in the guise of the snake (see p. 158 below).
THE PRAXEIS OR DEEDS
Of the many Deeds performed by Hercules only one appears to have been recorded on a British beaker.
This is the rescue of Hesione from a sea monster.
The legend tells how Laomedon, the King of Troy, gave offence to Poseidon, and was ordered by the god to offer a young virgin every year to a sea monster.
Eventually the lot fell on the King's daughter, Hesione, who was taken to the sea shore on the appointed day and tied to a rock.
Hercules arrived and made a bargain with the King, that if he rescued the girl, he would give him the mares presented to Laomedon by Zeus.
In one version, reminiscent of the story of Jonah, the hero was swallowed by the monster despite a wall built by Athena to protect him.
He then had to hack his way out, killing the monster in the process and unchaining Hesione.
The ungrateful King, however, refused to part with the mares and Hercules returned to Troy later with a body of companions and destroyed the city.
This myth of a maiden rescued from a monster is found in many places, but the most distant from the Mediterranean is probably Japan.
When the skystorm-god, Susa-no-wo was banished from the heavens, he wandered about the earth and met an elderly pair in a state of great distress.
On enquiring of the cause, Susa-no-wo was told they had been obliged to offer their eight daughters, one by one, to the eight-headed dragon of Koshi and it was now the turn of the last daughter.
This monster had eight heads and eight tails and was so long it stretched over eight hills and eight valleys.
The hero-god accepted the challenge on condition that he could have the girl if he rescued her, and ordered the couple to build eight large vats and fill them with rice-beer, so that when the monster arrived all eight heads could drink at once.
The monster fell asleep in a drunken stupor and Susa-no-wo then cut it to pieces and settled down with the maiden.
The sea-monster became, in the hands of Greek sculptors and vase painters, a composite creature based on the dolphins, whales and tunny they were accustomed to see in the Mediterranean, and to which the general term ketos (great fish) was applied.
One ketos disgorging Jonah has a dolphin's tail and the head and snout of a boar and with feline feet and presumably claws.
Others are more snake-like, with a dragon's head.
The Greek vase paintings of this Praxis , show the monster with an enormous open mouth.
On a sixth-century BC vessel made in Etruria, the ketos has a large eye and vicious curved teeth against which the hero holds a sickle; while in an early Attic scene, he  appears about to cut off the monster's tongue.
On an Etruscan handled-vase, the hero is advancing into the gaping mouth while drawing his sword.
These highly imaginative scenes are not found on the British examples.
Unfortunately, on the only example on pottery, from the Nene Valley, the monster appears on the broken edge of the sherd (fig. 14.40) and all that is visible are his sprouting whiskers and one foot.
Hesione is standing with her hands bound behind her back and held in position by two heavy chains attached to weights.
Hercules advances from the left with his enormous upraised club in his right hand and the lion mask and skin on his left arm.
The only other version in Britain, so far identified, is on a stone block from a mausoleum from Chester.
The ketos , to which the hero is advancing would have been on the missing part of the stone.
There is, however, another monster carved on the left-hand side of the block.
This is an anguiped , a creature the two legs of which are serpents.
It has a small head, its arms are upraised and it appears to wear trunks supported by a thick twisted cable round the waist.
Sources used by British potters for Hercules scenes
The problem of the sources of the scenes on this pottery cannot easily be resolved.
Although some of the scenes are found on Central Gaulish samian, the large jugs and flagons (Déch. form 76) made on the Rhône, probably at Vienne, gave more space for larger and more detailed scenes on the appliqué medallions.
The Central Gaulish industry was virtually destroyed c .
196, for reasons given above, and supplies were probably limited by the early third century.
The Rhineland potters who now supplied Britain with samian, but on a much reduced scale, appear to have had a limited figure repertoire.
The salvation — rebirth theme was acquired by Hercules through his visit to the Underworld to capture Cerberus.
In consequence, he was often depicted on mausolea and sarcophagi.
But these would have been mainly in the military zones, such as the example already noted of Hercules and Hesione at Chester.
From richer areas of the Roman world, sarcophagi have been found with many of the Labours in relief.
An example is one from the Via Appia, Rome.
One side of the sarcophagus actually shows, from the left, Hercules dragging Cerberus from Hades, the exit from which is shown by the overhanging rock.
Next, Hercules has his right foot on the body of the Queen of the  Amazons, from whom he took her girdle.
In the centre Hercules and the Ninth Labour are depicted — the taking of the Golden Apples with the guardian snake emerging from the tree and one of the daughters of Hesperos retreating in alarm.
The next scene is the Seventh Labour, the capture of the horses of Diomedes, and on the edge of the stone, Hercules is strangling the Nemean lion, the First Labour.
As fine and detailed as these scenes are, it is doubtful if any sarcophagi of this quality would have been produced or imported into Britain.
The sculptured reliefs which have survived are extremely crude.
The Whitley Castle altar has been described above (fig. 14.39 and note 109).
There is a small votive relief found near Colerne, Wilts., which has been identified as Hercules and the Hydra.
The hero is towering over three diminutive snake-like figures.
The stone is very weathered and much defaced, but its coarseness is beyond doubt.
One expects military sculpture to be massive and crude, and this is very true of a Hercules scene from Corbridge from the Chapel of the Standards in the western principia (Site xiv).
In this scene, a stiff muscular hero has a large, heavy club raised in his right hand and he advances towards his objective.
This can only be defined by a large claw-like grasp on his left forearm, which could be identified as a tentacle of the Hydra.
A diminutive figure of Minerva appears to be directing operations from the rear.
By far the most detailed and satisfactory portrayals of Hercules and his wide variety of performances are seen on metalwork.
In particular, the silver picture plates of the Late Antique, examples of which have been collected together and published by the late Professor Toynbee and by Kenneth Painter.
Relatively few have survived from antiquity, since silver became scarce and a much sought after commodity in the late Empire.
The examples listed here were all from hoards, and included a dish depicting the First Labour: the hero strangling the Nemean Lion.
He has the lion in a head-lock and his arms are buried in the mane to obtain a grip on the throat, his club and quiver lay.on the ground.
Another much earlier Hercules scene in a lively and highly naturalistic manner is on a silver-gilt phiale from the Thracian treasure hoard from Rogozen, Bulgaria, dated to c .
340 BC.
The scene in deep relief shows a seated, naked Hercules and the priestess, Auge.
She was the daughter of Aleus, King of Arcadia, and his niece, Neacra.
Aleus, forced Auge to become a priestess in the temple of Athena at Tegea, which secured her perpetual virginity.
Hercules, paying a visit, seduced her and she gave birth to a son, Telephus, with unfortunate  consequences for them both, but for Hercules it was a passing encounter.
Silver plate of a possible votive character was found in 1747 at Capheaton in Northumberland.
This included four highly decorated skillet handles and a circular medallion presumably from a base.
One of these was devoted entirely to Hercules.
On the handle are three bodies of animals he overcame, the Nemean Lion, the Keryneian hind and the Erymanthian boar, and at the base, the tree with the Golden Apples, two of the Stymphalian birds and the Lernaean Hydra.
A central medallion depicts the hero grasping Antaeus and lifting him above the ground to sap his power.
However popular such finely decorated silver plates may have been among the wealthy Britons, it is highly unlikely that they would be seen by the working potters, who would have had to rely on a more popular source for their repertoire.
Somewhat more accessible could have been an object such as the bronze strigil found in the Caerleon Fortress Baths, including six of the Labours and presumably paired with a companion to complete the Dodekathlos .
But decorated strigils were also relatively expensive and rare, especially in Britain.
A smaller and cheaper source would have been items like the decorated bronze disc or phalera found at Godmanchester.
It depicts in relief Hercules holding his club kneeling on the back of a lion (fig. 14.41).
Thus, it conflates the Nemean Lion with the capture of the Keryneian Hind, on which this stance is used, and would not have been a reliable guide for any copyist.
It has a hollow back with a lead filling and thus was clearly a decorative mount on a cart or large piece of furniture.
These examples clearly demonstrate that the scenes existed but they were hardly likely to have been seen by stone masons or potters to copy.
The most useful form of illustration would have been sets of drawings on papyri or thin wood tablets, loosely bound together.
One must conclude that such sources were available to the master potters, but it is also evident that peripheral factories were content merely to copy those more skilled in the art, with the crude results one must expect.
The Life-Force symbol
A much favoured theme on the British drinking beakers was the Life-Force symbol — the phallus.
Widely in evidence in the ancient world, it was regarded as a powerful protection against evil forces, especially that  of the evil eye.
For this reason the image was often worn as small bronze amulets, especially by children and soldiers, and it also commonly appears on buildings, as at Pompeii.
Primarily associated with fertility, so highly regarded in primitive times for the continuity of the group, this powerful force was often controlled and restricted by taboos, some of which have survived into modern times as codes of social behaviour, but deeply affected by both prudery and prurience which usually operated together.