

New Zealand's First Ecumenical Conference of Churches Communication Personnel took place in Wellington in September.
The conference, which attracted communicators from seven denominations, was initiated by WACC member, Diane Gilliam-Knight who is Director of Communication for the Presbyterian Church of New Zealand.
The aim of the conference was to consider how to communicate the ecumenical face of the churches, especially on economic and social justice issues.
The conference was a starting point to identify precisely what ways were open to the denominations to work together more closely.
These included agreements to:
initiate dialogue between church communicators and the denominational social justice issues committees, to help them communicate their activities more effectively to the churches and to the general public;
set up a vision group to work on the direction of future ecumenical interaction in communication;
produce more ecumenical editions of Crosslink, the Methodist Presbyterian monthly, on economic justice and evangelism;
set up a network for news sharing for the religious print media, and
maintain contact through conferences.
By Diane Gilliam-Knight, Director of Communications, Presbyterian Church of New Zealand, PO Box 9049, Wellington, New Zealand.
Tel (04) 801 6000.
Fax (04) 801 6001.
Korean churches form media committee
The National Council of Churches in Korea has formed a special committee to work on the ‘democratisation of the Korean media’.
The committee will monitor what it calls the ‘existing pattern of one-sided, distorted, government-controlled news reporting’ by TV, radio and the press.
It will work to promote ‘honest, balanced and objective’ media reporting.
The committee will set up a counselling centre for ‘victims’ of incorrect media reports.
A team will be formed to monitor daily media content, and monthly lectures on the role of the media in society will be held to raise social awareness of the media.
From Asian Lutheran Press Service
Christmas: A call to follow Christ
WACC's General Secretary, Rev Carlos A Valle, sends this Christmas message to all the Association's members and friends:
Christmas time.
The announcement of God's new era.
The renewal of energies for a new life.
The coming of Jesus is the Good News
of liberty to the captives,
sight to the blind
and freedom for the oppressed.
This is an announcement that accompanies a call to participate, and that needs to be put into action.
One cannot overlook, or be indifferent to, the needs of others.
For communicators there is a particular responsibility:
to ensure that communication is acknowledged as a human right;
to ensure that human beings are the subject of communication, and not the object;
to ensure their participation in the production and distribution of information;
to work for education for all and for the opportunity of free expression and communication;
to protect individual cultural expression from the domination of commercial pressures;
to ensure that existing communication systems be used to assist the integral development of communities in the search for a more just and peaceful world.
God
has created history,
a history which has no ending;
a history which exists eternally in Jesus, who was born in poverty and humility in a manger, who dies abandoned on a cross, and who calls us to follow Him right through to the morning of His resurrection, with its message of hope.
This is our inspiration and challenge:
to walk onwards, without turning back,
committing ourselves ever more deeply to the ministry of communication which we have been called to share.
Courses & Conferences
NABS-WACC ‘tunes in’ to the audience
‘Tuning in the Audience’ is the theme for the 1991 conference of WACC's North American Broadcast Section (NABS-WACC) to be held 2–6 December in Florida, USA.
The conference is the world's largest annual ecumenical event.
It brings together some 240 people from Canada and the USA who represent over 30 Catholic, Eastern Orthodox and Protestant groups.
Murri Selle, WACC Secretary and European Regional Secretary, will give the WACC International Address.
She will be examining Christian communications in the newly expanded European Community.
‘Five days and nights of plenary sessions and workshops will explore the changing nature of the religious and secular audience and our challenge to respond,’ says the new NABS-WACC conference brochure.
Themes include ‘Tuning in Audiences: A Broadcaster's Perspective’, ‘Living in the Audience's World: A Simulation’ and ‘Living in the World as Audience: A Process’.
US actor and television director, Mike Farrell, will lead the opening session.
Dr William F Fore, former WACC President and currently Lecturer at Yale Divinity School, and Dennis Benson, Associate Professor of Communication with the USA's United Theological Seminary, are also scheduled to lead presentations on aspects of the theme.
Other conference activities include special interest groups, breakfast seminars and a media show case.
The brochure encapsulates the essence of the conference: ‘We share our stories, we share our strategies.
We share our successes and our failures.
We leave NABS as part of a network of professionals endeavouring to move in new directions.’
For further information, contact NABS-WACC Business Manager, Rev Ed Willingham, 1300 Mutual Building, Detroit, MI 48226, USA.
Tel (313) 962 0340.
Intercultural meeting
A call for papers and programme proposals has been issued by the School of Communication in Miami, USA for its ninth annual Intercultural and International Communication Conference, to be held 19–21 May 1992.
The conference director, John T Masterson, says that the conference is intended to provide an opportunity for professionals and students to exchange communication ideas.
Submissions should be sent by 3 January 1992.
School of Communication, Graduate Studies Office, PO Box 248127, Coral Gables Florida 33124, USA.
Tel (305) 284 5236.
Ethno-religious conflicts in Asia
The Asian Social Institute (ASI) in Manila, Philippines, will host an intercultural seminar on ‘The Upsurge of Ethno-Religious Conflicts in Asia’, 9–15 February 1992.
Christian, Buddhist and Muslim traditions will be represented at the seminar, which is supported by WACC.
There will be approximately 25 participants from eight Asian countries.
The seminar will form part of a study-action programme developed by ASI to see what role communication can play in helping to resolve the various ethnic and religious conflicts in the region.
The programme also aims to broaden Christian communicators' understanding of ‘development’, which embraces not only food, clothing, shelter and employment, but also culture, ethnicity and religion.
The strategy for the programme will include:
bringing together Christian communicators and representatives from non-government organisations in areas of Asia which are afflicted by ethno-religious conflicts;
discussing how communication has been used to ignite or aggravate these conflicts, and how it can be used to alleviate them;
determining what WACC and the churches can do in specific contexts to promote harmony, and
mapping out the programme of action to be implemented over two to three years in these situations, using communication to promote peace and reconciliation.
Asian Social Institute, 1518 Leon Guinto Street, Malate, Manila, Philippines.
Tel (2) 595613 and 596266.
Information for human rights
HURIDOCS is holding its 3rd General Assembly and Conference from 4–7 May 1992 on the island of Crete.
The theme will be: ‘Information for Human Rights’.
HURIDOCS (Human Rights Information and Documentation Systems, International) is supported by WACC as an inter-regional project.
It is a worldwide network of more than 100 human rights organisations.
HURIDOCS provides communication hardware, software and training for local and national groups campaigning for human rights.
HURIDOCS Secretariat, Torggate 27, N-0183 Oslo 1, Norway.
Tel (2) 200 247.
Fax (2) 110 501.
E-mail GE02:HURIDOCS
Community radio provides lifeline in Guatemala
Radio La Voz de la Comunidad (Voice of the Community) has served the needs of some 900 families living on the outskirts of Guatemala City for more than thirty years.
The suburb, Colonia San José Buena Vista, suffers acutely from a lack of proper housing, clean water and basic education.
The situation of the local families is aggravated by the presence of commercial radio and TV, which broadcast mainly foreign programmes that undermine local cultural traditions and create deep dissatisfaction by portraying lifestyles which are unattainable.
Radio La Voz de la Comunidad seeks to redress this imbalance by being sensitive to the needs of the community and providing a mixed diet of local and national news, educational programmes and entertainment.
Broadcasting via a system of street loudspeakers the radio is on the air for three hours each Sunday.
This is a relatively short broadcast time, but programmes are carefully researched and prepared by volunteers from the neighbourhood.
The station was first created in 1960 when community leaders took specific steps to try and improve the quality of life in the community.
It had become evident that a simple and effective means of communication was required, and the radio was the next step.
At first there was just one loudspeaker that was used to announce community meetings and activities, and organise support for different neighbourhood needs.
This initial stage was taken one step further in 1987 when the Association of Health for the People began working in the community and provided an analysis of the main problems that needed to be addressed, and suggested some solutions — all of which depended upon good communication between the local inhabitants.
It was this impetus that spurred the community leaders on to forming a fully established radio station.
They aimed to help the community overcome its physical deprivation and build up social communication at the same time.
Since then a sound cabin has been built and technical training undertaken to maximise the effectiveness of the broadcasts.
The broadcasts are now transmitted using three megaphones situated on the tallest buildings in the area and the station was officially launched in August 1990.
The local programme producers cover a wide range of subjects affecting the daily life of the community.
Health education is a very important element in the programme schedule, and community news and issues are also given a large percentage of air time.
Entertainment is selected with care, ensuring that it is appropriate to the lifestyle and values of the community.
The radio team say their aim is ‘to establish ourselves as true social communicators, serving the interests and needs of our suburb’.
They also want the station to expand in order to be able to transmit programmes to a wider area.
As well as broadcasts on Sundays and public holidays the station produces special programmes to mark important days for the community such as religious festivals.
Radio La Voz de la Comunidad organisers are keen to ensure that their work is as effective and relevant as possible.
They plan to introduce a system of on-going evaluation of their broadcasts by interviewing listeners to ensure that they are still giving their public what they want.
La Voz de la Comunidad (Voice of the Community), 10 Calle Final, Zona 3, Colonia San José Buena Vista, Lote 5, 01003 Ciudad de Guatemala, Guatemala.
Pravda to publish Bible
The publishers of the soviet newspaper Pravda, now an independent group of journalists, have announced plans to publish the Bible, according to reports from Radio Vatican.
The Deputy Director of the newspaper, Mikhail Troschin, thinks the initial print run will be between five and ten million copies.
Copies should appear in the shops at a price of 15 roubles.
However some copies will soon be available on the black market at between 70 and 150 roubles.
From Evangelische Information
WACCS'S STUDY AND ACTION PROGRAMME (PART 4)
This is the final part of WACC's international Study and Action Programme, which will guide the Association's work and priorities until WACC's second World Communication Congress in 1995.
The Study and Action Programme has now been published as a booklet, which will be mailed to WACC members during the coming weeks.
Additional copies of the booklet may be obtained from WACC's General Secretariat in London (see address on page 8).
Women's perspectives
The five focal points which have been listed so far centre on specific themes, on which study and action should concentrate.
The final focus is on gender and gender-related structures of both media and society.
In this sense, all the themes discussed so far contain ‘women's issues’ and have to be treated from women's perspectives to arrive at true and complete reality.
The following section underlines the point.
WACC owes deep gratitude to its female members of ten or more years ago who insisted both on greater participation of women in decision-making and on greater concern for women's issues in the field of communication.
Some pointed out that even the MacBride Report with all its emphasis on democratic communication was highly defective on women's issues.
(This was indirectly acknowledged in UNESCO's World Communication Report 1989).
WACC is equally grateful to all those women who keep up the pressure and insist on equal opportunities for women and men.
WACC's Women's Programme encourages full and equal participation of women in public communication so that their distinctive insights into, and experiences of, life become part of the public agenda while, at the same time, the oppressive mechanisms of male domination are removed.
In other words, WACC's Women's Programme is a direct consequence of the principle of democratisation and the right to communicate.
The implementation of this programme requires many concrete steps.
The Manila Declaration states (paragraph 23): ‘WACC should give priority to the empowerment of women through communication training and other activities’.
Historically women have played a more prominent role in media education than in any other field of communication studies.
This is also true in WACC's own experience.
The media education movement in South East Asia, WACC's most active media education programme, is sustained largely by the efforts of women.
In the global implementation of this and all other programmes, WACC's Forum Sector wants to ensure that women are adequately represented, that their concerns are taken seriously and that women's perspectives of the media are considered.
Needless to say, this is not to the exclusion of men but in co-operation with them.
There are many other groups which suffer a similar fate to women.
Youth, ethnic and religious minorities, low caste and aboriginal people — and the poor in general— are as marginalised in the media as they are in society.
These ‘non-people’ are directly or indirectly associated with WACC's Women's Programme and will ultimately benefit from it.
Women's empowerment
Empowerment entails the distinctive qualities of confidence-building, group animation, skills training and leadership development of less formally educated women.
In addition, it is these ordinary women who should define the agenda of WACC's programme.
Needless to say, the process of such empowerment is arduous and long.
Empowerment is also a political concept.
It means that women should seize communication power for their own emancipation and the liberation of all oppressed groups.
The ultimate goal is a freer, more democratic  and more participatory society as a whole.
This programme is bound to affect the church.
The Harare Statement on Communication in Theological Education (1989) spoke of ‘frustrations about communication in a  hierarchical , authoritative and class-conscious Church, where its male clergy pay the piper and call the tune’.
Women's alternative media
One of the most significant developments in the past decade has been the growth of women's alternative media.
Because of their belief that women's concerns and activities are not adequately covered in the mainstream media, women's groups have produced their own alternative magazines, radio, TV and A/V programmes, and have even started their own press services.
There has been a remarkable rise particularly in the number of publications from Africa, Asia and Latin America.
Most of them cover issues that are of special concern to women, such as health and nutrition, child care, education, and women's rights.
Women's leadership and their training in alternative communication skills when addressing some of these concerns are crucial for the entire development process.
Portrayal of women in media
This is probably the area in which most work has been done.
But the task has not yet been achieved by any means.
There is evidence that media presentation of women is generally still unrealistic if not demeaning and damaging.
But the sheer effort required to gather and analyse data systematically, let alone the lobbying activities to initiate change, often exceeds the capacity of the groups working on this issue.
Special attention needs to be paid to the portrayal of women in advertising.
Many adverts are specifically aimed at women, supposedly because they do most of the shopping.
Often the adverts are not geared to needs but aim at ‘developing a desire’, thus fostering a consumerist mentality which can be detrimental to developmental effort.
Consumer boycotts are one answer.
Another is raising media awareness, which many WACC projects have done.
The focus of current media education workshops is on women.
Naming reality
Media represent socially constructed reality.
The biblical account of Adam naming the world can easily be applied to the mass media.
Men still define and control how people should perceive the world.
The media (at least in those countries where media, and particularly television, play a major role) are an important factor in upholding the patriarchal myth, even though they may subtly shift their ground here and there.
The examples mentioned so far are only illustrations for the massive task ahead: to deconstruct the male-dominated media world, and reconstruct a new and more just vision of society where women and men are equal partners.
It must be recognised that there is another repository of values, language, which needs to be freed of male bias.
WACC should promote the use of inclusive language and endeavour to unmask the patriarchal cultural patterns that maintain this bias.
Women's networks
WACC has had some experiences in the networking of women's groups in Asia, Latin America and Europe.
Important lessons have been learnt through this.
The first is the emphasis on groups rather than on individuals.
Secondly, WACC's efforts in communication should be truly ecumenical, i.e. relate to existing groups in and outside the churches which can share our principles.
Thirdly, such networking should be focused on specific tasks, such as health communication or consumer action, rather than addressing issues in general.
Concluding note
This has been little more than an annotated table of contents of a programme that should extend to 1995 and culminate in WACC's second World Congress.
It will be better understood if this conceptual paper is read against the reports on how this programme is being put into practice in several projects in different parts of the world and being implemented in colloquia and workshops, position papers and formal statements and declarations, in a publication programme consisting of academic studies and more popular magazines and newsletters, not only Media Development, Action and Communication Resource, but also books and periodicals published in different regions.
In some cases, themes and topics are already well defined and significant work has emerged already.
In others, WACC is breaking new ground.
In all cases, however, results will not come quickly but will need years of patient cultivation, experimentation and study.
The financial and human resources required to carry out this programme will never be enough.
Frustrations stemming from the implementation of the Forum Sector Programme will therefore be permanent, both on the part of the regional associations and on the part of staff.
Yet the challenge is there to be met.
Via radio and TV
‘Spirituality can't be imposed from above'
While congregants stay away from their formal places of worship, more and more seek their spirituality from radio and television programmes.
Until recently, religious establishments (with some perceptive exceptions) took such programmes lightly.
They were ‘entertainment’ and ‘chat’, not serious like sermons, even though they provided the staple religious diet for many people.
The medium does affect the message that comes through.
The paradigm of religion has been turned upside down.
At seminary, it was assumed that God was above and his servants below, and somewhere in between came his ministers of religion.
Their job then was to relay tradition from above to below, and congregants' requests in the opposite direction.
This paradigm does not work with a radio talk in the morning.
The situation does not fit in.
The ‘congregation’ is in bed, in the bathroom, in the loo, munching breakfast or in traffic jam.
Unlike a normal congregation they can reach out a hand, twirl a knob and obliterate the message.
The spirituality need not be the most ethereal, nor the most learned or literary, but it must be relevant.
It must take note of, and respect, the bedroom, bathroom, loo, kitchen and traffic jam and whatever is going on in them.
The spirituality cannot be imposed from above.
A second factor.
The ‘congregation’ belongs to all religions and none.
This creates an authority problem for the radio preacher.
What scripture can he appeal to, when his ‘congregants’ either do not share the same scriptures or do not have any?
‘The sages say’ or ‘Scripture teaches’cut little ice, unless such statements are also backed by his or her own experience.
The task of the radio preacher is not to sell his or her own religion like soap powder but to help listeners compose the ‘scripture’ of their own lives.
This private ‘scripture’ might be their bridge to traditional Scriptures.
You become very conscious in broadcasting that though you teach the same truths, you approach them from the opposite direction.
You also have no privileged situation.
You get no assistance from robes, choirs, lofty pulpits and religious furniture designed to give you status.
Speaking spiritually to doubters and agnostics concentrates pastoral theology.
You have to care for them, which means starting from where they are in life, not where you want them to be, and taking their lives and lack of belief seriously.
From an article by Lionel Blue, the British rabbi, author and broadcaster.
It was first published in The Tablet.
Traditional Thai drama animates AIDS education
In Thailand a traditional form of entertainment is proving invaluable in the nationwide effort to educate country people about AIDS, which is increasingly at an alarming rate in all areas of the country.
The Adventist Development and Relief Agency (ADRA) in conjunction with Si Sa Ket Hospital, have taken a popular local medium — a combination of dance, drama and song called ‘moh lam’— and adapted it to convey educational messages.
ADRA is the internationally recognised independent agency established by the Seventh-day Adventist Church which has headquarters in Washington, USA.
ADRA has been active in relief and development for more than 10 years.
A professional moh lam team travels from place to place entertaining villagers with songs, ballads and drama.
Moh lam is the most popular form of traditional entertainment in the north eastern region of Thailand.
Music at the beginning of the programme is interspersed with short messages explaining the background of AIDS and protection against it.
This is followed by an audio-visual presentation; then comes the traditional moh lam drama.
The driving force behind the project is Dr Chai Teerasut, of the Si So Ket Hospital Community Preventative Medicine Department.
The training method used by his team is story and drama.
States Dr Chai ‘Rural people do not learn from books or reading.
Their learning takes place by visual experiences, and this is how we should try to communicate with them.’
The main focus of the moh lam is the plight of two young men, one of whom catches AIDS.
The story follows the effect of the disease on him, his friends and family, ending with a warning about the risks of prostitution, homosexuality, intravenous drug use and promiscuity.
Response to the moh lam presentations demonstrates that it is throughly enjoyed by all.
Studies have been done to assess how effective it is.
It has been found that there has been a significant increase in the villagers' understanding of all aspects of the disease.
One of the biggest changes there has been is in the attitude towards people who have AIDS.
Now villagers feel that AIDS sufferers should be treated with compassion, and that they are not a danger to others if it is known how to protect oneself from the disease.
ADRA is planning to explore the use of other local forms of dramatic expression in AIDS education elsewhere in the country.
ADRA, PO Box 234, Phrakhanana Post Office, Bangkok 10110, Thailand.
Tel 391 8605
The complete version of this article by Lila Tidwell first appeared in the Bangkok Post.
It is brought to the attention of Action readers by Ray Coombe, Director of Communication of the Seventh-day Adventist Church in New South Wales, Australia.
The Church's General Conference is a corporate member of WACC.
Mexica radio station caters for children
Radio RIN (Radio Infantil Nacional — National Children's Radio) is the only radio station in Mexico that caters exclusively for the country's 41 million children.
Set up in 1984, Radio RIN currently broadcasts for 20 hours a day and successfully competes with many of the country's commercial stations.
Since large numbers of children with working parents spend long hours in front of the television, the radio has a critical gap to fill.
‘We try, through our programmes, to teach the new generation to respect dialogue and reject violence’, explains the station director, Martha Romo.
Apart from daily radio programmes, Radio RIN also runs campaigns to spread the word on health and against child abuse and physical violence.
Its programmes are also sometimes requested by schools to reinforce a classroom project.
Radio RIN also has its own strategy to keep children abreast of current affairs worldwide.
Earlier this year, at the height of the Gulf War, the station helped organise a ‘peace festival’ in a Mexico City park.
Nearly 8,000 children attended the festival.
RIN recently boosted its signal, allowing children in other states to hear the broadcasts.
From Development Forum
Radharc celebrates 300 TV programmes
Radharc is celebrating the completion of 300 programmes by its television unit.
Formed in 1961, Radharc is a team of Roman Catholic priests from Dublin in Eire who are all professionally trained cameramen, producers or presenters.
Their leader since the beginning has been Fr Joe Dunn.
They will go anywhere in the world to research issues of concern to modern Christians.
This often means taking risks.
The exposure of oppression in Guatemala meant visiting up-country villages with hidden cameras.
This was one of the topics among the several Radharc films which, over the years, have been awarded UNDA-WACC prizes for the best religious programmes on television.
Famine victims in Africa, Vietnamese boat people and Poles striving to leave their Communist past behind them compete for air-time with home stories such as pastoral work in Dublin's inner city or the arguments for and against integrated schooling in Northern Ireland.
Every year the Irish national broadcasting service, RTE, buys in a series of Radharc programmes and their high quality has ensured that a number of them have appeared on other national TV networks.
elsewhere as well.
Radharc programmes aim to show the viewer the reality of the world at home and abroad, as it is or as it was, with the apostolic object of evoking a Christian response to injustice, bigotry or pride.
Radharc, 6 Rock Road, Blackrock, County Dublin, Eire.
Tel (12) 288 1939.
From The Tablet
Books & Resources
Methodist resource catalogue published
The 1991–1992 Service Center Catalog has been published by the General Board of Global Ministries of the United Methodist Church in the USA.
This annual edition lists all current materials available for general distribution.
Some have been produced by the United Methodist Church and several others by different church organisations.
Items covered include books, study packs, audio visual materials and resources available in Spanish.
A wide range of subject matter is also covered including world hunger, worship resources, liberation, social justice, health and welfare ministries and personal growth.
The resources are suitable for use by pastors, mission workers, Christian educators and church school leaders.
The Service Center Catalog is available from the General Board of Global Ministries, 78720 Reading Road, Caller no 1800, Cincinnati, Ohio 45222–1800, USA.
Tel (513) 761 2100.
Newsletter links Kenyan churches
The National Council of Churches in Kenya (NCCK) has launched a bi-monthly newsletter — Church Link — to serve its member churches.
The Editor, Rev Obed Ochwanyi, said the newsletter is designed to ‘sustain Christians’ while the NCCK finalises its plans to launch a national church newspaper, similar to Target which it co-published in the seventies and eighties with the Christian Council of Tanzania.
After Target was closed in the early eighties, NCCK launched a monthly magazine, Beyond, which the Kenyan government subsequently banned in 1988, after the magazine criticised the queue-voting electoral system, which the government had introduced.
Mr Ochwanyi regretted the lapse of time between publications: ‘Three years is too long for a national church body like NCCK to remain without a mouthpiece,’ he said.
The new publication, Church Link, carries news and features, mainly from NCCK member churches, but also plans to carry articles from other churches and Christian organisations.
Church Link is available from the Communication Department of NCCK, PO Box 45009, Nairobi, Kenya.
Tel (2) 338211.
Swaziland churches launch newsletter
The ecumenical Council of Swaziland Churches (CSC) has launched its own newsletter entitled Umbiko (Message).
The four-page bulletin reports on CSC activities and other important events that affect the lives of Christians in Swaziland.
A recent lead article reported on a seminar organised by the CSC for pastors and other church leaders on sexually transmitted diseases, including AIDS, homosexuality and prostitution.
Other articles have covered the progress of the Council's Human Development Programme.
Council of Swaziland Churches, PO Box 1095, Manzini, Swaziland.
Tel 53628/53931.
Manual for writers
Write the Vision: A Manual for Training Writers has been published by the David C Cook Foundation in the USA.
Written by Marion Van Horne, the book draws on her wide experience of training writers throughout the developing world.
Topics covered include news and feature writing, fiction, writing for children and for the new reading public.
The manual includes sample lesson plans, as well as guidelines on preparing and evaluating writing workshops.
Write the Vision: A Manual for Training Writers,(paperback, 148 pages) costs US $7.95 and is available from The Publishing Center, David C Cook Foundation, 850 North Grove Avenue, Elgin, Illinois 60120, USA.
Tel (708) 741 2400.
Fax (708) 741 2444.
Communication thesaurus published
A new Communication and Information Thesaurus has been developed from the second edition of Unesco's Mass Communication Thesaurus.
Coverage of communication and information technology has been expanded and library and information science have also been included.
Originally compiled for use by members of COMNET, an international network of documentation centres on communication research and policies, the thesaurus will shortly be available in both printed and electronic formats in English, French and Spanish.
Communication and Information Thesaurus is available from Unesco, 7 place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris, France.
Tel (1) 45 68 1000.
Fax (1) 45 68 1690.
L American network promotes multi-media health education
As the cholera epidemic claims an increasing number of lives in Central and South America, a number of church and development organisations are struggling to teach people how to cope with the disease, which can be cured if the right steps are taken.
One organisation which works effectively throughout Latin America to promote health care is MAP Internacional.
From its regional offices in Quito, Ecuador, it has recently produced a multi-media package on cholera.
The package will be distributed through the MAP network to hospitals, schools, church and community groups with the aim of informing people how cholera is contracted, how it can be prevented, and what steps should be taken in the case of infection.
The set contains two short videos, one audio cassette, five manuals, several leaflets and posters, some or all of which can be used according to the needs of different groups.
In addition to its campaign against cholera, MAP Internacional works constantly to improve health care in Latin America through training programmes, publications and radio and video productions.
The challenges are enormous.
In El Salvador and Guatemala, for example, between 70% and 80% of all children under five suffer from malnutrition.
Even countries with higher standards of health care, such as Chile, are suffering an increase in diseases such as typhoid and hepatitis.
The most distressing aspect of the health situation in Latin America is that the diseases are avoidable.
They are all illnesses which are directly related to poverty and to the consequent lack of education concerning health care.
While education has always formed the core of MAP's work, the organisation challenges social structures which allow acute poverty and injustice to flourish, and encourages debate and action which will lead to changes in these structures.
Supported by WACC, MAP Internacional is one of the few Protestant organisations working at a regional level on health issues.
The international headquarters are in Georgia, USA, but the Latin American organisation is autonomous.
It is known particularly for its stress on the overall health of the individual, community and society — called ‘salud integral’.
Luis Carlos Moreno, Communications Coordinator, MAP Internacional, Avenida Los Shyris 3517, Casilla 17–08–8184, Quito, Ecuador.
Tel (2) 452373.
People
Rev Bernard Spong has been appointed Acting Head of Communication for the South African Council of Curches on a part-time basis.
He will continue to oversee the Interchurch Media Programme (IMP), which is a long-standing partner of WACC, particularly in church leader discussions on the role of IMP in the changing scene in South Africa.
Dr Sigurd Aske, former General Director of Radio Voice of the Gospel, in Ethiopia, died 6 October at the age of 77.
The Norwegian broadcaster became General Secretary of Norwegian Church Aid in 1974 and in 1977 he co-founded the International Mass Media Institute in Kristiansand.
The  Norwegian government awarded him the Order of St Olav in 1979.
Professor James D Halloran has been awarded the 1991 McLuhan Teleglobe Canada Award.
Professor Halloran retired in September from his position as Director of the Centre for Mass Communication Research at the University of Leicester, UK.
He had also been President of the International Association for Mass Communication Research for 18 years.
Prof Halloran is a long-standing colleague of the WACC and he coordinated the research for WACC's major study on the mass media and village life in India.
The award is presented every two years in recognition of activity that ‘has contributed exceptionally to furthering a better understanding of the influence of the communications media and technology on society in general, and on its cultural, artistic and scientific activities in particular .’
Previous winners have included Bolivian journalist Luis Ramiro Beltrán and Italian  communication researcher and social critic, Umberto Eco.
Elvira Dockerill has joined WACC staff as Assistant to the Director for Funding, and as Project Assistant for the European and North American Regions.
She originates from Coimbra in Portugal where she obtained a Masters Degree in Germanic Studies.
Elvira worked for 11 years as a secondary school language and music teacher in Portugal before coming to England in 1986.
Elvira has also worked at the Christian Literature Crusade headquarters in London and took part in a project for the rehabilitation of drug addicts and homeless people.
She succeeds Anne Watson who now works as WACC's Information Assistant.