

Censorship and violence silence media in Zaire
President Mobutu of Zaire has taken drastic measures to silence all journalists and publishers who criticise his policies.
Sweeping censorship and intimidation are common, and the violent destruction of printing plants has forcibly removed some of Zaire's most respected newspapers and magazines.
The country's newly developing democracy is gasping for life under the heel of an increasingly dictatorial regime, and the ordinary people, especially the poor, are suffering the consequences.
‘The country is in ruin.
Civil war threatens to explode,’ warn the leaders of the Church of Christ in Zaire, who are now obliged to communicate with their people through literature printed and distributed from neighbouring Kenya.
The Church's Director of Communication, Rev Siteke Ubial Susey, wrote to Action describing the impossible conditions facing his country's communicators:
‘The military are now occupying the national radio and television networks, and forcibly replacing journalists who insist on editorial independence and objectivity,’ he writes.
‘On 20 October, President Mobutu's government interrupted and shut down radio and TV programmes broadcast by the Church of Zaire because they were exhorting people to stand up for what they believe is right.
‘All religious programmes are now censored,’ he adds; ‘in addition, there has been wholesale destruction of printing presses connected with publications that were critical of the government and that supported the movement for change.’
Mr Ubial Susey, whose Department of Communication is a member of WACC and who served on WACC's Central Committee in the 1980s, is publicising the plight of Zaire in an effort both to gain international support for his country's struggle for democracy, and to encourage its people not to give up.
A recent communiqué states: ‘The Church of Christ in Zaire urges the entire political class, and particularly the present administration, to renounce the pursuit of selfish interests and to submit to the common good expressed by the will of the people’.
It calls for the setting up of political, socio-economic and cultural institutions that are ‘truly democratic and that reflect an equitable distribution of power’.
The Church praises the courage of a small number of press, radio and TV journalists who are risking their lives to maintain at least a few channels of information which are not controlled by the government.
Rev Siteke Ubial Susey, Service de Communication, Eglise du Christ au Zaïre, BP 4938, Kinshasa-Gombe, Zaire.
Tel (12) 3106 and 31337.
United Church in USA honoured for media advocacy
The United Church of Christ's Office of Communication has been honoured by the University of Missouri School of Journalism for its years of campaigning for justice in broadcasting.
‘I am pleased and excited that the Office of Communication's long track record for media advocacy is being recognised by such a celebrated educational institution, even though we are only doing what the Gospels tell us to do,’ said the Office's Director, Dr Beverly J Chain.
The UCC's Office of Communication, which has been an active member of WACC for over 20 years, will be the first religious organisation to receive the award — the Missouri Honor Medal for Distinguished Service in Journalism.
It recognises the Office's contribution to the struggle for the protection of the rights of women, children, ethnic minorities and minority points of view in the broadcast media.
Since the mid 1950s, the Office of Communication has been on the front line in the battle to give minorities and women a greater voice in the broadcast industry.
It was a plaintiff in the landmark 1969 US Court of Appeals decision to deny a Mississippi television station license renewal because of racial discrimination in its programming.
In addition to work in the courts, the Office of Communication has lobbied for legislation guaranteeing employment at decision-making levels for women and minorities in the media.
It has also helped write rules for community cable access and worked to ensure that the poor are not cut off from the benefits of new telephone technologies.
A leading member of WACC's North American Regional Association, Dr Chain has also served on WACC's Central Committee for several years and has been influential in ensuring greater participation by women in WACC's activities.
Office of Communication, United Church of Christ, 700 Prospect Avenue, Cleveland, Ohio 44115–1100, USA.
Tel (216) 736 2215.
WACC's L American members speak out
WACC's Latin American/Caribbean Regional Association (WACC-LA/C) has written to the military regime in Haiti condemning the imposition of press censorship and the persecution of journalists since the overthrow of the country's democratic government in September by military coup.
The regional officers also wrote to the Chilean authorities calling for the prompt introduction of legislation which will give  official licenses to the many community radio and TV stations that hitherto have been operating under severe restrictions.
These two initiatives were taken during WACC-LA/C's eighth Assembly in Chile, which attracted some 60 participants.
The Assembly theme, ‘Christian communication and social movements’, reflected the main thrust of WACC's regional animation programme for 1992.
Prior to the Assembly, delegates took part in a meeting of women communicators, and were joined by representatives from local women's groups involved in development communication.
Caribbean media report — page 4
New WACC-LA/C officers — page 8
Courses & Conferences
Communication in theological education
A ‘Consultation on Communication in Theological Education’ will be held 21–23 February 1992 at Yale Divinity School, USA.
The Divinity School are co-sponsors of the conference along with WACC.
Dr William Fore, former WACC President and now Visiting Lecturer in Communication at the School, said in a recent letter to delegates: ‘The meeting promises to be a landmark, since it is the first time that teachers of communication in seminaries and schools of theology will have come together to consider their distinctive task in theological education.’
Dr Michael Traber, WACC's Director of Studies, will lead the opening session, speaking on ‘The Interaction Between Communication and Theology’.
Other topics will include ‘The Cultural Environment and Media Education’ and ‘What is the Theological Significance of Teaching Communication?’.
The Divinity School, Yale University, 409 Prospect St, New Haven, CT 06511–2167, USA.
Tel (203) 432 5303.
Fax (203) 432 5756.
New culture and communication in Argentina
The Centre of Communication and Education (La Crujía) is holding a course entitled ‘New Culture and Communication’ in Buenos Aires, 10 February — 30 April 1992.
The course work will be approached from the perspective of the 500th anniversary of the evangelisation of the Americas, and will combine communication theory and practice.
Participants will look at the major trends in communication today, with special emphasis on the issue of the right to communicate and the relationship between evangelisation and culture.
There will be a series of workshops on themes such as communication planning and institutional communication.
In addition, participants will have the opportunity to brush up on their skills in radio and video production, journalism and graphic design.
Centro de Comunicación Educativa La Crujía, Tucumán 1993 (1050) Buenos Aires, Argentina.
Tel (1) 402509.
Fax (1) 8143656.
Desktop publishing
‘The Complete Desktop Publishing Seminar’ is to be offered by Claretian Publications Inc next year in the Philippines.
In three component parts, taking the participants from basic to advanced desktop publishing, the seminar is scheduled from 20 April to 12 June 1992.
Claretian Publications, a corporate member of WACC, describes the course as ‘the complete seminar in maximising the power of desktop publishing to enhance your publications’.
Claretian Publications, Inc, UP PO Box 4, Diliman, Quezon City 1101, Philippines.
Tel (2) 921 3984/7429.
Fax (2) 817 9742.
Multi-media training courses in Kenya
A series of short courses on communication skills and theory will be held by the Institute for Christian Ministries and Training at Daystar University College in Nairobi, Kenya, during 1992.
Courses on offer include ‘Communication by Radio’, ‘Financial Management in Book Publishing’, ‘Media and Evangelism in an Oral Society’ and a foundation course in Christian communication.
As well as these shorter non-degree courses Daystar offers study programmes which lead to BA and MA degrees in other areas such as Development, Urban Ministry and Management.
All courses are designed to assist those already involved in Christian ministry to improve their skills and become more effective in their work.
Daystar University College is an interdenominational organisation serving the needs of the African churches through training, research and consultation.
Media education in North America
‘Constructing Culture: Media Education in the 1990s’ is the theme for the second North American conference on media education.
Organised by the Association for Media Literacy, the conference will be held at the University of Guelph in Canada, 13–15 May 1992.
The keynote speakers are Barrie McMahon and Robyn Quin, media education specialists from western Australia, Susan Cole, journalist, researcher and teacher from Canada, and Barry Duncan, who was awarded the McCanse Award for Individual Contribution to Media Literacy.
Also part of the programme are a wide variety of workshops and panels, led by media practitioners from North America, Britain and Australia.
Constructing Culture, 500 10 St Mary Street, Toronto, Ontario M4Y 1P9, Canada.
Tel (416) 923 7271.
Fax (416) 923 0862.
Confirmation classes on Estonian TV
Confirmation classes have been televised for the first time in Estonia.
The 20-minute broadcasts began in October.
They are produced by the Evangelical Church of Estonia and will be broadcast weekly for 18 weeks.
The Church hopes this new opportunity will arouse a similar level of interest as that stimulated by previous religious radio broadcasts.
Religious programmes such as church services are televised already, however these classes mark the start of increasingly more air time being given to churches.
From Informationsdienst für Lutherische Minderheitskirchen in Europa.
Media education programme launched in Africa
A workshop on Women in Media Education, held in Zimbabwe on 4–7 November, marked the launch of WACC's first African sub-regional media education programme.
The workshop, which was co-sponsored by WACC and organised by the African Council for Communication Education (ACCE), provided a blueprint for future similar events throughout the continent.
The 25 educators and communication professionals attending the workshop brought insights from six African countries.
This was especially important as they worked together to draw up strategies to implement a media education programme in Africa.
Initially, the ACCE will organise the training of trainers to service an education network.
As regards content, the media programmes will cover important current issues such as media ownership, access and participation, sex, violence, stereotyping, cultural imperialism and advertising ethics.
Participants also suggested that a study be carried out of existing materials from other countries in the South such as Nigeria, South Africa, the Philippines and some Latin American countries.
Looking specifically to women's issues, the participants agreed to start compiling a directory of women involved in the media in each country as a prelude to revitalising the Federation of African Media Women.
At the closing session, Alex Quarmyne, the UNESCO representative in Harare, expressed appreciation for the workshop.
He considered it special because he recalled that ‘the first serious look at the involvement of women in the media in Africa was initiated by WACC.’
He was referring to a workshop organised in Kitwe, Zambia, in 1977.
For further information on the WACC media education programme, write to Teresita Hermano, WACC's Coordinator of Communication Education, WACC, 357 Kennington Lane, London SE11 5QY.
Tel (71) 582 9139.
Fax (71) 735 0340.
Polish women assert their right to participate in media and in churches
Women working in the media in Poland are preparing to assert their right to full participation in their profession, as well as in their churches, where they are still excluded from the decision-making processes.
The Lutheran Church leadership has agreed to meet to re-evaluate the role of women in the Church's activities.
It recognises that the Church's media centre has an important part to play in training and encouraging women who work in the media, and it is considering inviting women to take part in its forthcoming Media Commission meetings.
These were some of the resolutions that emerged during a conference organised by the Europe-based Network for Women in Communication (NETWIC) in Bielsko-Biala, 10–15 October.
The conference theme was ‘From a socialist to a market-oriented society’ and it looked at the growing opportunities for women within the new social structures.
The conference was hosted by the Evangelical Lutheran Church of Poland and brought together some 20 people from Switzerland, Sweden, Germany and Poland whose fields of expertise ranged from parish work to professional journalism.
As regards media training, an important outcome of the conference was an offer from the religious broadcasting department of Polish national radio to provide training for women.
A local NETWIC group was formed as a result of the meeting.
One of its priorities will be to publish a quarterly bulletin to maintain and develop the network.
NETWIC, which is supported by WACC, is planning a similar regional conference in Southern Europe for 1993 to establish contact with the Lutheran churches in the area.
For further information on NETWIC activities, contact NETWIC coordinator Christa Rothenbühler, Lutheran World Federation, P O Box 2100, CH-1211, Geneva 2, Switzerland.
Tel (22) 791 6353.
Fax (22) 798 8616.
Relating media studies and theology
More efforts need to be made to relate media studies and theological education, especially with regards to the language and symbols used.
This was one of the conclusions that emerged from a recent conference on Media and Theological Education which was sponsored by the Jerusalem Trust and held at Edinburgh University, Scotland.
It was also suggested that theologians may need to look at the theology of play in order to gain a more positive understanding of the entertainment role of the media.
Edinburgh University has been running a Media and Theological Education project since1986 to look at ways in which the media affect people's perceptions of the world, themselves and God.
A major objective of the project is to explore how media education can benefit those training to be church ministers.
The Edinburgh conference was attended by media practitioners, theologians and teachers.
There were four presentations on the theme and the main printed resource was the book Discerning Images — The Media and Theological Education, edited by Rev Derek Weber.
The speakers included Dr William F Fore, Visiting Lecturer at Yale University Divinity School and former WACC President, and Dr Colin Morris, the former Head of Religious Broadcasting at the BBC.
By Anne Simms of WACC staff; Administrative Assistant, Studies and Publications.
Media and Theological Education Project, Department of Christian Ethics and Practical Technology, New College, The Mound, Edinburgh EH1 2LU, Scotland.
Tel (31) 225 8400.
Fax (31) 220 0952.
Publications and audio visuals strengthen Caribbean cultures
One of the key topics for discussion at the WACC's Latin American/Caribbean Regional Association Assembly in Chile last October was the USA-dominated communication scene in the English-speaking Caribbean.
Leading the discussion, Professor Aggrey Brown of the Caribbean Institute of Mass Communication in Jamaica, described initiatives that are being taken at various levels, ranging from governments to grassroot groups, to preserve and strengthen Caribbean culture and identity.
The heads of government had regional integration in mind when they formed the Caribbean Community (Caricom) in 1973.
The community comprises some 13 English-speaking countries with a total population of five million.
As over 300 TV channels swamp the Caribbean with more than 80% foreign programming content, Caricom has increasingly sought ways to develop a local media industry.
These include experiments in programme exchange and plans to set up a regional TV network in time for the 1992 Caribbean Festival of Arts.
However, all these initiatives require heavy investment at a time when economies are squeezed by foreign debt repayments.
While Caribbean governments are trying to find ways of fostering local culture at a regional level, groups working at the grassroots level have had considerable success in developing self-supporting communication activities.
The most notable of these is the widespread use of popular theatre throughout the region.
The Sistren Theatre Collective, started in Jamaica in the late 1970s by a group of chronically employed and underemployed women, is today a permanent feature of the popular communications environment in Jamaica.
The virtual explosion of community newspapers and networking newsletters is another example of alternatives to mainstream media.
Qwik Qwak, for example, is a Kweol-language newspaper serving St Lucia, Dominica and Haiti.
One cultural organisation supported by WACC, the Folk Research Center based in St Lucia, is spearheading the effort to publish a Kweol dictionary.
Other non-government organisations (NGOs) such as the Small Projects Assistance Team in Dominica and the Association of Development Agencies in Jamaica use alternative media such as booklets and video productions as part of their work.
The Caribbean Conference of Churches, a long-time member of WACC, is an important enabling agency, supporting communication organisations throughout the region.
It also runs workshops on media theory and skills, and publishes the most substantial regional newspaper, Caribbean Contact.
Each one of the numerous NGOs which use alternative media have access to the newsletter Cross Over, published quarterly by the Caribbean Institute of Mass Communication.
This is the regional communication training centre based at the University of the West Indies in Jamaica.
From a presentation by Professor Aggrey Brown
Other papers presented at WACC's Latin America/Caribbean Assembly were entitled ‘Pastoral Communication’(Dennis Smith, Guatemala); ‘Mass Communication’(Valerio Fuenzalida, Chile); ‘Cultural Animation’(Rudi Torga, Paraguay); ‘Grassroots Communication’(Fernando Ossandón, Chile); ‘Social Movements in Latin America’(M Garcés), and ‘Communication in Latin America’(José Maria Pasquini, Argentina).
For further information, contact the WACC-LA/C Secretary, Marcia Cruz, Avenida Jaguare 325, Edificio Marcia, Apto 61, 05346 São Paulo, Brazil.
Tel (11) 258 2133 extension 340.
Public television set for Australia
The Australian Minister of Transport and Communications, Kim Beazley, has announced plans to introduce a non-profit television channel for public use.
Australia has five commercial TV channels.
The Minister said that the new channel will be shared by community organisations, educators and other special interest groups, including independent film and video makers.
The President of the Public Broadcasting Association of Australia (PBAA), Dr Jeff Langdon, has welcomed the decision to conduct a Parliamentary inquiry into the non-commercial use of the channel.
The PBAA has been lobbying the government for public television for over ten years and is looking forward to contributing to this inquiry process.
The existence of over 100 public radio stations throughout Australia has proved the public demand for local community-based broadcasting.
Public radio provides several models where community, education and special interest groups have shared the same broadcasting licence and have operated successfully.
At a recent PBAA conference, the policy was laid down that the first Public Television Licence in any given area should be community-controlled and that access be provided for educational and special interest groups.
Over the last few years the number of public television groups within the PBAA has grown steadily, and extensive technical expertise has been developed as more than twenty test broadcasts across Australia have taken place.
It is seen as crucial that all parties interested in broadcasting on the public channel should work together and seize the opportunity to make public television in Australia a reality.
Independent press in Latvia boosts Church and democracy
The first independent printing press in Latvia was inaugurated in September.
The press was provided with assistance from Church of Sweden Aid.
‘Help with the modern technology and improved communications is what is most important for us now,’ said Peteris Apse, the manager of the press.
The Latvian Church now has the opportunity to produce its own newspaper, educational material and theological literature.
The church newspaper, Sunday Morning, is printed at a rate of 50,000 copies every two weeks.
Other printing projects for the church already underway include Sunday school materials and a new hymn book.
The press also prints publications for non-church organisations, including several cultural periodicals and two of the country's national weekly newspapers.
The total print run amounts to more than 250,000 copies a week.
The press starting running in the summer and is expected to run at a profit by the end of the year.
Profits raised from the new printing press will be used for church renovation.
The Church in Latvia is currently experiencing a major revival.
People are flocking to the churches and the number of baptisms, confirmations and weddings is breaking all records.
However, many churches are in a very poor structural condition, and many are lacking essential equipment such as pews and hymn books.
Peteris Apse stressed the significance of the new printing press:
‘A priority now is for us to learn how to live in a democratic society.
Our new printing press is an important element in this,’ he said.
From News from the Church of Sweden.
Leading the discussion during the recent seminar on ‘Communication in Transition’ in Chile were:(left to right) Fernando Reyes Matta of the Latin American  Institute of Transnational Studies, María Elena Hermosilla of CENECA, Claudio Di Girolamo, video producer and actor, Pablo Portales of the College of Journalists and Susana Mena of ECO.
(Photo: Fernando Ossandón)
Communication on the move in Chile
‘Communication in Transition: Progress and Pitfalls’ was the provocative title of a seminar held in Chile earlier this year — just 18 months after President Patricio Aylwin's democratic government came to power.
The seminar was organised by the Taller Nueva Comunicación (New Communication Workshop) and supported by WACC's Latin American Regional Association.
Some 50 participants discussed the current situation in fields as varied as the mass media, grassroot communications, media legislation and institutions.
The most distinctive feature of the seminar was the contact established between professionally trained participants (journalists, media executives and parliamentarians) and grassroots practitioners and researchers.
The Chilean people are happier, but they still have anxieties.
Freedom of expression and the freedom of the press have returned after many years of absence.
There are moves to reintroduce public service broadcasting which lost all credibility under Pinochet's dictatorship.
And the anxieties?
There are many.
Democratic changes are slow and impeded by agreements forged with the former military government.
The country's farm-workers and labourers make up 17% of the population, yet they are ignored by the mass media.
Women notice that greater attention is being paid to their concerns, but they see little real change in the status quo.
The community radio stations remain silent as they wait for laws to be passed to allow them to operate.
The main obstacle lies in the existing neo-liberal economic model which favours the powerful and encourages monopolies to rule in communications and other fields.
But campaigning groups will not give up and they continue to demand conditions that will lead to broader participation.
Seminar participants agreed that communication — including the ability to listen and hear, as well as to inform — is a key element in the struggle to overcome political apathy and to advance on the road to democracy.
By Fernando Ossandón
Jamaican media feels the pinch
Jamaica's media industry is reeling under the country's economic crisis because of a heavy dependence on imported materials, Franklyn McKnight, President of the Press Association of Jamaica (PAJ), said.
‘Every time a newspaper comes out, imported newsprint, ink and plates are used…and like everybody else, publishers have to face higher costs for the imports,’ Mr McKnight said at a recent annual assembly of local journalists.
The electronic media have already been affected by the economic problems.
These hardships have serious implications for the quantity, quality and content of news.
‘It is cheaper now to buy an entire ABC or CNN newscast than to produce a 30-minute newscast,’ he added.
‘Stories from the capital, Kingston, will dominate Jamaican news and will be supplemented by canned material’, Mr McKnight said.
He reiterated an annual appeal for the repeal of the Secrets Act.
‘It is time we moved for concerted action to liberate the press from these laws.’
Since media house managers are not working to remove the obstacles, Mr McKnight said the PAJ would soon launch a campaign to change the libel laws.
US study to examine what makes religion hit the headlines
What makes religion news will be the focus of a new study on the role of religion in the mass media at the University of Colorado, USA.
The study, which is entitled ‘Religion in Public Discourse: The Role of the Media’, will be conducted by Dr Stewart Hoover, Associate Professor of Journalism at the University's Center for Mass Media Research and a former member of WACC's Central Committee.
The study will build on earlier research in the field of religious journalism completed by Dr Hoover in 1989.
The aim of the present study is to identify how the press, radio and TV determine how they cover religious issues.
It will also look at the qualities needed in religious journalism, the potential audience for religious news, and compare and contrast religious coverage with other specialist coverage such as that of scientific and educational issues.
Dr Hoover believes that the results of the research could have far reaching implications.
‘Implicit in the way journalism deals with religion is the more basic issue of the relationship between the press and other major social institutions.
The history and practice of press coverage of religion will tell us a great deal about the significance of the phenomenon of religion in contemporary social, political and cultural life,’ he said.
The research is being funded by a three-year grant from the Lilly Endowment of Indianapolis.
The Lilly Endowment has the largest religious grant-making programme in the USA.
Dr Stewart Hoover, Center for Mass Media Research, University of Colorado, Macky 201, Campus Box 287, Boulder, Colorado 80309–0287, USA.
Tel (303) 492 0445.
Christians honour Indian TV and film productions
This year's Santhome awards were recently presented at the Santhome Arts Festival in Madras.
The annual event recognises exceptional productions in national Indian film and television.
Mr G Ventateswaram, the film industrialist, said of the awards: ‘They are unique as they have no other purpose than encouraging good cinema and TV.’
Fr Henk Hoestra, President of OCIC (International Catholic Organisation for Cinema and Audio Visuals) presided at the ceremony and presented the awards.
Among those whose work was recognised was Mr K K Sampathknmar who received the award for the best television series.
Fr Antony S Kirupakaran, the Director of Santhome Communications Centre and a member of WACC, welcomed film and television professionals who had gathered from different parts of India to attend the festival.
The event was organised jointly by the Santhome Communications Centre, which supports Catholic and ecumenical communication activities in south India, and the Tamil Nadu Bishop's Council of India.
Santhome Communications Centre, PO Box 6164, 150 Luz Church Road, Madras 600 004, India.
Tel (44) 71344.
Books & Resources
S African challenge
The Institute for Contextual Theology (ICT) in Braamfontein, South Africa, has launched its own magazine.
Entitled Challenge, it ‘will be progressive in the sense that it understands Christian faith to be of necessity a commitment to the cause of all who are oppressed, discriminated against or unjustly treated.’
The editorial policy adds ‘Challenge will be an ecumenical magazine that attempts to reach Christians of all churches and church traditions’.
The editor, Albert Nolan, hopes that Challenge will challenge and encourage its readership and staff alike.
‘Such a magazine could become an instrument of God's peace, God's justice and God's salvation,’ he wrote in the latest issue.
This issue includes an examination of marginalisation, violence and the Church — both from the point of view of Christian youth and the ‘experts’, Bible study material, church profiles and a township perspective of violence in South Africa.
ICT, a long-time friend of WACC, is an ecumenical organisation working on behalf of poor and marginalised people in South Africa.
Challenge is published ten times a year and is available from Challenge, PO Box 32047, Braamfontein, South Africa 2017.
Tel (11) 3392513/3392562.
Fax (11) 3393704.
Network newsletter launched in Canada
The Division of Communication of the United Church of Canada has launched a newsletter entitled (In) communicado to keep Church members and colleagues in closer touch with its communication activities and with each other.
‘Increasingly, communication is seen as community, an exchange of stories, life experiences, insights — functions which build relationships in a world which naturally works against relationships, against being in touch with one another’, said Rev Randy L Naylor, Director of the Division of Communication and President of WACC.
(In) communicado is edited by Karen Gardiner and published by the Division of Communication, The United Church of Canada, 85 St Clair Ave East, Toronto, Ontario M4T 1M8, Canada.
Tel (416) 925 5931.
Fax (416) 925 9692.
Twenty-five perspectives on religious broadcasting in Europe
Opportunities and Limitations in Religious Broadcasting, a collection of articles by 25 communicators from 14 different countries, is ‘designed as a Speakers’ Corner with room enough for representatives from almost every point on the Christian compass', according to the publishers.
The book is edited by Canon Peter Elvy, a personal member of WACC, and is published by the Centre for Theology and Public Issues at the University of Edinburgh for the Jerusalem Trust.
The book was initially prepared to serve as the resource document for the Jerusalem Trust's second Cranfield conference.
Titles include ‘Three Cheers for Community’ by WACC's General Secretary, Rev Carlos A Valle; ‘Protestant Italy’by Dr Renato Maiocchi of the Federazione delle Chiese Evangelische in Italia, and a member of the Executive Committee of the European Regional Association of WACC; What Have You done for Me Lately?’by Bill Thatcher, Executive Director of the International Christian Media Commission; and ‘Catholic Europe’by Archbishop John P Foley, President of the Pontifical Council for Social Communications in Rome.
Opportunities and Limitations in Religious Broadcasting, edited by Peter Elvy,(paperback, 176 pages) costs £5.95 and is available from the Centre for Theology and Public Issues, The University of Edinburgh, New College, The Mound, Edinburgh EH1 2LU, UK.
Tel (31) 225 8400.
Fax (31) 220 0952.
Latin America year 2,000
Resource documents from a WACC-supported consultation on the New World Information and Communication Order which took place in Peru in November 1990 have been published as a book under the title América Latina: Las comunicaciones cara al 2,000 (Latin America: Communications facing the year 2,000).
The documents and articles look towards more democratic forms of communication and outline a new vision for the 21st century.
Contributors to the book include WACC's General Secretary, Rev Carlos A Valle, and Dr Rafael Roncagliolo, Director of the Latin American Institute (IPAL), which hosted the consultation.
Among the other contributors are José Marques de Melo, President of the Latin American Association of Communication Researchers; Fátima Fernandez, Professor of Communication at the National Autonomous University of Mexico; Hernán Uribe, Vice President of the Latin American Federation of Journalists, and Guido Grooscors, Ambassador for Venezuela to the Organisation of American States.
The book also includes major statements on communication issued in recent years at MacBride Round Table meetings and major WACC events.
América Latina: Las comunicaciones cara al 2,000 (in Spanish only) is edited by Pedro Goicochea and is co-published by Instituto para América Latina (IPAL) and WACC.
It is available from IPAL, Apartado Postal 270031, Lima 27, Peru.
Tel (5114) 617 949.
Fax (5114) 617949.
Canadian communicator chooses workshops
‘My heart is in the workshop aspect of my job,’ says Kristine Greenaway, who is a communication education specialist working with the United Church of Canada (UCC) in Toronto.
‘My subjects are basic communication ideas for congregations.
These can range from the use of colour in the sanctuary to reflect the colours of the liturgical seasons, and what to think about when designing letterheads for congregations.’
She is involved in the production of videos to help families reflect on the impact of television on family life, and how to manage TV rather than be managed by it.
In recent years, the UCC has been forced to reconsider the broader issues of communication both within its congregations and outside.
‘The debate on the ordination of homosexuals focussed the need for better communication across the church, and reflected directly on my portfolio,’ Ms Greenaway said.
She added that the angry debate surrounding the issue was a catalyst for many other questions such as who the UCC members are, and how they talk to each other and the world about who they are.
‘The experience has been both uniting and divisive,’ she said.
The UCC's Division of Communication meets yearly and feeds the major issues and needs to Kristine who then works with committees to help educate and work alongside congregations.
Another aspect of Ms Greenaway's job is to run seven audio visual educational libraries across the country.
She also helps to produce a user guide for A/V workshops.
Ms Greenaway is an executive member of WACC's North American Regional Association, and took part in WACC's Central Committee in Toronto, last June.
Kristine Greenaway, Division of Communication, the United Church of Canada, 85 St Clair Avenue, Toronto, Ontario, Canada M4 1M8.
Tel (416) 925 5931.
Hans Florin retires
Rev Dr Hans W Florin, WACC's former General Secretary, retired from his position as Regional Secretary for Europe and the Middle East with the United Bible Societies on 1 October.
He had joined the UBS in 1986 after leading WACC through ten of its most dynamic years.
‘I have very much looked forward to retirement, and, like many others, I find that I have even less time than before to pursue all that I would like to do,’ Dr Florin said.
A keen sailor, he has just completed a course for yacht master offshore.
Music and painting are also high priorities.
Dr Florin retains a strong commitment to communication and is at present reading up on Eastern Christian icons with a view to writing something on the subject.
Rev Dr Hans W Florin, Chimes Cottage, Church Lane, Sidlesham, West Sussex PO20 7RH, UK.
Tel (243) 641465.
L America/Caribbean elects new officers
Dafne Sabanés de Plou, Editor of El Estandarte Evangélico (The Protestant Standard) of Buenos Aires, Argentina, was elected President of WACC's Latin America/Caribbean Regional Association during the Association's Regional Assembly in Santiago, Chile, 4–8 October.
The new Vice-president is Camilo Moncada, Director of Servicio Colombiano de Educación (Colombian Education Service), based in Bogotá.
Marcia Cruz, a print and broadcast journalist living in São Paulo, Brazil, was elected Secretary, and Daví Nelson Betts, who also lives in São Paulo and works with the grassroots communication organisation CAVE-Brasil, was re-elected as Treasurer.
People
Ronita Torcato has been appointed as Editor of South Asia Religious News Service.
She is the first woman to hold this post.
In October SAR News moved from New Delhi to Bombay, India's ‘media capital’.
Ms Torcato  worked for several newspapers and magazines in India and, more recently, in Gulf countries.
She edits a weekly dispatch of news and features on the roles religions and the Christian churches play in the region.
Francisco Gutierrez has joined the International Community Education Association as Regional Director for Latin America.
His office is in Costa Rica.
Mr Gutierrez was formerly Director of the Latin American Institute of Communication Education (ILPEC).
He is a long-standing friend of WACC and served on the Association's Central Committee as well as playing an active part in activities organised by WACC's Latin American Regional Association.
Lyn Failing, a former Consultant with WACC's curriculum development programme, is the new Information Coordinator with the UN Relief and Works Agency for Palestinian Refugees in the Near East.
He will be based in Vienna, Austria.
Gunnleik Seierstad of Norway has moved to Crawley, UK, to take up the position of Regional Secretary for Europe and the Middle East with the United Bible Societies (UBS).
Mr Seierstad served on the advisory council of the UBS in Ecuador, and more recently he was General Secretary of the Norwegian Santal Mission.
He succeeds Dr Hans Florin.
Alain Gourd, Canada's Deputy Minister of  Communications , has been elected President of the International Institute of Communications, a UK-based organisation which undertakes communication research and policy analysis…
Nicholas Garnett has been appointed Director General of the International Federation of the Phonographic Industry, based in London, UK.