

WACC sends message to Venezuelan President
Heavy censorship threatens Venezuela's democracy
On the heels of a serious coup attempt against the Venezuelan government on 4 February, the authorities imposed severe censorship on all newspapers and all radio and television networks.
The censorship continues unabated, and the extreme measures are now threatening the democratic life of the country, whose 34-year-old democracy is one of the most stable in Latin America.
In response to this situation, WACC's President, Rev Randy L Naylor, and General Secretary, Rev Carlos A Valle, sent a message on 17 February to the President of the Republic of Venezuela, Dr Carlos Andrés Pérez.
We, the members and friends of the World Association for Christian Communication (WACC) write to express our deep concern over the recent attempts by factions of the armed forces of Venezuela to overthrow their country's democratically elected government.
We express our solidarity with you and your government at this difficult time, and congratulate your fortitude and courage in withstanding the coup attempt.
We are, however, dismayed to observe that extreme measures have been taken by your government to curb freedom of expression and to censor the print and broadcast media.
Since the coup attempt on 3 February, your government has suspended the constitutional right to the freedom of expression of thought without prior censorship.
This was despite the fact that the media had reacted in support of the government and the Constitution during the days following the attempted coup.
Therefore,
1
We urge the Venezuelan people to continue the strong, democratic tradition existing in your country for the past 34 years.
We draw your attention particularly to the conviction that all citizens have the right of freedom of information and freedom of expression, as expressed in Article 19 of the UN Charter of Human Rights, to which Venezuela is a signatory.
We urge you to ensure that your government does all in its power to respect and protect this right.
2
We urge you to suspend censorship of the media and refrain from all other repressive measures that inhibit the free flow of information and the practice of independent journalism.
3
We urge you to protect the livelihood and acknowledge the importance of community-based grassroots media representing the opinions of major sectors of the population which have little or no access to the mass media.
4
In this context, we urge you to maintain your government's commitment to a constant search for the truth in all the affairs of the nation, especially in your analysis of the deep social and institutional causes which provoked the military uprising of a sector of the armed forces.
El Salvador radios to be legalised
As part of the peace accord ending El Salvador's 12-year civil war, Radio Farabundo Marti and Radio Venceremos will be legalised, according to a report from the World Association for Community Broadcasters.
The two radio networks operated from within the country's war zones, providing a voice for the people's struggle against oppression.
Indigenous groups tell their own story
This year's 500th anniversary of Columbus' ‘discovery’ of Latin America has motivated indigenous groups throughout the continent to join together to tell their story and demand their rights as never before.
A few receive the justice that has been denied to them for five centuries, but most are still viewed by their governments as third-class citizens, subversive activists and threats to ‘national security’.
The coordinator of a leading indigenous organisation in Mexico, Publicaciones  Etnias (Ethnic Publications), visited WACC's London offices recently and reported that thousands of indigenous people are currently in prison for ‘political reasons’.
‘In most cases, their only crime has been to defend their own territories and natural resources,’ said Genaro Bautista.
‘Others have made the mistake of asking for respect for their traditions and languages and of claiming the human rights that are due to them — including the right of access to the mass media’.
In no Latin American country do the mass media reflect the situation of the indigenous population, despite the fact that there are over 40 million indigenous inhabitants (almost 6.5% of a total population of some 663 million).
In addition, in some countries, such as Bolivia, Ecuador, Guatemala and Peru, over 40% of the people are indigenous.
This situation led Genaro Bautista and others to create the magazine Etnias in 1989 to serve as a platform for the discussion of indigenous issues.
WACC has helped to provide computerised equipment for typesetting and page lay out.
Publications with similar aims are springing up in different countries, and indigenous people are forming themselves into groups to represent their needs and interests.
The reaction of governments has been to resist such initiatives and view them as threats.
‘From the beginning, we have been aware that the security forces have been keeping a close watch on our activities,’ said Mr Bautista.
They were present at the first national meeting of indigenous press that we organised in June 1991, and armed men visit the premises of Etnias magazine without warning.
Also without warning, the Etnias office was ransacked and valuable computer  equipment was stolen.
Rumour had it that this was carried out by national security forces ‘in the interests of public peace and harmony’.
Undaunted, the staff and supporters of Etnias are joining with indigenous communication organisations throughout Latin America to organise the first international meeting of indigenous press.
(See under Courses & Conferences on this page)
Genaro Bautista, Etnias, Madero 67–611, Col Centro, Mexico 06000, DF.
Tel (5) 576 50 99.
Haïtians call for international help
The Ecumenical Centre for Human Rights in Haïti has called for support from the world's press to focus international attention on the violence that is being used to muzzle the country's media.
All media, apart from government-controlled radio and television, have been totally silenced, and Haïtians caught tuning in to Voice of America broadcasts are arrested and beaten.
Since the former President, Jean-Bertrand Aristide, was overthrown last September, the director of National Radio has been kidnapped and other radio and TV employees have also disappeared.
The Ecumenical Centre says it is clear that from the very beginning the new regime planned to eliminate the media from the political scene.
Church and human rights groups in Haïti hope that more international pressure will oblige the current military regime to desist from its acts of violence and draconian censorship.
WACC's Latin American/Caribbean Regional Association sent a strong message to the Haïtian authorities soon after the coup, and WACC-LA/C representatives continue to keep in close touch with the situation.
Ecumenical Centre for Human Rights, 4 Rue de Marguerites, Port au Prince, Haïti.
Tel 54106.
Doris Hess joins WACC staff
Dr Doris Hess has joined WACC staff on a voluntary basis to work on WACC's Women's Programme and to assist Dr Michael Traber, WACC's Director of Studies and Publications.
Dr Hess has been involved with WACC since its ‘birth’ and was a member of its Constitution Committee in the 1970s, having worked for the Agency for Christian Literature Development which had merged with WACC.
One of her major contributions to WACC has been being involved in the impetus for representation of women in decision-making at all levels and the inclusion of women's issues as a focus of WACC activity.
After working as a journalist on local press in her native USA, Dr Hess then spent time in the Philippines working as a missionary for the United Methodist Church (UMC).
On returning to the USA she joined the UMC's Board of Global Ministries where she stayed for 29 years until her retirement in 1990.
Private media in Mozambique
As Angola prepares for the introduction of private newspapers and radio stations, Mozambique isn't far behind.
The launch of the country's first private newspaper was announced last week by a journalists' cooperative called Media-Coop, based in Maputo.
From SouthScan.
Courses & Conferences
Role of news reporting
‘News in Crisis’ will be the theme of a colloquium to be organised by the International Catholic Association for Radio and Television (UNDA) in Brussels, Belgium, 25–27 May 1992.
The colloquium will raise questions concerning the role that news reporting plays in modern society.
There will be an analysis of news reporting during the Gulf War and studies on crisis situations such as immigration in Europe, AIDS and freedom of information in eastern Europe.
Jean Dondelinger, European Commissioner for Audiovisuals, Information, Communication and Culture will open the colloquium.
There will be simultaneous translation in English, French and Spanish.
UNDA, rue de l'Orme 12, 1040  Brussels , Belgium.
Tel (2) 7349708.
Fax (2) 7347018.
Choices for change in print
‘Communication Choices for Change’ will be the theme of the International Christian Print Media Training Conference, LITT-WORLD ‘92, to be held in Wheaton, USA, 2–6 June 1992.
The conference brings together Christians who believe the printed word is strategic for evangelism and discipleship.
The conference is sponsored by Media Associates International, Inc, that helps train writers, editors and publishers.
LITT-WORLD ‘92, Media Associates International, Inc, P O Box 218, Bloomingdale, IL 60108–0218, USA.
Tel (708) 8931977.
Methodist publishers’ desktop workshop
A ‘hands-on’ desktop publishing workshop will be organised by the United Methodist Publishing House in Nashville, USA, on 24 April 1992.
There will be a presentation on new publishing technologies focusing primarily on personal computers and software for word processing, editing, composition, page layout and design.
Participants will create and print a newsletter using IBM-compatible hardware and Xywrite and Ventura programmes.
The workshop will be held at the same time as the World Methodist Council's International Publishing Committee.
Desktop publishing workshop, United Methodist Publishing House, 201–8th Avenue South, P O Box 801, Nashville, Tennessee 37202, USA.
Tel (615) 749 6327.
Fax (615) 749 6079.
Indigenous press to meet in Mexico
The first International Meeting of Indigenous Press will take place in Mexico, 24–26 April 1992.
Organised by the indigenous Mexican magazine Etnias, the meeting aims to evaluate the role of the press with respect to the problems of indigenous people.
Participants will discuss the introduction of criteria to guide the work of indigenous journalists in Latin America.
They
will also review the reasons for the European invasion of their continent and discuss the significance of the celebration of the 500th anniversary.
Other themes for discussion will include the role of indigenous press in national development, and the participation of indigenous women in the media.
First International Meeting of Indigenous Press, Etnias, Madero 67–611, Colonia Centro, Mexico 06000, DF.
Tel (5) 576 50 99.
In the Pacific
Computer technology boosts local publishing
‘The advance of computer technology has stimulated indigenous publishing in the Pacific and enabled even small groups to publish their own materials,’ said Terry Hermano, WACC's Regional Coordinator for the Pacific, as she explained the current need in the region for training in the new technology.
Traditionally there has been a lack of publishing infrastructure and trained personnel in the Pacific.
This has meant that a high proportion of all types of printed materials available have been imported from abroad, particularly from Australia and the UK.
In an attempt to respond to this need for training, WACC's Pacific Regional Association has organised and funded four desktop publishing workshops since 1987 specifically to upgrade the skills of Christian communicators in the Pacific islands and help them to use the new technology to maximum effect.
The most recent workshop took place in December 1991 at the headquarters of Lotu Pasifika Productions in Fiji.
Lotu Pasifika is a long-time friend and partner of WACC in the Pacific.
The seven-day ecumenical workshop attracted nine participants from five eastern Pacific countries — Tonga, Tuvalu, American Samoa, French Polynesia and Fiji.
Training was given using Apple Macintosh Pagemaker software.
The course started with an introduction to desktop publishing and continued with sessions looking at layout styles and techniques, the use and production of graphics, and the setting up of templates for regular publications.
For further information, contact Seru Verebalavu, chairperson of WACC's Pacific Regional Association, Lotu Pasifika Productions, P O Box 2401, Suva, Fiji.
Tel 24314.
News service scheduled for January
The long-planned Ecumenical News Service (ENS), which will be based in Geneva, Switzerland, is scheduled to start operations in January 1993.
Plans for the service, which will cost about US$ 1 million in the first year, have been delayed by lack of funds.
However, the sponsoring organisations are keen to start, albeit in a more modest form than previously hoped.
The sponsors are the World Council of Churches, the Lutheran World Federation, the World Alliance of Reformed Churches and the Conference of European Churches.
Steps are underway to find a coordinator for the service, and to appoint members to the ENS board.
The original plan was to target the ‘secular press’ throughout the world via computer and telephone networks, using four languages.
Budget problems will probably restrict the service to English to begin with, with plans to add other languages as soon as possible.
Target areas are still under discussion.
The sponsors expect the service to be self-supporting after five years.
For further information on the Ecumenical News Service, contact the General Secretariat, Lutheran World Federation, PO Box No 2100, Route de Ferney 150, 1211 Geneva 2, Switzerland.
Tel (22) 791 61 11.
Women and the pace of development
When development communicators ignore women, they consciously or unconsciously slow down the pace of development and perpetuate the vicious cycles of poverty, illiteracy, starvation and human suffering.
Why do development communicators and educators need to think about women?
The moral, human rights reasons are well known and need no elaboration.
The practical development reasons why communicators and educators can make a difference through communicating with women and empowering them with information and skills are outlined below.
Women are economic agents, although they are usually not perceived to be.
Their work is not accounted for, and so their further development potential is grossly neglected.
Women are farmers.
In Africa, they produce some 80 percent of food, and they can produce more if other workload is reduced and if they receive training and technical information.
Women are key agents of environmental protection.
In rural areas, they live and work closer to the eco-system; they can understand its limitations and can safeguard its future by practicing sustainable agriculture and forestry.
Therefore, they need support, technical conservation information, and sharing of their experience through communication.
Women are the key agents of human development.
They can improve the quality of life and optimise human responses in communities through reducing maternal and child mortality, reducing fertility, improving family nutrition, and managing safe drinking water and sanitation.
They also teach their children (especially daughters) good health practices and other skills at home, thus supporting formal education systems.
When development communicators ignore women, they consciously or unconsciously slow down the pace of development and perpetuate the vicious cycles of poverty, illiteracy, starvation, and human suffering.
Women and development support communication
Over recent decades, there has been growing recognition that communication based on people's background, culture and basic knowledge is a critical component of any development project, and that it must be systematically planned, budgeted for and evaluated.
But, as with development planning in general, there is still a tendency to assume that development communication and information directed at a general audience will equally reach women.
In fact, women often do not have equal access to information, due to such factors as restricted mobility outside the home, lower educational levels, and sometimes men's control over information or media technology.
Development communicators may need to ‘repackage’ information in a form that is comprehensible to illiterate women and to select those communication channels most appropriate for women.
Furthermore, women will have different information needs and ways of treating knowledge.
For example, women must be informed about life options in relation to marriage, safe contraception, and breastfeeding, in order to make choices in their own interest.
Even then, development communicators need to ensure that they bring women information as women and not simply as intermediaries for children and families.
For instance, a breastfeeding promotion campaign that focuses too much on child health goals might miss the fact that six half-hour feedings per day would seriously burden already over-worked and time-constrained mothers.
Thus development communicators must become much more sensitive to women's problems and listen to their own ideas of how to solve them.
It is also essential that more women be given an opportunity to be trained in skills that will enable them to become development communicators themselves.
Such skills range from interpersonal communication techniques, to production skills in folk media, small controlled media and mass media, as well as use of new high-tech information technologies as communication tools for development.
Women and the media
During the 1970s and 1980s, especially during the United Nations Decade of Women (1976–1985), the international women's movement made media producers, communication planners, and others aware of the need to think about women and the media in the context of development.
Many national and several international meetings were organised on the subject of ‘Women and the Media’, raising such questions as how the mass media treats issues of concern to women, and women's participation in various capacities in the production of mainstream media.
Social analysts and critics have pointed out that mass media — newspapers, television and radio — are used by those who have access to them.
Until now, men in all cultures have had both access to and control of the printing press, broadcast technology, computer-based technologies and production resources that determine the design and content of programmes.
Traditionally, men have communicated through the media on behalf of all humankind, influencing public opinion, and bringing about political, economic and social change from their point of view.
But because parents bring up girls in a different way to boys in most cultures, women experience life quite differently and so bring a uniquely female perspective to many issues of local as well as global importance.
In recognition of this fact, there has been a significant entrance of women into mainstream media — much more in western than in Third World countries, but to a noticeable extent in the latter as well.
At the same time, those attentive to issues of national and international development raised the question of whether the strategy for participation of women in the media should concentrate on getting women into mainstream media or creating ‘alternative’ media institutions to serve the interests of women and meet the communication needs unserved by male-controlled media.
Women's own media also allow an opportunity for open dialogue without domination by men.
Psychologists have observed that in a group composed of men and women, the men usually set the agenda, choose topics for discussion, and tend to answer most of the questions posed during the group discussions.
While the debate has continued, women have felt compelled to work on both strategies, depending on their local situations and, of course, their own vocational preferences.
The last ten years have seen an enormous expansion of women's own media: international networks of women's development information, development manuals for women, films and videos by and about women.
However, it can be argued that neither strategy has succeeded in making a significant enough difference in Third World women's access to information and skills relevant to them and useful for contributing to development in their communities.
Despite large numbers of women professionals employed in mainstream print and broadcast media in Third World countries, they still tend to be concentrated in sex-stereotyped posts such as announcing or children's programming, and are largely absent from management and decision-making positions.
Several recent studies show that factors push women who work in media to become ‘one of the boys’ in order to achieve recognition and status within the profession, neglecting women's interests in the process.
Mass media treatment of women's issues, while broader than before, is too often confined to a ‘women's page’ or programme rather than integrated into broader content, and many stereotypes and negative images of women prevail in media content as well as advertising.
The use of alternative media, when sustained, has indeed had an impact on women's knowledge and skills and is capable of reaching significant numbers of local women.
But these have been relatively rare phenomena, with small, alternative media constantly struggling to survive and dependent on financial support from donor agencies due to women's inability to pay for such information flows.
Policy makers
Currently, there is an enormous need to use communication to heighten male leadership's understanding of the importance of accepting women on an equal basis in development.
Development communicators, men as well as women, need to use their skills to reach policy makers and opinion leaders to make the case that women are key agents of development and that their needs and potential must be properly taken into account in development programmes.
The present challenge for development communicators is how to counter the negative reactions when ‘women's issues’ are brought up at national or international development discussions.
These negative reactions come not only from male decision-makers, but also from female decision-makers.
Communication strategies must be developed to address three stumbling blocks:
1
Many development professional and policy-makers hold deep-seated beliefs that women are not men's equals, and that economies and societies are correctly organised to reflect this inequality.
2
Some believe that it is inappropriate to ‘export’ a cultural ideology of women's advancement from one society to another,
especially when the export is from a dominant donor society to a poorer recipient society.
Many critics claim that to introduce the gender equality notions of the West into development programming in Africa, Asia and Latin America is a form of cultural neocolonialism.
3
Many development professionals resist raising women's concerns in development discussions as a separate issue to be analysed and assigned programmes.
They cannot see how they could begin to generalise about approaches to women in development that could be useful since women are represented in rich and poor, rural and urban, educated and uneducated, all ethnic, religious, cultural, tribal and other groupings.
Breaking barriers
Presenting women's viewpoint in development through interpersonal and mass media will explode several myths of patriarchal society, especially those assuming that ‘male-defined reality’ is the only reality, that political and economic systems created by men are superior and that women must merely be integrated into these systems.
Likewise, men should be brought into ‘female-defined reality’, that is, the reality of child rearing and education of the new generation.
Men have the advantage of better nutrition and education, and one question development communicators might pose is whether society ought to give greater responsibility for caring and educating children to the best qualified among us — the men.
A more gender-balanced communication requires that there be a process of redefinition and change in all areas of human activity.
It's a tall order, and a challenge to development communication professionals in the coming decade.
This article was first published in Development Communication Report, the quarterly magazine of the Clearinghouse on Development Communication, 1815 North Fort Myer Drive, Suite 600, Arlington, VA 22209, USA.
Tel (703) 527 5546.
Fax (703) 527 4661.
The author, Mallica Vajrathon, of Thailand, is a Senior Technical Officer in the Education, Communication and Youth Branch of the United Nations Population Fund in New York.
She has written widely on women's education and communication, and has produced films and other A/V materials in support of development initiatives.
Books & Resources
An alternative view of women
In Her Own Image, produced by the USA's Media Network, is a guide to films and videos aimed at empowering women for the future.
‘In Her Own Image offers an alternative view on the lives of women’ writes Anne Lieberman, the Project Director.
‘The documentaries in this guide explore and expose the realities of women's lives’, she adds.
More than 80 films from film makers around the world are catalogued under categories such as‘The Body Politic’, ‘War and Peace’ and ‘Confronting Violence’.
Each entry contains an evaluative description, information on how to obtain the film or video, and the names of the director and producer of the work.
The Media Network is an independent organisation established in 1979 which advocates the use of independent film and video by activists, educators, libraries and grassroots groups.
In Her Own Image costs US$7.50 and is available from Media Network, 39 W 14th Street, Suite 403, New York, NY 10011, USA.
Tel (212) 929 2663.
Teaching parents to manage television
Parenting in a TV Age helps parents learn to manage television intelligently, say it producers, the Center for Media and Values in Los Angeles, USA.
Designed for use by church groups, community centres and parent teacher groups, Parenting in a TV Age is a parent education programme which focusses on issues of children and television.
The Center developed the programme as one of their Media Literacy Workshop Kits, providing resources for group dialogue, awareness exercises and reflective thinking.
The Kit addresses areas such as developing family standards for sex and violence on TV, setting viewing time limits, coping with commercials and counteracting TV stereotypes.
Designed for four sessions, Parenting In a TV Age provides a step-by-step process to help parents learn to analyse the media, to teach their children to do the same themselves and to enable them develop selection criteria for what to watch and what to miss.
‘This is a programme that can make a difference by preparing our young people for living in a world of powerful images, words and ideas,’ says Elizabeth Thoman, the Center's Director.
The Center for Media and Values is best known for its quarterly magazine Media & Values, which has received support from WACC in past years.
Parenting in a TV Age costs US $21.95 and is available from Center for Media and Values, 1962 S Shenandoah Street, Los Angeles, CA 90034, USA.
Tel (310) 559 2944.
Fax (310) 559 9396.
Mexican children's radio closes
Radio RIN (Radio Infantil Nacional — National Children's Radio) has been closed by the Mexican Radio Institute, according to a report by the World Association of Community Radio Broadcasters.
The director of the institute, which is a government agency controlling radio broadcasting, said that children are not able to discriminate between good and bad radio material and are incapable of taking part in radio production.
Only a few months ago, Action newsletter (issue Nov/Dec 1991) reported that Radio RIN, which has successfully broadcast for eight years, had recently boosted its signal, reaching more children in different Mexican states.
WARC ‘92 manual published
Sharing Spectrum in the Digital Age is the title of the communication manual published for WARC-92 (World Administrative Radio Conference) that took place in February.
It comprises some of the papers prepared for this year's conference.
Titles include ‘Radio Regulations and ITU Reform’, ‘Mobile Satellites’ and International Radio on HF: The Technological Dilemma'.
The manual has been sponsored jointly by the International Institute of Communications, Friedrich-Ebert Stiftung, the Canadian International Development Agency and WACC.
Single copies of Sharing Spectrum in the Digital Age WARC-92 are available free of charge from WACC, 357 Kennington Lane, London SE11 5QY, UK.
Tel (71) 582 9139.
Fax (71) 735 0340.
Japanese Christians monitor the military
Japan Militarism Monitor is a quarterly publication produced by the Center for Christian  Response to Asian Issues.
The Center is one of the few Christian organisations in Japan which are actively concerned with social and political issues affecting the life of the nation.
The Center is supported by the National Council of Churches of Japan.
Center for Christian Response to Asian Issues (CCRAI-NCCJ), 2–3–18 Nishi-Waseda, Shinjuku-ku, Tokyo 169 Japan.
Tel (3) 3202–0494.
Estonian radio launched
A team of 12 journalism students has launched one of the first independent radio stations (Radio Tartu) in the former Soviet republic of Estonia.
The station takes its name from its sponsor — Tartu University, which is one of the oldest in Europe.
It broadcasts 16
hours a day, with several news bulletins, programmes on events and trends in Estonia and abroad, and live debates on current issues.
Hando Sinisalu, Radio Tartu (Department of Journalism), Tartu University, Ulikooli 18, 202400 Tartu, Estonia.
Fewer voices in the communication arena
‘Our globe is still populated by many diverse worlds, but the public voices dominating it have become fewer and fewer.
Media reform movements have never been more urgent than now.’
This quotation sums up the reason for the publication by WACC of Few Voices, Many Worlds.
It was published to ‘keep alive the call to put into practice the principles of democratisation’, and retains the spirit of Many Voices, One World — the report of the UNESCO-sponsored MacBride Commission which first articulated the call for a New World Information and Communication Order in the 1970s.
Few Voices, Many Worlds takes stock of the current situation in global communication.
In particular, it points to the rise of the multinational corporations as key players in the international communications arena, and the growth of global advertising.
The book is a collection of documents aimed at stimulating discussion and action and at promoting a more general awareness of the cultural environment in which the mass media play a major part.
Few Voices, Many Worlds contains a review of NWICO since 1990, a profile of the late Seán MacBride's contributions to world peace, the Statements of the MacBride Round Table on Communication, and statements from WACC-sponsored meetings in Manila and Lima.
Also included are relevant background documents such as the recommendations of the first book, Many Voices, One World, the International Principles of Professional Ethics in Journalism and excerpts from An Information and Communication Policy for Africa.
The book is jointly edited by Michael Traber, WACC's Director of Studies and Publications, and Kaarle Nordenstreng, Professor of Journalism and Mass Communications at the University of Tampere, Finland.
Few Voices, Many Worlds (paperback; 80 pages) costs £4 and is available from WACC, 357 Kennington Lane, London SE11 5QY, UK.
Tel (71) 582 9139.
Fax (71) 735 0340.
Women and media in the Asian context
‘The portrayal of women in the media is negative and deleterious both as the traditional wife-mother and gracious-lady portraits that limit the woman in growth and leadership, and the siren-victim-criminal image that exploits womanhood.’
This excerpt from the preface to Women and Media in the Asian Context gives a flavour of the book, which is published jointly by WACC and People in Communication, a group of communication organisations based in the Philippines.
The book is a collection of reports and papers presented during an Asian sub-regional conference on women and media in the late '80s but the findings are still relevant and pertinent to today's situation.
Women and Media falls into two broad parts: firstly, the examination of how women are portrayed in the media, and secondly, women as media practitioners.
The book is divided into country reports.
Countries examined are Hong Kong, Indonesia, Japan, Korea, Malaysia and the Philippines.
In the chapter on Japan, Midori Suzuki, a member of WACC's Central Committee and of the Executive Committee of WACC's Asia Regional Association, studies the portrayal of women on television, the commercialization of sex in television broadcasting of all kinds, and she looks at ways to bring an end to this sexual discrimination.
She writes ‘If the women employed in television treat the problem of discrimination against women as their own problem, too, and work together with other viewers…concrete changes will definitely take place’.
Women and Media in the Asian Context (paperback; 138 pages) is available from People in Communication, Inc, 3/F Sonolux Asia Building, Ateneo de Manila University, Loyola Heights, Quezon City, Philippines.
Tel (2) 982541 to 45 ext 366 and 362.
WACC works with UNESCO on training package
WACC has been asked to help with the preparation of a new education and training package on development communication.
The training package has been commissioned by UNESCO.
Professor Jan Servaes of the Catholic University of Nijmegen in the Netherlands is working with WACC and other development and training organisations to illustrate the difference in perspectives on development communication and to explore the points of contact between them.
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organisation, Communication Division, 7 Place de Fontenoy, 75700 Paris, France.
Tel (1) 568 1000.
Two decades of censorship monitor
Index on Censorship this year celebrates its twentieth anniversary of reporting on press and media suppression around the world.
In a special commemorative issue, Pavel Litvonov, a Soviet dissident now living and working in the USA, reflects on the changes over the past 20 years.
It was Litvinov's open letter to the Western press, published in the UK newspaper The Times in 1968, which brought to public attention the censorship situation then in the Soviet Union.
This led to the founding of the Index on Censorship in 1972.
Other articles include an examination of the present situation for journalists in Panama and an essay by Aung San Suu Kyi, Burma's leading politician and dissident, who has been awarded the Nobel Peace Prize and the Sakharov Prize for Freedom of Thought.
A regular feature of the magazine is the ‘Index Index’ which is an alphabetical summary of censorship news worldwide.
Index on Censorship is published ten times a year by a non-profit-making company, Writers & Scholars International Ltd, 39c Highbury Place, London N5 1QP, UK.
Tel (71) 359 0161.
Fax (71) 354 8665.
‘Media village’ unites communities in Indonesia
An unusual ‘media village’, probably the first of its kind anywhere in the world, is transforming the life of a small Indonesian village, Minomartani, about nine kilometres from Yogyakarta.
Established in 1990 by Puskat Audio Visual Centre, the ‘media village’ is centred around a two-storey village hall which houses a community theatre, rooms for music, meetings and courses, and a library.
The idea for the village sprang from Puskat employees, most of whom live in Minomartani.
It became the answer to their pressing question:
‘How can we motivate our neighbourhood to become a harmonious community where people care for each other and collaborate in answering their common needs?’
Employing communication media to achieve those goals, Puskat staff worked with the local community to develop a one-page community newspaper.
Posters were also created to draw attention to current social issues and to help to find solutions.
Indonesia's traditional performing arts, such as music and shadow-puppet shows, play a major part in the life of the ‘media village’, attracting people of all ages and social and religious backgrounds to perform together and to talk and share ideas and concerns.
Children's activities are also a high priority, with art workshops and dance courses taking place on a regular basis.
As a Roman Catholic organisation, Puskat is sensitive to the multi-cultural environment of Indonesia, and people of all faiths are welcome to take part in village hall activities.
Puskat started life in 1969 producing audio visuals for religious education.
Since then, it has become increasingly involved in social issues and its main objective is to motivate marginalised groups through audio visual productions and by organising training workshops in many parts of Indonesia.
For the past three years, WACC has been supporting Puskat's annual series of three two-week media workshops.
In 1991, the workshops focussed on photography, video and community theatre.
Workshop participants are always encouraged to work closely with local people, involving them in drama productions and reflecting neighbourhood hopes and concerns in the course work.
Puskat Audio Visual Centre, Jl Ahmad Jazuli 2, Teromolpos 75, Yogyakarta 55002, Indonesia.
Tel (274) 4705.
People
Josephine Mapoma has been appointed Permanent Secretary for Information and Communication with the government of Zambia.
She was formerly a lecturer at the
University of Zambia, and in the early 1980s she received a scholarship under WACC's Training Assistance Programme to advance her communication studies in Manila, Philippines.
Rev Norman A Hjelm, former Director of Communication of the Lutheran World Federation (LWF), is the new Director of the US National Council of Churches' Faith and Order office in New York.
He succeeds Brother Jeffrey Gros, who held the position for 10 years.
Prior to his LWF post, Mr Hjelm was Director and Senior Editor of Fortress Press, and also Vice-President for religious books for William Collins publishers.
Christine Hoogenkamp has taken up an appointment as Editor with the press office of the Netherlands Reformed Church in Leidschendam.
She was previously Secretary for the Media Committee of the Netherlands Missionary Council.
Fr Gerry d'Rozario, SJ, Director of the Xavier Institute of Communications (XIC) in Bombay, India, died suddenly of acute respiratory problems on 4 January.
He was 52.
Since Fr Gerry took over the directorship of the XIC in 1979, the institute grew to become one of the largest non-government media training centres in Asia.
A trained television professional, in 1974 Fr Gerry began a series of programmes on adult education which were aired on India's state TV network.
Rev Tiit Salumäe, Director of the Information Department with the Church of Estonia, has received the 1991 information award of the Church of Finland.
Mr Salumäe helped to establish the Information Department in 1988 founding the magazine Eesti Kirik and producing regular programmes on religious themes for both radio and television.