

Media group spearheads rescue effort in Guadalajara
The Mexican Institute for Community Development (IMDEC), has launched an intensive communication campaign urging people within Mexico and abroad to do all they can to help victims of the blast which tore through Guadalajara's sewage system on 22 April, killing around 200 people.
Within hours of the explosion, IMDEC was designing, printing and distributing leaflets around the city, calling for volunteers to help.
The institute's staff supplied local radio stations with the latest information, and obtained permission from the Red Cross to convert the IMDEC offices and cultural centre into a distribution centre for medicines, food and clothing.
Another important task for IMDEC was to prepare a more detailed account of the effects of the explosion in order to request emergency aid.
The institute has denounced as ‘absurd’ recent government measures to centralise all sources of aid and is calling on national and international media to urge the government to lift its ban on independent aid initiatives.
Knowing that mere seconds might mean the difference between life and death for the hundreds of people trapped by the explosions, IMDEC responded immediately by setting up a citizens' coordinating committee, drawing on the expertise and resources of 27 social and human rights organisations.
A major responsibility, particularly in the hours following the blast, was to help reduce panic by providing as much information as possible concerning the dead and injured, and those who were missing or left homeless.
‘Many areas were evacuated and hundreds of families sought refuge with relatives or in church buildings and sports grounds,’ said Carlos Nuñez Hurtado, Coordinator of IMDEC.
The institute has committed itself to continuing to offer practical help and communication expertise as long as it is needed in the recovery process.
In more peaceful times, IMDEC runs informal communication and education programmes for local communities in and around Guadalajara.
Part of IMDEC's programme, a series of educational videos, has been supported by WACC.
IMDEC (Instituto Mexicano para el Desarrollo Comunitario), Pino 2237, Col del Fresno 44900, Guadalajara, Jalisco, Mexico.
Tel (36) 104536 and 110944.
In Venezuela
Sanctions lifted, but censorship remains
The Venezuelan authorities have officially lifted the censorship measures imposed throughout the nation following last February's coup attempt against the government.
(See Action number 158.)
In practice, however, the media clampdown continues.
Shortly after the constitutional right to the freedom of expression was restored in mid-March, the government ordered the closure of a highly popular radio station.
One of WACC's partners in Venezuela, Centro Guarura, reports that the radio station had been accused of giving airtime to ‘destabilising and subversive elements’.
It was silenced for eight days.
‘The truth is that the station was meeting its obligation to cover the views of representatives of legal opposition parties, as well as of the families of military officials detained after the coup attempt,’ said Mauricio Brunner, Coordinator of Centro Guarura.
‘These clumsy attempts to muzzle the media reveal the lack of credibility that undermines our entire political system,’ Mr Brunner added.
In addition to censoring specific targets, the government now holds regular meetings with a broad range of media representatives in an effort to ‘persuade’ them not to publicise opinions which are critical of government policies.
Despite attempts by the government to control the media, Venezuela's population maintained communication using posters, leaflets, telephones and loudspeakers.
So effective was their network that pro-democracy groups were able to organise two unusual nationwide protests.
The protests involved switching off domestic lights at pre-arranged times, while sounding whistles, pans and household instruments to urge the government to restore full democratic rights.
Centro Guarura, Apartado 603, Carmelitas, Caracas 1010A, Venezuela.
Tel/fax (2) 414843.
New coordinator for WACC-Pacific
Seru Verebalavu has been appointed Coordinator of WACC's Pacific Regional Association.
His two-year assignment starts in July this year.
Based in Fiji, he will work in partnership with the Pacific Conference of Churches to develop communication activities throughout the region.
Mr Verebalavu was formerly General Manager of Lotu Pasifika Productions in Fiji and Chairperson of WACC-Pacific.
Mr Verebalavu is the third Coordinator to be appointed in the Pacific under WACC's Animation Programme.
Fr Kevin Walcot SVD launched the programme in 1986, followed by Rev Oria Gemo.
Seru Verebalavu, c/o Pacific Conference of Churches, PO Box 208, Suva, Fiji.
Tel 302 332.
Fax 303 205.
Courses & Conferences
Communication and Columbus 500
‘Communication for a New World’ is the theme chosen for the 18th Conference and General Assembly of the International Association of Mass Communication Research (IAMCR), to be held in São Paulo, Brazil, 16–21 August 1992.
The theme is an attempt, say IAMCR, to embody both the 500th anniversary of Columbus's landing in the Americas and the recent revolutionary changes in Eastern Europe and elsewhere.
Topics for discussion include Technologies of International Communication, The MacBride Movement: Flourishing or Perishing? and International Communication and International Conflict: Lessons from Recent History.
Among those involved in co-chairing the sessions are Dr Colleen Roach from the Communications Arts and Sciences Department of the City University of New York, and Dr Rafael Roncagliolo from the Instituto Para América Latina in Peru.
Dr Roach has worked with WACC for many years, particularly concerning issues of peace and the New World Communication and Information Order.
Dr Roncagliolo has participated in, or convened, several conferences for WACC.
Contact Fernando Perrone and Marina Rector, Escola de Comunicaçes e Artes, Universidade de São Paulo, Av Prof Lúcio Martins Rodriguez, 443 Cidade Universitária, São Paulo, SP CEP 05508 Brazil.
Tel (11) 814 0596 and 815 4272.
In Peru
Seminars link film with cultural identity
‘Audiovisual and Cultural Identity: Strategies for Pluralism and Democracy in the New World Order’ is the theme of the third international symposium of the organisation Videazimut.
According to Videazimut, the International Video Coalition for the Right to Communicate, the symposium's aim is for ‘deeper discussion about the implication that the ‘global village’ or ‘global supermarket’has on cultural identities, to be able to design a strategy to reply and to defend diversity and democracy.’
Taking place 29–30 June at Instituto para América Latina (IPAL) in Lima, the symposium gathers film and video producers, communications specialists, researchers, teachers and students who view the development of communication as a basic human right.
For information contact IPAL, Apartado Postal 270031, Lima 27, Peru.
Tel & fax (14) 617949.
The Fourth Interamerican Film Festival of Indigenous Peoples is to be held in Lima and Cuzco 17–26 June.
Like its predecessors in Mexico (1985), Rio de Janeiro (1987) and Caracas (1989) the Festival will provide participants with the opportunity to exhibit and view the most recent cinema and video productions made by and about the indigenous peoples of the Americas.
For the first time films by and about the indigenous population of North America will be included in the festival.
Awards will be presented in nine categories including ethnic identity and human rights.
Part of the event are exhibitions of indigenous art and a colloquium on visual anthropology.
For details contact Comisión Organizadora IV Festival Americano de Cine de Los Pueblos Indígenas, CLAPCI, Av Juan de Aliaga 204, Lima 27, Peru.
Tel & fax (14) 617949.
Communication training for leaders
The seventh Asian Institute of Christian Communication (AICC) will take place in Chiangmai, Thailand, 10 August-5 September 1992.
The aim of the institute is to provide advanced training in communication for Asian Christian leaders.
It is designed to help participants identify challenges in their ministry and to equip them with the necessary insights and skills to meet these challenges.
Subjects covered during the AICC course include communication principles and theories, research and its function in ministry development, anthropological insights for communication, effective use of traditional and modern media, and development issues.
Participants should have a leadership role in their place of work and a degree of at least BA level.
AICC-7, c/o Eagles Communications, Marine Parade, P O Box 581, Singapore 9144.
Tel 7485056.
Fax 7460452.
L American/Caribbean broadcasters to meet
The first-ever gathering of broadcasters of Latin American and Caribbean music will be held in La Habana, Cuba, 30 August-6 September 1992.
The meeting is organised by the Cuban cultural organisation, Casa de las Américas to coincide with the 70th anniversary of Radio Cubana, which is one of the region's first radio stations.
The theme of the meeting will be ‘Latin American and Caribbean unity and identity through the broadcasting of its music’.
The working language will be Spanish.
Primer Encuentro de Radiodifusores de Música Latinoamericana y Caribeña, Casa de las Américas, G y 3ra, Vedado, La Habana, Cuba.
Tel (7) 323587 and 321590.
Fax (7) 327272.
Telex 511019C AMER CU.
Erratum
In Action 159 (page 2) incorrect details were given about the second consultation on communication studies in Latin American seminaries to be held in July 1992.
The consultation will be held at the Escola Superior de Teología in São Leopoldo, Brazil and not at ISEDET in Argentina as  originally stated.
For further information contact Dr Nelson Kirst, Rua Martinho Lutero 291, Caixa Postal 14, São Leopoldo, Brazil.
Tel (0512) 92 1763.
Fax (0512) 257244
In Bolivia
New radio training programme promotes Quechua broadcasts
For the first time in Bolivia, Quechua-speakers have access to regular, in-depth radio training schemes, thanks to the initiative of the Radio Production Centre (CEPRA) in Cochabamba.
Radio broadcasting in Quechua is a vital means of communication for Bolivia's many indigenous communities.
Lack of training, however, has limited the scope and quality of programming, and very few people have been able to participate.
CEPRA was formed in 1981 to produce educational radio drama programmes involving a wide range of people in their preparation and production.
The programmes started off as the ‘Education by Radio’ series broadcast by the Roman Catholic station San Rafael.
Since then, training has become an increasingly important part of CEPRA's activities and in 1986 it joined forces with the Association of Native Language Communicators to set up a three-year communication diploma course for native language speakers.
The course is recognised by the Catholic University of Bolivia.
At a more popular level, CEPRA has organised occasional radio production workshops for community groups and trades unions, but there has been a growing awareness of the need for more structured, in-depth training schemes.
It was this need that led to the setting up of an annual programme of three two-week radio training workshops, which WACC has supported for the past two years.
Initially CEPRA invited five provincial radio stations to recommend local people for training in the various programme formats.
In 1991, some 80 participants completed the workshops; about 40% of these were women.
The centre's long-term objective is to offer training for ten radio stations each year, and to encourage community radios to share resources and work more closely together.
While the annual workshops focus on skills and techniques, CEPRA stresses the need to prepare programmes which accurately reflect the needs of the listeners.
These are predominantly agricultural labourers in Bolivia's main Quechua-speaking areas: Cochabamba, Potosi and Sucre.
The workshops included an analysis of the social and economic factors affecting Bolivia, in particular its marginalised Quechua-speaking communities.
A combination of the country's high external debt and recently introduced liberal economic policies has severely increased the numbers of unemployed and led to mass migration from rural to urban areas.
It has also encouraged many families to move to the Chapare and Yuuga valleys to grow coca leaves for the lucrative narcotics trade.
CEPRA hopes that the development of community radio will help people to gain a better understanding of their problems and the solutions open to them, and a greater awareness of the opportunities that lie ahead.
CEPRA (Centro de Producción Radiofónica), Calle Hamiraya No 249, Casilla 1986, Cochabamba, Bolivia.
Ecuadorians launch regional TV training scheme
The International Communication Centre for Latin America (CIESPAL) is setting up a region-wide television training scheme from its new studios in Quito, Ecuador.
It hopes to attract communicators and television producers from throughout Latin America and the Caribbean to attend courses and workshops that are sensitive to regional and local needs.
Before inaugurating the studios and training centre in October 1991, CIESPAL had undertaken detailed research in the region to determine training needs and opportunities in each country.
The results of the research revealed an acute lack of professional TV training including both theory and practice.
CIESPAL also identified the need for the production of high quality programmes that would promote social development throughout the region.
In the long-term, the centre aims to establish a network for the exchange and distribution of news programmes and documentaries.
CIESPAL's new studios and training centre were installed with support from the government of Ecuador and the Friedrich Ebert Foundation of Germany.
CIESPAL (Centro Internacional de Comunicación para América Latina) Apartado 17–01–584, Quito, Ecuador.
Tel (2) 544 624.
Fax (2) 502 487.
Telex 22474 CIESPL ED.
Ecumenical jury sits at Berlin film fair
An ecumenical jury took part in the international Berlin Film Festival for the first time in February this year.
Representatives of the international film organisations of the Roman Catholic and evangelical churches — OCIC and Interfilm — comprised the jury.
Its president was Rev Hans Hodel of Switzerland.
The jury awarded two prizes: one to ‘Infinitas’ by Russian film maker Marlen Chuzlev, the other to ‘L'Annonce Faite à Marie’by French/Canadian film maker Alain Cuny.
The 1992 Berlin Film Festival attracted more than 700 films from around the world in documentary and feature categories.
Puppet theatre animates AIDS education in southern Africa
Popular puppet theatre is helping to take on the struggle against AIDS across southern Africa.
A programme called ‘Puppets Against AIDS’ is using popular media to break through cultural and racial barriers as an instrument of information.
Puppets Against Aids is a long-term project by the African Research and Educational Puppetry Programme (AREPP) of Johannesburg.
At the centre of the programme is a 20-minute puppet play depicting the story of Mary and Joe and their struggle against AIDS.
Joe is a man who has led a promiscuous life.
He contracts HIV and passes it on to his wife, who then passes it on to their child.
As Joe is dying, two friends care for him showing the need for compassion to AIDS sufferers.
The play has two versions.
The first uses large, two metres tall puppets which can be easily seen by large audiences.
The second uses glove puppets and is performed from a small booth to animate smaller crowds.
The puppets are coloured grey to indicate that AIDS has no colour bias and the performances are kept humourous and light-hearted while conveying their serious subject matter.
The narrator uses the local dialect where necessary.
Performances are accompanied by live or taped music, demonstrations and an opportunity for questions from the audience.
Simple brochures help provide additional information.
The Mary and Joe play is performed in markets, health clinics, parks, schools and churches.
AREPP's programme started in Xhosa communities and then spread to other parts of South Africa.
It then began work in neighbouring Namibia, Zambia, Zimbabwe, and most recently in Lesotho and Mozambique.
Community groups are now being trained to carry on the work started by AREPP.
This is done at the headquarters in Johannesburg while the play is on tour.
This growing interest in using puppetry in the fight against AIDS has brought health education officers from Zaire, Burundi, Burkina Faso, Congo, Niger and Gabon to AREPP's centre.
There, in a five-day course, they are trained in basic AIDS education, education skills, script writing, puppetry techniques and animation exercises.
African Research and Educational Puppetry Programme, PO Box 51022, Raedene 2124, South Africa.
Tel (11) 485 1164.
Fax (11) 640 2934)
From a report in Exchange, World Health Organisation Global Programme on AIDS.
Massai get Bible
More African communities will now be able to read the Bible in their mother tongue.
The latest to do so are the Maasai nomads.
The Bible will now be available to the estimated 750,000 Maasai people who live in Kenya and Tanzania with the recent publication of the first ever Ki-Maasai version by the Bible Society of Kenya (BSK).
According to Pastor Joseph Kasio, a Maasai himself and Project Secretary for the new publication, the Bible will also be accessible to other ethnic groups close to the Maasai who include the Samburu, Rendille and I'Chamus.
‘All in all, we expect the new Ki-Maasai Bible to serve in excess of one million people’, he said.
However, the illiteracy rate among the Maasai people could be as high as 90 percent.
From APS News Bulletin
Record danger levels for journalists
The Committee to Protect Journalists (CPJ) has reported that more journalists were killed carrying out their professional duties in 1991 than in any other year since the formation of the committee ten years ago.
The New York based CPJ documented 66 deaths and 1,264 attacks on journalists and news media in 100 countries.
More journalists were killed in Yugoslavia than in any other country in 1991.
Nineteen were killed and two went missing and are presumed dead.
Ten journalists were killed in Colombia.
Journalists were also the targets of violence in other countries such as Pakistan, India, Togo, Sudan and the USA.
Asian booksellers look to year 2000
Christians involved in print media in the Philippines have united to form the Christian Publishers and Booksellers Association of the Philippines.
This was the principal outcome of a marketing seminar held in Quezon City recently.
The seminar brought together thirty personnel from all over the country for discussions and presentations looking at the challenge the new  millennium will bring.
Rev Kevin Engel, vice-chairperson of WACC's Asian Regional Association (WACC-AR), was the main speaker at the seminar which took place at the East Asia Pastoral Institute over three days.
In previous months two other seminars have taken place in India and Singapore addressing the same topic.
All three were initiated at the 1990 Frankfurt Bookfair Seminars where Asian participants pledged themselves to passing on what they had learnt to their colleagues.
Cecilia Ochoa of the Philippines, one of the participants of the Frankfurt meetings, played a key role in organising the Quezon City seminar, where the majority of participants were women in leadership roles.
Theology wins in Taiwan book fair
Publications on theology and religious teaching methods were bestsellers at the first ecumenical book exhibition held in Taiwan, 15–23 February.
More than forty publishing houses and institutions displayed in excess of 5,000 books, video-tapes and films at the Tien Educational Centre in Taipei.
The Republic of China branch of the International Catholic Union of the Press (UCIP-ROC) and the Protestants' Chinese Christian Literature Association organised the event.
Li-Cheng-i, a Presbyterian participant, described the exhibition as as ‘breakthrough in bringing so many people together.’
From Asia Focus, 58/154 Muang Thong 3, Project 1, Jangwattana Road, Parkkred, Nondhaburi 11120, Thailand.
Tel (2) 573 6736.
Fax (2) 574 2168
New Christian radio transmits in Russia
Eight out of ten Russian homes can now receive Christian radio programmes broadcast by the Far East Broadcasting Company (FEBC).
The new broadcasting organisation known as FEBC Russia International signed formal registration papers with the Russian government on 21 February.
Initially, a weekly 25-minute programme has been transmitted on the nationwide Radio Mayak (Lighthouse).
This network comprises more than 200 stations throughout Russia.
Arrangements have now been made with a station network in Khabarovsk to broadcast a daily 90 minute programme with the possibility of increasing airtime even further.
‘The opportunities are unbelievable,’ said Rudi Wiens, FEBC's Russian director.
FEBC are keen to provide training for Russian programme producers and have planned a programming seminar for the summer.
FEBC is the sister organisation of the UK-based Far East Broadcasting Association and broadcasts in 122 languages from 32 transmitters worldwide.
A group of Armenian broadcasters have recently sought FEBC's help with the setting up of local shortwave stations in their country.
FEBC, 2 Ashdene Close, Wimborne, Dorset BH21 1TQ, UK.
Tel (0202) 889885.
In Sri Lanka
Environmental journalists gain United Nations Global 500 award
The Sri Lanka Environmental Journalists Forum (SLEJF) has been selected by the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) to receive the Global 500 Award in recognition of its outstanding contribution to environmental reporting.
A UNEP press release said that since 1987 SLEJF has ‘trained over 350 journalists in environmental reporting and educated them and their public about a wide range of environment and development issues.’
UNEP's Executive Director, Dr Mostafa Tolba, said ‘UNEP hopes that the Global 500 awards will inspire others to do their part towards building a sustainable future’.
Mr Dharman Wickremaratne, SLEJF's Chairman, said of the award, ‘There are nearly 70 organisations worldwide working in the field of environmental journalism and communication, but we are the first to receive the Global 500 Award,’
The SLEJF is also the first NGO from Sri Lanka to be awarded this UN accolade.
Mr Wickremaratne will receive the award at a presentation ceremony during the UN Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, on World Environment Day (5 June).
SLEJF is a professional group of print and electronic media journalists working on raising public awareness of environmental issues in Sri Lanka.
It was founded five years ago as a small voluntary organisation and now has grown to a membership of 275 and a permanent secretariat with full time staff.
It publishes a monthly newspaper called Diyadama as part of its public awareness raising strategy.
The SLEJF participates in regional information exchanges and its members have attended environmental media seminars and workshops abroad.
It is a member of the World Conservation Union, the Centre for Our Common Future and the Environmental Liaison Centre International.
It is a member organisation of the Asia-Pacific Forum of Environmental Journalists (AFEJ) which was founded with help from the United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific.
The AFEJ has member organisations in 16 other countries in the region.
Dharman Wickremaratne, Sri Lanka Environmental Journalists Forum, PO Box 30, 5 Fourth Lane, Nawala, Sri Jayawardenapura, Sri Lanka.
Fax (941) 698315.
Telex (0803) 22144.
Croatia launches church news agency
Croatia is to have a church news agency with an ecumenical orientation.
The ‘Krscanska Informativna Sluzba’(Christian Information Service) will be led by the Franciscan Father Mirko Matausioc.
An Austrian organisation for the promotion of the religious media in central and eastern Europe has provided the information service with the technical assistance necessary in starting the agency.
From Informationsdienst für Lutherische Minderheitskirchen in Europa.
Malaysian government restricts use of satellite dishes to VIPs
The Telecommunications Department in Malaysia has been directed to take immediate action against anyone installing satellite dishes to receive foreign television programmes.
Heavy fines will be imposed on offenders.
The installation of satellite dishes on the roofs of many Malaysian homes has mushroomed recently.
Only VIPs and foreign diplomatic missions are given permission to utilise such dishes.
From Asian Mass Communication Bulletin.
Journal promotes democratic change in Zimbabwe
‘How democratic is Zimbabwe?’ ask the editors of The Journal on Social Change and Development, which is published three times a year in Harare.
The journal, which is supported by WACC, aims to provide a forum for discussion and debate on the reconstruction and transformation of Zimbabwe into a more democratic and socialist society.
In a hard-hitting editorial, the journal's editors challenge the effectiveness of the Zimbabwe government's new Economic Structural Adjustment Programme (ESAP) which promised to create more jobs and opportunities for ordinary people.
Journal staff recently organised an open seminar to examine the ESAP, extracting the main issues and arguments for publication in the magazine.
These include an analysis of the programme's effects on Zimbabwe's business community, working women and consumers.
An outline of the current national economic strategy is provided by the Minister of Industry and Commerce.
The journal staff organise up to three seminars a year, each dealing with an important national or international issue.
The seminars are widely publicised beforehand, and print and broadcast journalists are invited to attend.
Recent seminars have looked at the changing situation in southern Africa and the Gulf War and its effects.
Last year the journal celebrated its tenth anniversary.
Since its formation in 1981 as a non-profit making independent publication, the journal has covered important social, political and economic issues from a standpoint of critical support of government policies.
It recently opposed government moves towards the legal formation of a one-party state.
Regular features in the journal include a section entitled ‘Gender Issues’ which provides a forum for both sexes to raise their concerns about current social problems and opportunities.
An arts section looks at items of topical interest such as the rap music scene in the USA.
The journal staff work as a collective on a voluntary basis.
Their common aim is to help introduce a more just and democratic society; to bring into being the social transformation that was announced by the government as it took over the leadership of the newly independent Zimbabwe in 1980.
The staff all have additional commitments such as development education, and research at the Zimbabwe Institute of Development Studies and at the Southern African Political and Economic Series.
The Journal on Social Change and Development, PO Box 4405, Harare, Zimbabwe.
Tel (4) 700047.
Brazil's TV shuns Church
Just 0.79% of news on Brazil's four major TV networks focused on church-related issues during February this year.
Research from the Institute of Social and Economic Research (IBASE) and the Hélio Alonso School of Communication showed government, economics and sport as the most dominant topics.
Also with less than 1% coverage were the Afro-Brazilian and indigenous communities.
Among items reported less than 5% were children, women, AIDS, education, and civil organisations.
From Latin American Ecumenical News
The decade of solidarity
How has it affected women's lives?
How far has the Ecumenical Decade of the Churches in Solidarity with women affected the life of the churches and the ecumenical movement in general?
This was one of the questions raised during the Worldwide Anglican Encounter in Bahía, Brazil (29 March — 3 April), which brought together some 600 women from 47 countries.
Several bishops and priests also attended the Encounter, which was the first of its kind.
Although the Ecumenical Decade was launched by the World Council of Churches four years ago, many women feel that the churches have failed to take it seriously and have shown little commitment to the theme.
‘It must be said that many Christian men still have a hard time seeing women's issues as their issues too,’ said Bishop Edmond Browning, Anglican Primate in the USA.
‘Perhaps it does not come naturally to us.
We will have to learn,’ he added.
Despite their frustrations, the participants felt that this Encounter was an important step forward.
The Anglican Communion is the first group to organise an event involving women theologians, pastors and representatives of community groups.
They covered a wide range of themes including racism, sexual discrimination, feminist theology, liberation theology and violence against women.
Participants also discussed the churches' commitment to marginalised women and the theme of the 500th anniversary of the colonisation of the Americas.
As members of WACC, we should be alert to all these issues.
The theme ‘Women's Perspectives’ is an integral part of WACC's programme of activities.
But please!
This should not be left to women communicators alone; our male counterparts also have an important part to play.
Report filed by Dafne Sabanés de Plou from Bahía.
She is President of WACC's Latin American/Caribbean Regional Association.
Books & Resources
Visuals aid media education
Visual Media Education is designed to meet a need in media education for easy-to-draw chalkboard materials and overhead transparency originals, says Peter McCraken the book's author.
Divided into seven chapters, the book provides simple illustrations and summaries in the following categories: The Power of the Media, People and the Media, the Press, Radio, Film, Television, and Advertising.
Copyright is waived for non-commercial educational use of the book.
Also included is a bibliography of background reading and some ideas on how best to use the book.
Visual Media Education appeared in the Visual Series published by the Trustees of the Christian Brothers.
Other titles in the series include Visual Gospel, Visual Personality, Visual Moral Questions and Visual World Religions.
Visual Media Education is available from the Chevalier Bookshop, PO Box 13, Kensington, NSW 2033, Australia.
Tel (2) 663 3417.
Opportunities for Czech film and TV
The Czechoslovakian film and television industry is the subject of a recent study published by the International Institute of Communications.
The author, Vladimir Kroupa, is Legal Advisor for the International Radio and Television Organisation and a specialist in the Czech broadcasting scene.
The survey, entitled Partners in Production: The Czechoslovakian Film and TV Industries, begins with a detailed overview of broadcasting legislation in the country, and continues with chapters on film and video distribution.
A section on television covers both state-owned and private broadcasting and programme-making, and the author also takes a look at script-writing and development.
The book includes descriptions of major film studios and selected independent production companies, with information on their activities and position in Czech and world markets.
An appendix lists the names, fax and telephone numbers of media, television and film schools and companies, and details of film and television festivals held regularly in Czechoslovakia.
Partners in Production: the Czechoslovakian Film and TV Industries is available from the International Institute of Communications, Tavistock House south, Tavistock Square, London WC1H 9L, UK.
Tel (71) 388 0671.
Fax (71) 380 0623.
Human rights database now on electronic mail
A new bibliographic database providing information on human rights has been launched by Amnesty International (AI).
The Amnesty International Database (AIDOC) is accessed by electronic mail.
It gives details of documents produced by AI since the beginning of 1988.
Once a document has been selected via AIDOC its full text can be obtained by contacting national AI offices.
Amnesty International is a worldwide voluntary movement that works to prevent human rights violations, particularly those against prisoners of conscience.
To access database E-mail:GEO2:AIDOC.
For further information contact Poptel, Soft Solution, 25 Downham Road, London N1 5AA, UK.
Tel (71) 249 2948.
Fax (71) 254 1102.
E-mail: GEO2:SUPPORT.
Women's radio network initiated
An international network of women in radio is being set up by the World Association of Community Radio Broadcasters (AMARC).
The network is aimed at permitting exchange and support between its members, thus reinforcing their initiatives for the democratisation of communication and society as a whole.
Women involved in radio are invited to participate in this venture by completing a questionnaire giving details of their interests and involvement.
Questionnaires can be obtained from, International Women's Committee, AMARC, 3575 Boulevard St-Laurent, suite 704, Montreal, Quebec, Canada H2X 2T7.
Tel (514) 982 0351.
Fax (514) 849 7129.
Advertising works for social justice
The Public Media Center (PMC) is the only fully fledged advertising agency in the USA devoted to public service issues.
Based in San Francisco, PMC has employed for more than 15 years traditional media and conventional advertising techniques in the service of social and environmental justice.
PMC sees itself as not only a creative service agency, but as a think-tank for progressive ideas and radical action.
PMC works, according to its brochure, ‘for those who fight for democratic empowerment, for environmental values, for social justice and economic fairness, for people of color, for women, for all groups historically disenfranchised.’
Among PMC's clients are Amnesty International, Oxfam America, Greenpeace and Working Group for Indigenous Peoples, Amsterdam.
For further information contact: Public Media Centre, 466 Green Street, San Francisco, CA 94133, USA.
Tel (415) 434 1403.
New bulletin puts Mexico in sight
Mexico Insight is the title of a new monthly bulletin aimed at giving a balanced view of current affairs in Mexico.
‘We want this bulletin to be informative yet agile, helpful in understanding key phenomena of Mexican reality’, say its publishers, the Interinstitutional Network.
The Interinstitutional Network is an association of 11 Mexican non-governmental organisations working in support of grassroots movements throughout Mexico.
The first issue contains a brief profile of one of the member organisations of the network, the Centre for Encounters and Dialogues, as well as general Mexican news and an examination of the 500th anniversary of Columbus' landing in America from a Mexican viewpoint.
Mexico Insight is available from Mexico Insight, Av.
Alvaro Obregón £213, 2nd floor, Col Roma, 06760 México, D.F.
Tel (5) 511 2151.
Fax (5) 511 5241.
E-mail igc:sipro.
Women organise for media development in Papua New Guinea
Papua New Guinea's media women are moving towards the year 2000 with new determination for their role as equal partners in national decision-making.
The movement follows the 1992 National Seminar on Women's Concerns in Media Education and Communication held in Port Moresby, 31 March to 3 April.
Twenty-six women from the church and secular press, radio and television agencies participated.
The Papua New Guinea Women in Media (PNGWIM) has been formed as a result of the seminar, which began with a challenge from keynote speaker Dr Rose Kekedo, a former government official now working in the private sector.
Dr Kekedo explained that progress for women has been limited in the workplace despite legislation for equal rights since independence 16 years ago.
She said that acceptance of equality among Papua New Guineans and active participation in politics can only be achieved through education.
She urged women to re-examine their roles in society and to work together to become decision-makers.
The seminar participants worked for five days in groups to analyse the representation of women in newspapers, advertising, radio and television.
The heads of national radio, TV and the editor of the national daily newspaper presented papers on their policies about the portrayal of women and women's employment by their respective media.
Participants were given the opportunity to challenge their positions in a first-ever forum with senior media managers.
PNGWIM, with Lady Nennie Tololo from Boroko as newly-elected Chairperson, hopes to compile a directory of women's groups, publish a booklet on gender issues in media education and establish contact with existing women's networks.
Also on the agenda for PNGWIM are communication training programmes, provision of scholarships and production of television and radio programmes.
Guidelines for making women visible in the national media will be developed and distributed to provincial offices and media organisations.
The WACC-sponsored seminar was organised by Sr Evangelista Nite of the National Core Group in Media Education and Anne Kerepia of the Papua New Guinea Council of Churches Women's Ecumenical Committee.
Sister Evangelista Nite, Divine Word Institute,,
People
Dr Kim Yong Bock, a close friend of WACC, has been appointed President of the Hamil Theological Seminary in Korea.
Dr Kim is well known in ecumenical circles for his commitment to justice and peace issues.
Dr Kim will be a guest speaker at a conference on Global Communication and Ethics in New York, USA, 21–23 June this year.
Cho Sung-Ho, Programme Director at Christian Broadcasting System (CBS) in Korea, has been appointed Director of CBS-Chongjin, the latest local station of the CBS network.
Mr Cho is an officer of WACC's Asia Regional Association.
Jonathan Phiri has been made the Acting Director of the Africa Literature Centre in Kitwe, Zambia.
Mr Phiri previously worked at the Mindolo Ecumenical Foundation.
He succeeds Richard Sakala who is now the Special Assistant to the President of Zambia.
Alicia Paredes, Director of the social action centre, La Semilla, in Lima, Peru, has had her work as Christian social worker in sub-urban and rural Peru  publicly recognised by the National Council of Churches of Christ in the USA.
Ms Paredes is on the Executive Committee of the Latin American/Caribbean Regional Association of WACC.
Fr Jim Franks, General Manager of Word Publishing Company of Papua New Guinea, died suddenly on 30 March.
He had worked in the country for 27 years.
In a press release issued by the country's Prime Minister, his death was described as ‘a tremendous loss for the Church, the media and Papua New Guinea.’