

Seminar on human dignity sets priorities for CentCom
The issues surrounding the 500th anniversary of the ‘evangelisation’ of Latin America will be an integral part of WACC's Central Committee meetings (CentCom) in Quito, Ecuador, 26 June — 2 July.
Respect for racial and cultural identity, the right to freedom of expression and the upholding of human dignity are vital elements of many of WACC's activities.
They are also the very elements which have often been cruelly denied to Latin America's millions of indigenous communities during the past five centuries.
The 500th anniversary provides an opportunity for indigenous and Black groups from Latin America and the Caribbean to join together to reflect on their history, and to reclaim the justice and dignity that is the right of all people.
Several indigenous groups will take part in a one-day seminar entitled ‘Communication for Human Dignity’.
The seminar will be organised by CentCom's host, the Latin American Council of Churches.
The seminar will not only set the tone for the CentCom meetings, but will also form part of a worldwide series of activities leading up to WACC's Second World Communication Congress in 1995, which will focus on the same theme.
Deciding on the date and place of the Congress will be one of the tasks facing the 26 Central Committee members, who represent communication organisations in WACC's seven regions.
Other tasks include approving WACC's project portfolio for 1993 and looking at WACC's future work in the area of cinema.
WACC-Pacific elects new chairperson
Rev Dick Avi has been elected Chairperson of WACC's Pacific Regional Association.
He was appointed by postal ballot and takes up his new responsibilities in July.
He succeeds Seru Verebalavu who resigned in order to take up the position of the region's Coordinator as part of WACC's Animation Programme (see Action number 160).
Mr Avi is an ordained minister of the United Church of Papua New Guinea and the Solomon Islands and has been involved in WACC's regional activities since the late 1970s.
He holds a Master of Theology Degree and has worked within the ecumenical movement in the Pacific for more than ten years.
Mr Avi was formerly the Principal of Rarongo Theological College in Papua New Guinea and was also General Secretary of the Melanesian Council of Churches.
Last September he was appointed General Secretary of the Pacific Conference of Churches for a five-year term.
The Pacific also has a new Treasurer.
She is Sue Coulman, the Administrative Officer of the South Pacific Association of Theological Schools.
She succeeds Fr Pat Casserly.
Rev Dick Avi, Pacific Conference of Churches, P O Box 208, Suva, Fiji.
Tel 302332.
Fax 303205.
Journalists risk their lives for the truth in Yugoslav conflict
Print and broadcast journalists from the former state of Yugoslavia, whatever their ethnic background, are in fear for their lives.
They not only face the dangers of living in a war-torn society, but also risk torture or death for wanting to tell the truth as they see it and for refusing to be a part of the various propaganda machines that are fuelling the present conflict.
The head of Sarajevo Television, Nenad Pejic, was forced to leave Yugoslavia following death threats and paramilitary raids on his Bosnian home.
His crime: to run a television service which tried not to lie.
Mr Pejic has consistently refused to broadcast propaganda for any one ethnic group.
Of six senior editors still working at the station, two are Serbs, two are Slav Muslims, and two are Croats.
Unsurprisingly, viewers in the Serb-held cities in Bosnia are no longer able to receive Sarajevo TV, but can only see the Belgrade version of reality.
The head of another television network, the all-Yugoslav TV service, has also received threats which have forced him to abandon his apartment in Sarajevo.
In addition, the justice minister of the self-proclaimed republic of Bosnia-Herzegovina has accused Yugoslav TV's editor-in-chief, Goran Milic, of being directly responsible for committing genocide on the Serbian people.
From his new hiding place in Sarajevo, Mr Milic commented: ‘That was an appeal to Serbian extremists to kill me, without further ado.’
In Serbia itself, there have also been threats.
One nationalist leader read out a list of ‘traitors’ on Belgrade  Television , mostly Serbs working for Serbian radio and TV.
All have now lost their jobs.
In Croatia there was at least one case of an apparent war execution of an ‘unsympathetic journalist’.
And in Bosnia-Herzegovina journalists continue to work in circumstances which are so threatening that most foreign correspondents covering the conflict have fled.
From reports in The Independent newspaper.
The next issue of WACC's quarterly journal Media Development will carry several articles on the role of the media in the Yugoslav conflict.
Courses & Conferences
Educational and religious video forum
The world's largest forum of educational video will take place in October this year in the Netherlands.
The World Forum of Educational and Religious Video is a meeting place for producers, distributors, and video consumers from all over the world who are involved and interested in the use of video as an educational and developmental tool.
Organised by the International Catholic Organisation for Cinema and Audiovisuals (OCIC), the Forum will be held in Driebergen, Utrecht, 19–24 October.
The Forum offers a varied programme including seminars on video production and distribution, video and the child, video language and the language of faith, local communication, and video and the opening up of Eastern Europe.
WACC will sponsor Third World participants to take part in the event.
International Catholic Organisation for Cinema and Audiovisuals, rue de l'Orme 8, B-1040 Brussels, Belgium.
Fax (2) 734 3207.
Desktop publishing in the Philippines
Claret Technologies, a division of Claretian Publications, is holding its second Desktop Publishing Seminar in Quezon City, Philippines, 1–31 August ‘92.
The seminar will cover the design, layout and production of newsletters, brochures, catalogues, parish bulletins, books and posters.
It aims to help participants to find the most effective way of publishing literature with the best visual impact at the lowest possible cost.
Claretian publications is a corporate member of WACC.
It was established in 1983 to publish books that interpret the signs of the times according to the needs and pastoral demands of the Church.
Its new division, Claret Technologies, offers computer software development services as well as training programmes.
Claret Technologies, Claretian Publications, Inc, U P Village, P O Box 4, Quezon City 1101, Philippines.
Tel (2) 9213984 local 22 and 9217429.
Fax (2) 9217429.
Masters in theology and media ethics
A new Masters Degree/Diploma in the Theology and Ethics of Communication is now offered by the Department of Ethics and Practical Theology at the University of Edinburgh, Scotland.
The study consists of a core course entitled Religion, Media and Communication, and two courses chosen from: Theology of Education, Homiletics, Theology of Worship, Sociology of Religion, and Christian Ethics.
Students will also gain hands-on experience with media organisations such as local radio and Scottish television.
The course is intended especially for media professionals, clergy and those preparing to teach communication in schools, universities and theological seminaries.
Study can be on a full-time or part-time basis, from one to three years.
For further information contact The Project Director, Professor Duncan Forrester, Faculty of Divinity, New College, Mound Place, Edinburgh EHI 2LU, UK.
Africa Literature Centre (for Journalism and Art)
seeks a DIRECTOR
Applicants should have:
A proven track record in mass communication, preferably in print media.
A strong academic background, preferably an advanced degree in a relevant discipline.
At least ten years experience at senior management level.
Applications should be sent as soon as possible to:
The Chairman, Africa Literature Centre, PO Box 21319, Kitwe, Zambia.
Fax (2) 210765.
WACC-LA/C presses for legalisation of community radio in Chile
Members of WACC's Latin American/Caribbean Regional Association (WACC-LA/C) are increasing their efforts to press for the legalisation and development of community radios throughout the region.
Their latest initiative was in Chile, where Davi Betts, Treasurer of WACC-LA/C, met with government officials to discuss aspects of the legislation concerning community radios which will soon be passed by the Senate.
Mr Betts, who works with the media group CAVE of Brazil, had been invited to Chile to coordinate a three-day workshop for community radio technicians.
The workshop was supported by WACC-LA/C and organised by the communication and education group ECO (Educación y Comunicaciones) which is a member of WACC based in Santiago.
Some 20 participants from 14 community radio stations attended the workshop, and are now waiting for the legislation which would enable them to put their new-found skills into practice.
A large number of grassroot groups are keen to see community radios fulfil their vital role of helping to develop and sustain communities in areas where people are often marginalised and denied access to media which are relevant to their needs.
Many of the initiatives to promote community radio in Chile are spearheaded by the National Association of Community Radios (ANARAP), which is supported by WACC.
Davi Betts, CAVE,,
ANARAP (Agrupación Nacional de Radio Popular),,.
From a report by Fernando Ossandón, Executive Secretary of ECO (Educación y Comunicaciones),.
BBC wins international Christian TV prize
BBC Television's documentary programme ‘Lifelines’ won the two top prizes at the 11th International Christian Television Festival held in May in Bolzano, Italy.
‘Lifelines’, which profiles a British woman who corresponded with a man on ‘Death Row’ in the USA, won both the Jury Prize and the Participants Prize from 53 other programmes presented by 17 countries.
The jury of the competition, which is organised jointly by WACC and the International Catholic Association for Radio and Television (UNDA), said: ‘This is a film of total integrity.
There is no overt preaching against the death penalty and very little mention of God or religion, yet the meaning of ‘Love thy neighbour’ infuses the whole production.’
A film depicting a universal message of love and hope by the Dutch TV company IKON won the second prize.
The third went to Sender Freies Berlin TV, whose film offers an honest observation of the problems confronting the churches and Christians in eastern Europe after the fall of communism.
It portrays a community in which the ‘wealthy’ of yesterday have become the ‘poor’and the guilty of today.
The fourth prize was awarded to Hungarian Television for a film based on the traditional Way of the Cross.
The passion of Christ is placed, without comment, alongside images of Hungary today; images of prostitution, brawls, heavy metal stars and professions of love.
Other entries from eastern Europe also attracted considerable interest.
Programmes from Poland, Hungary, Croatia, Estonia, Czechoslovakia and the former East Germany reflected the first attempts after decades of oppression to present an uncensored picture of religious life in those countries.
The Italian broadcasting corporation, RAI, hosted the festival.
For further details contact Murri Selle, Organiser of the TV Festival and Secretary of WACC's European Regional Association, Lachnerstrasse 20, 8000 Munich 19, Germany.
Tel (89) 16781315.
Fax (89) 16781323.
Latin American audiovisuals boost health care
The cholera epidemic sweeping Latin America has called attention as never before to the need for basic health care and education throughout the region.
There are many initiatives to address this need, but one organisation in particular has the advantage of ten years of experience working in health care in some 12 Latin American countries.
It is called SELARE (Latin American Secretariat for Renewal).
SELARE was created by the Roman Catholic ‘Orden Hospitalaria’ to promote health care through seminars, training courses and conferences.
It has also run a distance learning programme for 628 students in 12 countries.
In the past, most of SELARE's training materials were in print.
It has published some 28 books on different health issues and produces a quarterly magazine.
More recently it has tackled the need to overcome the problems of illiteracy and lack of education by producing a series of ten audiovisuals (slide/cassette packs) to be used in clinics and hospitals as well as in dioceses and communities throughout the region.
WACC supported the preparation and production of the audiovisuals, which cover various aspects of health care in Latin America.
Subjects include mental health, support for old people, the sick person's rights, dying with dignity, and health care in parishes and hospitals.
SELARE plans to extend its audiovisual work to include video, and hopes to produce five videos on major health issues during 1992.
The countries where SELARE is most active are Colombia, Mexico, Cuba, Costa Rica, Panama, Venezuela, Ecuador, Peru, Bolivia, Argentina, Chile and Brazil.
SELARE (Secretariado Latinoamericano de Renovación), Orden Hospitalaria de San Juan de Dios, Apdo Aéreo 8669, Bogotá, Colombia.
Tel (1) 2723436 and 2784168.
Indian theatre festival highlights plight of tribals and Dalits
A festival celebrating the indigenous culture of oppressed groups in Bihar State, Central India, has helped raise public awareness of the plight of tribal and Dalit (outcast) communities.
Bihar State is one of the poorest areas of the country and its society has often been described as ‘feudal’.
The cultural traditions of many of its tribal and Dalit inhabitants have been repressed by the onslaught of modernisation which has destroyed much of the natural and cultural environment.
The ‘Seminar cum Festival of Popular Theatre Activists and Grassroots Media Users for Social Awareness’ brought together people from the villages and cities of the Bihar region.
The festival was organised by the Ravi Bharati Institute of Communication in Patna, with support from WACC.
Jacob Srampickal, the Institute's Programme Coordinator, said the main objective of their festival was ‘to bring together rural and urban popular theatre practitioners and help them reflect on how they are using people's media for social awareness-building.’
Before the festival took place, 18 villages took part in workshops to help them identify the ways in which their dance, songs and drama could be used in raising the wider community's understanding of the life of tribal and Dalit groups.
The Institute is planning to hold similar festivals every two years.
‘What is done is only a beginning.
We have to continue the dialogue,’ Mr Srampickal added.
The Ravi Bharati Institute was founded in 1977 by Roman Catholics as an audiovisual production centre for the needs of the Church.
Due to the multi-faith, feudal nature of Bihar State, the Institute now works ecumenically with Christian and Hindu groups.
Its activities are open to all people, regardless of caste and creed, but the main beneficiaries are tribal and Dalit groups.
The Institute is involved in short-term and long-term training, in all aspects of the media, the production of audiovisuals, theatre programmes and literature.
The proceedings of the festival will be published shortly in both English and Hindi and marketed with assistance from the Indian Social Institute in Delhi.
Ravi Bharati Institute of Communication, Sadaquat Ashram PO,,.
Popular theatre is an important part of tribal and Dalit life.
A recent drama festival in Bihar, Central India, showed how it could be used to raise awareness about the region's marginalised communities.
New format wins for US church radio programme
After 47 years on the air, the ‘new’ Protestant Hour began broadcasts on about 300 radio stations across the US and on US Armed Forces Radio on 10 May.
It has already won accolades.
The new format was tested in 1991 and won the Angel Award presented by Religion in Media of Hollywood.
The Evangelical Lutheran Church in America (ELCA) accepted the award as recognition of the Protestant Hour's new format.
‘We are looking forward to the entire programme following a format the ELCA helped pioneer,’ said John L Peterson, ELCA Director for Public Media.
He said that the new format will allow for more informal discussion, capitalise on the programme's ecumenical nature and complement the message with a wider variety of Christian music.
The Protestant Hour will offer a weekly combination of inspirational messages and music from ELCA as well as from the United Methodist, Presbyterian (USA) and Episcopal churches.
The ecumenical diversity is meant to help the programme be more of an evangelism tool for the churches, said Woody Wilson, Associate Producer.
From a Religious News Service report which was printed in Lutheran World Information.
For further information contact John L Peterson, Director for Public Media, ELCA, 8765 West Higgins Road, Chicago, Illinois 60631, USA.
Mr Peterson is Chairperson of WACC's North American Regional Association.
In Ghana
Students blame media for immorality
Students in secondary schools and teacher training colleges in northern Ghana have criticised the mass media for causing student unrest and the spread of youth immorality.
‘Because of the influx of television, video, radio, newspapers, and other means of mass communication,’ they argued, ‘the world has become a global village, making it possible to carry unhealthy materials from one side to another.’
They contended that pornography, lawlessness and other social disorders have been carried from the more permissive societies of the West, via the mass media, to the countries of the Third World.
They called on parents, teachers, guardians and the youth themselves to do their best to curtail the negative influence of the mass media on their lives.
Students taking an opposing view argued that it was the usage of the media that was evil and not the media themselves.
Recent discussions at national level have examined the role of media in nation-building, and suggested that the media have failed to protect society from the negative influences of pornographic literature and film.
The students were taking part in a debate contest organised by the Ghana edition of Step Magazine, which is a corporate member of WACC, as part of activities marking the launch of the magazine in that country.
by Lawrence Darmani, Editor, Step Magazine, Ghana Edition.
Step Magazine (Ghana Edition), P O Box 11150, Accra-North, Ghana.
Pictured at the Cannes Film Festival (from left) is Gilles Jacob, Festival Director, with three members of the Ecumenical Jury: Yvan Stern of Switzerland (President of the Jury), Miguel Gleason of Mexico and Rev Carlos A Valle, WACC's General Secretary.
WACC takes part in jury at Cannes
WACC participated for the first time in the Ecumenical Jury at the 45th International Cannes Film Festival, France, in May.
WACC's General Secretary, Rev Carlos A Valle, sat on the jury alongside representatives from church-related media organisations from Germany, France, Switzerland and Mexico.
The Jury awarded its prize to the Italian film, Il Ladro di Bambini (The Child Snatcher) by Gianni Amelio.
Special mention was made of Au Pays des Juiliets by Mehdi Charef and El Viaje by Fernando Solanas.
An Ecumenical Jury has been part of the Festival for the past 19 years.
The organisations represented this year were the international Catholic organisations for radio and television (UNDA) and for cinema and audiovisuals (OCIC), Interfilm, Chrétiens Médias, Profil and WACC.
Portuguese church wins TV franchise
The Roman Catholic Church has won the franchise for Portugal's fourth TV channel.
The franchise was awarded to Televisao Independente, whose main shareholders are Radio Renacena, the Church-sponsored radio station.
The new station, Channel Four, plans to begin broadcasts in October.
The station will carry religious, as well as documentary, news and drama material and will be funded by advertising revenue.
Radio Renacena is the most widely listened to station in Portugal.
The Church hopes the TV venture will be just as popular.
Europe's Protestants challenged to find a common language
In January, Gianna Urizio was appointed part-time Animateur for WACC's European Region, with special concern for the Protestant churches in Latin Europe.
She is also working as a television producer with the Federation of Protestant Churches in Italy.
Gianna recently made her first visits as Animateur in Italy, Portugal and Spain, and she sent us her initial impressions:
I see my task as a weaver who is looking for threads to weave together.
What I found in Italy, Portugal and Spain were skeins of scattered threads of various colours, dimensions and textures.
These threads are the many Christian communication activities which are often running parallel with each other in the same country.
But the people who are running them often do not know of each other 's existence, or if they do, they find it difficult to cooperate with one another.
Naturally, I know most about my home country, Italy.
There, in addition to the Media Department of the Federation of Protestant Churches, individual Protestants are active in private broadcasting.
Lack of effective legislation has allowed thousands of radios and many TV stations to mushroom over the past ten years.
There are more than 65 local Protestant radio stations, many of which are linked through national networks.
Most of the radios are run by young people and women on a voluntary basis.
Without planning it, these radios are creating a subtle network which is offering new forms of bringing people into contact with each other and with the Christian message.
Recently, broadcasters have raised the idea of creating a Union of Protestant Radios to promote an exchange of programmes and resources, and to provide legal help where it is needed.
In Spain and Portugal the Protestant churches are an even smaller minority than in Italy.
One exception, however, is the growing number of evangelical churches, which are very active in radio and television.
I believe that WACC's animation work should encourage and help groups to share their resources and, where possible, to organise joint productions and to share resources and personnel.
But it is not easy.
In these countries the Protestant world is fragmented into main line (established) denominations and new evangelical churches.
In this regard, Latin Europe reflects the situation that exists in Latin America.
That is, within a strong Roman Catholic tradition and culture, the Protestants are divided.
This poses a challenge for Europeans to find a language that is acceptable to both traditional Protestant and evangelical traditions.
In this area, theological colleges can contribute to redefining the meaning of a Christian presence in societies which are in transition — such as Spain and Portugal.
But that is not all.
In the rapidly changing European scene, Latin Europe can perhaps break the West-East dichotomy and start to build bridges with non-European Spanish-speaking countries that share similar communication and cultural ties.
It is in this very area that European theology can start to communicate with that of Latin America, and this exchange of experiences and ideas on theology and communication can begin to inspire the different Christian traditions to look for a common language.
Gianna Urizio, Federazione delle Chiese Evangeliche in Italia, Via Firenze 38, 00184, Rome, Italy.
Tel (6) 4825120 and 483768.
Fax (6) 4828728.
Books & Resources
How to plan and produce print
IN PRINT: How to Plan, Purchase, and Produce Print breaks down the complicated publication process into an easy-to-follow, step-by-step sequence.
The book, published by Media Associates International of Illinois, USA, covers all aspects of getting text onto the printed page, from the organisation of a production office to quality control of the end product.
It is designed, say its publishers, ‘to help people who want to know how to set up a sound production office and how to make wise decisions about buying print.’
IN PRINT: How to Plan, Purchase, and Produce Print (paperback, 136 pages) by Robert L Worcester costs US $22.95 and is available from Media Associates International, 130 North Bloomingdale Road, Bloomingdale, IL 60108–1035, USA.
Tel (708) 893 1977.
Fax (708) 893 1141.
Video changes society
Creating a People's Alternative in Video is the title of a booklet aimed at helping grassroots activists to produce their own videos.
The booklet starts with a description of the socio-economic situation of the majority of the world's population, with its widespread poverty and illiteracy.
It goes on to explain how audiovisual media, and video in particular, can be used to help bring about a process of change in people's lives.
The author, Jyoti Jumani, bases this work on his own first-hand experience of teaching the use of video in community development education.
He describes video as ‘a tool to enable everyone to speak for themselves’.
Creating a People's Alternative in Video (paperback, 51 pages) is available from the Jumani Foundation, 63 Thakorbhai Towers, Veer Kinariwala Marg, Ahmedabad-380 006, India.
Tel (272) 403 832
Ecumenical news crosses Asia
The Asian Ecumenical News Service (AENS) is the only agency in the region providing church news coverage that crosses denominational boundaries.
AENS publishes a three-weekly bulletin, which it distributes to church and secular media in Asia and around the world.
The training of Christian journalists is a priority for AENS.
In its efforts to expand its network of correspondents, AENS will work with other organisations, including UCAN and the Asian Regional Association of WACC, to run journalism training workshops.
AENS does not restrict its news coverage to religious news, but also carries articles and features on matters of fundamental human concern in Asia.
It seeks to be a prophetic voice in the region and aims to encourage the Asian churches to show more solidarity with the suffering and the poor.
The idea for the news service sprang from the movement for a new world information and communication order.
The need for relevant news coverage became evident as western media continued to dominate the Asian scene.
AENS was formed in 1990, with support from WACC, in cooperation with the Union of Catholic News Service (UCAN).
AENS is based is UCAN's Hong Kong office.
Asian Ecumenical News Service, 4/F, 57 Peking Road, Kowloon, Hong Kong.
Tel 7233217.
Fax 3699895.
Telex 37618 URM HX.
Publishers launch pan-African network
The first organisation bringing together publishers from throughout the African continent has been formed in Zimbabwe.
Called the African Publishing Network (APNET), the network is primarily geared towards providing information and assistance for African publishers through the publication of a bimonthly newsletter.
The other main concern for APNET will be training, which will be carried out under the umbrella of the African Publishing Institute (API).
The API was launched at the same time as the publishing network.
In August, APNET's working plan for the API, including training requirements and course content, will be presented at the Zimbabwe International Book Fair.
APNET Administrative Committee, CODE Book House, 12 Selous Avenue, Harare, Zimbabwe.
Tel (4) 729904.
Fax (4) 729905.
Jesuits help refugees
JESCOMEA, the east Asian Jesuit communications group, plans to provide audiovisuals and technology to Cambodian refugees to prepare them for repatriation.
JESCOMEA, PO Box 4132, Manila 2800, Philippines.
Tel (2) 521 9392.
Telex 75227574 JLP PH.
From Asia Focus
Gemini news marks 25 years
Gemini News Service began 25 years ago to help improve the flow of news reports between Commonwealth countries.
Soon after its launch, it extended its services beyond the Commonwealth and now stories are published in over 70 countries.
Gemini's aim was to ‘decolonise’ world news and to provide an alternative to reports written by western journalists for western readers.
In recent years, it has supplemented its news service with training schemes for journalists from all regions of the world.
‘Our correspondents write from long experience,’ states a Gemini press release.
‘They are not on quick visits to world hotspots.
Before headlines appear, and after they have faded, our writers are still there, monitoring events through the eyes of the people involved.’
Run by a staff of six from an office in London, UK, Gemini sends some 12 news-features a week to newspapers and magazines around the world.
The articles are accompanied by illustrations and graphics.
Gemini's service is now also available through electronic mail.
Gemini News Service, 9 White Lion Street, London N1 9PD.
Tel (71) 833 4141.
Fax (71) 837 5118.
Telex 262433 MONREF G.
E-mail links children in 40 countries
In May a two-day international discussion held on the electronic mail networks linked thousands of children from around the world.
The dialogue, entitled ‘KIDS-92’, was organised by KIDLINK, an international organisation concerned to establish communication between children worldwide.
The KIDLINK network connects children aged from 10 to 15 years living in some 40 countries, including Argentina, Brazil, France, Israel, Japan, Norway, Russia, South Africa and the UK.
The children, via the network, are able to learn about one another and develop their understanding of global issues through their exchange of messages on the system.
There are seven discussion lists on the network including RESPONSE where a child makes her or his first introductory contact, and KIDCAFE and KIDACT where the discussion and dialogue occur.
Although adults are involved with the organisation of the network, for the most part, the dialogue between the children is entirely without adult supervision.
It is the children who decide what they will communicate about.
KIDLINK is facilitated by professionals working in education at all levels, most of whom are specialists in information technology.
They see KIDLINK as a project to prepare the next generation in the use of the new technology.
A current priority for KIDLINK, initiated by the children, is to work towards making the network more globally representative, particularly to involve children from the world's Islamic communities.
A newsletter is regularly produced including excerpts from the electronic messages received and sent by children using the network.
Use of the network is free apart from the charge involved in linking with the nearest KIDLINK network ‘node’.
Mike Burleigh, UK Director KIDLINK, Oldfield House School,,.
Asian news service moves to Bombay
The SAR (South Asian Religious) News service has officially inaugurated its new offices in Bombay, India, after moving last year from New Delhi.
SAR News is a weekly news bulletin covering religious news and current affairs in Bangladesh, Bhutan, Maldives, Nepal and the Indian subcontinent.
As well as news and features from South Asia, SAR News includes a section with a global perspective.
The most recent issue includes a piece on the plight of Sudanese refugees and an examination of an anti-racism initiative from the USA.
The news service was established in 1981 by the Indian Catholic Press Association to help meet the information needs of the Christian community of South Asia.
SAR News,,.
Australians move against media discrimination
The Australian government has made it easier to take action against the discrimination and demeaning of women by the country's media.
The National Working Party on the Portrayal of Women in the Media has produced an easy-to-follow guide, called Media Complaints, on how best to make complaints about any material in the press, on TV and radio.
Although advertisers, newspaper publishers, and TV and radio stations in Australia agree to voluntary codes of standards and ethics, concerns are still expressed about the way in which women are depicted.
The National Working Party was set up by the federal government in 1988 to encourage the fair and accurate portrayal of women in the media.
Office of the Status of Women, Department of the Prime Minister and Cabinet, 3–5 National Circuit, Barton ACT 2, Australia.
Zairean church news presses on
The Church of Christ in Zaire (Eglise du Christ au Zaire) is still publishing its information sheet, despite the communication and print problems affecting the country.
The Church circulates its monthly bulletin, entitled Documentation et Informations Protestantes (Protestant Documentation and Information) both within and outside Zaire.
A recent edition carries a joint statement from the Christian and Islamic communities urging the people of Zaire to join together in an act of reconciliation and to support the democratic process which has been undermined so severely since January this year.
Along with topics of national importance, the information sheet publishes news of seminars and different activities organised by the Church.
It also carries items of religious news from around the world.
The Church of Christ in Zaire is a corporate member of WACC.
Eglise du Christ au Zaire, Service d'Information, B P 4938, Kinshasa-Gombe, Zaire.
Guide to aid for development
The Mission Project Service has just published its latest guide to agencies providing support to small, church-related projects in developing countries.
Agencies for Development Assistance provides profiles of international donor agencies as well as guidelines on how to submit support proposals to them.
In addition to address details, each profile includes the type of aid given, fields of interest, and details of application procedure.
WACC is included in the book.
The Mission Project Service is a church-sponsored, non-profit organisation which offers free information and consultation to the leaders of small-scale, development initiatives.
The Service has also published a comprehensive guide to project design and support proposal preparation called the Proposal Writing Workshop.
Agencies for Development Assistance (paperback, 224 pages) costs US $50.00 (including post and packing) and is available from Mission Project Service, 1 Haven Plaza £25A, New York, NY 10009, USA.
Tel (212) 533 6286.
UK's Catholic training centre starts with media awareness
‘Awareness first, training later’ could be Angela Salt's motto since she joined the UK's Catholic Communications Centre (CCC) last September as Director of Training.
Her main task was to organise courses in communication skills, but she soon found that more of her job was about creating the climate of media awareness in the Catholic Church.
‘I think we are two or three steps back from organising training schemes.
First we need to create the awareness that we need the training,’ she says.
The CCC was set up in June 1990 as successor to the audiovisual training centre, Hatch End, which ran courses mainly for Third World students.
The demand for courses had declined dramatically as more facilities became available in Third World countries.
Angela describes herself as ‘a mobile Hatch End’, but adds that the philosophy has changed radically, with a new emphasis on local, tailor-made training in the UK.
‘I think training should be based around a community or project need, rather than take the form of a general training session.
People identify their own needs and then we organise a course with them,’ she explains.
Angela has set up four regional training bases around the UK where she can draw on local church-related and BBC contacts to assist with training.
These bases reflect the ecumenical nature of her work.
In London, for example, she works with the Church of England's radio studio and in Litchfield, courses are often run with the help of an Anglican training officer at a local radio outside broadcasting studio.
The two other bases are Trinity and All Saints College in Leeds and Blackburn College.
Prior to joining the CCC, Angela taught both theology and media studies at a school in northern England and worked on local BBC radio for six years.
She also enjoyed taking on occasional press and public relations assignments, and brings that experience to her present work.
An important part of Angela's work is to organise ‘diocesan days’.
The day would typically begin with a discussion on internal communications, followed by a talk given by someone in the diocese who is involved in the media.
The day is aimed to build an awareness of communication and its uses.
In subsequent weeks, Angela would follow up by encouraging parish communication teams to work on newsletters, leaflets and other forms of media.
In addition to running courses, she responds to individual requests for advice and consultancy on various aspects of media work, such as how to approach the press and how to run effective publicity campaigns.
She also gets involved in occasional interviews and media productions.
The most recent production was a four-minute cassette that she recorded on behalf of the Church Urban Fund for use in some 80 local radio stations.
Angela works closely with Dr Jim McDonnell, the Director of the Catholic Communications Centre.
He overseas the centre's three main areas of responsibility: policy, production and training.
He also supervises a media technician who visits the centre twice a week to respond to requests from overseas for technical advice and consultancy.
Dr McDonnell previously worked with the Centre for the Study of Communication and Culture in north London.
Angela Salt, Director of Training, Catholic Communications Centre, 39 Eccleston Square, London SW1V 1PD, UK.
Tel (71) 2338196.
Fax (71) 6305166.
E-mail: Geo 2: CATHCOM.
People
Fr Vince Ohlinger SVD has been appointed the new General Manager of Word Publishing Company in Papua New Guinea.
He succeeds Fr Jim Franks SVD who died suddenly at the end of March.
Formerly the financial controller at Word, Fr Ohlinger will be responsible for the overall operation of the company which publishes The Times of PNG, Wantok, Weekend Sports and PNG Business.
Word Publishing Company is a corporate member of WACC.
Rev Bernard Spong has been appointed Head of Communication for the South African Council of Churches (SACC).
He has held the position on a part-time basis for the past few months.
Mr Spong is currently overseeing the closure of the Interchurch Media Programme (IMP), which he helped to found in 1977.
The next issue of Action will carry more information on the closure of IMP and the growth of the media programmes it has launched over the past 15 years.
Knud Jørgenson is the new Director for Information at Norwegian Church Aid.
Mr Jørgenson is experienced in radio journalism and is a former Director of the International Mass Media Institute in Norway.
He also worked for several years with the Lutheran World Federation.
He succeeds Thor Ullerø who is now working with the World Bank in Paris.
Satyajit Ray, the renowned India film maker, died in Calcutta on 23 April.
He had been at the forefront of Indian film-making for more than forty years and his work has received international acclaim.
In March this year the film industry in the USA awarded him a special Oscar for his outstanding contribution to world cinema.
María José Pérez has joined WACC staff as Project Assistant on the Latin America/Caribbean desk.
There are now two project assistants on this desk in recognition of the increased activities in the Region.
The other assistant is Tita Aguirre.
María José was born in Madrid, Spain, and studied Spanish Law at Madrid University.
This summer she will complete a part-time Diploma in International Relations at Birkbeck College, London.