

CHAPTER ONE
THE NATURE OF JUDICIAL REVIEW
Introduction
This book is chiefly about checking and control of governmental activities and the redress of grievances against government.
Another way of putting this is to say that we are concerned with techniques for holding government accountable for what it does.
But it should be said at the outset that none of the terms ‘check’, ‘control’ or ‘render accountable’has a single clear meaning: there are several ways of checking and controlling and several types of accountability.
This book concentrates on legal control by the courts, but the role and significance of judicial control cannot properly be understood without examining its relationship to alternative methods of control; and so, in Part V, certain non-judicial controls will also be considered.
Although the focus will be on control of governmental activities, the definition of this term is by no means a straightforward matter, as we will see in Chapter Two.
Three other important limits on the scope of this book should be noted.
First, it is mainly concerned with English law and with English governmental, legal and political institutions: despite the fact that in constitutional and governmental terms the United Kingdom is, for many purposes, a single unit, there are respects in which Scotland and Northern Ireland deserve separate treatment which they will not receive.
On the other hand, it is impossible to give a full account of English law without discussing the impact of European Community law, and this will receive attention at various points.
Secondly, this book is primarily about constitutional and administrative law and about governmental institutions .
But it should constantly be borne in mind that law and institutions only provide a framework for human activity and, in particular, for political activity.
The reader should resist the temptation to think of the law as a closed set of rules and principles, and should strive to see it as a setting in which the business of politics and government is carried on.
Thirdly, it should always be remembered that control is a negative and parasitic activity.
What citizens expect above all of governments is that they should achieve desirable ends.
Laws and institutions primarily provide governments with one (but not the only) means for achieving such ends; their function as tools for controlling government activity is only secondary.
This positive facilitating function should not be lost sight of in our study of the negative controlling function.
And just as laws and institutions are not the only means of controlling governments, so too they are not the only means available to governments for achieving their policy goals.
This point should become clearer as you read this book.
Our focus, then, is on legal control of government by the courts.
This takes two forms: government officials and bodies, like citizens, are liable to be sued for torts, breaches of contract, breaches of trust, and so on.
The main heads of government liability are dealt with in Part II.
But many of the activities of government are also subject to what is called ‘judicial review’, which is the subject of Part I. Both of these forms of judicial control are basically retrospective — they are concerned primarily with cure (dispute resolution), not prevention (dispute avoidance); but prospective methods of regulating (that is, controlling) government activities will also receive some discussion.
On the basis that prevention is better than cure, retrospective methods of control should be seen as having a secondary, although not unimportant, role.
Judicial control can also be described as ‘external’ control.
In many ways, external control is much less important than ‘internal’ or ‘self-imposed’control.
It is preferable for government, by training civil servants properly, by using sound management techniques, by carefully specifying the tasks to be performed by its employees and by monitoring their performance, to prevent the sorts of errors and mistakes which judicial control deals with after the event.
In this context, too, it is important to realize that law plays only a relatively minor role in regulating the exercise of government functions.
Nearly all of the techniques considered in this book for controlling government and redressing grievances are formal and institutionalized.
In one sense this presents a misleading picture because only a small fraction of complaints against government is handled through such channels.
Many more are dealt with (often much more cheaply and quickly) by direct, informal complaint to the official, department or body concerned by the aggrieved citizen, or by some body on his or her behalf such as an MP, local councillor, union, pressure or interest group, or other voluntary organization.
But the techniques discussed in this book are more important than the frequency of their use would suggest, for a number of reasons.
First, because formal institutionalized procedures generally attract more publicity than informal ones, the outcome of individual cases can influence the outcome of a large number of other complaints (or potential complaints).
Secondly, decisions about the legality or propriety of past administrative action may influence the way administrators deal with similar cases in the future; and the threat of publicity may contribute further to the deterrent effect of formal complaints procedures.
Thirdly, the respect in which the courts are held gives their decisions an influence out of proportion to the number of cases they deal with.
Fourthly, because decisions of the courts are often elaborately reasoned and reported in law reports, they are crucially important in developing the concepts and rules of common law which define the limits of lawful administrative action.
The courts do not hear a large number of cases, but they are the major source, apart from Parliament, of the legal rules governing administrative action.
Legal rules are a very important part of the ‘instructions’ according to which administrators exercise their powers.
Legal rules are not the whole of the instructions — departmental policy guidelines, for example, play a large part — but legal rules are of considerable importance because they are binding and authoritative.
Writers on administrative law are not all in agreement about the best way of approaching the study of the legal control of administrative action.
Some people think that the law of judicial review cannot be properly understood unless it is studied against the background of a particular area of governmental activity such as housing or immigration, in order to see how the general rules are use to deal with particular problems.
On the other hand, other people think that general rules, such as the rules of natural justice (considered in Chapter 8), which apply across the whole range of administrative activities, can usefully be examined and discussed in their own right.
An analogy can be drawn with study of the law of contract: books are written both on particular types of contract, such as contracts of agency or sale, but also on the general principles of the law of contract.
This book is based on the view that the general principles of judicial review of administrative action are worth studying.
Indeed, judicial control is relatively so rare and sporadic that there are too few court decisions relating to most areas of government activity to establish a detailed code of judge-made regulation governing those activities.
The chief importance of the cases is that they illustrate general principles.
This does not mean that the context in which the general rules operate can be ignored, and sometimes it will be crucial.
But there is much that can be usefully said about the way in which all governmental activities are controlled by law, particularly when considering the relationships between different branches of government.
One of the main assumptions underlying this book is that a sound understanding of public law generally and of legal control of government in particular, requires attention to be paid to the interaction between the different branches of government.
What is Judicial Review About?
Could a private citizen obtain a court order to prevent post office workers boycotting mail to South Africa?
Could the Greater London Council lawfully cut tube fares?
Could a taxi driver be deprived of his licence to operate at Heathrow because of misconduct, without being given a chance to put his side of the story?
Could the Secretary of State for Education force a local authority to go ahead with its predecessor council's plan to ‘comprehensivize’ schools in its area?
Could parents force a local authority to keep schools open during a strike of ancillary workers?
When is the Home Office entitled to change policy guidelines concerning the release of prisoners on licence or the admission to Britain of immigrant children wanted for adoption here?
Could the government ban union membership amongst civil servants working at its intelligence headquarters without consulting union leaders?
Could Spanish owners of fishing vessels force the government to allow the vessels to fish in British waters pending a decision as to whether they were entitled to do so under European Community law?
Could campaigners for the preservation of the remains of Shakespeare's Rose theatre challenge a decision to register the remains as a national monument?
Could the government lawfully ban transmission of the voices of members of terrorist organizations?
These are just a few of the issues which arose in cases involving judicial review which will be discussed in this book.
They show how diverse and important are the matters with which the rules and principles of judicial review deal.
Many judicial review cases concern situations of immediate importance to ordinary people — whether the Home Office could prevent people buying a new TV licence before their current one had expired in order to avoid a licence fee increase; whether an immigrant will be allowed to enter Britain or will be sent back whence he or she came; whether a landowner will be allowed to build on his or her land.
But many cases also raise constitutional and political issues of the most fundamental importance.
Take the case about cheap fares on the London Underground.
Was the Greater London Council entitled to cut fares and subsidize travellers out of rate revenue and central government grants?
Among the issues raised by this case were how the court was to go about deciding exactly what powers Parliament had intended to give to the GLC in relation to London Transport; whether the GLC owed a duty to its ratepayers not to spend the rates on large subsidies for travellers; whether the GLC was entitled to implement its cheap fares policy just because it had been a major issue in the recent GLC elections; the extent to which central government ought to control local authority spending; whether and to what extent public transport ought to be treated as a public service or, on the other hand, as a business which has to break even or make a profit.
These questions raised not only legal points but also constitutional and political issues of great complexity.
We will discuss some of them at various points in this book.
What is Judicial Review?
The first thing to note is that there is a distinction between ‘judicial review’ which is the subject of this chapter, and the so-called ‘application for judicial review’which is dealt with in Chapter 5.
The application for judicial review is a particular (and the main) procedure by which a litigant can seek judicial review of a governmental decision.
‘Judicial review’ refers to the power of the High Court to supervise the activities of governmental bodies on the basis of rules and principles examined in Section B of this Part (which may be called principles of ‘public law’, as opposed to‘private law’).
In this sense, to ask whether a body is subject to judicial review is to ask whether its activities are subject to supervision according to rules and principles of public law.
This ‘supervisory jurisdiction’(which is ‘inherent’, that is to say, it is a jurisdiction which was assumed by the judges rather than conferred on the court by statute) is to be contrasted with ‘appellate jurisdiction’(which is possessed by a number of courts and other bodies such as appeal tribunals).
The common law never developed mechanisms for appeals as we understand them today, and all appellate powers are statutory in origin.
It is important to understand the main differences between appeal and review.
The first relates to the power of the court: in appeal proceedings the court has the power to substitute its decision on the matters in issue for that of the body appealed from.
For example, if an appeal court thinks that the victim of a motor accident has been awarded too small a sum of damages for injuries inflicted by the defendant's negligence, it can increase the award.
In review proceedings, on the other hand, the court's basic power in relation to an illegal decision is to quash it, that is, to hold it to be invalid.
If any of the matters in issue have to be decided again, this must be done by the original deciding authority and not by the supervising court.
If the authority was under a duty to make a decision on the matters in issue between the parties, this duty will revive when the decision is quashed and it will then be for the authority to make a fresh decision.
It is also open to the court, in appropriate cases, to issue an order requiring the authority to go through the decision-making process again.
Another course open to the High Court when it quashes the decision of a governmental body is to remit the matter to the agency with a direction to reconsider it in accordance with the findings of the High Court.
The difference between this and the two previous outcomes is that under this procedure the agency does not have to go through the whole decision-making process again.
For example, it might be that all the relevant facts have already been ascertained and the findings of the High Court only concern their legal significance.
In such a case a complete reconsideration of the case, including the taking of evidence and the finding of facts, would be a waste of time and money; so the court can remit the case and direct the authority to reconsider the facts in the light of the law as it has been held to be.
This procedure is different from an appeal in only a very formal sense.
On the other hand, remission would not be appropriate where, for example, the authority is found to have been biased.
Then a complete rehearing before a differently constituted body would be needed in order for justice to be seen to be done.
The second main distinction between appeal and review relates to the subject matter of the court's jurisdiction.
This distinction can be put briefly by saying that whereas an appellate court has power to decide whether the decision under appeal was ‘right or wrong’, a court exercising supervisory powers may only decide whether the decision under review was ‘legal’ or not.
If the decision is illegal it can be quashed; otherwise the court cannot (with one exception) intervene, even if it thinks the decision to be wrong in some respect.
The exception is that the High Court has power to quash a decision for ‘error of law on the face of the record’ even though such errors do not render decisions illegal.
We will discuss this exception in detail in Chapter 6.
A term which may be used to describe a decision which is liable to be quashed (whether illegal or not) is ‘invalid’.
A further complication inherent in the distinction between illegality and wrongness is that in some cases, as we will see, the fact that a decision is wrong in law or fact will render it illegal.
Discussion of the notion of illegality is also made difficult by the fact that a number of different terms are used to convey the idea of illegality.
The question of whether a decision was ‘legal or not’ is sometimes put in terms of whether it was made ‘within or without jurisdiction’or whether it is ‘intra vires or ultra vires ’(that is, literally, ‘within or beyond power’).
These last terms are widely used as acceptable synonyms for ‘legal’ and ‘illegal’respectively.
The concept of jurisdiction is much more difficult, as we will see, and its use is perhaps best avoided since acting without jurisdiction is just one example of acting illegally.
The Importance of Remedial Law
In the remainder of this section we will examine the following issues: which bodies are subject to judicial review; what sorts of decision are subject to judicial review; who can apply to have a decision judicially reviewed; what remedies are available to an applicant for judicial review; and the procedures for seeking judicial review.
The reason for discussing the availability of judicial review before discussing the grounds on which decision may be reviewed is because the law of judicial review is more ‘remedies-oriented’ than private law.
In contract or tort, for example, the first question to be asked is whether the plaintiff has suffered some legally recognized wrong at the hands of the defendant.
Only if such a wrong has been suffered is it worthwhile considering what remedy, if any, would be suitable or available.
On the other hand, it is necessary for the applicant for judicial review from the start to give at least as much attention to questions of remedies as to the question of whether the respondent has committed a legal wrong.
An applicant for judicial review may lose the case no matter how sound it might be as a matter of substantive (as opposed to remedial) law if, for example, he or she pursues the wrong procedure for seeking a remedy or does not satisfy the rules of standing (see Chapter 3).
It is worth examining briefly some of the possible explanations for this emphasis on remedial law.
The first explanation is a very basic constitutional one.
Private law primarily concerns the rights and obligations of citizens against and towards one another.
So it is clear that private citizens are the proper persons to ‘enforce’ private law.
At the other end of the scale, although in many cases it is open to private individuals to prosecute for breach of the criminal law, it is generally thought, for various reasons, that usually it is best for public prosecutors to take such action.
But when it comes to ensuring that public bodies act reasonably and within their powers, it is often felt to be much less clear how the law ought to be enforced.
Should private individuals be given a remedy through the courts; or should it, rather, be left to some public official, such as the Attorney-General, or to Parliament or an ombudsman, or to some officer or body within government itself to supervise the activities of government?
For a long time English law embodied the idea that the rights of individuals to challenge governmental action should be quite limited.
The idea that control of ‘inferior’ governmental bodies and officers by the higher echelons of government is in some way particularly desirable is reflected in the history of the so-called ‘prerogative’orders:certiorari , prohibition, and mandamus.
These remedies are called ‘prerogative’ because the function of controlling the exercise of governmental authority was initially ‘regarded as a royal prerogative’.
For this reason, all applications for prerogative orders take the form:R v. A (respondent body or officer),ex parte (on behalf of)B (the real applicant).
But this is nothing but form because the real applicant initiates the proceedings, conducts them in their entirety and bears the costs of the action.
The form does, however, serve as a reminder of our uncertainty about the extent to which private citizens are the most appropriate persons to initiate action in the courts to challenge governmental action.
This uncertainty about the proper role of litigation by private citizens is also reflected in the requirement that a litigant who applies for a prerogative order must first seek the leave of the court to do so.
The alleged function of the leave requirement is to protect public bodies from harassment by citizens bringing cases of no merit.
The respondent does not have to appear in leave proceedings.
In private law, by contrast, it is for the defendant to take action to have the plaintiff's case struck out if it is without substance.
The leave procedure focuses attention on remedies (more than on the merits of the applicant's case) because ‘leave’ is leave to apply for a remedy .
Another factor which draws attention to remedies in relation to judicial review is that all judicial review remedies are discretionary.
There are some principles upon which the discretion whether or not to award a remedy is exercised, but no public law litigant can afford to ignore the fact that usually there is no right to the remedy sought however strong his or her case may be on its merits.
CHAPTER 2
THE SCOPE OF JUDICIAL REVIEW
Public Law and Private Law
As we noted in the last chapter, to say that a decision or action is subject to judicial review is to say that it can be challenged on the basis of the rules and principles of public law which define the grounds of judicial review.
Public law can, of course, be contrasted with private law.
Private law might be defined as law regulating the relations of private persons, whether individuals, corporations, or unincorporated associations, with one another.
This definition suggests that public law in a broad sense (not confining ourselves to the law of judicial review) concerns the activities of governmental bodies, by which we mean the legislature, the departments of central government and the very large number of bodies and agencies which can be described as offshoots of these departments (these are often called ‘fringe bodies’), courts and tribunals, local government, and, perhaps, the police.
Public law regulates relations between such governmental agencies and private individuals on the one hand, and between different governmental agencies on the other.
Further, just as private law defines what is meant in law by a ‘person’, so public law is also concerned with the creation and (certain aspects of) the organization of governmental agencies.
Let us rest content for the moment with this definition of public law, and ask why a distinction is drawn between public and private law.
The obvious but not very informative reply is: because we want to subject activities of governmental agencies to a different legal regime from that which regulates the activities of private individuals.
It is possible to suggest a number of reasons for this.
First, since the government has the job of running the country it must have some functions, powers and duties which private individuals do not have; obvious examples are the waging of war and the issuing of passports.
Secondly, because of the very great power which the government can wield over its citizens, the law has traditionally imposed on governmental agencies special duties of procedural fairness (embodied in the rules of natural justice discussed in Chapter 8) which do not normally apply to dealings between private citizens.
The courts have also developed a set of rules embodied in the doctrine of ultra vires (see Section B) which impose certain limitations on the substance of governmental actions and decisions.
Thirdly, the activities of governmental agencies are often subject to forms of ‘public accountability’, notably to Parliament, to which the activities of private individuals are usually not subject.
Public accountability is particularly important in respect of activities over which the government has a monopoly and in respect of which the citizen has no choice but to deal with the government.
Fourthly, the view the courts take of their proper role when dealing with the exercise of governmental power is different from the way they view their role in relation to purely private matters.
In relation to the affairs of private citizens the courts are the primary organs for interpreting, applying, and enforcing the law.
But when they are dealing with matters involving other branches of government the courts take a more restrained view of their role.
The legislature is largely free of judicial control; and under the doctrine of ultra vires the executive enjoys a considerable degree of autonomy and immunity from judicial control.
This judicial restraint is partly a function of the doctrine of separation of powers which will be considered in Chapter 20.
A fifth reason for distinguishing between public and private law arises out of the fact that, although some of the functions of government are peculiarly governmental, not all are: governments make (and sometimes break) contracts just as private individuals do; governments own property in the same way as private citizens; governments also sometimes commit torts.
The law of contract, tort and property are central areas of private law.
Should the unmodified rules of private law apply equally to government contracts, government property, and government torts, or should there be a law of public contracts, public property, and public torts?
As we will see in Part II, the answer which the courts have given to this question is neither an unqualified ‘yes’ nor an unqualified ‘no’.
There are, for example, some ‘public law’ rules of liability in contract and tort.
The argument against having a special regime of rules to regulate the activities of government which are not peculiarly governmental was most famously put by the eminent Victorian jurist, A. V. Dicey.
In his view, it was a great strength of English law that governmental officials were subject to basically the same laws as private citizens to the extent that these covered the activities of government.
In this way the law ensured that the government was given no unfair privileges or advantages over its citizens.
An argument which pulls in the opposite direction is this: even when the government or a governmental agency is, for example, making contracts, it is doing so in some sense as representative of the citizenry at large and must bear the interests of the community as a whole constantly in mind.
It might sometimes harm the public interest to subject the government to rules designed to deal with cases in which the political responsibilities of government are not at issue.
On the other hand, the government is a very powerful institution, and in some cases there may be an argument for protecting private citizens, in their dealings with government, against the operation of this power (even in the absence of abuse) by modifying the rules which govern the citizen's dealings with other citizens when these rules are applied to dealings between citizens and government.
The distinction between public law and private law can, therefore, be used either to accord government special privileges, or to impose on it special responsibilities and duties and to subject it to special controls.
Three examples will illustrate the importance of deciding whether a particular activity ought to be regulated by public law or private law.
Take government contracting first.
As a general rule, private individuals are free to refuse to buy goods or services from a business on the ground that the business has trading links with a country which is under the control of a government of which they disapprove.
This follows from the principle that individuals are free to contract or not to contract with whomever they please.
Do (and should) government bodies enjoy the same freedom?
As we will see in Chapter 13, local authorities are generally not free to refuse to enter contracts on such ‘non-commercial’ grounds whereas under English law, central government (subject to certain constraints) does enjoy such freedom.
The basis of the freedom of central government is the idea that the contracting powers of central government are the same as the contracting powers of a private individual; and those powers are basically defined by private law.
On the other hand, the contracting powers of local authorities are derived from statute and are subject to certain ‘public law’ controls which do not restrict the contracting activities of private individuals (and central government).
Another illustration is provided by the police.
The police, of course, have extensive powers of arrest; but these powers are not unlimited.
In particular, a police officer can be sued for wrongful arrest and false imprisonment (which are forms of the tort of trespass to the person) if he or she arrests a person without a justification recognized by law.
The application of the law of tort (which is, of course, part of private law) to the police is a reflection of the fact that constitutionally police officers are not government officials but enjoy independence from the government of the day.
On the other hand, police officers are not the same as private security guards, and they enjoy powers of arrest more extensive than those possessed by ordinary citizens.
Apparently because of the public nature of policing activities, the House of Lords has held that in a tort action for false imprisonment the question of whether the police acted reasonably in arresting a person suspected of having committed an arrestable offence is to be judged according to public law principles of reasonableness.
The impact of this decision is to give the police greater freedom to arrest in the public interest and correspondingly to devalue the liberty of the individual.
It is also clear that decisions and actions of the police can be challenged by way of an application for judicial review.
As a third example, consider the case of Swain v. Law Society .
The Law Society ran a compulsory liability insurance scheme for solicitors under statutory powers.
The Society placed the insurance with commercial insurers and received commission for so doing.
It decided not to pay out the sums so received to individual solicitors as a sort of dividend but to apply them for the benefit of the profession as a whole.
Two solicitors challenged this decision but the House of Lords held that since, in administering the scheme, the Society was acting in a public capacity in the interests of all solicitors and members of the public who employed them, the legality of its decision was to be judged according to principles of public law, not private law; and so judged, what the Society had done was a proper use of its statutory powers.
The question of whether, as a matter of private law, individual solicitors were entitled to a pay-out, was irrelevant.
This discussion suggests that the question we ought to be asking is not a descriptive one — what is public law?— but a prescriptive or normative one: when ought public law rules apply; or, what is the proper scope of public law?
The fact that some of the activities and functions of governmental agencies are subject to the rules of private law shows that we cannot (contrary to the tentative definition of public law suggested earlier) answer this question solely in terms of whether we are dealing with a governmental agency.
In order to give a full account of the scope of public law it is necessary to add to the institutional criterion (are we dealing with a governmental body?) a functional criterion — was the body performing a governmental function?
But once we add this functional criterion we create a different problem: sometimes non-governmental bodies perform functions which we might consider to be governmental (or ‘public’) in nature (or, in other words, most appropriately conducted by government).
For example, professional bodies such as the Law Society or the General Medical Council perform licensing functions designed to protect the public generally against unqualified practitioners.
Another example is the City Panel on Takeovers and Mergers (which was set up informally, but as a result of prompting from central government, by major City financial institutions); it plays a central role in the regulation of company mergers and takeovers.
Many would think it quite appropriate for government to perform these regulatory functions, and if these non-governmental bodies did not perform them, government would almost certainly step in to fill the gap.
Furthermore, sometimes the government expressly delegates public administrative functions to non-governmental bodies: for example, under the Financial Services Act 1986 the Securities and Investments Board exercises a wide range of regulatory functions delegated to it by the Secretary of State; the Board of Deputies of British Jews plays an important role in policing certain Sunday Trading laws; the Wood Green Animal Shelter in North London runs the government's computerized register of fighting dogs; and the Rowntree Trust (a private charitable organization) administers the Family Fund (a public fund to assist families of severely handicapped children).
It may not be thought satisfactory to control and regulate non-governmental bodies which exercise ‘public’ functions just by applying private law rules and concepts to their activities.
Perhaps, therefore, we should say that public law ought to govern the exercise of public functions whether by governmental or non-governmental bodies.
But how are we going to decide whether a function is a public one or not?
The discussion so far might suggest the following definition: a public function is a function peculiar to government, or a function not peculiar to government the performance of which has an important impact on society at large.
This definition, however, does not enable us to say which functions are public functions, but only to give a reason why certain functions are classified as public.
In the end, the question of whether a function is a public one is a political question which may not always be answered in the same way.
This can be appreciated by considering how, in different countries and at different times, the provision of health care, housing, education and other ‘essential’ services such as electricity and transport, has been subject to varying degrees of public ownership and control.
The 1980s witnessed a significant shifting of the boundary between the public and the private sectors in many Western countries.
In Britain this shift most obviously took the form of the sale of (shares in) state-owned industries and the sale of council houses; but other manifestations of the shift included provision for the ‘contracting out’ by local authorities of various functions to private contractors and moves towards the ‘privatization’of certain types of prison facilities.
Where the shifting of assets and activities from the public to the private sector has not been possible, the government has attempted to subject public organizations (such as the National Health Service and the administrative sections of Whitehall departments) to competitive and financial pressures analogous to market pressures under which private businesses operate.
In the United States, where many fewer industries have ever been state-owned, the shift from public to private mainly took the form of reducing government regulation of activities such as air transport (‘deregulation’).
Perhaps ironically, in Britain the 1980s also saw increased government regulation of certain sectors of the economy such as the financial services ‘industry’.
Increased regulation to protect the interests of consumers was also made (politically) necessary by the privatization of state-owned monopolies such as the gas, electricity and water industries which, even after privatization, face little or no competition.
Reduced public ownership has led to increased public regulation.
The fact that activities can be shifted from the public to the private sector (and vice-versa) suggests that the classification of functions or institutions as public or private according to their intrinsic nature is not the way to decide the scope of public law.
Rather we should begin by asking why we have a distinction between public and private law.
Earlier, five reasons were suggested.
There are, as we will see, yet other reasons for the distinction.
For example, procedural reasons are discussed in Chapter 5; reasons associated with imposing liability in tort and contract are discussed in Chapters 12 and 13; and reasons associated with the free flow of information in society are considered in Chapters 15 and 16.
We should then ask whether any of these reasons are relevant to the case with which we are concerned, and classify the activity in question in such a way as to achieve the desired level and type of control.
In other words, we can only understand the difference between the public and the private by understanding the reasons for drawing the distinction.
Furthermore, it appears that the distinction is not drawn in the same way in all areas where it is used.
The reasons for which it is drawn influence the way it is drawn.
In summary, we can say that public law rules and principles (including the rules of judicial review) ought to apply to the exercise (or non-exercise) of public functions; and that public functions are functions which ought to be subject to public law controls.
This conclusion is, of course, circular.
To break the circle someone has to decide, by making a value-judgment, whether or not any particular function ought to be subject to public law.
In the context of litigation, this is done by the courts: the courts decide which activities are subject to which legal controls; and such decisions are, essentially, political decisions.
In many cases such decisions will be uncontroversial; but in marginal cases a decision whether or not to subject the performance of a particular function to public law controls may require a court to make difficult political judgments.
With this general discussion in mind, we are now in a position to consider which individuals and bodies are amenable to judicial review.
Respondents
It follows from what has just been said that the identity of the respondent is not of much importance in defining the scope of judicial review.
Since many of the functions performed by government bodies are uncontroversially public, government bodies are amenable to judicial review.
When a central government department is sued, it is usual to name the respondent as the Secretary of State who is constitutionally responsible for the conduct of the department's business; although, of course, the decision or action being challenged will more often than not have been made or done by someone other than the Secretary of State personally; and in the case of a geographically decentralized department, such as the Department of Social Security, the challenged decision or action may have originated from any one of a large number of regional offices of the department.
Occasionally the respondent is named as the department itself (for example, the Department of the Environment).
There are also a large number of agencies and bodies which are not actually part of central government departments but which are funded by central government and staffed by civil servants and which perform public functions: examples include the Equal Opportunities Commission, the Police Complaints Authority, the Monopolies and Mergers Commission and prison authorities.
Fringe bodies such as these are all amenable to judicial review.
Local authorities are statutory corporations and are sued as such regardless of which of their officials or members did the challenged act(s).
Inferior courts, such as magistrates courts, coroners courts and crown courts are amenable to judicial review, as are tribunals and tribunal-substitutes such as university and prison visitors, the Army Board and the Civil Service Appeal Board.
The administration of justice by such bodies is a public function even when all the parties to the action are non-governmental.
Although many governmental bodies owe their existence and powers to statute, it is clear that non-statutory governmental bodies may also be subject to judicial review.
So, for example, the Criminal Injuries Compensation Board (CICB) is amenable to judicial review even though it was not set up by statute and even though the Criminal Injuries Compensation Scheme (CICS), which it administers, is non-statutory.
It has also been held that non-statutory government advisory panels are subject to judicial review.
Indeed, the great offices of state were not established by statute and some, including that of the Prime Minister, still do not have a statutory basis: they were the product of organic political and constitutional growth rather than of any deliberate act of creation.
It is sometimes said of bodies such as the CICB that they owe their existence to exercises of ‘prerogative’ power, but in this context, this means the same thing as saying that the body was not set up by statute.
Statutes are only one of the means by which governments can achieve their policy objectives and there are, surprisingly, relatively few things which governments can do only with the approval of Parliament as expressed in the passing of a statute.
So, while a statute is needed to authorize the expenditure required to fund the CICS, a statute was not needed to establish or administer it.
The crucial point about the CICB was not the source of its power but the fact that the function it was performing was very similar to the (public) function performed by courts of law when they award damages in tort for personal injuries.
On the same basis, non-governmental (or ‘private’) bodies which perform public functions may be subject to judicial review.
Such private bodies (some of which are sometimes called ‘domestic tribunals’) may derive their powers from a contract: in one case, for example, it was held that a trade union had to comply with the (public law) rules of natural justice in deciding whether the dismiss a union official.
But a body may be subject to judicial review even if the powers it exercises have no identifiable legal source; so, for example, a refusal by a non-governmental, non-statutory licensing body, such as a horse-racing or boxing control body, to grant a licence to an applicant may be subject to judicial review even though it seems to be the case that before a licence is granted, no contract exists between the applicant and the licensing body.
Moreover, a body may be amenable to judicial review even if, to use a graphic phrase of Lord Donaldson MR, it ‘operates without visible means of legal support’.
So, it has been held that decisions of the City Panel on Takeovers and Mergers, which was set up neither by statute nor contract but simply by informal agreement, are subject to judicial review; so are decisions of the Advertising Standards Authority and of the Code of Practice Committee of the British Pharmaceutical Industry.
Indeed, in such cases, judicial review may be the only avenue of redress if, as is quite possible, the body did not commit any private law wrong (a tort or breach of contract or trust, for instance) in making the challenged decision.
Underlying these decisions about non-governmental bodies is an extremely important recognition of a phenomenon which is often called ‘corporatism’.
There is an enormous literature on this topic, but mostly written by political scientists and sociologists, not lawyers; and there is disagreement about what exactly the phenomenon is, largely because the term is used to refer to a variety of different arrangements.
But for our purposes we can say that corporatism involves cooperative arrangements between government and non-governmental groups or institutions under which the latter, either in return for some benefit or in order to avoid some disadvantage, agree to act in a way which will further government policy.
Some examples of such arrangements were given above as illustrations of the way in which governmental functions may be performed by non-governmental bodies.
Corporatist arrangements may be given effect to formally by statute (as in the case of the complex system of structured self-regulation established by the Financial Services Act 1986) or by contract (as in the case of the contracting out of the running of the register of fighting dogs); or they may operate purely by way of informal agreement.
Corporatist arrangements play a part in the performance of a wide range of government functions including (as we have seen) the supply of welfare services and benefits and the regulation of economic and other activity.
Corporatism in various forms has a very long history: for example, professional groups such as doctors and lawyers have regulated themselves for centuries; indeed, voluntary self-regulation is a defining characteristic of a profession and has long been used as a way of avoiding government control.
Corporatist arrangements are now extremely common; the language of ‘partnership’ between government and non-governmental bodies to achieve ‘shared policy objectives’became a cliche of political discourse in the 1980s.
To the extent that non-governmental bodies perform functions which government would have to perform if they did not, there is no good reason why such bodies should not be subject to judicial review in the same way as a government body performing equivalent functions would be.
By extending judicial review to cover such non-governmental bodies performing ‘public functions’, the courts have provided a valuable means (even if of marginal importance) of exercising legal control over the pursuit of governmental aims and policies.
This development is, I believe, traceable to the seminal case of Council of Civil Service Unions v. Minister for the Civil Service .
One of the issues in this case was whether so-called ‘prerogative powers’ of the Crown (which is another name for central government) are subject to judicial review.
Prerogative powers are non-statutory powers, and they include the power to wage war, the power to make treaties, the power to conduct foreign relations, the powers of the Attorney General to control the criminal process and the power to award honours.
The position before this case was that if a power was properly classifiable as a prerogative power, the courts could decide what the extent of the power was and whether a proper occasion for its exercise had arisen, but they could not decide whether it had been exercised reasonably or fairly.
In this respect, the law drew a clear distinction between prerogative powers and statutory powers: in relation to the latter, the basic rule is that their exercise is subject to judicial review on grounds of reasonableness and fairness.
In other words, the source of the power was important to its reviewability.
In the GCHQ case the House of Lords held that there was no general rule that prerogative powers were not subject to judicial review on grounds of reasonableness and fairness: whether any particular exercise of a prerogative power was subject to such review depended on the nature of the power in question and the circumstances in which it was exercised.
The question was whether there was any reason, based on the nature of the power or the circumstances of its exercise, why it should not be subject to review for reasonableness and fairness; in other words, was the decision or action ‘justiciable’?
The House of Lords was, no doubt, influenced by the fact that the effects of a decision can be exactly the same whether or not it is made in exercise of a statutory power.
The wider impact of this decision was to define the scope of judicial review not in terms of the source of the power being exercised but rather by reference to the functions of judicial review and its appropriateness in particular cases.
This approach opened the way for extending judicial review to the exercise of power whether conferred by statute or common law or simply by virtue of the background principle of English law which permits anything to be done which is not prohibited by law.
The fact that a power has no legal source does not render it unreviewable by the High Court if there are sound reasons for and no good reasons against such review.
It is difficult, I think, to overestimate the potential significance of this approach, and we will return to it at several points in this book.
On the other hand, it is by no means clear that all ‘corporatist arrangements’ involve the exercise of public functions by non-governmental bodies, and to the extent that they do not they remain beyond the scope of public law.
Reviewable Decisions and Acts
The Distinction between Decisions and Acts
Both decisions and acts can be invalid in a public law sense, and in this respect there is no particular reason to distinguish between them.
But the distinction between acting and deciding to act can be important from the point of view of available remedies.
If an authority has decided to do an act which is allegedly illegal but has not yet done it then, of course, the applicant will want to challenge the decision to act and to obtain an order instructing the authority not to carry out its decision.
If the authority has decided not to perform some duty the applicant will often be satisfied with an order requiring it to act.
If the authority has already acted and the act can be easily undone, the applicant can challenge the decision to act and seek an order requiring the authority to undo its action.
For example, if an authority has granted planning permission to A but building has not yet started, B might be able to get the permission revoked.
But if the authority's decision has inflicted irreparable damage on the applicant — for example, if it has pulled down his or her house in pursuance of an invalid demolition order — the remedies of public law are going to be much less satisfactory for the applicant.
Public law remedies will enable him or her to establish the illegality of the order; but, unless the applicant can take advantage of some statutory provision for compensation, he or she will have to establish an entitlement to damages in private law if the damage is to be made good by monetary compensation.
Public law remedies are not of much use to the citizen who has suffered actual injury (whether physical or economic) as opposed to one who has an intangible grievance.
We discuss in Chapter 4 whether there ought to be ‘public law’ rights to compensation.
Public Functions
We have seen that decisions and acts may be subject to judicial review if they are made or done in the exercise of public functions, whether those functions are conferred by statute or common law or neither.
We have also seen that there is no mechanical way of deciding whether a function is a public one or not.
How, then, should a court confronted with the issue go about classifying a function as public or not?
In cases where the respondent is a non-governmental body, it may be possible to ask whether there is evidence that if the respondent had not taken on the function in question, the government would have.
If so, the function may be a public one.
This was the line of reasoning adopted in the Takeover Panel case: the government had apparently made a conscious decision to encourage the setting up of a self-regulatory body, and the Panel operated against the background of a network of statutory provisions relevant to its activities.
At first sight, this approach has the advantage that the classification issue does not depend solely on a value judgment by the court about the appropriate scope of governmental activity.
But the approach is not adequate by itself: on the one hand, not all of the functions which government consciously decides to perform are public; and on the other hand, there may well be functions performed by non-governmental bodies which have not attracted government attention, encouragement or participation but which nevertheless are of public importance.
So at the end of the day it must be for the courts to decide how to classify particular functions, and this can only be done on the basis of some normative judgment about the desirable scope of judicial review.
A good illustration of this point is provided by a case in which the London Borough of Greenwich sought to challenge by judicial review the distribution by the Government of a leaflet explaining the poll tax: the Borough argued that the leaflet was inaccurate and, therefore, that its distribution was illegal.
The court decided that the leaflet was not sufficiently misleading to justify finding in the Borough's favour; but implicit in the court's decision is a further decision that the court had jurisdiction to decide the issue of legality — in other words, that the decision to distribute the leaflet was amenable to judicial review.
This aspect of the case provoked a vigorous correspondence in The Times .
Some argued, in effect, that the decision to distribute was not subject to judicial review because the distribution of information is not a public function but one which any individual is entitled to do; and distributing false information is not, as such, a wrong recognized in private law.
Against this, it was argued that government bodies which use public money to provide information to the public are under a special public law obligation to ensure that the information is accurate; and this obligation, being a public law one, was properly enforceable by judicial review.
A bald statement that the exercise of public functions may be challenged by judicial review does not, however, tell us all there is to know about the sort of decisions which are amenable to judicial review; and so now we must consider a number of distinctions which can be drawn between types of public functions.
Legislative, Administrative and Judicial Functions
The institutions of government are traditionally divided into three: the legislature, the executive (or ‘the administration’) and the judiciary.
Corresponding to this tripartite division of institutions is a tripartite classification of governmental functions: legislative, administrative, and judicial.
Legislation might be defined as the making of general rules to govern future conduct; under this definition, Public Acts of Parliament are the central case of legislation.
Administration is considerably more difficult to define briefly, but for our purposes may be taken to mean the application of general rules to particular cases by the making of some order (for example, a demolition order), or some decision (for example , that an immigrant's entry certificate was obtained by fraud in contravention of some statutory regulation), or by performing some action (for example , making a payment of social security benefit).
The central case of the judicial function is the final and binding resolution of bipartite (i.e. two-party) disputes as to facts, or as to the existence or scope of legal rights or duties, by means of finding facts, deciding what the law is and applying the law to the facts.
None of these definitions is entirely straightforward because borderline cases can easily be found.
For example, Private Acts of Parliament are treated as legislation even though they may regulate the conduct of only a single individual; on the other hand, an ‘administrative order’ affecting a large number of people may be difficult to distinguish from as legislative act.
Again, it is not easy to be dogmatic in answer to the question whether a court is exercising a judicial function when it entertains a reference from the Attorney-General as to what the law is on a particular point.
Another complication arises from the fact that the same term may have different meanings in different contexts.
For example, the definition of the judicial function may vary according to whether we are concerned with rules about contempt of court, absolute privilege in the law of defamation, judicial immunity from actions in tort, or the applicability of the rules of natural justice.
Because of these difficulties, the law should avoid allowing too much to turn on these distinctions.
However, despite the complications, each of these types of function has a relatively clear central core, and the distinction between them is of importance in several areas of administrative law.
It should be noted, however, that it is by no means true that each function is performed only by the branch of government with the corresponding name.
In particular, the executive exercises all three types of function.
For example, a great deal of legislation is made by Ministers under statutory powers delegated by Parliament.
Another point to note is that, at certain times in the history of administrative law, a distinction has been drawn between ‘judicial’ and ‘quasi-judicial’functions.
The distinction was drawn in the following terms: both types of function involved the resolution of a dispute, but whereas the former involved resolution by recourse to law, the latter allowed and often required recourse to considerations of public policy.
Quasi-judicial functions, it was thought, were best committed to politically responsible Ministers rather than to courts because ultimately the required decision had to be made on policy grounds.
This distinction was heavily criticized, chiefly on the ground that courts, when exercising judicial functions, often cannot resolve a dispute simply by applying the law but must sometimes exercise discretion on policy grounds to fill gaps in the law; so the need to have recourse to policy was no reason not to commit a decision to a body which would deal with it in a fully ‘judicial’ way.
This criticism is part of a wider attack on the use of classification of functions as a criterion for deciding issues such as the availability of judicial remedies to control administrative action (the remedy of certiorari was at one time said to be available only if the decision-maker was under a duty to act ‘judicially’), or the applicability of the rules of natural justice in particular circumstances (sometimes said to apply only to ‘judicial functions’).
Classification of functions fell into disrepute because the classifications were often applied mechanically and without it being asked whether judicial review ought to be available, or whether the rules of natural justice ought to apply as a matter of fairness or policy.
A turning-point came in the case of Ridge v. Baldwin in which it was held that the distinction between administrative and judicial functions was of no relevance to deciding whether a decision-maker ought to comply with the rules of natural justice or to the availability of judicial review remedies.
The important thing was not whether the decision-maker was performing a judicial or an administrative function but whether the decision made affected the rights of those subject to it.
As we will see in Chapter 8, the judicial/administrative distinction has not been completely removed from the law of natural justice.
So far as the availability of judicial review (remedies) is concerned, the distinction was used in cases decided after Ridge to provide a basis for denying, for example, that disciplinary decisions of prison governors (as opposed to boards of prison visitors) were subject to judicial review.
But the House of Lords has since made it clear that the scope of judicial review does not depend on any distinction between judicial and administrative functions but on whether the challenged decision affects the applicant's rights or legitimate expectations and on arguments about the suitability and propriety of judicial review in the circumstances of the case.
Not only may judicial and administrative functions be subject to judicial review, but so also may legislative (or ‘rule-making’) functions.
The major limitation relevant here is that Parliamentary (or ‘primary’) legislation (that is, ‘statutes’) cannot, because of the doctrine of Parliamentary supremacy, be challenged in a court of law except on the ground that it is inconsistent the European Community law.
But rule-making by bodies other than Parliament may be subject to judicial review on a number of grounds, as we will see in due course.
Reviewable rules can be usefully divided into a number of categories.
First, there are statutory instruments which are subject to the provisions of the Statutory Instruments Act 1946.
To be so subject, the rules must meet the definition of a ‘statutory instrument’ contained in s.1 of the Act.
All such rules are made either by a Minister or the Queen-in-Council in exercise of powers conferred by statute, and they must normally be published.
Commonly the statute under which particular rules are made provides that they must be laid before Parliament and, in many cases, approved (or, at least, not disapproved) by one or both Houses; the 1946 Act regulates the procedure for laying.
Secondly, there are statutory instruments and other legislative documents made in exercise of statutory powers to make rules, but which are not subject to the 1946 Act.
This category includes what is sometimes called ‘sub-delegated legislation’, that is rules made by B in exercise of a power to make rules conferred by statute on A and delegated by A to B in exercise of an express or implied power to delegate.
Also included in this category are local authority byelaws.
Instruments in this category may be (but equally may not be) subject to a statutory requirement of laying before Parliament or publication or both contained in the statute conferring the power to make rules.
Thirdly, there are rules made by governmental bodies but not in exercise of any statutory or common law (or ‘prerogative’) power to make rules.
Such rules go by a variety of names: ‘quasi-legislation’, ‘administrative rules’, ‘administrative guidelines’, ‘circulars’, ‘informal rules’, ‘codes of practice’ and so on.
Such rules do not have to be, and are often not, published, and they do not have to be laid before or approved by Parliament.
The constitutional and legal status of many such rules is a matter of controversy.
Take ‘extra-statutory tax concessions’, for example.
These are non-statutory rules made by the Inland Revenue stipulating when full tax liability will not be enforced.
Now, there is a basic constitutional principle, embodied in the Bill of Rights of 1688/9, that the levying of taxes must be authorized by statute, and so there is an argument for saying that non-statutory rules made by the Revenue which effectively determine a taxpayer's liability to tax are ‘unconstitutional’.
On the other hand, it has been recognized that such concessions can, if applied fairly and without discrimination, aid the efficient administration of the tax system.
A different criticism is that non-statutory rules are undesirable if they are used as a substitute for legislation to achieve ends which might encounter political opposition in Parliament.
Nevertheless, the courts have recognized the value of informal rules in a variety of contexts, and it is now quite clear that such rules may be subject to judicial review on a number of grounds (as we will see in due course).
The decision in the GCHQ case which was discussed earlier, by focussing attention away from the sources of government power to its nature and effect, has arguably assisted the extension of judicial review to cover rules which ‘lack any visible means of legal support’.
Fourthly, there are rules made by non-governmental bodies which exercise public functions but enjoy no statutory or common law power to make rules to regulate the conduct of members of the public.
Such rules, too, may be subject to judicial review even if both the rules themselves and the body making them ‘lack any visible means of legal support’.
It is sometimes said that rules in the last two categories ‘lack the force of law’, that is, they are not enforceable in a court.
But this statement is an oversimplification: the phrase ‘having the force of law’ has no precise meaning but is an amalgam of features which different rules may possess to a greater or lesser extent.
For example, although the Immigration Rules (which fall into the second category) have statutory backing, there is considerable doubt about the extent to which departure from them renders decisions liable to be quashed.
Again, it has been held that the Prison rules are merely ‘regulatory’ and that breach of them cannot give rise to a cause of action for damages although it may found an application for judicial review.
In fact, the legal force of any particular rule depends partly on the source of its authority (essentially, whether it is supported by statute or not); partly on the way it is drafted (rules which are drafted in precise technical language are more likely to be given some legal force than are rules drafted loosely and non-technically); and partly on its contents.
Powers and Duties
Another way of classifying reviewable functions is into the categories of powers and duties.
In this context, the word ‘power’ is used in three senses.
First, to say that a body has a (legal) power to do X may mean that it is (legally) entitled to do it.
In this sense there is nothing wrong with saying that a body has both the (legal) power and a (legal) duty to do X because, of course, if a body by law must do X, then it is legally entitled to do X. Secondly, we need to distinguish between legal powers and what we might call ‘de facto ’ powers.
Legal powers derive either from statute or from common law: the legislature and the courts are the only sources of law recognized in the English legal system.
If a body has a legal power to do X, it has authority to do it.
By contrast, a body may have the ability to do X without having legal authority to do it: the doing of X may lack visible means of legal support.
Ability without legal authority is de facto power.
As we have already seen, the exercise of de facto power may be subject to judicial review.
So far as ordinary citizens and non-governmental bodies are concerned, the background principle of English law is that a person or body may do anything which the law does not prohibit.
In some respects, governmental bodies enjoy the same freedom of action.
For example, in Malone v. Metropolitan Police Commissioner it was held that since there was no law against telephone tapping and it did not amount to any common law wrong, it was not unlawful for the police to engage in it.
Again, central government appears to enjoy freedom to make contracts as extensive as that enjoyed by private individuals.
But in other respects, government bodies are more restricted.
For example, taxes may not be levied and public money may not be expended without the authority of an Act of Parliament; an individual may not be deprived of personal liberty without positive legal authority; private property may not be seized or searched by government except with legal authority.
But there is no identifiable general principle determining which acts of government require positive legal authorization in order to be lawful.
It should be noted, too, that government conduct can be authorized by ‘prerogative’ powers which depend for their existence on recognition by the courts.
It is now accepted that new prerogative powers cannot be created, but the scope of many established prerogative powers is unclear.
If a court feels that a particular act which is not authorized by statute requires positive legal authorization, it may be able to achieve this by extending an existing prerogative power into a new area.
The third meaning of the word ‘power’ is ‘discretion’.
The concept of discretion is a complex one, but for our purposes we can say that the essence of a discretion is choice .
In this sense of the word, a body cannot have both a power and a duty in respect of the same action.
A duty is something black and white: once we know what it is that a body has a duty to do and what it actually did, we can say either that the authority has performed its duty or that it has not.
Furthermore, it is not for the duty-bearer to decide what action the duty requires; some other (superior) body, will decide exactly what the body has to do.
Discretionary powers are quite different.
They give the power-holder a choice.
That choice is not unlimited, as we will see: it is limited in accordance with the doctrine of ultra vires .
But, within the limits laid down by that doctrine, it is for the power-holder to decide what to do.
Failure to act in a particular way will not be an abuse of power unless the decision not to act in that way is beyond the limits of the discretion given to the power-holder.
The discretion given to a power-holder may relate to one or more aspects of an activity.
It may be a choice as to whether to do X or not, or as to whether to do X, Y, or Z or as to how or when to do X.
However, the distinction between discretions and duties is not so clear in practice as it is in theory.
As we have seen, the notion of a duty entails that someone other than the duty-bearer must decide what action the duty requires.
Sometimes the legislature does this when it imposes the duty by couching the duty in very clear, concrete, and specific terms.
But many statutory duties are couched in quite vague terms which leave it unclear what the duty-bearer must do in concrete situations.
For example, if a local authority has a duty to cause streets in its area to be ‘sufficiently lit’, how many lights does this require it to install?
Or, if it has a duty to maintain the highway, does this require it to clear snow and ice from every road and path in its area?
The question in such cases will be whether the duty requires the authority to do what the plaintiff alleges it ought to do.
Courts are not always happy about deciding what vaguely-worded public duties require to be done.
The reason for this is related to the way the courts view their role in controlling government.
Sometimes the question of what a public authority ought to have done in performance of its duties will be politically or morally contentious, and the court would prefer not to have to pronounce on the issue.
Where the duty is a broadly framed one (for example, the duty of local authorities under section 8 of the Education Act 1944 to provide sufficient schools), a way of getting around this problem is to interpret the duty as an amalgam of mandatory and discretionary elements.
Local authorities are under a duty to provide a minimum of educational facilities and the courts will decide what this minimum is.
But beyond that minimum they will leave it to the authority to decide what to provide, especially if the decision raises difficult political issues.
For example, in Meade v. Haringey LBC the issue was whether the council had breached its duty by closing its schools during a strike of ancillary workers.
The court said that the decision whether to close the schools was within the area of discretion left to the authority.
This technique of interpreting a duty as coupled with a discretion, although strictly illogical (how can a duty be discretionary?), is a useful device to enable courts to keep out of contentious areas.
Statute, Prerogative and Justiciability
As noted above, some prerogative powers are considered unsuitable for judicial review.
Examples given by Lord Roskill in the GCHQ case were ‘those relating to the making of treaties, the defence of the realm, the prerogative of mercy, the grant of honours, the dissolution of Parliament and the appointment of ministers’.
Another is the power of the Attorney General to ‘lend his or her name to relator proceedings’.
Nor can the grounds on which payments of ex gratia compensation are made or refused be questioned in a court, unless criteria for the payment of such compensation are published.
On the other hand, it has been held that the power to issue passports can be questioned in a court, unless, for example, the particular case involves matters of national security.
Also reviewable are decisions of prosecuting authorities whether or not to institute proceedings, although the available grounds of review may be limited.
It is clear, too, that the exercise of statutory powers (and the performance of statutory duties) might be unreviewable in a court if the particular case raised issues, such as matters of national security, which were considered unsuitable for judicial review.
As we have already seen, the source of a power does not determine its reviewability.
Decisions and acts which are unreviewable in a court are sometimes called ‘non-justiciable’.
The idea of non-justiciability is a complex one, but may be said to involve an amalgam of several related ideas.
The first concerns what might (following American terminology) be called ‘political questions’: because courts are neither representative bodies nor responsible to the electorate, they should not pronounce on the reasonableness of decisions which raise issues of ‘high policy’.
So, for example, the duty of the Secretary of State for Health under the National Health Service Act 1946 to promote the establishment of a comprehensive health service is, no doubt , non-justiciable: this duty could be enforced, if at all , only by the political process.
This example also illustrates a second idea which is sometimes referred to as ‘polycentricity’.
This concept was worked out in detail by the American jurist Lon Fuller in a famous article first written in 1957 but not published widely until 1978.
A polycentric issue is one which involves a large number of interlocking and interacting interests and considerations.
Fuller gave several examples of polycentric problems: how to divide between two art galleries in equal shares a collection of paintings left by will; the task of establishing levels of wages and prices in a centrally-planned economy; how to decide the positions members of a football team will play in.
By this definition, the question of what would count as a comprehensive health service could be said to be a polycentric one.
Fuller argued that court proceedings and the judicial process (‘adjudication’) were not suitable for the resolution of polycentric issues and disputes.
The essential feature of the judicial process which makes it unsuitable to deal with polycentric problems is its bipolar and adversary nature.
It is designed for one party to put forward a proposition which the other party denies or opposes.
For example, the plaintiff asserts that he or she owns Blackacre and the defendant denies it; or the plaintiff asserts that he or she is entitled to compensation from the defendant and the latter denies it.
None of Fuller's examples lends itself to being dealt with in this all-or-nothing way.
For example, one of the galleries might want the Picasso if it also gets the Cezanne but not the Turner; but it would not insist on the Picasso if it got the Turner; but would want both if it did not get the Cezanne.
The other gallery might have an equally complex set of preferences, and the greater the number of works involved, the more complex the preference sets might become.
Again, the workers in an industry might claim a wage increase of ‘X and their employers might resist it and offer ‘Y; but the interests of another part of the economy might be affected in such a way by either proposal that neither is acceptable.
An example of this sort of difficulty in English law is Launchbury v. Morgans in which the House of Lords declined to extend the vicarious liability of the owner of a car for negligence of its driver because it lacked information about the impact this would have on the insurance industry.
Many issues with which governments have to grapple are so complex that no matter how well-informed the decision-maker, it is not possible confidently to predict all the likely consequences or knock-on effects of any particular decision.
But the courts are particularly handicapped in dealing with such issues.
Finally, it might be impossible to decide whether Joanna should play in a particular position on the football field without knowing where other players are going to be: the permutations are numerous and interdependent.
In all these cases some form of consultation of all interested parties and groups, and mutually acceptable or advantageous adjustment of the competing possibilities in as wide a context as possible is desirable.
A good example in the administrative law context of a polycentric problem is provided by a motorway inquiry.
The ramifications of the decision whether to build a motorway or not are enormous.
At stake are not only the interests of potential motorway users and of persons whose land might be compulsorily acquired to provide a route for the motorway; also involved are the inhabitants of villages and towns which will be relieved of through-traffic by the motorway; British Rail may have an interest in inhibiting the development of alternative means for the transport of goods; improved transport and communications facilities provided by the motorway may benefit some businesses at the expense of others; and motorways have, of course, serious environmental effects which lovers of the countryside and people who live near the proposed route will be anxious to avoid.
Not only would accommodation and compromise between these various interests be desirable, but also it may be that the best solution would be some alternative to a motorway, or some alternative route not already considered.
The complexity of the issues involved makes the model of bipolar adversary presentation of fixed positions by parties in conflict seem inappropriate to the sound resolution of the issues involved.
It is important to realize, however, that problems do not present themselves pre-labelled as polycentric or not.
It depends on how they are viewed.
Many problems which we are prepared to treat as bipolar have ramifications which could be taken into account if they were thought to be as important as the impact of the decision on the two contestants.
For example, the decision in Paris v. Stepney BC , in which it was decided that the employer of a one-eyed motor mechanic had a special duty of care to provide him with goggles to protect his good eye, may have had the perhaps unexpected and certainly undesired consequence of making it harder for disabled workers to get jobs in which they need special protection.
The wider interests of disabled people could not easily have been taken into account in that case but they were undoubtedly relevant .
Conversely, we could decide the question of whether a motorway should be built solely by considering whether landowners, whose property is to be acquired, will be properly compensated; but to do so would be to ignore a large number of other important interests.
Very many court decisions have an impact far beyond the interests of the litigants, if only because the doctrine of precedent makes them relevant to the affairs of others.
The bipolar adversary process often involves paying little attention to these wider interests.
Furthermore, polycentricity is a matter of degree.
How many of the ramifications of a particular decision ought to be explicitly taken into account by the decision-maker?
A third idea underlying the concept of justiciability is related to the second.
As one might expect, the procedures followed by courts are designed to deal with bipolar disputes in an adversary way.
We will consider some of the implications of this in Chapter 8.
The point to make here is that the logic of adversary adjudication is that the decision of the court should be based on the case put to it by the parties in dispute and not on material or information supplied by third parties; and rules of evidence are designed to achieve this result.
On the other hand, polycentric disputes can only be satisfactorily resolved if the solution takes account of the interests of all affected parties and if the decision-maker has access to all relevant information and opinions from whatever quarter they come.
In other words, court procedures are not well-adapted to resolving polycentric disputes.
This fact provides another good reason why courts should decline to entertain polycentric disputes.
However, this is not always easy to do because, as I have already said, most disputes are more or less polycentric.
Some people would argue that many applications for judicial review which are heard by courts in fact involve wider political and administrative issues; and that the rules of evidence and procedure in such cases should be changed to allow interested third parties to ‘intervene’ in the proceedings and to allow relevant information to be given about the likely impact of a decision one way or the other on the administrative process and on the public at large.
On the one hand, such proposals seem no more than simple common sense: why should courts decide disputes without being aware of the wider ramifications of what they are deciding.
But they also raise important issues about the role of the judiciary which can only be assessed in the light of a consideration of the proper role and function of judicial review, which will be undertaken in Part IV.
A fourth idea implicit in the concept of non-justiciability is that of expertise : a court might decline to review a decision or action if it felt it lacked the skill, expertise or experience to judge the issues raised by the dispute.
For example, courts have refused to review decisions about the grading of examination papers by university examiners, decisions to remove a person from a list of approved foster parents on grounds of reputation, character and temperament, and clinical decisions about the treatment of psychiatric patients.
But this approach should not be taken too far.
The only thing that most judges are expert in is law: they are very often not expert in the subject-matter of the disputes which come before them.
But this does not relieve courts of the need to decide technical issues arising in litigation: expert witnesses are called and courts are often required to choose between the conflicting testimony of expert witnesses called by opposing parties.
Nevertheless, in some cases at least, an argument from lack of expertise might well support a refusal by a court to hear a particular dispute.
It is important to distinguish the idea of non-justiciability from the idea of judicial restraint in reviewing the decisions of government bodies.
If a decision is held to be non-justiciable the court will decline jurisdiction over it.
For example, if the government alleges that what it did was done in the interests of national security and the court accepts this, the aggrieved party's action will simply be dismissed.
However, the arguments which underlie the concept of justiciability can also be used to support the idea that in reviewing government decisions over which the courts are prepared to exercise control, they should only award remedies to aggrieved parties in cases where it can be said that the respondent has gone wrong in some fairly extreme way.
If a decision is non-justiciable, it is not subject to judicial review; but even if it is ‘justiciable’, the arguments which underlie the concept of non-justiciability also restrain the courts in awarding judicial remedies.
What this means in detail we will see in Section B.
Varieties of Government Functions
Government activity can be usefully divided into a number of different areas, and it is illuminating to see to what extent each of these areas is likely to be subjected to scrutiny in the courts.
A large proportion of public expenditure and a smaller proportion of public revenue arises from the making by the government of contracts for the purchase and sale of goods and services.
In the case of purchase, this function is known as ‘procurement ’.
Contracting by central government is, as we shall see, quite immune from judicial review because central government essentially enjoys the same freedom of contract as private persons.
The contractual freedom of local authorities is less because their contractual powers are statutory in origin and are limited by statute.
Judicial review can be used to enforce those statutory limits.
This example illustrates a general point, namely that the more heavily regulated by statute a government activity is, the more likely it is to be amenable to judicial review.
Court actions for breach of contract against public authorities are very rare because other means of resolving contractual disputes (such as arbitration) are seen as preferable to litigation.
Where the alleged breach consists of the exercise of a contractual power in a particular way, it is unclear to what extent principles of public law (as opposed to the ordinary law of contract) can be used as criteria for judging whether the action taken was an abuse of the power.
As a matter of general principle, public law rules may be relevant in cases where the exercise of a contractual power involves the performance of a public function.
Another important area of government activity is what might loosely be called ‘regulation ’.
The government regulates a great many aspects of economic and social life to a greater or lesser extent, but some areas of regulatory activity generate much more judicial activity than others.
For example, a significant proportion of judicial review actions arise out of regulation of the movement of persons (that is , immigration control).
This is partly because of the importance of the interests at stake in immigration decisions: personal safety and liberty.
Land use planning decisions also generate a considerable volume of litigation, once again partly because of the value of what is at stake and partly because of dissatisfaction with the system of planning appeals.
These examples show that the value of what is at stake and the availability of alternative remedies can both have an effect on the likelihood that the courts will be asked to review particular government decisions.
On the other hand, although in recent years the regulation of the financial services industry has generated a lot of judicial review applications against regulatory bodies, the courts have discouraged these largely because they do not want court proceedings to be used as tactical weapons to delay financial transactions by parties disappointed by the failure of a regulatory body to give the applicant the protection it sought from financial predators.
As we will see in Chapter 12, the courts have also gone to great lengths to make it difficult to bring tort actions against regulatory bodies.
Thirdly, let us consider the raising and spending of revenue .
Taxes must be authorized by an Act of Parliament, and questions about liability to pay tax rarely arise in judicial review proceedings because there is an adequate system for appealing against decisions about tax liability.
Disputes about the legality of extra-statutory tax concessions may be dealt with by judicial review, but normally only at the suit of the taxpayer directly affected.
Third parties are unlikely to be able to challenge concessions granted to a taxpayer.
The raising of revenue by local authorities has generated a lot of litigation in the last decade as rate-capped and community charge-capped authorities have sought to challenge the legality of the caps imposed by central government.
As far as government spending decisions are concerned, there is a great difference between central and local government.
Individuals who contribute to local authority finances through rates can challenge authority spending decisions by judicial review because local authorities are said to owe a ‘fiduciary duty’ towards their ratepayers.
On the other hand, central government owes no such duty to taxpayers who cannot, directly at least, challenge in the courts the way government decides to use tax revenue: the control of public expenditure is seen as a matter for Parliament.
Another broad area of government activity is the provision of welfare benefits.
This is heavily regulated by statute, but because there is an extensive non-judicial appeals system, and because the amounts at stake for any one individual are typically small, judicial activity in this area is low.
In recent years, however, the Child Poverty Action Group has made considerable use of judicial review as a way of attacking what they see as faults in the social security system, and this has to some extent overcome the barriers to the use of judicial review in this area.
The relaxation of standing rules has facilitated this development.
I have not attempted to give an exhaustive or systematic account of the variety of government functions.
The four broad types I have mentioned account for a very large proportion of governmental activity, but each could be divided up into a number of smaller functions.
The point to make is that light can be thrown on the role of judicial control of government activity by looking at how it operates in relation to particular areas of government activity, and although I will not attempt to do so in any systematic way in this book, the reader would do well to bear this approach in mind.
Beyond Judicial Control
As we have seen, the distinction between public and private functions is important in determining the scope of applicability of the public law principles of judicial review.
It also figures in the rules governing the legal liability of public authorities.
But judicial control is only one form of what might be called ‘public accountability’.
Other forms include being subject to investigation by a public ombudsman, or by a select committee of the House of Commons, or by a public auditor, or by a public regulatory body (such as those which supervise the recently privatized gas and telecommunications industries); being obliged to conduct business in accordance with statutory rules or government direction or to submit business plans for public approval; holding a position or office which is subject, either directly or indirectly, to popular election.
Such forms of control, unlike judicial review, are more concerned with political and financial accountability than with legal accountability.
The bodies which are most obviously subject to various forms of public accountability are central government departments and local authorities.
But there are many other bodies which perform public functions and which, to a greater or lesser extent, operate at the fringes of government.
Such bodies present us with a dilemma.
On the one hand, to the extent that they perform public functions and are financed with public money, there is a good case for subjecting them to appropriate forms of public accountability.
On the other hand, many fringe bodies are located on the fringe exactly in order to distance them from the core of government so as to give them a degree of independence from public control.
For example, the nationalization of an industry signals its public importance, and such industries are often subsidized with public money; on the other hand, there are good economic arguments for leaving the managers of such industries to run them as they would if the industry was privately owned.
Reconciling the conflict between the demands of public accountability and the desirability of freedom to operate in the market has proved extremely difficult.
John Major's Citizen's Charter promises new forms of accountability for the delivery of public services.
Difficulties of accountability have also been created by what are called ‘regulatory agencies’, that is, agencies set up outside the core of government to regulate various aspects of economic and social activity.
Such bodies are set up outside government partly so that they can attract skilled personnel who might not be prepared to work for the core of government; so that they can develop a high level of expertise in the area they are responsible for; and so that they can develop policy in an atmosphere divorced from direct party political pressures.
On the other hand, such bodies are, of course, acting to further the public interest, and it has not always proved easy to strike the right balance between independence and public accountability.
Another related issue raised by regulation is the balance between external regulation and ‘self-regulation’.
Self-regulation means that those conducting the regulated activity play a greater or lesser role in regulating it, and to the extent that this is allowed, the public accountability of the regulatory process is reduced.
Self-regulation is an example of what we earlier called ‘corporatism’.
Corporatism raises complex issues of public accountability.
Two other political phenomena deserve brief mention in this context.
In the last few years the Conservative government has instituted a programme called ‘Next Steps’.
Under this programme (which is being implemented not by statute but by ‘framework documents’ of unclear legal status) the Civil Service is being progressively subdivided into two sectors which, very crudely, might be called the ‘policy-making sector’and the ‘policy-executing sector’.
Policy-makers remain in the traditional Whitehall departmental structure but policy-executives are ‘hived off’ into administrative agencies.
Agencies are given budgets and are expected to use them in the most efficient way possible.
The main aim of this reform of the civil service is to increase efficiency and financial accountability in the running of government programmes and to put the delivery of public services on a more business-like footing while stopping short of privatization which (for the present, anyway) may seem politically unacceptable.
Most of the new agencies are answerable to the appropriate minister and their chief executives are answerable to the Public Accounts Committee of the House of Commons.
But there are reasons to think that the Next Steps programme may create problems of political accountability.
A basic motivation for recent reforms to create trust hospitals and an ‘internal market’ within the NHS and to allow schools to ‘opt out’of LEA control is also, to use a neutral phrase, to change traditional patterns of public accountability by shifting the emphasis from accountability to political bodies such as Parliament to financial accountability to auditing bodies.
Finally, we should note here a phenomenon which we will refer to again later, namely the fact the a large number of what are usually called ‘interest groups’ or ‘pressure groups’or ‘lobby groups’play an important role in the process of policy formation in Britain.
Not only do pressure groups seek to influence the formation of government policy; also, voluntary consultation of pressure groups by government is a standard feature of the policy-formation and legislative process.
These facts raise important issues of accountability such as: should there be any public control over the funding and internal organization of pressure groups?
Should there be any public control over which pressure groups are consulted by government and when?
To what extent should pressure groups be allowed to use the courts to achieve their desired ends?
What forms of pressure group activity are desirable or acceptable or unacceptable?
Proper exploration of these issues is, unfortunately, beyond the scope of this book.
The patterns of public accountability in the British constitutional set-up are extremely complex, and all I have been able to do here is to alert you to some key issues of relevance to the subject matter of this book.
The basic point is that although our focus of attention is legal control of government, a proper understanding of the role of the law in controlling government activity requires attention to be paid to the total picture of public accountability.
CHAPTER 3
APPLICANT
Judicial review is available not only to citizens (individuals, corporations, trusts and so on) with grievances against government but also to government bodies with a grievance against another government body.
But to be entitled to seek a remedy by way of judicial review an applicant must have sufficient standing (or locus standi ).
The existence of the requirement of standing indicates that the law's primary concern is not, as such, to control government activity but rather to control it at the suit of persons affected by it in a particular way.
The rules about standing need to be considered in relation to three types of judicial review actions: I shall call these private actions, public actions and hybrid actions.
Private judicial review actions
We will discuss the distinction between public judicial review actions and private judicial review actions in detail later.
Here an example will suffice: a challenge to a decision of a non-governmental body, such as a trade union, the jurisdiction of which depends solely on contract, is a private action.
The only remedies which can be sought in private actions are private law remedies, that is declarations, injunctions, and damages.
Damages, as we will see, can only be sought in respect of wrongs recognized in private law; declarations and injunctions can also be sought in respect of public law wrongs, that is wrongs as defined by the rules establishing the grounds of judicial review such as breach of natural justice.
It should be noted that it follows from this that an action in respect of a public law wrong can be a private action for present purposes if it is against a non-governmental body.
This is because, as we have seen, judicial review is not restricted in its scope to governmental bodies.
The requirement of standing only applies to actions in respect of public law wrongs.
The reason for this is not entirely clear.
There are certain rules of private law which resemble rules of standing: for example, duty of care rules in the tort of negligence, and the rules of privity of contract.
But these are not seen as separate from the rules which define the relevant wrong, but as part of the definition of the wrong.
In public law, on the other hand, rules of standing are seen as rules about entitlement to complain of a wrong rather than as part of the definition of the wrong.
The explanation for this may be that public law wrongs are first and foremost wrongs against the public; they infringe the public's right to be lawfully governed.
The government, as representative of the public, is the proper guardian of the public interest, but the government allows certain individuals affected by the wrong to the public interest to bring action to redress the wrong.
Thus the wrong is defined in terms of the public interest whereas the right to sue in respect of it is described in terms of the individual's interest in the matter.
This explanation might be thought to fit in with the prerogative nature of the original public law remedies of certiorari, prohibition and mandamus.
It would also explain why the Attorney-General, as representative of both government and people, always has standing to protect public rights (although in practice the Attorney never does sue where the respondent is a department of central government).
A litigant who seeks redress for a public law wrong in a private action must establish, in order to have standing, that the public law wrong has invaded some legal right of his or hers, recognized in private law, or has caused him or her some special damage.
Typical legal rights are property rights and contractual rights.
For example, a breach of natural justice by a trade union in depriving an official of office is actionable, if at all , as a breach of the contract between the union and the official.
By contrast, a private citizen has no legal right which would give standing to seek to prevent a post office union (a private body) from acting illegally by boycotting mail to a foreign country.
Special damage is a more difficult concept.
In general terms, special damage is damage over and above that suffered by the public at large or some significant section of it affected by the decision.
For example, a boycott of mail to a foreign country adversely affects all persons who might wish to use the mail service to that country.
It would inflict special damage on a person who had just posted a business letter the purpose of which would be defeated by any exceptional delay.
Special damage is not defined in terms of the right of the plaintiff which has been invaded but in terms of the effect of the challenged action.
It seems that the requirement of special damage may be satisfied by potential damage, and it may be possible to rephrase the requirement in terms of the plaintiff having a special interest in or concern with the challenged action.
So, for example, it may be that a keen walker would have a special interest in a stretch of country where he or she frequently walked which would entitle him or her to challenge a decision to grant planning permission to develop it, whereas an ordinary member of the public or even of some environmental group in a different area might not have.
The question of whether someone has suffered special damage or not depends on the facts of the particular case, and so is very much in the discretion of the court.
There is a procedure by which a plaintiff in a private action may be able to seek redress for a public law wrong even though he or she cannot establish sufficient standing in accordance with the above rules.
This is called the relator procedure (Attorney-General (ex relatione A)v. B ).
It will be recalled that the Attorney-General always has standing to sue to vindicate public rights (which includes a right that the criminal law be complied with).
If a private individual without standing can persuade the Attorney-General to ‘lend his or her name’ to the action, it can go ahead.
The relator, as the real complainant is called, conducts the proceedings and bears their cost but the Attorney-General is the nominal plaintiff.
The most famous recent attempt to use this procedure is Gouriet v. Union of Post Office Workers .
In that case Gouriet sought an injunction to restrain the union from instructing its members to boycott mail to South Africa as a protest against the South African government's policy of apartheid.
The Attorney-General refused to lend his name to the action, and the House of Lords held that this refusal could not be challenged in an action for judicial review.
One of the arguments used to justify this result was that the Attorney-General's decision could and should be questioned, if at all, only in Parliament.
This is somewhat unrealistic because provided the government has a majority in the House of Commons, any parliamentary challenge to such a decision on political grounds would be unlikely to be successful.
The situation in the Gouriet case was a politically sensitive one and this may well have justified the court's refusal in that case to review the Attorney-General's decision, but it is not clear that such refusal would be justified in every case.
Another difficulty in the Gouriet case was that the applicant sought an injunction to restrain a threatened breach of the criminal law.
The basic principle of English criminal law, that a person should be presumed to be innocent until proven to have committed a criminal offence, produces another principle.
This is that, except in very special cases, injunctive relief will not be granted to restrain threatened breaches of the criminal law before they are committed.
In general, such an injunction will be granted only when offences have been committed in the past and it appears that mere prosecution will not deter further breaches of the law in the future.
Public and Hybrid Actions
Public judicial review actions are actions brought by way of an Application for Judicial Review (AJR) under Order 53 of the Rules of the Supreme Court (RSC).
We will examine the scope of Order 53 in detail in Chapter 5.
Here we need only note that all applications for a prerogative order are public actions; and in some cases applications for declarations and injunctions must be made in accordance with Order 53.
But in other cases, an application for a declaration or injunction may be made under Order 53 but may alternatively be made by way of an action begun by writ or originating summons.
Such cases I shall refer to as hybrid judicial review actions.
The standing rule for public actions and for hybrid action brought under Order 53 is laid down in RSC Ord. 53 r. 3(7).
The rule says that the court shall not grant leave to apply for judicial review unless the applicant has a sufficient interest in the matter to which the application relates.
It is worth noting that, in its terms, this rule applies only to applications for leave.
As we will see later, the applicant in a public law action must first seek leave to apply for judicial review, and only when leave has been granted will the application actually be heard.
The rules contain no provision about standing at the hearing stage, but the basic test of sufficient interest appears to apply at the hearing stage as well as at the leave stage.
It is not clear what the standing rule is for hybrid actions brought by way of writ or originating summons.
There is some authority for saying that the ‘sufficient interest’ test applies to such actions; but there are also dicta suggesting that a stricter rule should apply to such actions on the ground that leave is not required to bring actions begun by writ or originating summons.
Before the provision contained in rule 3(7) was enacted, the law governing standing to apply for prerogative orders was, in simplified terms, as follows: a person could apply for certiorari or prohibition provided he or she had a genuine grievance or, in other words, provided the applicant was a person aggrieved by the challenged decision.
A genuine grievance did not have to be financial.
It could, for example, consist of a complaint that a rating list had been prepared on an unfair basis in the sense that another ratepayer's property had been undervalued, even if a revaluation would not lead to a reduction in the complainant's rate bill.
The crucial difference between special interest, or special damage, and genuine grievance was that a special interest was one greater than that of other affected people generally, whereas a genuine grievance did not need to be any different in type or intensity than that of other affected persons.
The statute in pursuance of which the challenged action was done would provide guidance to the court as to what grievances were to be considered as giving a genuine cause for complaint.
For example, an inhabitant of Glasgow would be unlikely to be held to have a genuine interest in a planning decision in Oxford.
Persons without a genuine grievance have been called ‘busybodies’, that is people who interfere in things which do not concern them.
Usually the statute would provide only limited guidance on the question of genuine grievance, and the court would have quite a bit of freedom in deciding which grievances were genuine.
The law regarding mandamus was less clear.
There was authority for the view that the test was ‘person aggrieved’.
But there were also cases which held that the applicant for mandamus had to show that some legal right of his or hers had been infringed by the challenged decision.
For example, in one case it was held that electrical contractors, as such, had no right to complain that a local authority had not followed proper tendering procedures in letting out a contract for the installation of central heating.
There were no relevant standing rules governing applications for declarations and injunctions before the enactment of rule 3(7) because before then these remedies could not be applied for under Order 53, but only in private actions.
The enactment of rule 3(7) (as interpreted in the cases) has rendered the old rules concerning standing to apply for a prerogative order more or less defunct.
The leading case on the interpretation of the rule is R. v. Inland Revenue Commissioners, ex parte National Federation of Self-Employed and Small Businesses Ltd. (the Fleet Street Casuals case).
In this case the applicant challenged a tax amnesty granted by the Revenue to casual workers in Fleet Street: the Revenue had agreed not to seek to recover unpaid tax provided the workers ceased their tax-evading tactics in the future.
It was held that the applicants lacked a sufficient interest in the matter because the Revenue had acted within the discretion permitted to it in the day-to-day administration of the tax system.
Some of the judges thought that one effect of rule 3(7) was to abolish the distinction, so far as standing was concerned, between mandamus on the one hand, and certiorari and prohibition on the other; but at least two of their Lordships were less certain on this point.
The later case of R. v. Felixstowe Justices, ex parte Leigh appears to have clarified this point, and the position now is that standing is related to the applicant's interest in the case and not to the remedy sought.
In that case it was held that a journalist lacked standing for an order (of mandamus) that the chair of the justices should reveal the names of the magistrates who had heard a particular case, but that he did have standing for a declaration that a policy of not disclosing the names of justices who heard certain types of cases was contrary to the public interest and unlawful.
The point was that the journalist's investigative purpose was sufficiently served by the declaration, and that he did not need to know (and had no sufficient interest in knowing) the identities of the justices who had heard the particular case.
The implication of this decision is that whether or not an applicant has standing does not depend on which remedy of those available under Order 53 is sought.
It so happened that two different remedies were sought in this case, but the decision on the issue of standing would have been the same even if the applicant had sought two declarations in different terms.
Other important points emerge from the Fleet Street Casuals case.
First, the question of what is a sufficient interest is partly a question of legal principle — what do earlier cases say about standing?— and partly a question of fact to be decided in the light of circumstances of the case before the court.
So it will often be impossible to be entirely sure, in advance of litigation, whether any particular applicant has a sufficient interest.
Secondly, the question of sufficient interest has to be judged in the light of the relevant statutory provisions — what do they say or suggest about who is to be allowed to challenge decisions made under the statute?
For example, suppose a statute gives a minister two different but related powers; suppose further that the statute provides that before the minister exercises power A, he or she must consider representations made by ‘any person’, and that before the minister exercises power B he or she must consult a particular government body with responsibility for some relevant aspect of government policy.
It could be argued that these provisions would justify allowing any person to challenge exercises of power A, but also applying a more restrictive standing rule (perhaps something like ‘special interest’) to challenges to exercises of power B on the ground that Parliament had intended the government body in question to be the prime guardian of the public interest in the exercise of power B.
Thirdly, sufficient interest has to be judged in the light of the substance of the applicant's complaint.
Looking at the substance of the complaint has a number of purposes.
There is no point granting leave to a person with sufficient interest if it is clear, for example, that the applicant's case is a hopeless one on its merits and is bound to fail for that reason; or that the case raises only non-justiciable issues.
The Felixstowe Justices case illustrates another way in which standing and merits are related: just as the journalist had a sufficient interest only in the general policy of secrecy and not in its application to a particular case, so the remedy to which he was entitled related only to the general policy.
In other words, whatever the applicant's interest in the subject matter of the application may be, that interest not only determines whether the applicant has standing but it also dictates the nature and terms of the relief to which the applicant can expect.
Finally, whether the applicant's interest is sufficient depends to some extent on the seriousness of the alleged illegality.
Whatever the applicant's interest, the more serious the illegality, the more likely that interest is to be sufficient.
This last point raises a fundamental question about the nature and function of standing rules.
There is a sense in which standing is a preliminary question, separate from that of the substance and merits of the applicant's case: standing rules determine entitlement to raise and argue the issue of illegality, and it makes little sense to say that entitlement to argue the merits of the case depends on whether one has a good case on the merits.
Only if the chance of failure at the end of the day approaches certainty should the likely outcome affect the question of access to the court.
But this argument assumes that there is some value in separating the issue of entitlement to apply for judicial review from the question of entitlement to a remedy at the end of the day.
A counter-argument might be that standing rules are just one mechanism for weeding out hopeless or frivolous cases at an early stage and protecting government bodies (rightly or wrongly) from harassment by ‘professional litigants’(who else would expend the time and resources necessary to mount a hopeless case?) meddling in matters which do not really concern them.
If this assertion is correct, then it would not matter if the standing requirement was abolished entirely, provided some other mechanism was put in its place for weeding out hopeless and crank cases.
The requirement of obtaining leave performs this function, and some judges discern quite a direct relationship between relaxation of standing rules and strict enforcement of the leave requirement.
So we might conclude that there is no need to have stringent standing rules (or, indeed, any standing rule at all) if other means to weed out hopeless and vexatious cases are provided.
The ‘sufficient interest’ test as interpreted in the Fleet Street Casuals case can be seen as giving partial effect to such an argument.
However, this counter-argument in turn assumes that the requirement of sufficient interest is a liberal standing rule in the sense that it makes access to the courts to challenge administrative action very easy, and so shifts the burden of weeding out weak cases to other mechanisms.
Do the cases support this assumption?
This question is made somewhat difficult to answer because one of the effects of the emphasis on the facts and merits of the particular case in Fleet Street Casuals is that the issue of standing now often receives little or no attention from the courts and is sometimes the subject of concessions by the respondent.
Judges often try to avoid the issue of standing by resolving the merits first.
However, there are some cases decided since Fleet Street Casuals which throw some light on the issue.
It has been held, for example, that a gypsy living on a caravan site provided by a local authority under statute has sufficient interest to challenge a decision by the authority no longer to provide the site or any alternative; and to challenge a decision by the Minister not to exercise his statutory default power.
It has also been held that a taxpayer would have standing to challenge the legality of an Order in Council authorizing the payment of public money to the European Community; and that a television licence-holder has standing in respect of alleged breach by the IBA (the predecessor of the Independent Television Commission) of its responsibility to monitor programmes.
But it is clear from decisions since Fleet Street Casuals in which standing has been denied that there are still limits to the rights of individuals to challenge government decisions.
Of considerable importance is a series of cases which introduce the concept of ‘legitimate expectation’ into the law of standing.
A legitimate expectation may arise when a government agency, by its words or conduct, leads a citizen reasonably to expect that it will act in a particular way.
If the agency then acts differently it may be held to have acted unfairly and illegally, at least if it has not given the citizen a chance to make representations as to why he or she should be treated in the way expected.
It has been held in a number of cases that if a person claims to have a legitimate expectation, this will give that person standing to make an application for judicial review unless the claim is totally frivolous.
One case concerned a change in the criteria according to which immigrant children whom British residents wished to adopt would be given leave to enter Britain.
In another it was said that the legitimate expectation of a prisoner that he would be allowed maximum parole if no disciplinary award of forfeiture of remission of sentence had been made against him, gave him sufficient interest to challenge the award.
A third case concerned changes in the policy guidelines governing the release of prisoners from gaol before expiry of their sentences.
These cases are significant because they illustrate one of the ways in which standing is related to the merits of the case.
The notion of legitimate expectation concerns whether the applicant has a case on the merits, but the claim that such an expectation exists, provided it is not prima facie ludicrous, will give the claimant standing to argue the merits of the claim.
These cases seem to indicate that the effect of RSC Ord. 53, r. 3(7) has been to liberalize the law of standing.
But the best test of the liberality of a standing rule is how it deals with might be called ‘representative standing’.
A representative applicant is one who comes to court not to protect his, her or its own interests but to represent the interests of other parties not before the court.
The applicant in the Fleet Street Casuals case was itself a representative of the interests of its members: as a company it really had no interest independent of that of its members; but the issue of representative standing was not considered in that case.
But in the Felixstowe Justices case it was held that the applicant journalist was entitled to represent the public interest as a ‘private Attorney-General’.
It has also been held, obiter, that the Child Poverty Action Group (a pressure group representing the interests of social security claimants) has standing to make applications for judicial review of decisions in the area of social security.
On the other hand, in R. v. Secretary of State for the Environment, ex parte Rose Theatre Trust Co. the judge appears to have been of the view that an applicant could have standing only on the basis of a personal interest and not on the basis of representing the interests of others.
It can be argued that true liberalization of standing rules requires not only that applicants be accorded standing to represent interests which they share with many others (the old test of ‘genuine grievance’ achieved that) but also that standing be accorded to genuine representatives of interested persons even if the only interest of the representative is to further the interests of the represented.
Representative standing, it might be said, is an important feature of any system of public law which is chiefly concerned to ensure that governments act lawfully.
For example, poor and underprivileged members of society are very dependent in a variety of ways on the government; but they are not well-equipped to enlist the aid of the courts to challenge governmental action affecting them.
They need champions.
So does the public at large.
Under the old law the public's only champion was the Attorney-General who, as we have noted, always has standing to represent the public interest.
But there is obvious weakness in a system for controlling the government which can only be activated by a member of that government.
On the other hand, this argument assumes that the function of judicial review is first and foremost to provide redress against illegal government action rather than to protect the personal interests of litigants.
But this assumption rests on a contestable value judgment about the proper role of the judiciary in controlling the government.
It can be argued, to the contrary, that the more the courts are opened up to arguments based about the interests of the public or of significant sections of it rather than of particular individuals, the more likely are the judges to be drawn into political battles which ought to be resolved in the political arena and not in courts.
Also, allowing representatives to initiate applications for judicial review raises the question of whether representatives ought to be allowed to intervene in applications initiated by others in order to express opposing or complementary points of view.
English court procedure at present gives no rights of intervention to third parties; and it might be argued that if they were significantly extended, this would increase even further the role of the courts in resolving disputes which ought to be settled by political, not legal, means.
Representative standing also raises the wider issue of the role of pressure groups in the formation of government policy.
As we have already noted, governments routinely consult and are lobbied by interest groups.
Being able to challenge government decisions in the courts offers to groups disappointed by the outcome of the policy-formation process the prospect of re-opening the policy argument before the courts.
At first sight, this seems undesirable.
On the other hand, the policy formation process is a largely uncontrolled one: on the whole, the government decides which groups it will consult or listen to and which it will ignore; and empirical evidence shows what one would intuitively expect, namely that some groups are in a much better position to influence government than others.
It might be argued that the courts have a role to play in ensuring that groups which have been unfairly denied access to the policy-making arena or who have a genuine complaint about how that process was conducted, should be allowed to challenge the outcome of that process in the courts.
Once again, however, it might be replied that for the courts to seek to regulate the policy-formation process in this way would inevitably embroil them in undesirable political controversy.
Even if the courts purported only to be concerned with the fairness of the process of policy making and not with the substance of the policies made, it is very difficult to draw a sharp distinction between process and substance: complaints about process are usually, at bottom, complaints about substance —‘if we had been treated fairly, the outcome would have been different’.
However, let us assume for the moment that representatives may be accorded standing in some cases at least.
Are there any restrictions on who may be a representative and who may be represented?
The only aspect of these questions on which the English cases give any guidance concerns the expertise or appropriateness of the representative.
In the Felixstowe Justices case the court seems to have been influenced by the fact that the applicant was a journalist with a serious purpose.
Since the claim arose out of government secrecy and since, in a free society, the press play an important role in ensuring the free flow of information, a journalist was arguably a particularly appropriate representative of the public interest.
The Child Poverty Action Group might also be seen as an expert and appropriate group to raise social security matters, having been for many years active in campaigning on such matters.
By contrast, in the Rose Theatre case the judge seems to have been influenced to deny standing partly by the fact that the Trust had been formed only for the purpose of campaigning for the preservation of the remains of the theatre; whereas the same judge in another case accorded standing to challenge a grant of planning permission to a representative of a snake-preservation society which had been active on the site in question for many years and had ‘put money into it’.
Another important issue concerns the connection between the representative and the represented.
Certainly, if the latter did not want to be represented or could easily apply for judicial review in person, there might be no good reason to accord standing to a self-appointed representative.
It may be, too, that a distinction needs to be drawn between groups which have a non-executive membership and groups which do not: the Child Poverty Action Group does not have non-executive members.
This example suggests that having such a membership should not be a pre-requisite of representativeness, but it may be a relevant factor to take into account.
On the other hand, if there are non-executive members, this may raise questions about the internal organization of the group: can the executive of the group really claim to represent its member's views?
How does it ascertain those views?
Should it be required to do so in a democratic way?
The possibility of asking such questions shows how far the courts have to go in dealing with the issues raised by representative standing.
But it also shows that the introduction of the test of ‘sufficient interest’ has had a liberalizing effect on the law of standing.
This has been possible because the phrase ‘sufficient interest’ is very vague and leaves it largely up to the courts to decide what interests are sufficient.
One thing is clear: the requirement of standing has not been abolished.
Rule 3(7) is re-enacted in the Supreme Court Act 1981 s. 31(3), and the main effect of the rule seems to have been to equip the court with a flexible and unpredictable tool for controlling access to judicial review.
We have seen that, according to the Fleet Street Casuals case, the question of sufficient interest depends to some undefined extent on principles contained in cases decided before rule 3(7) was enacted.
What are these principles?
There are not very many, in fact.
It is clear that ratepayers have standing to challenge a wide variety of decisions, including expenditure decisions, by local authorities; whereas it is clear from the Fleet Street Casuals case that the right of taxpayers to challenge decisions of the Revenue concerning the tax liability of other taxpayers, let alone to challenge policy decisions of central government, is limited.
Local authorities owe a fiduciary duty to their ratepayers in the use of rate revenue, and the right of ratepayers to challenge local authority decisions is a corollary of this duty.
Central government, by contrast, owes no special legal duties to taxpayers in the use of the ‘tax pound’.
There has been quite a bit of litigation in the United States in which taxpayers have sought to challenge some use to which taxes have been put.
The American cases draw a distinction between genuine personal interest (which gives a right to sue) and generalized grievances about the way the country is being run (which do not).
In England the courts are almost certain to take the view that the way taxes are spent is a political question which the courts are not the proper bodies to consider, and that no taxpayer has sufficient interest to raise this matter in court.
Is the difference between the challengeability of central and local government spending decisions justified?
Neighbours have sufficient interest to challenge planning decisions in respect of neighbouring land.
Producers and traders have standing to challenge the grant of a licence or other benefit to a competitor .
In terms of that aspect of the Fleet Street Casuals case which relates sufficient interest to the facts and merits of the applicant's case, it is probably correct to say that ratepayers challenging decisions of local authorities, competitors challenging decisions affecting their business activities, and neighbours challenging planning decisions would be held to have a sufficient interest unless other facts of the case provided very strong grounds for denying the existence of such an interest.
By contrast, taxpayer standing is likely to be heavily dependent on the detailed facts.
Broad ‘standing categories’ of this nature are clearly desirable because they inject a degree of certainty and predictability into the question of standing.
Finally, it seems clear that the meaning of ‘sufficient interest’ is related to some extent to the ground on which the decision is being challenged.
For example, it is likely that the only person who would be held to have sufficient interest to challenge a decision on the ground of breach of natural justice would be the person denied a hearing because the rules of natural justice are designed to protect individual rights.
But if the ground of challenge was unreasonableness, then a wider range of affected persons might be able to demonstrate sufficient interest because the notion of unreasonableness defines the limits of legal action (and in one sense everyone has an interest in the government acting legally) rather than the limits of individual rights.
The same point can be made in a different way.
Defining sufficient interest is relatively easy where one or more persons are more seriously affected by a decision than people generally.
But where a decision affects everyone in general and no one in particular it is much harder to define sufficient interest.
The cases of the neighbouring landowner and the competitor mentioned above fall into the former category.
The cases of the ratepayer, the taxpayer and of many representative applicants (especially pressure groups) fall into the latter category.
The Function of Standing Rules
What is the function of standing rules?
In general terms it is to restrict access to judicial review.
But why restrict access?
One suggested reason is to protect public bodies from vexatious litigants with no real interest in the outcome of the case but just a desire to make things difficult for the government.
But it is highly doubtful that many such litigants exist in real life, and if they do, the requirement of leave to apply for judicial review should be adequate to deal with them.
Others have been suggested: to prevent the conduct of government business being unduly hampered and delayed by ‘excessive’ litigation; to reduce the risk that civil servants will behave in over-cautious and unhelpful ways in dealing with citizens for fear of being sued if things go wrong; to ration scarce judicial resources; to ensure that the argument on the merits is presented in the best possible way, by a person with a real interest in presenting it (but quality of presentation and personal interest do not always go together); to ensure that people do not meddle paternalistically in the affairs of others (query: can representative applicants be accused of this?); to ensure that the applicant has a personal interest not just an ideological concern in the outcome (but, query, may not a genuine concern for the interests of others be neither purely personal nor purely ideological?).
Undoubtedly each of these aims could be furthered by standing rules; but their are probably other ways in which each of them could be achieved.
What is distinctive about standing rules is that they direct attention to the interest of the applicant in the outcome of the case.
The sort of interest we require the applicant for judicial review to have will depend on what we think judicial review is for .
If the aim of judicial review is seen as being only the protection of individuals (whether people or organizations), this would suggest and justify standing rules which require the applicant to show that he, she or it is specially affected by what has been done or decided.
If judicial review is seen as going further and being concerned with the protection of groups as well as individuals, standing rules should only require that the applicant show that he, she or it shares some interest with others.
If the prime function of judicial review is seen as being to provide remedies against unlawful behaviour by government, then there should be only an absolutely minimal standing requirement such as‘taxpayer’ or ‘citizen’, or even no requirement at all (‘any person’).
The ultimate logic of this view is the abolition of standing rules: the only question to be answered on this approach concerns the merits of the arguments about illegality.
The prime function of representative standing can be said to be to facilitate the protection of what might be called ‘diffuse interests’, that is interests shared by many people.
If members of the public generally or of a section of the public share an interest which has been interfered with by government action, the protection of that interest by court action is made much easier if one person can bring an action as representative of a large number of people.
Representative actions are particularly useful when the impact of the challenged action on any particular individual is too slight to justify litigation, but where the aggregate impact on all members of the affected group is considerable.
Viewed in this way, representative standing is a sort of substitute for a class action, that is an action in which a large number of litigants can consolidate their claims into one for the purposes of having it decided by a court.
Representative standing is, therefore, most relevant to the protection of group and public interests.
There is no logical reason why a person ought not to be allowed to represent another in order to protect that other's individual interests, but in such a case the main function of representation would probably be to provide finance for the action rather than organizational efficiency; and in most cases there is no reason why one person should not provide another with finance to enable that other to bring an action in his or her own name.
CHAPTER 4
REMEDIES
Uses and Availability
Prerogative Orders
Judicial review remedies fall into two broad groups.
On the one hand are the prerogative orders:certiorari , prohibition, and mandamus; on the other hand there are the ‘private law’ remedies of declaration, injunction, and damages.
Certiorari
The function of certiorari is inextricably tied up with the theory of jurisdiction which is discussed in Chapter 6.
In its terms an order of certiorari instructs the person or body whose decision is challenged to deliver the record of the decision to the office of the Queen's Bench Division to be quashed (i.e. deprived of legal effect).
However, there is in theory a distinction between the effects of two types of error of law (‘jurisdictional’ and ‘non-jurisdictional’), which is relevant to the function of the order of certiorari .
As we will see, there is some doubt as to whether the distinction between jurisdictional and non-jurisdictional errors of law still exists in modern law, but for the sake of this discussion we will assume that it does.
The effect of jurisdictional error of law is said to be to render the affected decision void or a nullity in the sense that the decision is treated as never having had any legal effect.
A decision which has never had any legal effect cannot be deprived of legal effect, and so when we say that certiorari quashes a decision which the decision-maker had no jurisdiction to make, what we really mean is that the order formally declares that from the moment it was purportedly made (‘ab initio ’) the decision had no effect in law.
Thus anything done in execution of it is illegal.
This is the declaratory function of certiorari .
If certiorari only declares what is the case anyway, why would a person bother to seek such an order?
Why not just ignore the decision and act as if it was never made?
In practical terms, a person may be able to afford to ignore an order that he or she do something, but not to ignore an order in pursuance of which an authority can do something detrimental to him or her.
Furthermore, apart from the fact that it is often unclear, as a matter of law, whether a decision is illegal or not (and so it would be unsafe just to ignore it), it is not the case that a void decision is for ever void.
However illogical it may seem, a void decision will become valid unless it is challenged within any time limit for challenges, by an applicant with sufficient standing, and unless a court exercises its discretion to award a remedy to the applicant.
Once the decision ‘matures into validity’ as it were, acts already done in execution of it also mature into legality because maturity is retrospective.
The preceding discussion applies not only to jurisdictional errors of law but to all heads of illegality which render a decision ultra vires , including breach of natural justice.
The effect of non-jurisdictional error of law is different; the affected decision has legal effect from the very beginning because although it is wrong in law it is not illegal.
In relation to such decisions, therefore,certiorari really does quash the decision and deprive it of legal effect.
The accepted theory is, however, that this quashing is not retrospective in effect but only prospective.
Acts done in execution of the decision before the date of the quashing remain legal, but any such act done after that date would be illegal.
This is the ‘constitutive’ use of certiorari .
And, of course, unless an applicant with standing applies in time for certiorari and the court exercises its discretion in the applicant's favour, the decision, though wrong, will remain valid for ever .
Decisions affected by non-jurisdictional error of law are sometimes called ‘voidable’ as opposed to‘void’.
Prohibition
The prerogative order of prohibition, as its name implies, performs the function of ordering a body amenable to it to refrain from illegal action.
Its issue presupposes that some function of the body remains to be performed, and this sets an internal time limit after which the order could not issue (although an applicant can be denied the order because of undue delay even before the expiry of this time).
Prohibition is only available to restrain illegal action and so it plays no part in correcting errors of law within jurisdiction, for which certiorari is the only remedy.
It used to be the law that orders for certiorari and prohibition were available only against decision-makers who had a duty to act judicially .
The meaning of this phrase was never very clear, but it now seems that whatever it meant, the availability of these two remedies is not limited in this way.
Mandamus
Certiorari and prohibition are concerned with control of the exercise of discretionary powers whereas the prerogative order of mandamus is designed to enforce the performance by governmental bodies of their duties.
Breach of statutory duty can take the form either of non-feasance (i.e. failure to perform the duty) or misfeasance (i.e. bad performance).
In certain circumstances a person who suffers damage as a result of a breach of statutory duty by a public authority can bring an action in tort for damages or an injunction.
But public authorities can also be attacked for non-feasance by being required to perform their duty.
Mandamus (or an injunction in lieu) is the remedy for this purpose.
Mandamus sometimes issues in conjunction with certiorari to require a body whose decision has been quashed to go through the decision-making process again.
In this type of case the duty which mandamus enforces is often not a statutory one but the common law duty, which every power-holder has, to give proper consideration to the question of whether or not to exercise the power.
Prerogative Orders are Public Law Remedies
Certiorari and prohibition are not available against ‘private’ bodies, that is bodies which derive their powers solely from contract.
This limitation is technical and historical.
It is concerned with defining the scope of judicial review.
As we have seen, this is no longer done in terms of remedies available but mainly by reference to the idea of ‘public functions’.
There is no reason why a contractual body performing public functions should not be amenable to these remedies.
It is not clear whether mandamus is available in respect of any failure by a statutory authority to perform a statutory duty.
Probably mandamus is available as a remedy only in respect of public duties, that is, duties which are not shared with private citizens.
If this were not so a plaintiff could, by seeking mandamus, evade the restrictive rule that an action in tort for an injunction to restrain breach of statutory duty will lie only if the duty is owed to the plaintiff individually because, as we have seen, the applicant for mandamus only needs to have a ‘sufficient interest’ in the performance of the duty.
The Crown and Prerogative Orders
The traditional rule is that prerogative orders of prohibition and mandamus are not available against the Crown or any servant of the Crown acting in his or her capacity as such.
The appropriate remedy against the Crown is the declaration.
The reasons for this are technical and constitutional.
In theory the Crown is the applicant for every prerogative order; therefore, it would be incongruous if coercive relief were available against the Crown at its own suit.
Furthermore, it is said that it would upset the constitutional balance between the courts and the executive if the Crown could be held in contempt of court for disobeying a prerogative order of prohibition or mandamus.
On the other hand, there are many cases in which prerogative orders have been awarded against Ministers without any qualm or discussion of the matter; but it does not follow from this fact that such orders operate as anything other than‘requests’ to act or to refrain from action.
However, in M v. Home Office the Court of Appeal held that although neither the Crown as such nor a government department could be held liable for contempt as a result of disobeying a court order (including an order of prohibition or mandamus) because they are not ‘legal persons’, Ministers and civil servants could be personally guilty of contempt for failing to comply with an order directed to a Minister in his or her official capacity.
But the decision is rather undermined by the Court's acceptance that the order in question ought not to have been made because, in making it, the judge had ignored the rule that coercive interim relief is not available against Ministers of the Crown.
Are there any good reasons of substance for the Crown's immunity from coercive orders?
This depends in part on what we mean by ‘the Crown’.
The widest definition of the Crown in the cases is that of Lord Diplock in Town Investments Ltd. v. Department of Environment who said of the term that it is ‘appropriate to embrace both collectively and individually all the Ministers of the Crown and parliamentary secretaries under whose direction the administrative work of government is carried on by civil servants in the various government departments’.
In this case it was held that when a lease is made with a Minister in his or her capacity as such, it is made with the Crown; and that a building is occupied by the Crown even if it is occupied by civil servants from a department other than that of the Minister named as lessee in the lease.
This case did not concern the availability of coercive remedies against the Crown and it might be argued that this statement is of no relevance in that context.
Certainly, once the Crown has been depersonalized to the point where it is synonymous with ‘the government’, it is unnecessary and undesirable that coercive remedies designed to control government activity should not be available against the Crown which is the government, and that ultimately the only sanction for government compliance with the law should be political.
On the other hand,if the Crown is the government, it would empty the term of any meaning to exclude Ministers from its ambit.
English constitutional law recognizes no entity, such as‘the State’, over and above the government of the day, to which the term ‘the Crown’ could apply.
Private Law Remedies
The other group of remedies consists of the so-called private law remedies of declaration and injunction.
These are called private law remedies because they were originally used only in private law but later came to be used in public law.
Declaration
There are several reasons for this extension but the most important in the case of the declaration is that, being a non-coercive remedy (which means that failure to comply with a declaration does not amount to a contempt of court), it is available against the Crown; and it is very useful in other situations where the seeking of a coercive remedy might be thought unnecessarily aggressive, and where the plaintiff is confident that the defendant will do the right thing once a court says what it is.
It is sometimes possible to obtain a coercive order if a defendant deliberately refuses to comply with a declaration, but this is exceptional and does not invalidate the general argument.
The declaration, as its name implies, only declares what the legal position of the parties is; it does not change their legal position or rights.
The force of this statement can be illustrated by referring to the two functions of certiorari .
The declaration is available to perform the declaratory function of certiorari (i.e. in relation to ultra vires decisions) but not to perform its constitutive function.
So the declaration is not available as a remedy for non-jurisdictional error of law.
Injunction
The injunction performs essentially the same function as an order of prohibition, namely to restrain a person or body from illegal action.
It is also possible to obtain a mandatory injunction which performs essentially the same function as an order of mandamus, that is to require a body to do its legal duty.
The injunction is important in public law in the context of the rules of natural justice.
As we have seen, the prerogative orders are not available against bodies whose jurisdiction rests entirely on contract (that is, on rules of private law); but such bodies are often required to comply with the rules of natural justice and the injunction, being a private law remedy, can be used to enforce the rules against contractual bodies.
The other context in which injunctions are important is that of ‘interim relief’.
When a party challenges the validity of a governmental decision, the applicant's interests might be irreparably damaged if, pending the hearing and resolution of the case by the court, it was open to the decision-maker to act on or execute the decision.
The main function of interim relief is to prevent this happening by ordering the respondent to refrain from giving effect to its decision pending the trial of the action.
When an applicant seeks leave to apply for a remedy of certiorari or prohibition, RSC Ord. 53, r. 3(10) (a) allows the court to order that the granting of leave shall operate as a ‘stay of proceedings’, preventing the decision-maker taking any further action against the applicant pending the hearing of the application.
Such a stay of proceedings can be ordered against any respondent amenable to these orders including the Crown.
If the remedy the applicant seeks is an order of mandamus or a declaration or injunction, then the main form of interim relief available is an interim injunction.
Unfortunately for applicants, there is a common law rule which prevents the award of injunctions against the Crown; and for the purposes of this rule, ‘the Crown’ seems to include Ministers.
The Crown is amenable to declarations but a declaration cannot be awarded at the interim stage of proceedings; so the effect of the rule is that interim relief is not available in actions against the Crown in which the remedy sought is mandamus or a declaration.
However, a decision of the European Court of Justice (that is, the Court of the European Communities) has necessitated the creation of an exception to this rule where the applicant is seeking to enforce rights recognized by European Community law.
The fact that an applicant seeking to enforce European law is in a better position in respect of interim relief than an applicant seeking to enforce English law has been rightly criticized, but the anomaly could only be removed by legislation which the government has little incentive to promote.
More generally, the reasoning used by the European Court of Justice in the Factortame case to justify requiring interim relief to be available to protect rights in European law has wide implications.
The basic principle of European law is that the provision of remedies for the enforcement of European law rights against member states is a matter for the legal systems of the member states (although, of course, European law itself does provide remedies for breaches of European law by the Community's own legal institutions).
The Court held that the English rule that interim injunctions are not available against the Crown was a barrier to the ‘effective protection’ of European rights in English courts, and that English courts are under an obligation to remove such barriers.
The concept of ‘effective enforcement’ is not a very clear one; but it is possible that it could be used to attack other rules which limit the remedies available against governmental bodies.
An alternative to the award of an injunction for protecting the interests of applicants pending trial is to allow claims to be made for monetary compensation for loss inflicted by governmental action.
As we will see, the possibility of bringing such actions is very limited.
Indeed, in Factortame II Lord Goff considered the unavailability of damages as being a ground in favour of the award of an interim injunction.
An applicant seeking an interim injunction is normally required to give an undertaking to compensate the respondent for irreparable monetary loss suffered as a result of compliance with the injunction in case the respondent wins at the hearing and the injunction is not made permanent but is discharged.
If the respondent is a government body, such an undertaking will often not be required because any damage likely to be suffered will be intangible or unquantifiable injury to the public.
Where a government body seeks an injunction against a private individual or corporation, the position may be different.
For example, in one case the government sought an interim injunction to restrain a drug company from disobeying a statutory order regulating the price it could charge the NHS for its drugs; and in a recent series of cases local authorities have sought interim injunctions against traders to restrain them from opening their businesses on Sunday in breach of Sunday trading laws.
English law draws a distinction between central government (the Crown) and other governmental bodies: if one of the latter wants an interim injunction, it must be prepared to give an appropriate undertaking as to damages.
But central government need not give such an undertaking if it is seeking to enforce compliance with a statute or regulation; although it must do so if it is seeking to protect its property or contractual interests.
It appears, however, that this immunity enjoyed by the Crown is contrary to the EC law principle of effective protection and so would not apply in a case involving rights in EC law.
The Discretion to Refuse a Remedy
The prerogative orders, declarations and injunctions are all discretionary remedies.
This means that even if the applicant has standing, has made the application in good time, and can establish that the respondent has acted illegally, he or she may be denied relief if the court thinks, for some reason, that relief should not be granted.
The fact that a decision is void or that some action or inaction is illegal does not impose on the court any obligation to award a remedy to the applicant.
This discretion can also be used to justify refusal of leave to apply for judicial review under RSC Ord. 53; and so it is sometimes said that the whole judicial review jurisdiction is discretionary, not just the remedies.
One aspect of this discretion relates to the time limit for making an application for judicial review under RSC Order 53: s. 31(6) of the Supreme Court Act 1981 allows the court to refuse leave or to refuse relief if there has been undue delay in making the application and that the granting of relief would, amongst other things, be ‘detrimental to good administration’.
Another aspect of the discretion allows a court to refuse a remedy if some suitable alternative avenue of redress was open to the applicant; this is considered in detail later in this chapter.
The use of the discretion is particularly controversial in the context of review on the basis of procedural impropriety, and it will be considered in that context in Chapter 8.
The general idea underlying this discretion seems to be that a court should not award a judicial review remedy if to do so would cause (query , serious) damage to the ‘public interest’ such as would outweigh the injury which the applicant would suffer as a result of refusal of a remedy.
But this principle is hopelessly vague.
Do the cases give any more concrete guidance as to how this discretion might be exercised?
In R. v. Monopolies and Mergers Commission, ex parte Argyll Group plc Lord Donaldson MR said that courts must show ‘a proper awareness of the needs of public administration’: a court should be wary of striking down a decision if it is clear that the same decision would have been made even if the decision-maker had not acted unlawfully; or if doing so would unduly delay the conduct of government business; or if members of the public are likely already to have relied on the challenged decision; or if the court thinks that the applicant's motivation in making the application was improper or vexatious or frivolous.
Several of these points were taken up in the Takeover Panel case in which Lord Donaldson said that the court should be wary of allowing judicial review to be used as a tactical or delaying device by a company which is the target of a takeover bid or by one of several rival bidders.
It has been said that an order of mandamus ought not to he made if the respondent is doing all it reasonably can to remedy its breach of duty.
Another factor was raised in a case in which the government did not properly consult local authorities (as required by statute) before making some regulations: by the time the application to revoke the regulations was heard, they had been in operation for some time and to revoke them would have caused considerable administrative inconvenience which could not be justified given that no real complaint was made about the substance of the regulations.
But the judge was prepared to award a declaration that the government had not complied with their obligation to consult.
This shows that even if a court is not prepared to award one remedy, it may be prepared to give another instead.
Relief has also been refused on the ground that the applicant has in the past behaved badly in dealings with the respondent and so is undeserving of assistance.
Finally, courts have shown considerable reluctance to allow judicial review of decisions of social workers designed to protect children from abuse, for fear of putting undue pressure on them in the performance of difficult tasks.
The discretion to refuse relief (or leave under RSC Ord. 53) raises a number of very important issues.
First, is it right that a remedy should be refused because the respondent would have made the same decision even if it had not acted illegally?
At first sight it certainly seems wasteful in such circumstances to require the decision-maker to decide again, and in some cases refusal of relief might be justifiable.
But the danger is that if relief is too often refused on such grounds it may give decision-makers the signal that it does not really matter whether they act within the law or not, so long as the decision is ‘right’.
This danger is particularly great in relation to procedural impropriety, and we shall discuss it again in that context.
Perhaps it would be useful in such cases if the court could, instead of refusing relief completely, grant some sort of declaration which would not impugn the decision affecting the applicant but would state a rule or principle which would apply to future cases.
The problem of administrative inconvenience resulting from the quashing of decisions with retrospective effect might also be capable of being overcome in some cases by some form of prospective relief (that is, relief which only operates in the future).
Secondly, is it right that relief should be refused because the court disapproves of the applicant personally or of the motives behind the bringing of the application?
In extreme cases perhaps it is, but relief should not be refused unless the applicant's conduct or motive makes it inappropriate to award the relief sought in this case: courts should not refuse relief in order to penalize an applicant for bad conduct unrelated to the relief sought.
Thirdly, it can be argued that the discretion creates unacceptable uncertainty and unpredictability in the law because it allows a person to be refused relief on unexpected and ill-defined grounds.
However, this argument assumes that the rules of judicial review which can be waived by appealing to the discretion are themselves clear and certain; but, as we will see, this is very far from the case.
On the other hand, remedial discretion should not be seen as a substitute for defining the grounds of judicial review more carefully and narrowly.
For example, if it is thought that an error of law or fact or a breach of natural justice should justify quashing only if it can be said that but for the error or breach the decision would have been different, this should be built into the definition of the relevant ground of review and not dealt with as a matter of remedial discretion.
Nor should remedial discretion be used as a way of discouraging applications for judicial review in order to reduce the Crown Office List to manageable proportions.
It is certainly essential that the grounds on which the discretion to refuse relief can be exercised should be spelled out as clearly as possible, and that those grounds should be supportable by rational argument.
The courts will always wish to retain a residual and undefined discretion to deal with unexpected cases but the scope for its operation must be kept as narrow as possible.
Damages
Damages a private law remedy
Unlike the declaration and the injunction, which are private law remedies (i.e. remedies for the redress of private law wrongs) which have been extended to redress public law illegality, damages is a purely private law remedy.
In other words, in order to obtain an award of damages it is necessary to show a private law wrong; damages cannot be awarded simply on the basis that a governmental body has acted illegally.
The relevance of the remedy in public law is that public bodies can commit private law wrongs and so damages is a remedy available against public bodies.
For example, damages for breach of contract can be obtained against a government department.
Conversely, whereas a declaration or injunction is available to restrain a breach of natural justice or to declare the invalidity of a decision made in breach of the rules of natural justice, damages are not available for breach of natural justice as such, because this is a wrong recognized only in public law.
But, if a breach of natural justice also amounted to a breach of contract, damages might be available for the breach.
It is not clear why damages are not available as a remedy for public law wrongs.
Why should a citizen, injured in a pecuniary sense by a public law wrong, have to be satisfied with having the decision reversed if reversal does not undo the pecuniary injury?
The explanation may lie in the fact that all the remedies we have so far considered are discretionary.
On the other hand, damages are not a discretionary remedy and so the courts do not have as much control over the award of this remedy as over the judicial review remedies.
Another possible explanation is related to the nature of judicial review.
One of the characteristics of judicial review is that the supervising court does not substitute its decision for that of the public authority; rather it leaves it to the body to make good its illegal behaviour by making a fresh decision which complies with the requirements of the law.
To award damages, on the other hand, is in a sense to substitute a decision for that of the public authority.
A strict analogy with judicial review would perhaps give the decision-maker a power (and a duty) to award compensation after it had re-made its decision, if it turned out that the applicant had suffered loss as a result of the initial illegal decision (although there are difficulties in this solution which we will consider in a moment).
Should monetary compensation be made available as a remedy in public law, and if so, on what basis?
There seems no reason not to allow that monetary compensation may, at least in some cases, be a suitable remedy in public law.
The second question is, therefore, the more important of the two.
There are two main theories which have been suggested as providing a suitable basis for an award of monetary compensation: the illegality theory and the risk theory.
Compensation for Illegality
Under the illegality theory, as the name implies, the ground for the award of damages is that the defendant has acted illegally.
The main problem with this theory is that because of the nature of judicial review for illegality it would, in many cases, be extremely difficult, if not theoretically impossible, for a plaintiff to prove a causal link between the illegal action and the loss suffered.
Suppose a plaintiff suffers loss as a result of an illegal administrative decision.
The decision is quashed and the authority makes a fresh and legal decision.
That decision might be the same as the first one and cause the plaintiff the same loss.
In fact, one would expect a public authority always to be inclined to search for a way to reach the same decision legally the second time round, if only to save face; and the incentive to do so would be even greater if it were likely to be required to pay damages should it decide that its earlier loss-causing decision ought to be changed.
Many grounds of public law illegality do not rule out the making of the same decision again.
A decision can be illegal because, for example, it was made in contravention of the rules of natural justice; or because relevant considerations were ignored in making it; or because the authority was unduly influenced by some external factor, such as the opinion of some other authority or an agreement with a third party.
None of these grounds of illegality rules out the possibility that exactly the same decision might be reached even if natural justice were complied with, or all relevant considerations were taken into account, or the authority were to ignore all undue fetters on its discretion.
So, until the decision is made again, it is not possible to say whether the loss would not have been suffered but for the illegal decision.
A solution might be to postpone the decision on the issue of damages until after the authority has deliberated again.
The danger of this is that the fear of an award of damages against it would unduly encourage the authority to reach the same decision again, thus creating an appearance of bias.
Whether this is a real practical difficulty depends on whether the desire to save face would not anyway have this effect of encouraging the same decision to be made again, even if there were no risk of a damages award.
On the other hand, public authorities do not usually commit illegal acts deliberately, and if an atmosphere of opinion were created in which compensation for illegality were seen as being simply compensation for loss and not as carrying any stigma of fault or as being designed to perform the function of deterring illegal conduct, public authorities might be able to put the chance of an award out of their mind in deciding the applicant's case the second time round.
There is a danger of viewing compensation for illegality too much in terms of a traditional tort model rather than in terms of distributing widely and thinly the financial ill-effects of governmental ‘mistakes’.
In a less than perfect world it is inevitable that government authorities will sometimes act illegally, and there may be a lot to be said for bringing the ‘loss distribution’ insights of modern tort theory to bear on the way we perceive public law compensation.
The fact that the government pays the compensation should not lead us to think of the government as an ordinary defendant.
We could see it as providing an insurance fund against loss caused by (usually) unintentional failure to keep within the bounds set by the principles of public law.
On the other hand, it may be that this is wishful thinking and that, in practical terms, the award of damages for illegality is incompatible with the theory of judicial review because it cannot be reconciled with the idea that the ultimate decision must usually be left to the public authority.
Sometimes the ultimate question is only in theory left to the public authority; for example, in some cases of review for jurisdictional errors of law or fact in which it is clear that if the authority had got the law or the facts right, its decision would have been different and could only have been one way.
Again, if the court holds that a particular decision was unreasonable,that decision could not lawfully be made again.
In such cases the applicant may be able to show that if the respondent had not acted unlawfully, no loss would have been suffered.
There are certain other circumstances in which this problem of unduly encouraging an authority to reach a particular decision does not arise and in which a scheme of compensation might be feasible and desirable: where there is no question of a decision being re-made, notably where the time-limit for challenging an allegedly illegal decision has run out (through no fault of the applicant); or where a citizen has suffered loss by relying on a representation by a public body that it will act in a particular way, in circumstances where the law will not require the body to make good its representation because it has undertaken to act illegally; or where a court exercises its discretion not to quash an illegal decision In such cases the problem of causation does not exist because the decision in question will not be reconsidered.
The problem with drawing distinctions between cases in this way is that the chance circumstance that a particular case falls into one of these categories does not seem to justify the difference between compensation and no-compensation for illegality.
Compensation for Risks
The risk theory is a theory which operates independently of any concept of fault or illegality.
The idea here is that citizens would be entitled to compensation for loss caused by the conduct of a particular activity regardless of whether that activity was conducted legally or illegally, in a faulty way or absolutely blamelessly.
In terms of the law of tort, the risk theory contemplates either a strict liability scheme of compensation, in which the government would bear the initial burden of compensation, or a no-fault scheme in which the individual is insured against loss by some form of insurance (perhaps tax-based).
Under the risk theory, therefore, compensation might be awarded for public law wrongs, but it might also be awarded for action which is perfectly legal in the public law sense.
There are situations in which, by statute, compensation is already payable on a risk theory.
For example, under the Land Compensation Act 1973 property owners are entitled to compensation for depreciation in the value of their land caused by such things as noise, vibration, smells, and fumes, resulting from public works, The underlying reasoning is that since the public is presumed to benefit greatly from the building of a motorway (for example ), private citizens who suffer as a result of its construction should not have to bear their loss for the sake of that wider public interest.
The risk theory, therefore, requires an important value judgment in relation to any particular governmental activity: if that activity inflicts loss on private individuals, should those individuals be expected to bear it or should the government pick up the bill?
A court might not be thought to be a particularly suitable body to make such a decision because, in many situations, the decision, whichever way it goes, will be politically highly contentious.
It is worth noting, however, that one of the ideas behind the risk theory, namely that losses should be borne by the party best able to absorb them with least dislocation and disruption, is a very popular one in the (private) law of tort where the theory of fault liability is, in some areas at least, under attack.
And since government is responsible for, or influences in important ways, a very large number of activities, there may be sound political arguments for thinking seriously about a more extensive and rationalized set of ‘risk theory schemes’ of compensation for loss caused by governmental action.
It may be, of course, that what we really want is that some losses so caused should be compensated for if they result from illegal action, and some other losses compensated for regardless of whether they result from illegal action or not.
The category into which particular losses are put will depend on the value we put on the interests which the governmental action in question has interfered with, weighed against the value we put on the end which the governmental action was designed to serve.
In some cases we might be happy for courts to do the weighing exercise involved and, to the extent that we are, we could have a ‘common law’ of public law compensation.
But if the decisions involved are perceived as being too politically sensitive for the courts, some legislative intervention might be necessary to establish the desired framework of value judgments.
The Impact of European Community Law
In certain circumstances, monetary compensation is available in European law as a remedy against governmental institutions of the Community for the equivalent of what, in English law, would be called public law wrongs.
In Bourgoin v. Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food the plaintiff sought damages from the Ministry for an alleged breach of Article 30 of the Treaty of Rome which prohibits Member States imposing ‘quantitative restrictions on imports’ from other Member States.
The Court of Appeal held that because the principle of effective protection only required that national courts should provide remedies for the protection of European rights which were as effective as the remedies available for the protection of similar rights in English law; and since a plaintiff can recover damages against governmental bodies in English law only if a breach of private law can be shown; and since the challenged action would not be actionable in tort in English law; it followed that the principle of effective protection did not require that damages be available to the plaintiff as a remedy.
However, Oliver LJ dissented partly on the ground that the principle of effective protection might require a national court to give protection to a European right even though a similar domestic right would be denied protection.
Oliver LJ's dissent seems more in tune with the decision of the European Court in Factortame II than are the judgments of the majority in Bourgoin .
It seems clear that the principle that remedies are a matter for the courts of Member States and the principle of effective protection are, potentially at least, in conflict; and that ultimately the legal system which creates a right must also control the way that right is protected.
If this argument is correct, it is possible to conceive that the European Court might, given the right circumstances, hold the English rule that damages are only available in English law to protect private law rights to be in conflict with European law.
If this happened, there would be a glaring difference between the protection available against the government for European law rights on the one hand and English law rights on the other.
There is another indirect way in which an award of damages might be obtained against a governmental body which would not be available against anyone else.
If the relevant provisions of an EC directive are clear, unambiguous and unconditional, it may be enforceable by citizens against a Member ‘State’ even though the directive has not been implemented by the state in question.
Provisions which are enforceable in this way are called ‘directly effective’.
If damages would have been available against ‘the State’ if the directive had been implemented, then damages can be obtained even though the directive has not been implemented.
Furthermore, if a citizen suffers loss as a result of failure by a Member State to implement a directive, the citizen may be entitled to recover damages for that loss from the State even if the relevant provisions of the directive are not directly effective and even if, had the directive been implemented, the citizen would have been entitled to damages from another citizen rather than the state.
Impact of the European Convention of Human Rights
If a breach of public law also amounts to a breach of the European Convention on Human Rights it may be possible to obtain an award of compensation under the Convention from the European Court of Human Rights, but not from an English Court.
Voluntary Compensation Schemes
Finally, it should be noted that central government does sometimes voluntarily pay compensation to injured individuals without being held liable to do so and even when legal liability to do so may be doubtful or non-existent.
This may happen when a government department settles a case out-of-court or decides to make an ex gratia payment.
Sometimes ex gratia payments are made as a result of a recommendation of an ombudsman.
For example, over ‘150 million was paid out to investors in the failed Barlow Clowes investment group after an adverse report by the Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration on the role of the Department of Trade in the affair.
The making of one-off ex gratia payments is not subject to judicial review.
But if there is a large group of potential claimants, the government may formalize the awarding of compensation.
Sometimes this is done by statute.
In other cases the government may establish a non-statutory scheme.
Perhaps the best-known of such schemes is the Criminal Injuries Compensation Scheme (CICS), but there is also, for example, a scheme for compensating people who suffer loss as a result of maladministration by officials handling National Insurance contributions.
Ex gratia compensation schemes of this sort are attractive to governments because the identity of the beneficiaries and the amounts paid out are under their direct control.
On the other hand, such schemes inevitably create anomalies: chosen beneficiaries are often no more ‘worthy’ of compensation than other victims of government action who are not covered by a similar scheme.
The creation of such schemes is more often a reaction to political pressure than the result of a rational approach to the issue of compensation for the effects of government action.
The administration of non-statutory,ex gratia compensation schemes may be subject to judicial review.
It can be argued that such schemes should be embodied in statutes so as to put their administration and the principles of compensation on a firm legal footing.
Statutory provisions embodying the CICS have been enacted, but at the time of writing they had not been brought into force.
Local authorities have no general power to make ex gratia payments, but may do so on the recommendation of the local government ombudsman.
Exclusion of Remedies
Express Ouster
Original and Appellate Jurisdiction
The power to entertain judicial review actions belongs to the High Court and is called its ‘supervisory jurisdiction’.
The power of the High Court to hear other types of actions, such as contract and tort claims, belongs to what is called the ‘original jurisdiction’ of the court.
The power to hear appeals is, of course, referred to as the ‘appellate jurisdiction’.
Our main concern in this book is with the supervisory jurisdiction, but brief consideration of the effect of alternative remedies on the original (and appellate) jurisdiction of the courts is not out of place.
There is a strong presumption (invented by the courts) against ouster of the original and appellate jurisdiction of the ordinary courts.
A statutory power to make delegated legislation will not empower the delegate to make rules designed to oust the jurisdiction of the courts unless very clear words to this effect appear in the enabling statute.
Thus, a statutory provision allowing recourse to an alternative remedy will not readily be interpreted as requiring the alternative redress to be sought at the expense of an application to a court.
Provisions in a contract which purported to give a non-judicial body exclusive power to decide questions affecting the rights of contracting parties would be void as contrary to public policy.
Supervisory Jurisdiction
The courts have at times taken an uncompromising attitude towards express legislative provisions designed to exclude judicial review.
Judicial review is seen as a basic right of all citizens which the legislature will be taken to have excluded only by the very clearest words.
This attitude seems to be the result of viewing judicial review as chiefly designed to protect the rights of the individual from unlawful interference by government.
So it has been held that a provision in a statute that regulations made under the statute will take effect as if enacted in the statute (that is, they will be unchallengeable as if they were made by Parliament) does not prevent the courts holding the regulation to be ultra vires .
A provision that a decision shall not be subject to appeal (or that it shall be ‘final’) does not oust judicial review.
And in Ansiminic Ltd. v. Foreign Compensation Commission it was held that a statutory provision that decisions of the Commission were not to be ‘called in question in any court of law’ was ineffective to exclude the quashing of a decision vitiated by jurisdictional error of law: its only effect was to prevent a decision being quashed for non-jurisdictional error of law.
The excluding provision was drafted in what appeared to be very clear and unambiguous terms and the decision indicates that the House of Lords saw the role of the courts in judicial review proceedings as being of great importance.
Since Anisminic was decided there have been a couple of noteworthy developments in this context.
The first is a perceptible change in judges' attitudes to judicial review.
In the late 1960s and in the 1970s the development of administrative law was strongly influenced by Lord Reid and Lord Denning, both of whom were in favour of expanding judicial control of government.
Now, however, the current Master of the Rolls, Lord Donaldson, is the most influential figure and he favours a more modest role for the courts in this area than Lord Denning, in particular, would have wanted.
This change of atmosphere is important because the scope and effectiveness of statutory ouster clauses is a matter of statutory interpretation, and so it is open to the courts, by interpreting ouster clauses more or less strictly, to regulate access to judicial review.
Of course,Anisminic is authority only in relation to the precise wording of the provision in issue in that case, and so courts are able to interpret different wording more favourably to the government.
So, for example, recent authority suggests a provision to the effect that the issuing of a certificate ‘shall be conclusive evidence’ that the conditions for the issue of the certificate had been satisfied would normally be effective to oust judicial review of the decision to issue the certificate.
Secondly, after a period when the insertion into statutes of ouster clauses of the Anisminic type fell out of favour, their use is again on the increase.
A variety of wording is used and it is difficult to be certain how such clauses will be interpreted; but the change in judicial attitudes just noted would suggest that they will fare better than did the clause in Anisminic .
Another important type of statutory ouster clause are clauses which set a time-limit on judicial review.
It has been said by the courts that there are good reasons of public policy to enforce such time-limits: public programmes ought not to be suspended or held up indefinitely for fear of a challenge at some later date.
The most common statutory period for the challenge of administrative decisions is six weeks.
There can be no sound objection to time-limits of some sort, but six weeks seems an unnecessarily and even unfairly short time.
Such limits might be acceptable if the only persons entitled to challenge governmental action were persons directly affected.
But as we have seen, the law in some cases allows anyone with a genuine interest to make an application for judicial review, and it may take such persons a considerable time to find out about the decision they want to challenge.
Implied Ouster by Alternative Remedies
If the applicant for a judicial remedy could have pursued a non-judicial remedy but has failed to do so, this may give a court a ground for refusing a judicial remedy: the law requires the ‘exhaustion of alternative remedies’ as it is sometimes put.
This, being a common law principle, can be displaced by statutory provision preserving judicial remedies despite the existence of alternative non-judicial remedies.
There are two different ways in which the existence of an alternative remedy can affect the availability of judicial remedies: it might entirely preclude the award of a judicial remedy, or it might give the court a discretion to refuse a (discretionary) remedy if it thinks that the alternative remedy is adequate.
The most common type of alternative remedy is an appeal to a higher level within the decision-making body (for example, from a government official to the Secretary of State), or to some external body such as a tribunal.
Original and Appellate Jurisdiction
The presumption against ouster of original jurisdiction which was mentioned above applies here too.
There is authority for the proposition that the mere existence of an alternative remedy will not oust such jurisdiction; in other words, the existence of the alternative gives the court a discretion whether or not to award a remedy.
A good illustration of this principle is provided by the rules concerning ‘statutory default powers’, that is, powers of ministers of central government to give directions to an authority which fails to perform some statutory duty (or, sometimes, a statutory power) as to what it must do in pursuance of its duty (or in exercise of its power).
Suppose a plaintiff sues an authority in tort for breach of statutory duty despite the presence in the statute of a default power.
The court might hold that the existence of the default power precludes the tort action; but if the authority has not just failed to act but has taken positive action, or if it has acted ultra vires , or if it has inflicted injury on the applicant greater than that suffered by other affected parties (‘special damage’), a court might be prepared to allow a tort action even in the face of a statutory default power.
In their terms, however, all of these exceptions turn on legal concepts (ultra vires , misfeasance/nonfeasance, special damage) which are difficult to define and apply and which, on their own, give little help in predicting whether or not a judicial remedy will be available.
On the other hand, there are cases in which the existence of an alternative remedy seems not to have given rise to a discretion to refuse a remedy but to have operated as an absolute bar to the award of a judicial remedy.
For example, it has been held that an applicant for unemployment benefit cannot sue the government in tort for negligence in processing the application because there is a statutory right of appeal against refusal of benefit.
The jurisdiction of a university visitor to adjudicate on disputes governed by the university's statutes, regulations and other ‘internal laws’ precludes recourse to a court in respect of the dispute, although the decision of the visitor is amenable to judicial review.
It has also been held that where the right which the applicant seeks to protect by action in a court was created by the same statute as provided the (alternative) remedy for its protection, the statutory remedy is the only one available.
The cases perhaps support the principle that an alternative remedy will oust judicial jurisdiction if it performs the same function as the available judicial remedy; but if it performs a different function, the court will have a discretion to refuse a remedy.
Supervisory Jurisdiction
The basic principle here is that since judicial review remedies are discretionary, they will not be awarded if an equally or more ‘convenient, beneficial and effectual’ alternative remedy is available.
But it is clear that the mere existence of an alternative remedy does not oust judicial review.
So, for example, it is in the discretion of the court whether or not to award mandamus to enforce the performance of a statutory duty despite the existence of a statutory default power.
On the other hand, recent cases contain statements to the effect that judicial review will be allowed in the face of an alternative remedy ‘only in exceptional cases’.
It has been argued that judicial review should never be refused because of the existence of an alternative remedy if the applicant can establish a ground for judicial review.
But this approach seems unnecessarily rigid in cases where the matters which would give grounds for judicial review could also be resolved by the alternative process.
On the other hand, it may be that in practice a court would not refuse judicial review in a case of seriously illegal action even if an alternative remedy was available.
In practice, the preference for alternative remedies makes judicial review of little importance except in cases where there is no alternative.
In a case where a court does have a discretion whether or not to award a judicial remedy despite the existence of an alternative non-judicial remedy, what factors are relevant to deciding how to exercise that discretion?
In other words, what criteria are used in judging how ‘convenient, beneficial and effectual’ a remedy is?
A number of factors have been mentioned by courts.
First, judicial review may be allowed in cases where the applicant has pursued the alternative remedy but the procedure appears unlikely to produce a satisfactory outcome; or if it has become seriously delayed.
In this latter context, it should be noted that RSC Order 53 rule 3(8) provides that where certiorari is sought to quash any decision which is subject to appeal, and a time-limit is fixed for that appeal, the court may adjourn the application for leave to seek certiorari until the appeal is heard or the time limit for appealing has expired.
Secondly, even if the applicant has not sought the alternative remedy, judicial review may still be allowed if the applicant alleges malice on the part of the decision-maker; or if the court thinks that the applicant's interest in the action is of such importance that it deserves judicial protection: an example would be personal liberty.
Thirdly, a court might decline to allow judicial review if it thought that the alternative dispute-settling body possessed relevant expertise which the court lacked; or, fourthly, if the case raised issues which could be considered by the alternative body but not by the court on judicial review; or, fifthly, if the alternative body's procedure was better suited to resolving the case than judicial review procedure.
A sixth relevant factor would be which of judicial review and the alternative procedure was likely to resolve the case more quickly.
The Impact of European Community Law
Mrs Johnston was a reserve officer in the Royal Ulster Constabulary.
Her contract of employment was not renewed because there was a policy that women officers should not carry arms and, as a result, there were enough full-time women officers in the RUC to do all the jobs open to women.
Mrs Johnston made a claim to an industrial tribunal that she had been a victim of sex discrimination; but the Secretary of State issued a certificate (which the relevant statute said was ‘conclusive’) that she had been dismissed on grounds of national security.
This certificate deprived the tribunal of jurisdiction.
Sex discrimination in employment is a matter dealt with by European law, and the tribunal referred a number of questions to the European Court of Justice which held, inter alia, that the Order in Council under which the certificate was issued was inconsistent with a requirement of EC law that the right of men and women to equal treatment recognized by EC law should be effectively protected by national legal systems.
It is clear, therefore, that rules of English law which restrict access to courts, tribunals and remedies may fall foul of the principle of effective protection recognized by EC law; and the greater the restriction, the more likely is it to do so.
Being required to have recourse to one remedy rather than another would not fall foul of the principle unless the the latter gave significantly less effective protection to the aggrieved party than the former.
But very short time limits may be vulnerable under the principle.
The Constitutional Significance of Rules about Exclusion of Remedies
In theory, the effect of a statutory ouster clause is simply a matter of statutory interpretation.
But interpreting the words of a statute is often not a simple matter, and an ouster clause will often be capable of being given more than one meaning.
If so, and if the different meanings leave more or less scope for the award of judicial remedies, then the courts have a limited power to give effect to their view of the importance of judicial control of government.
Judicial views on this matter are likely to vary from judge to judge and from time to time: some judges favour more rather than less judicial review; others less rather than more.
Ultimately, the balance is a question of individual judgment guided, perhaps, by some notion of the function of judicial review.
Also, the factors identified above as relevant to deciding the effect of alternative remedies may be relevant to deciding what effect to give to a statutory ouster clause which is open to more than one interpretation.
Relevant, too, are the views of individual judges about the role of the courts in interpreting and applying legislation: some judges may be more prepared to find an ambiguity in statutory language than others or even to interpret a statute ‘purposively’ in order to achieve a desired result.
Individual judges may give more or less weight to the fact that it is the government rather than Parliament which drafts legislation and decides what it shall contain.
Some may wonder why the government should be able to stipulate the limits of judicial control of the government by embodying ouster provisions in statutes which courts are, by virtue of the doctrine of Parliamentary supremacy, bound to apply.
So far as alternative remedies are concerned, if the alternative is provided by statute then deference to Parliamentary intention can be called in aid of requiring recourse to the alternative.
But alternative remedies also raise quite directly questions about the suitability of the judicial process as opposed other avenues open for the control of governmental action.
For example, if an application for a judicial review remedy raises politically contentious matters, a court might be inclined to say that an alternative political form of control, such as a ministerial default power, is the only one available.
As we have seen, questions of expertise and speed are also relevant.
Once again, judicial views about the function and importance of judicial remedies, even if unexpressed, are bound to underlie decisions about the effect of alternative remedies.
In one case an immigrant who was present in Britain was denied judicial review of a decision not to give him leave to enter the country because of the existence of a right of appeal which could only be exercised if the immigrant left Britain.
This decision seems very harsh, but this is a value-judgment with which others could reasonably disagree.
Views about the proper role and function of judicial remedies to control government activity are inevitably political in nature in the sense that they concern the allocation of decision-making power in society.
We will explore these themes in more detail in Chapter 20.
It has also been suggested that requiring recourse to an alternative remedy is used as a way of reducing the number of judicial review cases and the strain on the judicial resources available to hear such cases.
But it is questionable whether this is a good way to deal with lack of judicial resources.
At all events, the rules about alternative remedies introduce another large element of discretion into the award of judicial review remedies, making the outcome of the process of seeking judicial review extremely unpredictable.
Indeed, Lord Donaldson has said that the circumstances in which the court will allow judicial review in the face of an alternative remedy ‘defy definition’!
CHAPTER 5
PROCEDURE
The Application for Judicial Review
One of the results of the emphasis on remedies in administrative law is that the procedure for applying for these remedies is central to an understanding of the position of the public law litigant.
The procedure for applying for the prerogative remedies of certiorari , prohibition and mandamus is contained in Order 53 of the Rules of the Supreme Court (RSC), some provisions of which have been re-enacted in statutory form in section 31 of the Supreme Court Act 1981.
Order 53 (which was introduced in its present form in 1978) lays down the procedure for what are called Applications for Judicial Review (AJRs).
The AJR is not itself a remedy but rather a procedural umbrella under which any of the prerogative orders can be sought.
In certain cases declarations and injunctions can also be sought under Order 53; and a claim for damages can be joined to an AJR if it arises out of a matter to which the AJR relates and provided the court is satisfied that the applicant has a case in private law for the award of damages.
Here it is important to recall the distinction drawn earlier between judicial review and the AJR under Ord. 53.
Judicial review actions are actions in which the alleged wrong is a public law wrong.
Public law wrongs are defined by the rules establishing the substantive grounds of judicial review discussed in Section B below.
An AJR is one way, but not the only way, of bringing a judicial review action.
As we noted above, judicial review actions may be either private actions or public actions or hybrid actions.
Public judicial review actions are those which must be brought under Ord. 53; hybrid judicial review actions are those which may but need not be brought under Ord. 53; and private judicial review actions may not be brought under Ord. 53.
The AJR procedure is the only procedure by which the prerogative orders can be sought (so all applications for a prerogative order are public actions).
But because the declaration and injunction are remedies in private law as well as in public law, there are also procedures contained elsewhere in the Rules of the Supreme Court for applying for these remedies.
Without going into details, these procedures can be described as ‘procedure by writ’ and ‘procedure by (originating) summons’.
AJR procedure is rather similar to summons procedure, but it is different in important ways from writ procedure.
It is necessary to outline the chief differences between writ procedure and AJR procedure.
AJR Procedure and Procedure by Writ Contrasted
The first important difference is that under Order 53 the applicant must first apply for leave to make an AJR.
AJR procedure, therefore, has two stages: the ‘leave stage’ and the ‘hearing stage’.
At the leave stage the court decides whether the application should proceed, and at the hearing stage it decides whether it should succeed.
In theory, any matter which is relevant to whether the applicant should be awarded a remedy at the hearing stage is also relevant to the decision at the hearing stage of whether the application should be allowed to proceed; in other words, leave to apply for judicial review can be refused on any ground on which a remedy could be refused at the hearing stage.
Conversely, the fact that an applicant is given leave does not prevent the court at the hearing stage deciding, for example, that the application should fail because of undue delay, even if the issue of delay was argued and expressly decided in the applicant's favour at the leave stage.
The requirement of leave gives the court control over the proceedings from the very start, and because the respondent does not have to appear at the leave stage, it is relieved of the need to take any steps to get a weak claim struck out.
By contrast, in actions not brought under Ord. 53 the defendant must take positive steps to apply to the court to have the plaintiff's case struck out if there is some ground for doing so.
Straightforward leave applications are often decided without an oral hearing; but even when there is a hearing in order to clarify issues, leave proceedings are meant to be very brief: a recent practice statement requires special notice to be given if it is anticipated that the leave application will last for more than 30 minutes.
The idea is that the court should give only very cursory consideration to the applicant's case at the leave stage, and that leave proceedings should not be used as a surrogate for a full hearing in order to test the strengths and weaknesses of the parties' respective cases as an aid to settlement out-of-court.
The function of the leave requirement is not spelled out in Order 53, but it is designed to weed out cases which have no real chance of success or which might be called ‘frivolous’ or ‘vexatious’in the sense of being brought not out of a genuine interest in the outcome but for some ulterior motive such as to make things difficult for a government agency.
But legal proceedings are often brought for a variety of reasons: not just to obtain a favourable outcome, but also in order, for example, to obtain publicity or to force a reconsideration of a contentious decision or policy or as a bargaining tactic.
So long as one of the applicant's motives is to obtain a favourable outcome, leave should be granted provided the claim is not unarguable.
However, it has been said in the context of applications for judicial review of decisions of bodies exercising powers to regulate takeovers that a remedy would not normally be given until after the takeover process was complete.
It follows from this that leave should not normally be granted in such a case while the takeover ‘battle’ is still in progress.
Underlying this approach is a fear that judicial review will be used for tactical purposes to cause delay and ultimately defeat the takeover bid.
If the function of the leave requirement is to weed out unarguable or vexatious cases it might be expected that only a small proportion of cases would fail at this stage.
However, it seems that leave is refused for between a quarter and a third of all AJRs, and this might suggest that the leave requirement is performing some other function such as keeping the number of pending AJRs down so that the delay between the granting of leave and the hearing is not too great.
If this is happening, it is surely a misuse of the leave procedure and it reveals a lack of judicial resources to meet demand.
Ironically, the leave procedure itself is liable to exacerbate any shortage of judicial resources: a two-stage procedure inevitably requires more judicial resources than would a single-stage procedure.
Also, it may be that the relative cheapness and speed of the leave procedure encourages applications to be made for tactical reasons (for example, to increase the chance of a favourable settlement) despite the absence of any serious expectation that leave will be granted.
In other words, the requirement of leave may encourage the very sort of applications it is designed to weed out, especially given the very short time limit within which an AJR has to be commenced: it is safer to seek leave even if the applicant expects to settle the claim without further litigation.
In this light, the high failure rate of leave applications would not be as surprising as it first seems.
The second noteworthy feature of AJR procedure is that Ord. 53 r.4 imposes a very short time-limit in which an AJR must be made: subject to a discretion to extend the period, the application must be made promptly and at any event within three months from the date when the grounds for the application arose.
By contrast, the time limit for actions in private law is at least three years, and for judicial review applications made outside Ord. 53 there is no fixed time limit: delay in applying is just a factor to be taken into account when the court exercises its discretion whether or not to award a declaration or injunction.
The chief functions of the short time-limit under Ord. 53 are to prevent public programmes from being unduly held up by litigation challenging the legality of such programmes; and to prevent steps already taken in execution of challenged decisions having to be reversed long after the decision was acted upon.
The time limit in Ord. 53 suffers from three major defects: first, the basic limit of three months is too short and may, indeed, be contrary to EC law; secondly, not even the three months is an entitlement: a case may be struck out for undue delay even if brought within three months; and thirdly, there is a discretion to extend the time limit on vague grounds, and this creates uncertainty.
It would be better if, as in private law, there were a longer fixed period which could be extended only in exceptional cases on stated and reasonably precise grounds.
The third notable feature of AJR procedure is that the facilities provided in Order 53 for pre-trial fact-gathering in the form of interrogatories and discovery of documents, are less freely available than in actions begun by writ.
It is often said that Order 53 procedure is designed to be speedy and that cases raising significant disputes of fact are not suitable for resolution under Ord. 53.
Thus there are no pleadings (which are designed to clarify issues of fact in dispute) in an AJR and the evidence is given in writing on affidavit rather than orally.
Cross-examination of the maker of an affidavit is possible but not usual.
Interrogatories and discovery of documents are procedures designed to help in the resolution of factual disputes by ensuring that all relevant documents and information are disclosed, and in actions begun by writ they are available to the parties without the consent of the court.
Under Ord. 53 these procedures can only be used if the court so orders, although it is said that such an order should be no less readily made than in other types of proceedings (by originating summons) where such an order is needed.
These limitations on the availability of the interlocutory procedures are presumably designed to prevent AJRs becoming bogged down by complex factual arguments, thus unduly delaying public programmes.
They may also be designed to minimize the pressure to disclose government documents.
On the other hand, the limitations hinder investigation and resolution of relevant factual disputes.
Discovery of the truth is a basic requirement of justice which should be sacrificed for speed of dispute-resolution only when the case for expedition is overwhelming.
It is undoubtedly the case that many AJRs raise matters of urgency for applicants but in such cases the applicant, who is usually the party with the interest in obtaining information, can choose not to seek discovery etc.
A greater problem of time is caused by delay in the hearing of AJRs caused by the volume of applications and the two-stage nature of the AJR procedure.
Delay of this sort can also adversely affect the efficient conduct of government business; but it is largely outside the control of either party or even of the courts themselves.
It is up to the government to help itself in this respect by providing more judges or by limiting access to judicial review by legislation.
It is also the case that delay in hearing cases can benefit applicants who wish to use judicial review as a delaying tactic: delay caused by waiting lists cannot justify claims of vexatious litigating in the way that delay caused by the applicant can.
A fourth difference between AJR procedure and writ procedure relates to standing: the standing required to make an AJR under Ord. 53 is ‘sufficient interest’ while the standing requirement for private actions is much more strict.
It can be argued that the requirement of obtaining leave is the price for the generous standing rule under Ord. 53, and that for this reason the standing rule for hybrid judicial review actions not brought under Ord. 53 (for which leave is not required) should be stricter than that under Ord. 53.
As stated above, there are two procedural regimes for applying for declarations and injunctions in judicial review actions, one by AJR under Ord. 53 and the other by writ or summons.
By choosing the latter rather than the former an applicant might be able to avoid the restrictive features of AJR procedure.
The Law Commission, which first suggested the introduction of the AJR, contemplated that applicants would have a free choice between the two procedural paths in cases where both were available on the facts of the case.
Moreover, both Ord.53, r. 1(2) and s. 31(2) of the Supreme Court Act 1981 provide that declarations and injunctions ‘may’ be awarded under Ord. 53 but do not require an applicant for such remedy to claim under Ord. 53.
However, in O'Reilly v. Mackman Lord Diplock argued that the present procedural regime for AJRs is more advantageous to applicants than that under the pre-1978 version of Ord. 53. and that it strikes a sound balance between the interests of applicants and respondents.
For this reason the House of Lords held that in certain cases an applicant for a declaration or an injunction should not have a choice of procedure: in certain cases it would be and ‘abuse of the process of the court’ for an applicant seeking a declaration or an injunction to proceed otherwise than by way of an AJR under Ord. 53.
In other words, some judicial review actions involving applications for declarations and injunctions are, like all applications for prerogative orders, public judicial review actions which must be brought under Ord. 53.
We might say that the decision in O'Reilly established an ‘exclusivity principle’ applying to some judicial review applications for declarations and injunctions.
But the exclusivity principle does not apply to all such applications: some are what I have called hybrid judicial review actions and such actions need not, but may, be brought under Ord. 53.
Furthermore, as we will see, some actions in respect of public law wrongs cannot be brought under Ord. 53.
It is important, therefore, to know what count as ‘purely public judicial review actions’ which must be brought under Ord. 53; and it is to the definition of this term that we must now turn.
But before doing so, it should be noted that although the discussion so far has treated procedure by writ or summons in the High Court as the relevant alternative to Ord. 53 procedure, this is not the only possible alternative.
Declarations and injunctions can also be sought in the County Court, and issues of the sort which can arise in judicial review actions under Ord. 53 may also arise in cases before tribunals and criminal courts.
But the general thrust of the above discussion is relevant to all such cases: whatever the alternative to Ord. 53 procedure for dealing with a particular issue, the question is whether the peculiar features of an Ord. 53 make it inappropriate to use the alternative in the particular case in question.
Public Judicial Review Actions
In O'Reilly v. Mackman the House of Lords held that a prisoner who was seeking to challenge (on the ground of breach of natural justice) a decision of a Board of Prison Visitors which had the effect of depriving him of a remission of sentence, had to use AJR procedure because he had no private law right to a remission but only a legitimate expectation that the remission would be granted if no disciplinary sentence of forfeiture of remission had been made against him.
This legitimate expectation was recognized only in public law and not in private law.
This decision established the general rule that if an applicant for judicial review seeks to protect rights or interests recognized only in public law, he or she must do so by AJR under Ord. 53.
In Cocks v. Thanet DC the House of Lords applied this rule and held that an applicant who wanted to challenge a decision of a local authority to the effect that he was intentionally homeless and so not entitled to be housed, had to use AJR procedure because his only rights in respect of the decision were public law rights, namely that the decision would be made in accordance with rules of public law.
By contrast, in the same case it was held that once the council had decided that the applicant was entitled to be housed, the right to be housed was a private law right which did not have to be enforced by AJR procedure, but could be enforced in a tort action for breach of statutory duty in the County Court.
On the other hand, consider Wandsworth LBC v. Winder .
The council passed a resolution increasing council house rents.
The applicant thought that it was ultra vires and refused to pay the increased rent.
When the council sought to evict him for non-payment of the extra rent he pleaded in defence that the resolution was invalid.
The House of Lords held, in effect, that since the applicant was arguing that he had a contractual right under his lease to remain at the lower rent, he was asserting private law rights and so could raise the defence in the possession proceedings in the County Court and did not have to raise it by means of an AJR.
The distinction between public law and private law interests seems to rest on the assumption that the latter are in some way more important and more worthy of protection than the former.
AJR procedure incorporates certain procedural protections for public bodies and the rule that a claimant asserting public law interests can only use AJR procedure puts him at a disadvantage which is justifiable only on the assumption that public law interests do not matter as much as private law rights and, therefore, do not deserve as much legal protection.
But when one considers the subject matter of some of the public law interests which have generated litigation (e.g. remission of sentence, obtaining council housing) this assumption appears absurd.
The fact that the public law applicant is usually challenging the exercise of a discretionary power does not mean that what is at stake for him or her is any less important than the sort of interests protected by private law.
Protecting Private Law Rights under Order 53
Assuming that the underlying rationale of the distinction between public law and private law interests is to force certain litigants to use the less advantageous Order 53 procedure, it might seem to follow that an applicant would be free to choose to bring an AJR to protect private law rights.
And in some cases this is undoubtedly so: if he had wished, Winder could have challenged the resolution raising council house rents by way of an AJR.
Public law is not only concerned with the protection of public law rights but also with the protection of private law rights against illegal interference by government bodies.
However, in some instances, private law rights cannot be protected by an AJR.
In the first place, it has been held that judicial review actions against bodies which owe their existence to contract cannot be brought under Ord. 53.
This rule seems to be a hangover from the time when the only remedies available under Ord. 53 were the prerogative orders: these are not available against contractual bodies, but there seems no good reason of policy or principle why a declaration or injunction should not be sought against such a body under Ord. 53.
Secondly, the contractual rights of an employee even against a government employer cannot be enforced under Ord. 53 unless those rights are ‘underpinned by statute’ in a way which injects a ‘public element’into the employment relationship.
A policy basis for this rule might be that the preferable way to protect employment rights is by an action for unfair dismissal before an Industrial Tribunal or by an ordinary action for breach of contract; and that in cases with no clear public element recourse should be had to such alternative remedies and not to an AJR in the High Court.
This rule adds a consideration to those already discussed as being relevant to the scope of Ord. 53, namely whether the High Court (which hears AJRs) or the alternative forum is more expert in dealing with the type of issue in question or better equipped to resolve it.
Judges of the High Court who regularly hear AJRs are, presumably, expert in the law of judicial review but not in employment law which industrial tribunals deal with regularly.
Of course, this consideration can only be relevant if there is an alternative forum available; if there is not, then the High Court may be inclined to allow an AJR unless there is some statutory provision which precludes this, even if the rights in issue are essentially ordinary employment rights.
The question which these cases raise concerning the proper forum for protecting the employment rights of government employees has generated a large volume of litigation, and the resulting law is complex and unsatisfactory.
The underlying problem is that cases concerning the employment rights of public employees often raise both public law and private law issues which are not easily separable, if at all.
It has been argued that all public employment cases should be dealt with by the same forum which could resolve all the issues raised.
This proposal is not inconsistent with a more general suggestion made later in this chapter.
It is unclear whether or not the rule that private employment rights are not enforceable under Ord. 53 is an application of a wider principle that contractual rights cannot be protected by AJR unless they possess a sufficient ‘public element’.
Of course, any definition of ‘sufficient public element’ is bound to be complex and controversial.
Exceptions to the Exclusivity Principle
In O'Reilly v. Mackman Lord Diplock said that there were two exceptions to the principle that it would be an abuse of the process of the court not to bring a purely public judicial review action under Ord. 53: first, Ord. 53 need not be used when none of the parties objects to the use procedure by writ or summons.
The rationale of this exception is that there is no reason to protect a respondent who does not wish to be protected by the restrictive features of Ord. 53 procedure.
On the other hand, it could be argued that the procedural restrictions of Ord. 53 are in the public interest and should not be waivable.
Also it is strange that an action which is an abuse of court process can be allowed to proceed simply because no party to the action objects.
The second exception arises where the challenge to the contested decision or action is collateral , that is, it arises out of and incidentally to a some other legal claim.
The challenge to the council's resolution in Wandsworth LBC v. Winder was collateral in two ways: it was made in answer to a claim for possession of the premises by the Council, and it was incidental to an assertion of a contractual right under the lease.
Does a case fall within the exception only if it is collateral in both senses?
There is no simple answer to this question.
On the one hand, it would seem that if a claim can be framed as one in contract or tort, or if it concerns a private legal right, it need not be brought under Ord. 53 even if the very ground on which the respondent's action is alleged to be a tort or breach of contract is that it was illegal in a public law sense.
It is not an abuse to process to assert private law rights by a private action even if the action raises or turns on public law issues.
And, of course, if an action in tort or contract against a public authority does not turn on any issue of public law, it need not be brought under Ord. 53.
On the other hand, it has been held that gypsies who camp on public land cannot argue, in defence to a claim for an eviction order by a council, that the council has failed to fulfil its statutory obligation to provide camping sites because the gypsies had no legal right to the land on which they were camping.
So it would seem that even a defence may be an abuse of process if it is not based on private rights.
One might conclude from these cases that the collateral attack exception is simply a restatement of the public right/private right distinction.
However, it also seems clear that it is permissible to argue, in defence to a prosecution for breach of a statute or regulation, that the relevant statutory provision or regulation is ultra vires ; but it is difficult to see how this involves assertion of a ‘private law right’: there is no private law right not to be prosecuted apart from the right not to be prosecuted maliciously.
The ‘collateral attack’ exception raises a number of problems.
First, consider Winder again: the council sought to evict Winder years after the challenged resolution was passed.
If Winder's challenge to the resolution succeeded this would mean that all the council's tenants would be in a position to refuse to pay the increased rent, and maybe to claim return of overpaid rent.
Such an outcome would have caused a great deal of trouble for the council which could have been largely avoided if the resolution had been directly challenged soon after it was made under Ord. 53.
The short time limit under Ord. 53 is designed to deal with just such cases.
By contrast, although the plaintiff in O'Reilly v. Mackman had also delayed well beyond the Ord. 53 time limit in bringing his claim, this delay would have caused no undue problem for the respondent.
This suggests that there may be a mismatch between the rationale for protecting respondents by a short time limit and the criteria used to decide whether or not Ord. 53 must be used by the applicant.
We will return to this point soon.
A second difficulty posed by the collateral attack exception is that Ord. 53, r.7 provides that a claim for damages may be brought under Ord. 53 if the claim arises from any matter to which an AJR relates.
It could be argued that if a claim for damages is based on a claim that a governmental body has acted illegally in a public law sense, then the damages claim should be attached to an AJR and be saddled with the same procedural restrictions as would apply to an AJR.
Thirdly, many collateral attacks, especially claims for damages, are likely to raise factual issues.
It has often been said that because of the restrictions on discovery, interrogatories and cross-examination under Ord. 53, the AJR is not a suitable vehicle for resolving factual disputes, and this provides a justification for not requiring collateral attacks to be made by way of an AJR.
However, despite what Lord Diplock seemed to believe it is not the case that direct challenges to governmental decisions by way of judicial review are unlikely to raise factual issues: in particular, challenges based on breach of natural justice or on error of fact may well raise difficult and complex issues of fact.
There is no direct correlation between whether or not a challenge is collateral and whether or not it raises issues of fact.
More generally, there is no direct correlation between the reasons for the procedural restrictions of Ord. 53 and the criteria used to decide when Ord. 53 procedure must be used.
The requirement of leave is designed to weed out frivolous, vexatious, or hopeless cases; but there is no reason to think that claims based on private law rights will not sometimes be frivolous, vexatious, or hopeless or that claims based on public law rights are particularly prone to be frivolous, vexatious or hopeless.
Nor is there any reason to think that claims based on private law rights will not sometimes hold up public programmes if they are allowed to be brought after the short time-limit in Order 53; or that claims based on public law rights will necessarily cause trouble if brought after that time limit has expired.
Finally, claims based on public law rights might well raise factual issues more suited to resolution in an action begun by writ than by Ord. 53 procedure; conversely, claims based on private law rights may well raise no such issues — which is why originating summons procedure is available as an alternative to writ procedure for claims brought outside Ord. 53.
This produces a tension within the Ord. 53 procedural scheme: on the one hand, AJRs may involve factual disputes which take time to resolve properly and fairly; on the other hand, AJR procedure is designed to be speedy.
In short, there is no reason to think that the procedural features of Order 53 are ideally suited for all claims based on public law rights or, conversely, that the procedural features of writ procedure are necessary for all claims based on private law rights.
The exclusivity principle, therefore, seems to be based on a false premise, namely that AJR procedure is necessary and desirable for dealing properly with all purely public judicial review actions.
Let the Applicant Beware!
The exclusivity principle creates a procedural minefield.
In principle, an applicant who should have brought his or her case under Ord. 53, but did not, will lose: there is no provision under which the case can continue as if begun in the correct way.
However, in practice it appears that the court has a discretion to allow the case to continue as if begun under Ord. 53 provided this will not unfairly deprive the respondent of some protection which would have been enjoyed if the case had been begun under Ord. 53.
The position of the litigant who wrongly brings a case under Order 53 is different because Ord. 53 r. 9(5) may allow the case to continue as if it had been started by ordinary writ procedure.
But the court's discretion under this rule only arises if the applicant has sought a declaration, an injunction or damages; and even if one of these remedies has been claimed the court may, in cases raising complex factual issues, refuse to exercise the discretion in the applicant's favour on the basis that it would be better if the case were started afresh by writ.
On balance, it is probably safer to use AJR procedure if there is doubt about whether one's case is a public law case or not.
But this course of action brings with it the disadvantages of AJR procedure already discussed.
There seems no justification for this situation.
Further Procedural Reforms
It can be argued that the question of whether an applicant ought to be required to use Ord. 53 procedure should depend on whether the particular procedural features of Ord. 53 are appropriate to the case.
A way of achieving this result might be to require all cases brought against governmental bodies and all cases concerning the exercise of public functions to be brought under a revamped Ord. 53 which would provide for two procedural tracks: a fast track for cases which, in the public interest, needed to be dealt with speedily, and a slow track for other cases.
The fast track would resemble present Ord. 53 procedure while the slow track would incorporate features of writ procedure designed to deal properly with factual disputes.
Every applicant could be required to apply for leave to make a judicial review application.
If the court decided at this stage that the case did not in fact involve the performance of a public function, the case should normally be allowed to continue as a non-Ord. 53 case if the applicant wished.
However, if the applicant was happy to have the case dealt with under the procedure for public law cases, then there is no reason why the case should not proceed in this way.
If the case did concern a public function, the court would have to decide whether the applicant had sufficient standing, whether the case was brought in time, and whether the case was a hopeless, frivolous, or vexatious one.
If the court decided that the case should go ahead, it would then have to decide by which procedural track it should proceed.
If the case raised factual issues, then the fact-oriented procedure should be allowed unless there were compelling reasons of time why the extra delay this would cause was unacceptable.
The court should take account of the fact that it could minimize the delay by setting a timetable for the action.
Given that cases involving the exercise of public functions might also raise issues of private law, it should be made clear that the court hearing an application under public law procedure is to decide all issues raised by the case, whether of public law or private law.
It might be argued that this scheme puts the claimant who at present has a choice whether or not to use Ord. 53, at a disadvantage because under the new scheme he or she would have to seek leave and would possibly be subject to very restrictive time-limits.
But the requirement of leave need not be too burdensome for applicants if an expeditious procedure for cases of emergency is provided; and the question of time-limits could be dealt with by making it clear that a short time-limit should be imposed only if public works would otherwise be held in undue suspense.
This proposal is a sort of half-way house.
It is an attempt to preserve the special protections for public bodies contained in Order 53 while at the same time limiting the application of those protections to cases where they are necessary and suitable.
There is, however, a view which supports an even more radical approach, which would remove the protections for public bodies and assimilate public law procedure fully to private law procedure.
Why, after all, should public bodies be specially protected from the grievances of citizens who feel strongly enough to litigate?
Several other procedural reforms have been suggested in recent years.
They are designed to cope with the fact that judicial review actions often raise complex issues of public policy administrative practice which go well beyond the interests of the parties to the judicial review application and of the applicant in particular.
One idea is that judicial review procedure should be more ‘inquisitorial’ and should allow the court to take a more active part in the finding of facts and the calling of evidence relevant to wider issues raised by the case but which the parties themselves might have no strong incentive to call.
The adversarial system of procedure currently in use confines the judge to a passive umpiring role and gives no real scope for the gathering of evidence which the parties do not wish to present.
Another idea is that there should be an official — perhaps called a Director of Civil Proceedings — who would have the power to initiate court proceedings if this was in the public interest and to intervene in proceedings initiated by others to represent the public interest.
This official would be to public law rather what the Director of Public Prosecutions is to the criminal law.
Such an official would be able to bring before a court the sort of evidence which the proposal for inquisitorial procedure is designed to elicit.
But he or she would also be able to initiate the sort of actions which, under the present system, might never be brought because of lack of funds or problems of co-ordination, or because prospective applicants, by reason of social deprivation or lack of education, do not have the human resources to speak for themselves.
The former proposal could be seen as just a way of improving the quality of decision-making by the High Court when hearing judicial review applications.
But the second proposal seems to contemplate an expanded role for judicial review as a way of controlling government activity; and increasing the sources of information available to the courts in the way contemplated by the first proposal might so change perceptions of the judicial role that it, too, would lead to an expanded conception of the role of judicial review.
Whether or not such an expansion of judicial review is desirable is a question the reader must decide for him or her self after reading the rest of this book.