

News
Scorning the immortal Muse
This month sees both the UK and Italy voting for new governments, with the US winding up towards its elections in November.
In all three, the arts are barely on the official agenda: they bring in few votes; they have small budgets compared to the least of other government departments, so they marshall small political forces.
That is not to say, however, that these elections are irrelevant to the cultural life of each nation: there are ideas in play which affect them very profoundly.
In the US, the arts briefly hit the headlines when President Bush unedifyingly threw the Head of the National Endowment for the Arts to the wolves of the right–wing electorate because the NEA had sponsored some difficult, and, in particular, sexually explicit arts projects in recent years.
The significance of this event was not so much that it was government interfering in artistic freedom, as liberal would-be martyrs would have it, but that it showed how frightened the President was of the populist, anti-intellectual feeling which has developed in the US over the last few years.
The belief that the liberal East Coast intelligentsia is ruining the country is rife across the country and will be affecting cultural policies at their broadest from city hall to the White House before and after the election.
In Britain the populist, anti-intellectual pressure has come from government instead of from the people.
The arts world has almost grown accustomed to the hand-to-mouth condition in which it is kept, but what it has not become resigned to over the long period of Tory rule is the positive hostility to its aims and values.
It may well be that the Tories' most lasting and damaging contribution to the cultural life of the nation will have been their deliberate subjection of Britain's television companies to the crudest of market forces, which will almost certainly reduce the best programmes in the world to the shoddy idiocies everyone else in Europe and US is fed.
Again and again, in the name of public accountability, but often with a barely concealed philistine agenda, the government has demonstrated its lack of faith in intellectual or artistic endeavour over and above the purely functional or business-related.
German and French academics and museum curators are astonished, for example, to hear that their counterparts in Britain have had to defend their right to do research.
The arts world does not expect to resolve its funding problems by a change of government, but it is hoping for a more civilised political climate.
In the meanwhile, a new Leviathan has surfaced in cultural life.
It is the European Community, ‘the united states of Europe’, now counting down to the D-Day of the single integrated market on 1 January 1993.
From its founding in 1957 until last December, the EC had no formal competence in cultural matters; in December, the Council of Ministers voted in a culture clause of the most practical, and agnostic, the least grandiose and least proscriptive, sort imaginable (see p.7).
But look which cultural projects have been funded by the EC almost incidentally over the last few years, and you see that in practise it is likely to be a  thoroughly benign Leviathan.
It believes that the arts are forces for social and economic regeneration; it believes in scholars and art experts from different countries meeting each other; it believes in restoring monuments; it believes in education; it believes in bringing damagingly incompatible laws on cultural property closer together.
It obviously believes that an emphasis on its citizens' common humanity is essential to the Community (it is very premature to say nation or State); that is an old-fashioned belief, dating back to the nineteenth century, but it is consoling in these jarring, mean-spirited, unidealistic times.
Paris
Huge Rodin frauds uncovered
Maigret of the bronzes world, Inspecteur Vincenot, on the trail of dealer Guy Hains
PARIS.
The Musée Rodin, founded in 1917 after the death of the prolific Auguste-René Rodin, is having to deal with an unprecedented quantity of fakes which have infiltrated the art market in France.
The nightmare for the Museum and many art world professionals handling turn of the century bronzes began late last January with the arrest and imprisonment of an antique dealer, Guy Hains, age forty-nine.
He was indicted for ‘fraudulent imitation, sale of forgeries, and false pretences’ following a police raid on a foundry at Luxeuil-les-Bains in the Haute Saône region of eastern France.
The arrest of Hains, nicknamed ‘Le Duc de Bourgogne’ after galleries he ran first in Dijon and then in Le Louvre de Antiquaires in Paris, is expected to be followed by many more.
Police seized 3,000 pieces of evidence during their raid on the foundry, placed under the name of Hains's former wife Solange Jonkheere, who was also charged.
Police evidence was reported to have included fake bronzes, original Rodin plasters, and moulds.
A very provisional figure of FFr50 million was put on the market value of the forgeries.
Legal authorities who have taken over the case have imposed a blackout on information and until their investigations are complete and the case is ready to go to trial, probably in two to three months time, no-one can say how many fakes were involved, what their real value was, nor indeed how many people worked in the ring.
Investigations started in October 1991 under the aegis of Inspecteur Vincenot and the Dijon Police Judiciaire squad who last year ran to ground the fake Giacomettis (see The Art Newspaper No. 14, January 1992. pp. 1 and 2).
Nine workmen were reportedly employed at the Luxeuil-les-Bains foundry and authorities are said to have been alerted by the fact that Hains got behind with his Social Security payments.
Patina and chasing work were added in workshops in the Paris region, where Rodins were the speciality.
Other turn-of-the-century artists, easy to fake because their works were frequently not numbered, were also produced there.
Hains allegedly took mouldings of existing works to fake minor artists while using original casts for Rodins.
According to Le Figaro, one major Rodin produced by Hains and his men, the famous youthful male nude bronze ‘L'Age d'airain’, was sold at Drouot salerooms in Paris on 27 November 1989 for FFr3.6 million (£360,000).
Although it is known that Hains had genuine and legitimate professional links with Georges Rudier, the nephew of Rodin's own bronze-founder, Alexis Rudier, further investigations still have to determine how Hains came to acquire original Rodin plaster casts.
The legal ramifications of the Hains case are tortuous.
So far the Musée Rodin has kept up a pretence of knowing nothing about the case while in reality keeping an extremely close eye on every aspect of it.
The institution is expected to wait until investigations are complete and criminal responsibilities are more clearly defined before bringing charges.
The legal loopholes are many.
In French law private possession of the reproduction of a work of art which is not stamped ‘reproduction’ is not a criminal offence, although it can entail an administrative police fine, like a parking ticket, of between FFr 100 and FFr1,000 (£10–£100).
Only when an unmarked reproduction is sold does it become a forgery.
Around one quarter of Rodin's work was unpublished when he died and the casts and moulds became the property of the Musée Rodin which also inherited property rights and ‘Le droit moral’, the right under French law to defend an artist's reputation.
In 1982,(fifty years, after the sculptor's death excluding the statutory ‘war years’) Rodin's work moved into the public domain, although the Musée Rodin retained its ‘droit moral’.
That year the Museum began founding bronzes from the unpublished casts, which it keeps at a secret location somewhere in France.
Since 1982 the Museum has produced an average of five works a year in twelve issues numbered 1 to 8 in Arabic figures and I to IV in Latin numerals.
These works, although not for sale, have sometimes been known to appear on the market.
Nicholas Powell
Expo ‘92
Americans art-less in Seville: Britain fields four sculptors
Expo's own Arts Pavilion fails to meet standards of security and climate control
LONDON.
Lack of interest and meagre funding are the feeble pillars of British and American official attitudes to the display of art at Expo ‘92 which opens in Seville towards the end of this month (20 April-12 October).
That the American Pavilion, where a grand presentation of painting and sculpture would surely have been expected, will not, in fact, show any works of art underlines how far the subject has been marginalised in favour of achievements in the fields of science, discovery and other disciplines.
That state of affairs has been exacerbated by recognition that Expo's own Arts Pavilion (The Art Newspaper No. 16, March 1992, pp. 1,3) is unsuitable for art exhibitions, with neither security nor climate conditions in this temporary structure matching international standards.
It is a pathetic and lamentable contrast to the vital contribution made by the arts at previous Expos in, for example, Paris in 1900 and 1937, or Montreal in 1967.
For Great Britain, the Department of Trade and Industry persuaded Luke Rittner, former Secretary General of the Arts Council, to act as its cultural adviser, but wasted the invitation by equipping him with a totally inadequate budget.
Estimated at less than £200,000, it is a sum roughly equivalent to the money which will be spent in fireworks and flypasts when the Prince and Princess of Wales visit Seville for the evening of 20 May.
Nevertheless, Rittner has been able to channel those modest resources into a taste of British sculpture, with four artists each contributing one important work of art.
Anthony Caro's ‘Tower of Discovery’ has already been erected in a plaza close to the entrance to Expo's site.
Rittner saw the work in the artist's studio shortly before it was installed in the Tate Gallery's Octagon Room last October, and suggested its title with Seville in mind.
But there is concern that Caro's great statement in ‘sculpitecture’ may be dangerous in the heat of Spain's summer months and the authorities may deny the access which gave the work its popularity in London.
Anish Kapoor is, with Matt Mullican, Ilya Kabakov, Stephan Balkenhol and six other artists, recipient of a commission partly financed by Expo itself.
In collaboration with architect David Connor, he is constructing ‘Building for a Void’, a tower of fifteen metres in height, which can be entered by means of a spiral ramp.
A small skylight has been cut into its dome, while a hole in the floor connects to a hollow chamber.
Peter Logan, whose work was shown in The Economist Plaza in London until February, is participating in ‘12 Esculturas’, an EC programme.
He is showing ‘Pencils’, a kinetic wind sculpture constructed in a sprayed and lacquered light aluminium.
Initially created in 1982, Logan has continued to adapt this work, and recently revised it to a new height of over ten metres.
The other participants in this programme, which will place twelve sculptures on a special lawn, include France's Dominique Labauvie and Brigitte Schwake from Germany.
Finally, Richard Wilson's ‘20.50’ oil sculpture, on exhibition at the Saatchi Collection for the last twelve months, will be recreated on the top floor of Seville's Museo de Arte Contemporaneo, although it will be seen only in June and July.
Discussions are continuing with the artist about a second work, but Wilson, on his way to Berlin with a DAAD scholarship, told The Art Newspaper that he doubted that the funds for a new commission would be forthcoming.
Art and government
We want your power: we don't like you: we've been ripped off
The British, U.S. and Dutch arts-funding bodies all at a crossroads
London
Is this the end of the arm's length policy for arts funding?
LONDON.
Tim Renton, Minister for the Arts, has caused a storm by calling into question one of the main dogmas of British arts administration, the so-called arm's-length principle ‘government funding through semi-independent institutions’, as Lord Keynes, the architect of the Arts Council put it in 1945.
In a speech at the end of February to the Royal Society of Arts, Renton suggested that the role of the central Arts Council should be reviewed when the delegation of powers to the Regional Arts Boards (RABs) is complete.
The Arts Council is funded by the Office of Arts and Libraries (OAL) and in its turn primarily funds performing arts companies.
Of the £194.2 million ($337.9 million) in the 1991/92 budget, just over £58 million ($100.9 million) went to the four nationals (Royal Opera House, Royal National Theatre, Royal Shakespeare Company, English National Opera) and the South Bank Centre, with only £3.5 million ($6.09 million) for the visual arts, the main clients being the Whitechapel Gallery in London, the Arnolfini Gallery in Bristol and the Museum of Modern Art in Oxford.
As a result of the current devolution in favour of the regions, the Arts Council will be directly funding only about half the 170 arts bodies it funded in 1991.
Renton's suggestion of a further review of its role stems from the feeling in his department that the present system is an administrative duplication, that it does not allow the Minister to determine the policy framework, and that whenever a major funding issue arises the government has in any case to be directly involved at present.
He has therefore floated the idea that the four nationals and the South Bank Centre could perhaps be directly funded by the OAL.
This would certainly entail restructuring the staff of the Arts Council, whose role would become that of advising the Minister and overseeing the RABs.
The reaction of the Arts Council establishment was prompt.
Lord Palumbo, the current Chairman, sprang to the defence of arm's-length funding: institutions such as his own, he wrote to The Times, ‘are a countervailing force to the centralisation of decision-making of government’.
He also emphasised in an article in the Financial Times the cost of politicians meddling in art and referred to President Bush's ditching of John Frohnmayer, Chairman of the US National Endowment for the Arts.
Five former chairmen of the Arts Council, Lord Cottesloe (1960–65), Lord Goodman (1965–72), Lord Gibson (1972–77), Sir Kenneth Robinson (1977–82) and Lord Rees–Mogg (1982–89) also wrote to The Times: ‘It has been and remains the cardinal principle of the Arts Council since its formation, that the arts should be immunised from political control’.
The Arts Council is based on a delicate balance between political restraint and government intervention.
It grew out of the work of the wartime Committee for the Encouragement of Music and the Arts and was set up in 1946, with the great economist Lord Keynes as its first Chairman.
The Arts Council was thus the result of a political climate that favoured state intervention and support, with one of it principal exponents at the helm.
The delicate political balance lasted until the late Seventies.
After the Conservatives gained power in 1979, many would argue that the arm's-length principle started to be eroded.
As evidence they would point to the government's growing practice of giving funds already allocated for a specific purpose: for example, the £1 million contribution to the Royal Opera redevelopment decided by Lord Donaldson, Minister for the Arts 1976–79, or the Enhancement Funding Scheme, introduced in 1991 to stimulate private sponsorship.
Currently, earmarked funds represent approximately 5% of total Arts Council monies.
Critics also maintain that the government started appointing as Chairman and members of the Council people who were politically sympathetic to the Conservative cause.
This claim is difficult to prove and depends primarily on the point of view of the observer: for some, Lord Rees-Mogg, a former editor of the Times, was just a mouthpiece of the government, while Lord Palumbo is very independent; others argue the reverse.
The main article of faith for recent Conservative governments financial good housekeeping with great emphasis on public accountability obviously leads the Office of Arts and Libraries to wish to avoid unnecessary duplication of administrative systems.
Furthermore, ever since it became an independent department it has wanted to stop being merely a postman between the Treasury and the recipients of funds, and aspires instead to set the policy framework.
In their election manifestos, Labour, and to some extent also the Liberals, have professed loyalty to the arm's-length principle while at the same time proposing to set up large culture ministries on the continental European model.
If they come to power, such institutional changes would of necessity lead to a review of the Arts Council's role and therefore of the arm's-length principle.
Tim Renton could be said to have been the first to grasp this nettle.
Washington D.C.
Fumigating the N.E.A. in pre-election America
WASHINGTON, D.C. Politics continues to wreak havoc on the National Endowment for the Arts.
Having struggled through Congressional reauthorisation two years ago, the agency is still an emotional ‘hot switch’ for Right-Wing fundraisers and election campaigns.
In late February, Patrick Buchanan, the conservative newspaper commentator who is opposing President Bush in the 1992 Republican Presidential primaries, threatened to attack the agency's funding of ‘offensive’ art, and make it an issue in his Southern campaign.
The Bush administration responded by ousting NEA Chairman John Frohnmayer (see also p. 14).
A letter was made public in which Mr Frohnmayer submitted his ‘resignation’, effective 1 May.
But The Washington Post reported on 22 February that Mr Frohnmayer had been warned last October that he might as well start looking for a new job.
When the chairman seemed intent on remaining in the post, White House Chief of Staff Samuel Skinner fired him.
House Representative Sidney Yates (Democrat from Illinois), a fervent NEA supporter, declared Mr Frohnmayer ‘a victim on the altar of Pat Buchanan and the conservative wing of the Republican Party’.
Indeed, the very morning of Mr Frohnmayer's dismissal, the coup de grâce had been delivered by Mr Buchanan, with journalistic flourish: he described Mr Frohnmayer's agency as ‘the upholstered playpen of the arts and crafts auxiliary of the Eastern liberal establishment’.
Mr Buchanan gleefully claimed the chairman's ‘scalp’, and promised, ‘When I get to be President, we're going to shut that place down, then padlock it and fumigate it’.
The agency had been under constant scrutiny since Mr Frohnmayer took over in July 1989.
He entered in the midst of a raging dispute about whether the endowment deserved to exist at all.
In one camp were those who claimed the agency serves an elite group of beneficiaries.
After all, they argued, the State doesn't subsidise auto racing, hunting and pop concerts.
In the other camp were the advocates, who characterised arts funding as a fundamental department of any civilised nation, and pointed out with some embarrassment that most Western countries devote ten times the per capita budget supported represented by the NEA's $175 million (£100 million) budget.
After a bitter struggle, the NEA was eventually reauthorised, though not for the customary five years, but rather a probationary three, and with compromise ‘decency’ stipulations for grant recipients.
The latter resulted from an ongoing battle pitting freedom of expression against government accountability and the need to adhere to ‘general standards of decency’.
The inability of Mr Frohnmayer to come down squarely on one side of this debate or the other plagued his early tenure, and ultimately contributed to his vulnerability when Mr Buchanan stepped up his attack.
Even after announcing his resignation, Mr Frohnmayer is besieged.
On 28 February, the President of the College Art Association sent a letter to the NEA chairman expressing concern with ‘allegations that a conservative staff with ties to the White House and Congress is asserting bureaucratic control of policy and process in contravention of NEA mandate’.
The letter accuses the agency of employing ‘irregular procedures’ and demands ‘a full disclosure of criteria used in the selection process’.
In his letter accepting Mr Frohnmayer's ‘resignation’, the President called the chairman's job ‘one of the most difficult in government’.
He thanked him for his ‘integrity and commitment’, but added ‘some of the art funded by the NEA does not have my enthusiastic approval’.
He may have had in mind a letter he and Congress had received just weeks before, containing excerpts from Queer City and Live Sex Acts, two publications of The Portable Lower East Side, an NEA-sponsored semiannual literary journal in New York City.
Mr Frohnmayer defended the agency's $5,000 ‘project-specific’ grant, explaining that the NEA was erroneously credited with supporting one magazine, and that the lines of the poem from the other describing the brutal rape of a female jogger in Central Park were ‘taken out of context and sensationalised’.
Notwithstanding his attempts to appease conservative critics, Mr Frohnmayer's aversion to placing any restrictions on artistic freedom was increasingly apparent.
A post-resignation statement demonstrates he was never in sympathy with Congressional policies, especially regarding ‘decency’ language: ‘I believe that adequate Federal government support of the arts, free of content restrictions, is vital to our educational, economic, community and intellectual success as a country.
When I leave government, I expect to work…for quality art, for less hate and for a generosity of spirit that allows us to live with our differences in real community’.
Now there are rumours circulating that the NEA will be abolished, or combined with its sister agency, the National Endowment for the Humanities.
But such fears are unwarranted, at least in the short term.
In 1990, the White House signed a reauthorisation bill covering fiscal years 1991–92, ensuring the life of the agency to 30 September 1993.
The outlook is not however as rosy as it might seem.
In the President's budget proposal for 1993, while the President requested an $11.1 million increase to $189 million for the National Endowment for the Humanities, his NEA request remained unchanged at $175.9 million.
One way to continue federal arts funding, but avoid controversy, is to distribute all NEA monies to regional or state groups.
This seems to be the way things are heading.
With the 1990 reauthorisation, the percentage of NEA money going to state councils for distribution climbed to 35% from 20%.
The idea is that community standards could be more closely applied on a local level.
Susan Lubowski, Director of the NEA's Visual Arts Program, told The Art Newspaper that ‘the national overview is very important, otherwise things get very insular.
It's a major career step to receive an NEA grant, whereas a state or local award doesn't carry as much weight as when comparisons between artists are being made nationally’.
Robert Lynch, President and Chief Executive Officer of the National Assembly of Local Arts Agencies, voiced a current fear among the arts community when he told The Art Newspaper, ‘The NEA does not need a conservative ideologue to clamp down on everything creative’.
What the agency does need is a politically astute and highly articulate spokesman, capable of effectively rebuking the relentless attacks of the far Right with sane and moderate reason.
The President's choice to succeed Mr Frohnmayer must be confirmed by the Subcommittee on Education, Arts and the Humanities, then pass a hearing held by the Senate Committee on Labor and Human Resources, before going on to a Senate vote.
But the President has been slow to name even an acting director.
He appears to have no game plan.
If, as Mr Bush indicated in his letter, he knew in October of Mr Frohnmayer's ‘wish to step aside’, why has he not nominated a successor?
That he has not done so tends to confirm that the firing was a spontaneous action triggered by the unexpected escalation of Mr Buchanan's attack on the NEA.
The President may be watching to see how long Mr Buchanan remains a contender, delaying as long as is necessary making an appointment that could fuel his opponent's campaign.
In the meantime, having placated conservative critics, the Bush administration is waiting.
The Hague
The Dutch Arts Council wants quality
THE HAGUE.
The Arts Council of the Netherlands has presented its advice to the Minister of Culture, Mrs Hedy d'Ancona, with a policy document outlining its plan for the arts in the period 1993–96.
In May this year the Minister will present the definitive arts bill, with a debate in Parliament planned before the summer recess.
The annual budget of DFl.65,641,000 (£20,512,812; $35,897,421)(18% of the total arts budget) for the visual arts would, under the present proposals, not diminish significantly.
Having said that, the Arts Council proposes a number of significant shifts in the allocation of funds, in which the trend is to move away from income-support schemes for artists towards what the Council has vaguely described as ‘upgrading quality’.
With this objective in mind it has proposed that the system of interest subsidies, which the government introduced in 1984, be either abolished or privatised.
The scheme was set up to encourage a broader section of the public to buy works of art by living artists, thus opening up the art market while at the same time helping artists to earn an income.
Works of art valued between DFl.1,250 (£390; $683) and DFl.10,000 (£3,125; $5,468) can, under the present scheme, be bought with a loan handled through a subsidiary of the Rabo Bank, for which the government then agrees to pay the interest.
The use of this scheme grew spectacularly during the period between 1984 and 1990.
In those six years a total of DFl. 57 million was spent on art by private individuals, an amount which, according to a recent investigation, would have been considerably less had the system not existed.
In 1990 the Ministry paid out more than DFl. 4 million in interest on loans totalling a record DFl. 13 million.
Although it had been designed to help living artists, the scheme, being difficult or even impossible to control, was open to doubtful practices.
The 159 galleries in Holland which had been selected to sell under the scheme, occasionally got rid of old stock by artists long dead, or even sold objects which did not fall under the category of works for which the system had been intended.
This is where the Arts Council has stepped in with the argument that if the scheme promotes a form of art which does not conform to their qualitative criteria, it should be abolished.
This attitude has provoked strong reactions from various gallery holders who have benefited by the system, some of whom accuse Mr Job de Ruiter, the chairman of the Arts Council, of wanting to dictate the taste of the public by forcing on it a type of art it simply doesn't want.
Whatever the elusive meaning of quality, the Ministry has recognised the need for tighter controls.
A new department in the Ministry of Culture was set up last year which has imposed a ceiling of DFl. 3 million (£937,500; $1,640,625) in subsidies and has ruled that galleries which have been selected to sell under the scheme will have to submit a yearly programme of exhibitions to the Arts Council who in turn will decide which of those exhibitions are eligible for the interest-subsidy scheme.
Jacob Voorthuis
Happy ending to devilish conspiracy
FLORENCE.
The Italian State has received sixteen paintings valued at L4.5 billion (£2.04 million; $3.55 million) from the Strozzi-Sacrati collection as payment of inheritance tax.
The Strozzi-Sacrati collection achieved celebrity status a few years ago when a forged will was discovered in a bureau in the palace, placed there by an antique dealer sporting a false moustache who had gained entry on the pretext of checking items in the collection.
The false will, made out in favour of a close associate of the dealer, was contested by the real heirs, distant English relations of the Strozzi-Sacrati.
After lengthy legal proceedings the forged will was declared void in 1989 and the forgers duly punished.
Among the sixteen paintings are two celebrated tempera-on-panel Muses, ‘Erato’ and ‘Urania’, which formed part of the cycle of Muses at the Belfiore Studio of Leonello and Borso d'Este.
The sixteen paintings seem likely to remain with the Uffizi, where they have been stored for some time.
We've got it, we bought it in good faith and we're keeping it
PARIS.
Will the Louvre lose one of its Murillos?
This could be the outcome of the ‘Canson affair’, following the trial, last November, of Joëlle Pesnel, who was found guilty of forgery, extorting a signature, failure to render assistance, and kidnapping (see The Art Newspaper, No. 13, December 1991, p.2).
Joëlle Pesnel, you may recall, gained the trust of the rich heiress Suzanne de Canson and persuaded her to sell a number of works from her collection.
These included Murillo's portrait of Don Inigo Melchior Fernandez de Velasco, which was purchased by the Louvre in 1985.
Pesnel also succeeded in becoming the heir of Suzanne de Canson who died in 1986.
Now Jeanne Deschamps, Suzanne's sister and sole legal heir, is demanding that the painting be restored to the family.
Taking up the case, The Wall Street Journal, which reports statements made by Jeanne's son, expressed doubts as to the rectitude of the French museum's behaviour.
Should it be exhibiting a work which, in all probability, was obtained from its legal owner by fraudulent means?
The Louvre's spokeswoman Sylvie Poujade has recently commented that everyone at the Louvre is sick and tired of the affair, which has turned into a living nightmare.
‘According to long-standing legal precedent in France’, she maintains, ‘possession of furniture and paintings is nine-tenths of the law.
When it acquired the painting for the sum of FFr5 million (£511,000; $889,000) the Louvre acted in good faith following guarantees given by Christie's lawyer Paul Lombard and by a Swiss notary.
In any case, if all the great Western museums were required to return works acquired by means now judged illegal or immoral, total chaos would ensue!’
Dublin
Chester Beatty curator in court
Irish Times highlights catalogue of cover-ups and errors by David James and his trustees
DUBLIN.
Dr David James, former Curator of Islamic manuscripts at the Chester Beatty Library, Dublin, appeared at Dublin Circuit Court on 19 February and pleaded guilty to thirty-six charges of theft (see The Art Newspaper No.12, November 1991, p.1).
The background to Dr James's activities (the thefts are alleged to have taken place between 1983 and 1989) and the collection's record of poor security, lack of co-operation between staff and trustees and professional mis-conduct, were covered in detail in a recent article in The Irish Times (22 February).
The report highlights the minimal security operating within the library which allowed Dr James's thefts to go undiscovered for so long.
In 1987 the library's annual report noted that there was no complete list of the entire collection.
Such lists as were drawn up by James are now thought to contain deliberate  inaccuracies in details, such as the number of pages in certain books, thus enabling James to remove and offer pages from illuminated Qur'ans on the international market.
Such a page, offered to the Metropolitan Museum of Art, New York, for £25,000, finally led to James's arrest, as the sheet was recognised by Dr Estelle Whelan of the Centre for Iranian Studies at Columbia University, to whom the Met had turned for a second opinion.
Dr Whelan had spent three years at the Chester Beatty and had devoted herself to a detailed study of this particular Qur'an.
David Lewis James read Fine Art at King's College, Durham, graduating in 1963.
He worked for the Sudan Civil Service from 1965 to 1967 and took a diploma in Arabic at Durham in 1968.
James offered his services to the Chester Beatty in 1969 and was taken on in the Islamic section.
In what can only be described as a pampered career, James was given considerable financial support by the library who funded his PhD, housed him and his family, and allowed him to receive numerous outside grants and sponsorships to fund extensive foreign travel.
The family acquired property in Spain and entertained on a surprisingly lavish scale.
When the appointment of new director Wilfrid Lockwood in 1983 meant that James had to yield up the house normally granted to the director, he threatened to sue the library.
The library responded by making available an £11,000 low-interest loan to fund the purchase of a new house nearby.
Throughout his career at the library, James constantly blocked efforts to improve security and cataloguing procedures, in particular those proposed by the director, Islamicist Wilfrid Lockwood, who had formerly worked with British Intelligence.
Until Lockwood took over, all four curators had keys of their own strongrooms; Lockwood's decision to hand over strongroom keys to the security staff is said to have incurred ‘considerable resentment’.
Lockwood received so little support from the Board of Trustees that one member, Professor Kevin Cathcart, head of the Department of Near Eastern Languages at University College, Dublin, resigned in 1988.
Lockwood himself was forced to relinquish his position in 1990.
Shortly afterwards, his decision to cease using the garden library as an exhibition centre on grounds of security was revoked; last June thieves broke into this area and stole a thirteenth-century Arabic manuscript, a Qur'an, eleven miniature Chinese snuff bottles and other items.
The robbery was described as ‘minor’ by acting director and trustee Joan Duff.
Following a financial crisis in the mid-1980s a government-commissioned report was instituted on the library's future.
The Irish government's continuing preoccupation with the library is evident in the secondment of Dr Michael Ryan, Keeper of Irish Antiquities at the National Museum, to the post of director from January this year.
London
Douglas Cooper v. the Knight Commander of the Mexican Order of the Aztec Eagle: Round one
John Rothenstein, the Tate Gallery's longest serving director, dies
LONDON.
Sir John Rothenstein, Director of the Tate Gallery for twenty-six years (1938–64), died 27 February aged ninety.
He received lengthy obituaries in the British press, which remembered his support for English artists such as Burra, Spencer, Moore, Bacon, Pasmore, Freud and Paolozzi.
He was not, however, the chauvinist some took him to be, and he introduced the British public to a number of foreign artists, including Leger, Klee and Chagall.
In the early Fifties he passed through a difficult period when his directorship came under fierce attack from some art critics, none fiercer than the collector and famous critic of the Modern movement, Douglas Cooper.
This culminated, in 1954, with the episode which sent a delicious frisson around the English art Establishment and made Rothenstein's popular reputation: going around the Diaghilev exhibition, he ran into Cooper, who started insulting him and then punched him.
Opinions vary on what followed.
One account has it that Rothenstein laid out Cooper accidentally with his head as he straightened up; the other, that Rothenstein actually slogged him back.
Be that as it may, Cooper was spoiling for a fight, as this unpublished letter shows.
John Richardson tells us that its violent tone actually protected Rothenstein.
When Cooper lobbied government to get rid of him it persuaded M.P.s that Cooper just had a bee in bonnet and was not to be taken seriously.
Received 13 June 1953
Dear Rothenstein, Now that the Mexican president has provided you with the beak and talons of an Aztec eagle you may perhaps feel better equipped to face me in open contest.
But do not deceive yourself into thinking that because your continual disservices to art bring you knighthoods and ribbons, I shall in any way weaken in my attack.
There are still more than ten years in which to hound you out of Millbank [the Tate]and it shall be done.
Yours, Douglas Cooper.
P.S. Do not forget to circulate this to all the Trustees.
Their dossiers should be kept complete, as complete as those of my friends to whom copies of the present missive have been sent.
[Tate Gallery archive 8726]
London
A loyal tribute at the V&A but let's hope it makes them money
Celebrating Queen Elizabeth's forty-year reign with robes, regalia, royal presents and memorabilia
LONDON.
In 1863 the Victoria and Albert Museum exhibited the wedding gifts of the Prince and Princess of Wales, attracting 217,000 visitors in seventeen days.
Given that 27 million people recently watched the BBC1 television tribute to Queen Elizabeth, the British fascination with royal-watching seems undiminished.
Now we are to have ‘Sovereign: A Celebration of Forty Years of Service’ from 3 April (until 13 September), brainchild of Robin Gill, Executive Chairman of the charity Royal Anniversary Trust which will receive any profits arising from the exhibition and use them for educational projects.
The tone of ‘Sovereign’ will be ‘educational, informative and fun’, in line with the Trust's guideline for all their projects.
It will include many previously unshown items belonging to the Royal family including coronation robes, gold plate used at state banquets, family photographs, cartoons and gifts received during overseas visits.
The exhibition will conclude with a section entitled ‘The Family at Home’ with specially-commissioned photographs of the family and official photographs of family events such as weddings, christenings and engagements.
The show has been designed by the Royal College of Art and curated by John Julius Norwich at the suggestion of Jocelyn Stevens the RCA's former director.
A V&A spokeswoman stressed the museum's enthusiasm for the project, and felt that such a show would attract visitors not normally likely to visit the museum who would then be drawn to related exhibits in the permanent collection.
The exhibition has aroused comment in the British press as the first to impose a stiff £6 entrance charge, albeit including an ‘acoustiguide’ a sort of sophisticated Walkman.
This is despite the exhibition's substantial sponsorship: The Daily Telegraph, Pearson plc and Reed International have underwritten the £2 million costs.
There is no separate provision for exhibitions in the V&A's budget which is approximately £30 million per annum.
Of this sum £16.6 million goes almost entirely on salaries; £10.3 million is devoted to the running and maintenance of the building and £1.145 million is available for purchases.
Any money for exhibitions or gallery refurbishment must be squeezed out of the £16.6 million or obtained by sponsorship, such as Samson's for the forthcoming Korean galleries.
Given that some exhibitions such as the recent ‘Art of Death’ attract little or no sponsorship, profits from crowd-pullers like the Japan show last year (which attracted 180,000 visitors and made money) are needed to be ploughed back into the funds.
What to do with 250,000 works of art
THE HAGUE.
The Minister of Culture of the Netherlands, Mrs Hedy d'Ancona, has informed Parliament that important works of art in Dutch museums may not be deaccessioned before the Arts Council has advised the Minister on their importance for the nation.
The argument concerning the destination of the nation's art treasures has, however, acquired a bitter aftertaste.
One of the most painful issues concerns the increasingly urgent question about what to do with the 250,000 works of art which are rotting away in various stores as a result of the disastrous consequence of the BKR scheme.
This was an income support scheme specifically for artists, which was set up not long after the war in order to ensure state sponsorship of the arts.
Artists, selected by a team of experts, were guaranteed an income by the Dutch government who agreed to purchase their works for a set amount each year.
This scheme, open to all forms of misuse and fraudulent practices, was eventually stopped in 1984, but not before several huge stores spread around the country were filled to bursting point with works of art for which there was no destination, no demand and no adequate storage facilities.
Within a few weeks the Minister Mrs Hedy d'Ancona, who is on record as saying that some of the works are in such poor condition that they cannot be given away without loss of face, will come forward with a number of proposals.
Whatever the outcome, the government is bound to have to pay dearly for the consequences of a utopian scheme, which, whatever one's opinion of the welfare system, was one of its most generous and uncritical offshoots.
Je m'ECUse
LONDON.
In last month's issue, the page one article on EC regulations governing the restitution of cultural property gave the incorrect conversion rate for the ECU.
It is, of course, £0.70 ($1.30) to the ECU, not £1.40.
Venice
Biennale wrangling still
Delays in the appointment of the new committee and Gianni De Michelis says ‘close it down’
VENICE.
As the Venice Biennale approaches its centenary year, political machinations, seemingly so dear to the heart of Italian and particularly Venetian cultural activities, are holding up the appointment of new members of the Management Committee which is responsible for the programme of the Biennale over the next four years.
The Committee has also failed to appoint new directors for each sector of the festival (visual arts, architecture, cinema, music and theatre) as well as a general secretary and the next president.
The allocation of the annual budget and grants also falls within its domain.
Delays in the organisation of any of these areas will inevitably result in serious administrative difficulties in the run-up to the next Biennale in 1993.
As it stands, the Committee consists of the Mayor of Venice who acts as Vice-Chairman (the present outgoing Chairman is architect Paolo Portoghesi), and eighteen other members: three appointed by the local authority, three by the provincial government, five by the Veneto region, three by the Council of Ministers, a further three by the major trade-union confederations and a final member from among the permanent staff of the Biennale.
The presence of local and central government appointees means that there may well be damaging delays in the re-forming of the Committee in the run-up to the Italian general elections to be held on 5 and 6 April.
So far only the local city authority has nominated its three members and the identity of the new President is still a matter of speculation: after ten years of Socialist rule the Christian Democrats feel it is their turn to be represented, but so far no suitable candidate has emerged.
For the important post of Director of Visual Arts the current favourite would seem to be the art critic Achille Bonito Oliva who has long-standing associations with the Biennale, but there has also been mention of the art historian and art critic Giulio Briganti and the Director of Bologna's Galleria d'Arte Moderna Giovanni Castagnoli.
Another possibility is the fifty-seven year-old Bolognese art historian Renato Barilli who co-curated a Biennale show back in 1972.
The fact that Barilli has recently shown a keen awareness of contemporary art trends may help his candidacy at a time when the Biennale has reaffirmed its  commitment to the documentation of contemporary art.
The November document issued by the Committee, which included this commitment, also called for a simplification of the Committee's decision-making processes, the widening of its brief to encompass programming and the inclusion of international institutions and other private bodies on the board.
A meeting in March should have resolved some of the present issues but the long-term future of the Biennale still presents difficulties: ‘Let's have the centenary then close the Biennale down for good’ is the recent opinion of Gianni de Michelis, Italian Minister of Foreign Affairs.
London
Britain's premier art college lures new head from Chicago
Professor Anthony Jones wins unanimous decision
LONDON.
Professor Anthony Jones, who has been President of the School of the Art Institute in Chicago since 1986, is the new appointment as the Rector of the Royal College of Art.
He succeeds Jocelyn Stevens, who turned down a fresh contract, and will pick up his duties with a five-year tenure on 1 August.
British-born Professor Jones was the unanimous choice of the Joint Committee of Members of the Council and Senate.
Christopher Frayling, the RCA's Professor of Humanities, with responsibility for several courses including the college's new Visual Arts Administration programme being launched in the autumn, was one of three short-listed candidates.
Speculation that Sir Terence Conran might have been drafted into the job was inaccurate, and he had, in fact, ruled himself out of consideration as long ago as January.
Already well known to art colleges in this country from his directorship of the Glasgow School of Art between 1980 and 1986, a period which witnessed the emergence of an exciting new generation of Scottish figurative painters, Professor Jones returns from the United States with an enhanced reputation for public relations and for the support of his students.
Two incidents marked his highly regarded but controversial career in Chicago.
One student, responding to allegations of the Mayor of Washington's homosexuality, exhibited a portrait of Chicago's first ever black mayor in women's lingerie and day-glo colours at the School's degree show, which was promptly raided by council officials with police support.
The offending picture was confiscated and Professor Jones was mauled for permitting its exhibition.
A year later, a different student spread an American flag on the School's floor and invited visitors to step on it and record their comments in a book.
Inevitable protest from the War Veterans' Association followed and funding was withdrawn.
On both occasions, Professor Jones stood firm against complaint and censorship.
Germany
Nuremberg's cultural head has got religion and the politicians don't like it
The scandal of Karla Fohrbeck who has proclaimed her faith openly
NUREMBERG.
For several months now, Nuremberg's Kulturreferentin (Head of Cultural Affairs) Dr Karla Fohrbeck has been the subject of an unedifying newspaper campaign at times reminiscent of a medieval witch hunt.
She has lost the support of the town's Social Democratic mayor, Peter Schönlein, who will not even let her represent him at official functions, and the political parties and their committees also systematically exclude her.
The indignation stirred up by the gutter press in Nuremberg focuses on Dr Fohrbeck's religious convictions.
A Protestant, who is regularly described now as ‘a charismatic’, Karla Fohrbeck underwent a Road to Damascus conversion immediately before taking up office.
At the time of her appointment, Fohrbeck, who is a distinguished sociologist and studied under the renowned philosopher Jürgen Habermas, made no mention of her firmly held and openly practised faith.
As a result, the city councillors feel they were misled; but, says Fohrbeck, ‘One's faith is one's own affair’, and she quotes the preamble to the German Constitution.
Her style of leadership has angered both political parties and the cultural institutions with which she deals.
She differs from most of her male colleagues who want to raise the cultural profile of their city by grandiose schemes, festivals and new building projects.
Asked about her own plans for Nuremberg, Karla Fohrbeck told The Art Newspaper that first she would attend to the backlog of theatre, conservatoire, archive and fine arts schemes begun by her predecessor Hermann Glaser.
Her projects for the second half of her six-year term of office include activities at Nuremberg's large Schlachthof, a children's art centre and a book programme for TV.
She sees her task as ‘guiding the city safely through the crisis and ensuring the survival of its existing assets’.
By ‘crisis’, the head of cultural affairs means not only the need to economise but also the fragility of the administrative structure.
The turmoil surrounding the personality of Karla Fohrbeck, which even the respected weekly Die Zeit and the conservative Frankfurter Allgemeine Zeitung have reported, is not entirely due to her religious beliefs.
It is also because she represents change: she is a woman taking over from a man who occupied the post for twenty-three years.
And although she does consult with colleagues, advisory committees and city councillors, according to her critics, Dr Fohrbeck fails to present her projects in such a way as to find much-needed allies on the city council.
In the political skirmishes over scant resources in which long-term strategies and confidence in the administration are essential, such clichés as ‘Small is beautiful’ are not helpful.
Karla Fohrbeck has no party-political affiliation and has fallen foul of the SPD (the Social Democratic Party) running the town.
Given Nuremberg's deeply repressed recent history with its strong Nazi connections, it is perhaps also not surprising that her idea of transforming the former site of the Nuremberg rallies into a peace park should meet with opposition.
The neighbourhood culture workshops specially promoted by her predecessor apparently feel they have insufficient support from her, although in fact only three out of seventy workshops have been scrapped.
She has, however, had some successes after one year in office: she has reconciled warring groups of artists, set up a film theatre, found a home for the city's picture-lending library, and appointed a theatre director.
Fears that she would interfere with the Kunsthalle or the Museum für Stadtgeschichte have proved groundless.
Nuremberg's museum directors decide freely and independently on exhibitions and acquisitions.
Theoretically, Karla Fohrbeck could in her official capacity prevent any purchases she disapproved of, but such a veto would not only be in breach of artistic freedom but would also conflict with her idea of autonomy for the museums in her charge.
Colleagues and city councillors frequently claim that Dr Fohrbeck's policies are increasingly affected by her religious convictions, but during our conversation with her there was no evidence of any fanaticism.
It seems that by making such an open and emphatic declaration of her beliefs, Karla Fohrbeck has brought about her own political isolation.
But if Mayor Schönlein hoped that by ostracising Fohrbeck he would force her resignation before her term of office ends in April 1996, it looks as though he was very much mistaken.
United Technologies' strategic withdrawal
CONNECTICUT.
United Technologies, producers of armaments, elevators, etc., lost $1.02 billion on revenues of $21.26 billion in 1991 and has announced that it will drop its arts sponsorship programme.
In a general restructuring programme costing $1.28 billion, 13, 900 jobs will go.
‘It's tough to justify a sponsorship when you're laying off people’, said Chris Conover, manager of international communications and administrator of the arts programme.
United Technologies has sponsored the arts for about twelve years.
It is currently supporting a retrospective of Bonington at the Yale Center for British Art, a show of Matisse currently at the Palazzo Reale, Milan, and ‘Picasso and Things: The Still Lifes of Picasso’, a major touring exhibition, at Cleveland until 3 May.
A Giacometti case of mistaken identity
LONDON.
In our report on the verdicts of the Giacometti fake trial in The Art Newspaper No. 15, February 1991, p.3 we incorrectly stated that Mr David Bernstein was given a two-year jail sentence and fined.
It was in fact Jean-Eugène Leons of the Worms Corporation who was fined and sentenced in this way.
Mr David Bernstein was not the subject of investigation or prosecution and we apologize to him for our error.
Mr Bernstein's lawyers have informed us that he is not, nor has been, an employee of the Worms Corporation.
Akademie der Künste West and East: a controversial unification as artists resign
BERLIN.
Members of the Akademie der Künste of West Berlin voted in February to admit en bloc as new fellow-academicians all remaining forty-five members of their East Berlin sister institution.
The unified Akademie der Künste will have over 300 members.
The decision, a breach of the Akademie's statutes, according to which only individual members can be admitted on a basis of merit, is highly controversial.
It means that the past involvement of several of the new members with the former DDR regime will have to be generously forgotten.
Membership of East Berlin's Akademie depended on government approval more than on artistic merit.
Some of the best known Western academicians have already resigned as a mark of protest, including the painters Gotthard Graubner, Markus Lüpertz, and Gerhard Richter.
The Akademie's president, Walter Jens, admits that his institution is undergoing a gruelling test but maintains that ‘generosity’ is the most sensible thing in the circumstances.
The Senat (parliament) of Berlin is expected to give its stamp of approval to the decision so that the merger can go ahead.
The Prince of Wales launches his own private school for architects
LONDON.
A new school for aspiring architects will be launched in London in October 1992 on the initiative of the Prince of Wales.
The initiative builds on the Prince's architectural summer schools for post-graduate architectural students held in Oxford and at the British School in Rome and elsewhere in Italy.
It will be headed by Mr Keith Critchlow, currently head of the department of Islamic architecture at the Royal College of Art.
Staff will include Dr Brian Hanson, the Prince's architectural adviser; architectural theorist Christopher Alexander from the University of California; architect Demetri Porphyrios; Mr Leon Krier, responsible for the planning of the Prince's new-town development at Dorchester, Dorset; and John Simpson.
The foundation course offered to around one hundred students by the Institute will aim to ‘encourage experiment in order to find more sensitive and imaginative ways of using modern materials to create buildings which reflect a hierarchy of scale’ according to the Prince, who delivered the inauguration speech on 30 January.
The Institute will be housed in a Regency terrace house in central London and will be funded by private capital.
In addition to the foundation course a four-year postgraduate course will begin in 1993.
Literary critic appointed Russian Minister of Culture
MOSCOW.
Two significant events took place within a week of each other in February: a wake for the old USSR Ministry of Culture and the birth of the new Russian Ministry.
At the first of these, Nikolai Gubyenko presided at a banquet for ex-colleagues from his former Ministry and the actors who at present occupy the building.
According to one observer, there were over 200 mourners; Gubyenko made a touching speech, but no-one shed any obvious tears.
About a week later, Boris Yeltsin finally introduced the new head of the Russian Ministry of Culture, fifty-three-year old Evgeni Sidorov.
Author of seven books, he is rector of a literary institute, where he lectures on literary criticism.
He intends to continue teaching, combining these activities with those of his ministerial post.
Sidorov admitted that it was a great honour to be appointed to the government, but was not yet ready to discuss his policies, as he ‘needed to assess the situation at the Ministry’, although he did hint that changes in the organisation's structure would be required.
In addition, he must find a source of extra-budgetary finance.
On this subject, there has been criticism of Nikolai Gubyenko for turning the remains of the old Soviet Ministry of Culture into a Russian centre for the creative intelligentsia.
Experts estimate that the work of the present Russian Ministry of Culture has virtually doubled overnight.
The demise of the old Ministry has now put eleven theatres, eighteen museums and libraries, eighteen teaching and research institutes, eight industrial companies and several other organisations in the hands of its successor.
Renzo Piano's contribution to Palladio vetoed in Vicenza
VICENZA.
The Ministero dei Beni culturali has given a firm ‘no’ to the latest plans from the office of architect Renzo Piano, co-designer of the Pompidou Centre in Paris, for the restoration of the Palladian Basilica complex in Vicenza.
In the words of the Ministry: ‘This is not a sufficiently rigorous restoration, nor does it respect the monument’.
The decision has been greeted with surprise, and no comment was available from Piano's office.
Piano was first associated with the restoration project in 1987 and proposed a drastic plan involving the restructuring of the interior of the basilica.
A second, conservation-oriented design met with more approval but action was blocked by the imposition of an environmental safeguard on the area by the then Minister for Beni culturali Vincenza Bono Parrino, which permitted no more than monitoring and surveying to be carried out.
Piano's latest plan, produced in collaboration with the Soprintendenza of Verona, was thought to have more chance of success.
In the meantime, the city of Vicenza has invested L450 million in successive plans to save their basilica which continues to fall to pieces.
Oxford hit by double theft
OXFORD.
The city was hit by two thefts last week which netted works of art to a value of around £65,000 ($113,000).
Between the evening of Friday 6 March and Sunday 8 March a thief stole a number of Near-Eastern items of the ninth to second centuries BC from the Draper's Gallery of the Ashmolean Museum.
These include three gold roundels, two pairs of gold earrings, a gold and a bronze torque and the basalt head of a bearded man.
A spokewoman for the director's office said that security at the Ashmolean Museum was approved by government security advisors and was constantly under review.
A ‘rigorous reappraisal’ would be carried out in the light of the latest theft.
In addition, and three days earlier, a ‘Martyrdom of Saint Catherine’ by Giovanni Francesco Caroto (c.1478–1555) was taken from the Christ Church Picture Gallery on 3 March.
A member of the Thames Valley police force stated that they had no information to suggest the thefts were linked.
Chambord not out of the woods
CHAMBORD.
The alarming prospect of another ‘Renaissance Centre’ theme-park development for the château de Chambord has arisen in the wake of the two earlier rejected schemes (see The Art Newspaper, No. 7, April 1991).
The ever-watchful members of the Association pour la défense de Chambord (whose members include René Huygues, Marc Fumaroli and Henri Cartier-Bresson) spotted the recent announcement in La Republique du Centre of a public enquiry into the proposed purchase by the Syndicat intercommunal for the region of Chambord of a further parcel of land around the Saint Dyé entrance to the château.
The Saint Dyé entrance was the proposed location for the second scheme, which was to consist of a Tower of Babel-like structure culminating in a glass-sided cafeteria topped by a Leonardo da Vinci-style sculpture of a man with outstretched arms.
By the summer of 1991 the proposed site for this monstrosity had been shifted to the village of Mer on the other side of the Loire.
Now, however, the unfortunate residents of Mer have learned that their village is to be the site of a huge new quarry which would clearly make it unsuitable for exploitation as a centre of tourism.
Whether a scheme is now afoot to reinstate the Saint Dyé site is as yet unclear but the members of the Association pour la défense de Chambord are anxiously awaiting the outcome of the purchase application.
Finest collection of works by Miró acquired by Japanese businessman
YOKOHAMA.
Emili F. Miró, grandson of the artist, recently confirmed that one of the three finest collections of works by Miró is now the possession of the Japanese shipowner and real-estate dealer Katshuda.
The collection was acquired about a year ago from the heirs of Pierre Matisse, who acted as Miró's dealer in New York for many years, and comprises 530 works, mostly drawings and collages, but also several canvases.
Rosa Maria Malet, Director of the Fundación Miró in Barcelona, declared: ‘We are talking about one of the best collections of Mirós in the world, and even if some periods are not very well represented there are some works of very great importance in the evolution of the painter's oeuvre’.
Pierre Matisse, son of the painter Henri, also had works by Miró in his own personal collection but it would appear that all the works acquired by Katshuda belonged to his gallery and were intended to be sold.
Matisse had an arrangement with Miró whereby he would buy the latter's works and put them on the market when the time seemed right.
The deal was recently negotiated by Sotheby's New York.
Zagreb
Croatians take stock of artworks pillaged from churches and museums
Uncertainty over their whereabouts and fears that they will enter the art market
ZAGREB.
‘If you see this object please call us!’ could be the poster of the Museum Documentation Centre in Zagreb, Croatia.
Their staff is busy compiling lists of works of art, documents, books, maps, applied art objects and church inventories that have vanished during the recent fighting.
Truck loads of antiques are reported to be disappearing from Croatia.
Since the beginning of the war Serbian forces seem to have targeted the artistic and cultural heritage and the number of monuments destroyed had risen to 529 by February.
But while the Federal Army attacked Sibenik Cathedral and the city of Dubrovnik, artefacts from collections in occupied or destroyed Croatian cities have been simply removed.
Croatia's moveable heritage, ranging from works of art and archaeological finds of great European importance to folk art of only local value, are likely to appear on the art market.
The town of Vukovar, which became the symbol of Croatian resistance, has been virtually destroyed.
One of the last reports told of enemy soldiers lighting an open fire in a wheelbarrow in the church of Saints Philip and Jacob.
A statue of St Anthony is missing from the church's altar, and it is unclear whether the effigy of St Bonus is still there.
The saint's relics were given to Vukovar by Pope Benedict XIV and brought from Rome in 1754.
Since then the effigy has been displayed in his highly decorated sarcophagus, dressed in sumptuous clothes embroidered with gold and silver thread and studded with precious and semi-precious stones.
The whereabouts of the treasury in the adjacent Franciscan monastery which dates from 1737 is now unknown.
An eye-witness report states that the Federal Army and Serbian irregulars found the contents stored for safety and removed them.
Of particular value is an enamelled baroque chalice depicting a battle with the Turks, and a baroque chasuble bearing the coat of arms of the Eltz family.
The municipal museum of Vukovar which was housed in the stately home built by the Eltz family in 1749, one of the most beautiful baroque buildings in Slavonia, has been badly bombed.
The museum and its branches held 32,513 items as well as a rich collection of books and newspapers printed in Vukovar.
The museum directed the field research on the nearby internationally famous archaeological site of Vucedol.
According to the Serbian-based Tanjug agency and Serbian television reports, the contents of the municipal museum of Vukovar, and its branches, have been taken to Serbia.
The requisitioning of cultural treasures is contrary to the provisions of the Hague Convention.
The Museum Documentation Centre in Zagreb has therefore informed the Director General of UNESCO and ICOM in Paris of this occurrence.
One of the branch museums of Vukovar contains the memorial collection devoted to Professor Lavoslav Ruzicka, the Nobel prize winner for chemistry in 1939.
Also housed there was the collection of Professor Dr Antun Bauer, the founder of postgraduate museological studies at the University of Zagreb.
An internationally prominent art historian and archaeologist, he donated 1,500 works of art to Vukovar, his native town.
A similar fate has befallen another gift, now removed by the Federal Army.
This is the work of one of the most famous Croatian artists Ivan Mestrovic (1883–1962), whom Rodin described as ‘the greatest original phenomenon among sculptors’.
Mestrovic left a collection of thirty-five paintings and sculptures to the village of Drnis on his last visit to his homeland in 1959.
Included in this gift are some very early works, and the oil paintings have particular documentary value.
On reading the list of collections in the occupied territories, one can only speculate as to what has happened to some 3,000 numismatic items, 15,000 volumes of rare books and 8,100 prints, as well as antique arms belonging to the collection of Baltazar Bogisic, one of the most distinguished Croatian scientists of the nineteenth century.
A short statement from its curator informs us that the collection was not evacuated.
In other instances we read that museum collections were set on fire.
The Museum Documentation Centre in Zagreb and the Institute for the Protection of Monuments are in constant touch with UNESCO, ICOM, ARCH and other institutions involved in the protection of cultural property.
Italy
Italian Senate votes $ 1.4 billion for Venice
While churches may close for lack of $ 40,000
VENICE.
There is a very real danger that Venetian churches will be forced to close to the public except when services are being conducted.
In a recent decision, the Venetian Comune cancelled funds to help pay the salaries of church custodians.
In 1990 the Comune contributed L30 million (£14,000; $24,000) to the salary bill and L50 million (£23,000; $40,000) in 1991, enabling churches such as S. Sebastiano, S. Nicolò dei Miracoli and Sta.
Maria Mater Domini to remain open all day.
There have been so many thefts from Venetian churches over recent years (see p.16) that, without custodians, the college of priests will be forced to recommend keeping most Venetian church doors closed.
On 23 January, on the eve of the dissolution of Parliament, another Law for Venice was passed by the Senate in Rome authorising a total expenditure of L1,750 billion (£809 million; $1.4billion) over a period of two years (1993–94) to be raised partly by loans.
This compares with a total of L2,200 billion (£1.01 billion; $1.76 billion) already allocated under four previous laws (of 1984, 1986, 1988 and 1991).
A Parliamentary Commission, presided over by Christian Democrat Giorgio Santz has been investigating how the preceding laws have worked and has now come up with its report which shows that in the last eight years, of the L1,500 billion allocated to Venice only L853 billion (£394.3 million; $686 million) have actually been spent.
This is largely because money allocated centrally at the beginning of the financial year does not usually reach the city itself until the autumn.
As Italy's financial year closes at the end of the calendar year and money cannot be held over from one year to the next, there is not enough time to distribute and use such funds as have been allocated.
The Committee is making recommendations on how the bureaucratic procedures governing the erogation of funds can be speeded up.
The new law is said to alter the priorities of the operation to safeguard Venice, giving precedence to overhauling the conditions in the Lagoon such as reinforcing the shore-line and mud-flats, controlling pollution, checking on fish-farms and the eventual elimination of petrol tankers, before carrying out the installation of the flood barriers.
The Region's plan for dealing with pollution is said to emphasise action on prevention before the installation of purification plants, but these will have to be tackled in the centres of Venice and Chioggia.
The Region has a contract with the Consortium ‘Venezia Disinquinamento’(Venice De-pollution) for the purification of waters draining into the Lagoon from the surrounding hinterland, and a contract for the provision of technical services required (including all the legal and administrative procedures) to de-pollute the Lagoon, the historic centre of Venice and the towns of Mira and Chioggia.
In an interview with La Repubblica on 24 January Luigi Zanda, Chairman of the Consorzio Venezia Nuova, confirmed that it was still feasible to complete the operations in the Lagoon by the year 2000 provided there were no interruptions in the flow of funds or technical hitches.
He maintained that the construction of the flood barriers (based on the MOSE prototype: see The Art Newspaper, No. 15, February 1992, p.1) would not be held up until the de-pollution programme was completed: plans and experimental work on the flood barriers would go ahead while the environmental problems were being dealt with and experimental work should be completed by the beginning of 1994.
The Consorzio Venezia Nuova is also involved in the recently formed ‘North-East Association’, set up to monitor and improve environmental, ecological and economic conditions in the Adriatic Sea.
Members of the organization, who all share the coastline on the eastern shore, are Slovenia, Croatia, Bosnia Herzegovina, Montenegro, Albania and Greece, all of whom sent representatives to a conference at the Cini Foundation on 7 February.
Italy, of course, plays a major role and already has plans for economic aid to the States across the sea, such as electrical power development.
Dr Zanda said that it was essential to agree common standards for any works being carried out on both shores and that an international statute governing the Adriatic should be drawn up to which all states bordering on its coasts should adhere.
Conferences
Compare national styles of art his- and herstory
The revealing differences between the U.S., British and German agendas
CHICAGO, LEEDS, BERLIN.
Three parallel conferences covering an enormous range of art historical material take place this year.
The American College Art Association's eightieth Annual Conference was held in Chicago 12–15 February, the British Association of Art Historians' eighteenth is to be held in Leeds from 10–13 April, and the Comité Internationale de l'Histoire de l'Art's twenty-eighth conference will be in Berlin 15–20 July.
Some of the flavour and intent of each conference can be deduced from the ‘keynote speakers’ who, respectively, are the North American Indian installation and performance artist James A. Luna; the promoters of the ‘new art History’T.J.Clark and Griselda Pollock; and the President of the Federal Republic of Germany, Richard von Weizsäcker.
The Leeds conference announces (under the general title of ‘Subversions’ Objects’) that it will ‘investigate forms of art and art history often regarded as subversive or marginal: the social history of art; feminist studies; sculpture, printmaking, the decorative arts and design; popular and electronically produced culture’.
It continues, ‘Two general questions will be addressed…have subversive types of practice succeeded in their object of overthrowing traditional forms of art, criticism and scholarship?
Secondly, is the unique art object still the main focus of attention for artists and art historians?’
Academic sessions will include: ‘Deconstruction: Art and Propriety’; ‘On the Social History; of the Social History of Art’.
‘Cultural Colonisation: ‘Modernism and the  Consrtuction of the ‘Other’’, among many less abstruse themes.
Visits are planned to Saltaire, Temple Newsam, Yorkshire Sculpture Park, and the Bowes Museum, Castle Barnard where a further ‘mini conference’ on the decorative arts will be held.
At Berlin, the general theme is ‘Artistic Exchange’, and the programme deals on the whole with much more concrete topics, aided by the new accessibility of many works of art since German reunification.
On Saturday 18 July, Congress excursions visit a very wide range of sites in and around Berlin.
These include the former east German cities of Brandenburg, Magdeburg, Dresden and Weimar.
Titles of discussion sessions include ‘The Museums island in Berlin’, ‘Artists and Emigration’, ‘Critical Theory in Art History’ and ‘The International Survey of Jewish Monuments’.
Special events include the VDK (National Association of German Art Historians) Conference (18 July) and there are four intensive post-Congress tours visiting a large number of museums and other monuments throughout Germany.
The Chicago talks programme was sub-divided into Art History Sessions, Studio Art Sessions and Board-sponsored Art History Sessions, most offering a strong dose of politically correct Latin American, American Indian and Black American/non-American subjects.
Typical of session topics were ‘The Archaeology of Gender in Material Culture’, ‘The Historiography of Herstory’ and ‘Re-Evaluating the Eurocentrism of Italian Renaissance Art History’.
The titles of many of the talks seem curiously backward-looking, particularly compared with the straightforward approach of the Berlin programme.
A spokesman for the CAA explained that James Luna, who expressed hopes in his address to the conference that the current sensitivity to American Indian issues was more than 1990s chic, had been selected ‘to tie in with the quincentennial’.
Significantly, the on-site Job Placement Center, normally a frenzied mecca for the field, closed a day early.
The number of job offerings was down 11% from the previous year, with studio teaching positions particularly hard hit.
Don't think we're against generosity
The article in your February issue (No.15, p.4) concerning the UNIDROIT meeting to discuss the Draft Preliminary Convention on Stolen or Illegally Exported Cultural Objects was much appreciated in alerting the world of curators, collectors, and dealers to an important further step in the process of harmonising disparate laws on the international traffic in cultural objects.
While generally a very fair summation of the draft (though, of course, some interpretations could give rise to discussion), the description of Article 11 is, I fear, a very serious misunderstanding of the draft Convention which could give rise to unfortunate and unnecessary misapprehensions.
The principle behind Article 11 is to allow States which already accord more generous treatment to a dispossessed owner, to retain that treatment.
This applies, for example, to many English-speaking systems of law, which return stolen property to its owner without compensating a purchaser.
Article 11 is not intended to, nor does it, allow a requesting State to require a requested State to return an object illegally exported before the entry into force of the Convention.
Article 11 can hardly be said, therefore, to ‘weaken’ the Convention it allows States who wish to be more generous to a claimant than the minimum standards set out in the earlier articles to do so, but not for more than minimum standards to be imposed by a requesting State on a requested State.
The phrase ‘it allows individual countries to apply their own regulations’ obscures this important difference.
I would point out also that, contrary to the implication in your article, there was no move to delete Article 11 at the Rome meeting.
Although some amendments were suggested, they were in the same tenor e.g; to allow States which are already more generous in respect of returning illegally exported material without compensation to continue that more generous treatment.
Again these changes would not enable a requesting State to impose its own views on a requested State.
Great paintings at the Utopia Show, but the ceramics disappoint
In your March issue, No. 16, I am correctly described as having misgivings about certain aspects of the blockbuster Russian avantgarde show being organised by the Guggenheim Museum, N.Y.
and the Frankfurt Schirn Kunsthalle.
Now, after attending the opening of ‘Die grosse Utopie: die Russische Avantgarde 1915–1932’ in Frankfurt-am-Main yesterday, at my own expense, I wish to state that I was dazzled by the beauty and breadth of the exhibition and that the pluses far outweigh the minuses.
The 800 exhibits include paintings, watercolours, architectural models, posters, photographs, sculptures, stage and costume designs and ceramics.
Never before, and probably not for a very long time again will it be possible to recreate such an exhibition, containing as it does important paintings from major Western and Russian museums and private collections, as well as outstanding works from circa fifty provincial and specialised museums in the former Soviet Union.
With the breakup of the U.S.S.R., it is the latter part of the feat that will be difficult to duplicate, for as Christoph Vitali, Director of the Schirn Kunsthalle, mentioned in his opening speech, the State and the Ministry of Culture of the U.S.S.R. with which they signed the initial protocol for the show no longer exist, and several cities from which the art has travelled have changed names.
Room I is breathtaking with many fine, unknown Exters, Popovas and Rozanovas from provincial museums and several superb unknown Kliuns, as well as familiar works by these artists.
Indeed all sections of the exhibition struck me as exciting and thought-provoking with the exception of the ceramics section which is mediocre.
Although my worst fears about dealers infiltrating fake pieces into this section and having them ‘authenticated’ by being included in the catalogue, as was the case recently at an important exhibition in Berlin, did not occur, this section adds nothing to our knowledge of Soviet ceramics 1915–32.
With dozens of Chashnik and Suetin's great 1923–24 signed Suprematist prototypes available in the reserves of Soviet museums, it is a pity that the people who chose (and  mislabelled most of the ceramics exhibits) assembled weak, late pieces.
When this was pointed out to the organisers, they replied: ‘It is an unimportant section, it does not matter’.
Then why did they include it?
It would have taken no additional effort to assemble a selection representative of the period and presenting a new view of many leading artists' activities and styles applied to this medium.
However, despite my indignation about the ignorant handling of the ceramics section, I came away excited and deeply impressed by this show which should not be missed by anyone interested in modern art.
Nina Lobanov-Rostovsky
Save Rembrandt drawings as well In his article in your March issue Mr Royalton-Kisch roundly criticizes Benesch's serial method of making attributions to Rembrandt: as a result almost any Rembrandtesque drawing might find itself not just in the catalogue raisonné but might be used as a starting point for further attributions to Rembrandt.
But he did not seem to notice that in the previous paragraph he had just used the same method for boosting the production of Johannes Raven.
He tells us that, ‘with the reassessment of this one drawing in the British Museum ‘Seated nude surrounded by drapery’ once a Rembrandt but now a Raven the attribution to Rembrandt of a whole series of nude studies by the same hand collapsed’.
A further criticism of this new attribution is the very flimsy evidence in favour of the single ‘core work’ by Raven.
First, it is very similar to male nudes by Rembrandt, including those in his etchings.
Second, it has nothing in common with known paintings by Raven.
Third, Raven has signed it in a position that suggests ownership (i.e; on the back); if he were claiming authorship he would surely have signed it in the bottom right-hand corner in the normal way.
Fourth, why, if he had the unusual habit of signing on the back, do none of the new Ravens have a similar signature?
To check the statements ‘comparison with the etching turn out to be optimistic’(Schatborn) and ‘there is not a line that resembles Rembrandt's other drawings of the period’(Royalton-Kisch), readers have only to compare the treatment of the back in the drawing with the etching to see that the explanation offered by the experts that they are the product of two separate artists working independently in, ‘a joint session of study from the model’ is far fetched.
When Mr Royalton-Kisch goes on to describe this joint session of study as a ‘known feature of the Rembrandt workshop’, I am delighted because it is the very foundation of my own very different view of Rembrandt and his school.
The experts have only to accept that the joint sessions also used groups of models kitted-out for each occasion by Rembrandt from his well stocked theatrical wardrobe and used them for painting as well as for drawing, to come to realize that their efforts over the last seventy years have been largely misdirected.
Concessions for historic houses in Italy
ROME.
Owners of historic houses are to be exempt from the revaluation for tax purposes included in measures covering commercial property.
This is one of the provisions of the final draft of the 1992 Finance Bill approved by both the Chamber of Deputies and the Senate.
The bill has already been modified by the Senate following amendments presented by various political groups who were pressing for tax reductions for buildings of artistic or historic interest which only generate a small income but which are expensive to maintain.
Craftarts to get their due
NEW YORK.
Clement Greenberg will be the keynote speaker at the First National Symposium on Criticism in the Craftarts.
The term ‘craftarts’ refers to objects made by artists who ‘are crossing between traditional art media and those of craft’.
Sessions will consider these works in relation to painting and sculpture, the language of criticism, twentieth-century American art history, the roles of galleries and museums, and the vocabulary of materials.
Organised by the Department of Art and Art Professions at New York University, the two-day event (24–25 April) will be held at Tisch Hall, 40 West 4th Street in Greenwich Village.
For further information call Dr Judith Schwartz:(212) 998–5700/5090.
Proposed lottery meets with public support
LONDON.
After the recent failure of a private member's bill to introduce a national lottery (see The Art Newspaper, No. 16, March 1992, p.1) the government has decided to introduce the measure itself.
Seen in some quarters as pure electioneering, Kenneth Baker, the Home Secretary, has published a White Paper outlining the proposals which will bring Britain into line with the rest of Europe.
The lottery is expected to raise around £1 billion per year, about half of which will be used to support the arts (in particular the national heritage), with the remainder allocated to protection of the environment, sports and charities.
Museums
Paris
Louvre buys Cook Collection
Antonello da Messina
Vindication of masterpiece doubted by the art trade at Christie's 1989 auction
PARIS.
The Musée du Louvre, Paris, has just purchased Antonello da Messina's ‘Christ at the Column’ from Brenda, Lady Cook, for approximately £4.5 million ($7.8 million).
Less than forty pictures exist by the fifteenth-century Sicilian artist, who was credited by Vasari with bringing the ‘Flemish’ technique of oil painting to Italy, and whose placid works were of decisive influence on contemporary Venetian painters, especially Giovanni Bellini.
Lady Cook's picture, a small (11 ¾ x 8 in.; 30 x 20 cm) devotional panel, was the last work by the artist in private hands.
The finest representation of Antonello's work is in the National Gallery, London which owns the ‘St Jerome in his study’, a damaged ‘Christ Blessing’, a Crucifixion and a ‘Male Portrait’.
In contrast, the Louvre owns only one painting, the striking male portrait known as ‘Il Condottiere’.
It is nonetheless likely that an export licence will be denied, to give a British institution the chance of raising the necessary matching funds to purchase the picture, as the Cook panel has been in England since 1863 (in the Cook family since 1868) and as Messrs MacGregor and Rosenberg (Director of the National Gallery and Curator of Paintings at the Louvre, respectively) would agree, one cannot have too many Antonellos.
The Cook Antonello has been offered privately for some time, being turned down by both the J. Paul Getty Museum and the Polish/American heiress Basia Johnson, the latter dissuaded by her advisors Derek Johns and the late Adrian Ward-Jackson (see The Art Newspaper No. 1, Oct. 1990, p. 17), who held that it was a copy by Andrea Solario after a lost prototype by Antonello, an opinion that originated with Bernard Berenson in 1895, and one that stuck for most of the twentieth century.
The problem was complicated by the numerous copies after the picture, several of them being claimed as Antonello's original, notably the version in the Institute of Arts, Detroit.
After finding no takers for the painting at £4 million, Lady Cook consigned the painting to Christie's for sale in April 1989 acting against the advice of her advisor Stephen Somerville, who cautioned that the powerful subject might be too strong for the average clientele (‘Not many people would want an expensive picture of a man with a noose around his neck’, said one prominent member of the Old Master community, ‘unless, of course, they're into bondage’).
Although Christie's promoted the picture extensively, giving it a separate catalogue, the picture was bought in at £3.6 million.
Lady Cook subsequently lent it to the National Gallery, London, from  October 1989 to February of this year, where, for the first time seen in the company of undisputed masterpieces by Antonello, its autograph status as an Antonello was regained.
One prominent scholar of Italian paintings believes that the National Gallery was ill served by the loan which seems to have been a rather persuasive pre-sale exhibition for the benefit of Lady Cook.
Nicholas Penny, curator of Italian paintings at the National Gallery, declined to comment on the picture.
Madrid
New York Guggenheim to receive $ 18.9 million rent for collection and name
Bilbao Guggenheim official cost: $189 million
MADRID.
The final agreement between Spain's Basque government and the Solomon Guggenheim Foundation on the construction of a new Guggenheim museum in Bilbao was signed in New York on 27 February by Peter Lawson, President of the American foundation, Thomas Krens, its director and José Antonio Ardanza, President of Spain's Basque regional government (see The Art Newspaper No. 15, February 1992, p. 3).
Works of art of ‘the same high quality’ as the Guggenheim Museum in New York, and encompassing ‘all the essential works in the Guggenheim collection’will be loaned to the new museum, initially for a period of twenty years, though this may be extended to seventy-five years or indefinitely, according to the agreement.
It is also stipulated in the agreement that the only works of art that may not be transferred to Bilbao from New York are those that are subject to American legal restrictions, or works that are too fragile to travel.
Notwithstanding these restrictions, Basque officials are confident that the quality of the art works that will be transferred to Bilbao will be guaranteed by clauses in the agreement, and by the fact that, due to a lack of space in the New York Museum, only about one-seventh of the total Solomon Guggenheim collection can ever be exhibited there at any one time.
The agreement will cost the Basque authorities the equivalent of a total of £108 million ($189 million), which is more than has ever been spent on a single cultural project in Bilbao since the city's decision to create a Fine Art Museum in 1908.
The negotiations have been carried out with utmost discretion, and involved on the Basque side just two members of the ruling Basque Nationalist Party (apart from José Ardanza, the Basque government's president) and José Alberto Pradena, the governor of the Basque province of Guipuzcoa, the capital of which is Bilbao.
Politicians representing other Basque parties have therefore felt left out, and believe the public should have been informed about the negotiations at the beginning, in view of the huge scale of the financing involved.
To assuage the criticism, the Basque government has said it will spend the equivalent of £16.2 million ($28.35 million) on urban projects in the area where the museum is going to be built.
This investment will be in addition to the £54 million ($94.5 million) it will cost to build the museum itself, which is due to be launched in 1996.
The Basque government will also endow a new foundation that will be set up in Bilbao with the equivalent of £27 million ($47.25 million), which is to be used to buy works of art for the new museum.
The foundation will benefit from the advice of experts from the Guggenheim Foundation in New York.
Finally, as compensation for the loan of the modern works of art, and for the use of the Guggenheim name for the Museum and the Foundation, the New York organisation will receive the equivalent of £10.8 million ($18.9 million).
Cambridge
Harvard beats Met and Peabody Museum for best collection of Korean ceramics outside Korea
Diplomats Gregory and Maria Henderson  amassed the pieces en poste
CAMBRIDGE, MASS.
The Harvard University Art Museums are in the process of acquiring the Gregory and Maria Henderson Collection of Korean Ceramics, the most important private collection of its kind in the West.
Maria Henderson has given Harvard a 50% interest in the holdings she amassed with her late husband Gregory, an American diplomat stationed in Korea for many years.
The remaining 50% will be acquired through gifts and purchases over the next few years.
The collection totals approximately 150 items comprising an historical survey of first-class material ranging from the first to the nineteenth century AD.
Dr Robert Mowry, Associate Curator in charge of Asian Art at Harvard's Arthur M. Sackler Museum, told The Art Newspaper, ‘It is quite comprehensive and exceptionally well balanced.
For a teaching museum we couldn't have hoped for a better gift.
The great strength of the collection is the archaeological components unglazed stoneware from the first to the ninth century.
Harvard now has the finest collection of such material outside of Korea’.
A number of museums wanted the works, some of which had been on loan to The Metropolitan.
About ten years ago the Hendersons gave the Los Angeles County Museum of Art a hoard of Korean ceramic shards from known kiln sites, but loaned no works from the collection.
(Los Angeles has the largest Korean population outside Korea, generating considerable interest there in things Korean.)
The Peabody Museum in Salem, Massachusetts, with one of the most important collections of ethnographic Korean material outside Korea, was very interested in the Henderson ceramics.
In addition various private museums in Korea offered to purchase the trove en bloc for substantial sums of money, reportedly as high as $5 million.
Mrs Henderson plans to establish later this year the Gregory and Maria Henderson Endowment for the Study of the Visual Arts of Korea and its Neighbors.
The fund will create graduate study fellowships and student travel, enable specialists from Korea to teach or speak at Harvard, and help permit the museum to publish and research the collection.
In anticipation of the gift, the collection has been housed in the Sackler since October.
The Henderson Collection will be exhibited there from 12 December 1992–22 February 1993, accompanied by a modest catalogue with an overview of Korean ceramics, illustrated with Henderson objects.
Beginning in August the museum will present a complementary long-term display from the existing permanent collection, featuring the Sackler's best Korean paintings, gilt bronzes, lacquers and ceramics.
Guercino Sybil joins ‘Elijah fed by Ravens’ in the National Gallery
LONDON.
Sir Denis Mahon, owner of the most important private collection of Italian Baroque paintings, whose much-discussed future bequest to the National Gallery is the subject of on-going debate, has loaned a second Guercino painting to the Gallery.
His ‘Cumaean Sybil with a putto’ of 1651 is among the artist's major and most pleasing pictures, and joins Mr. Mahon's other loan, ‘Elijah fed by Ravens’, painted thirty years earlier.
Getty deaccessions Italian paintings
NEW YORK.
As the Getty Museum knows, no matter how much money you have, it isn't enough, and what better way to get some extra bucks to make that down payment on that Titian than deaccession?
On 21 May, Christie's New York will sell thirty-one Italian paintings from the Getty's collection, most of which have not been on view for many years either due to their unsatisfactory condition or their downgraded status: a ‘Rest on the Flight into Egypt’ was described in 1963 as ‘the greatest reward for visitors to the collection…by Orazio Gentileschi, a Caravaggesque masterpiece by an artist who had learned the lesson of realism’, only to be dubbed a later copy, probably Francesco Gentileschi, in the opinion of R.W. Bissel, the leading authority on the artist (est. $50–70,000).
Earlier pictures include a ‘Male Saint holding a book’ by Ugolino da Nerio (est. $100–150,000) Madonnas by Paolo di Giovanni Fei ($80–120,000), Jacobello del Fiore (est. $60–80,000) and Michele Giambono (est. $100–150,000) and portraits by Cariani (est. $20–30,000) and Paris Bordone (est. $200–300,000).
Among the more intriguing lots is an altarpiece by Pietro Marescalchi of ‘The Madonna and child with Sts.
Prosdocimus and James’, bought by the museum from Walter P. Chrysler in 1969 (est. $80–120,000) and a mammoth seventeenth-century Neapolitan ‘Triumph of Love’ depicting a triumphant cupid on a cart surrounded by lovers of various persuasions and attitudes (est. $60–80,000).
Variously ascribed to Andrea di Lione, Pietro Testa and Mattia Preti, it is a fascinating art-historical curiosity, that in my opinion is sufficiently unusual to hang on to a while longer.
Go-ahead given for the Hamburg art island
HAMBURG.
The Senate of Hamburg has given the go-ahead for the redevelopment of the museum area near its central station.
Work on the ‘kunstinsel’(art island) may start this year and could be completed by 1996.
After much discussion, the task of building the island (which is surrounded by traffic not water) falls to the winner of last year's competition, the architect Oswald Matthias Ungers.
According to his plans, the old Kunsthalle will remain in its place but the adjacent ugly exhibition buildings of the Sixties will replaced by an elegant showcase à la Ungers.
The Kunstverein and Kunsthaus (art association and society of artists), which are currently housed there, will move to the old flower market building beyond the station called the Deichtorhallen.
Eventually, Hamburg will have a ‘museum mile’ stretching from its inner-city lake down to the harbour.
The costs of the project are estimated at DM 93 million (£32.4 million; $56.9 million).
Tretyakov broke: $15 million more needed
MOSCOW.
For the first time, the Tretyakov has openly pleaded poverty.
The announcement was made at the opening of the ‘Spassenje’(Rescue) charity appeal, whose aim is to make up the shortfall of $15 million dollars still needed to complete the gallery's reconstruction.
Through a major media campaign it is seeking to obtain funds by raising public awareness of the museum's past history.
The Tretyakov collection of paintings was donated to the city of Moscow a century ago.
In 1916, the city Duma (parliament) voted for reconstruction of the gallery.
Work was never started, and the situation remained unchanged for seventy years.
In 1986 it was decided that it would take three years to complete the job, twice as long as to construct a new building.
Finance was available from the treasury, and by the end of 1987 the equivalent of $12 million had been allocated.
In the same period, contracts were signed with foreign contractors for more than $27 million.
By simple calculation, it can be seen why the luckless Tretyakov needs the $15 million.
According to gallery director Yuri Korelev, state construction finance was significantly reduced in 1989 and was constantly on the verge of being cut off altogether.
The museum's own commercial activities, always criticised as unsuitable for a prominent national institution, have not been very effective.
The facts, as presented by Yuri Korelev, show that the six commercial exhibitions held in 1990 and 1991 raised only $630,000 towards its current deficit.
Hopes are now pinned on donations.
There has already been some response to this cry for help.
The Soviet-American joint venture ‘21st-Century Technologies’ has given a million roubles and a truckful of restoration materials has arrived in Moscow, courtesy of the Schirn Kunsthalle in Frankfurt.
A cocktail of Esso, Rubens, and Italian Renaissance
MELBOURNE.
The National Gallery of Australia has opened its latest brain-child, the exhibition ‘Rubens and the Italian Renaissance’, sponsored by Esso (until 8 June).
Australian audiences will have the opportunity to see ‘the greatest collection of Italian masterpieces ever seen in Australia, combined with a survey of the work of Peter Paul Rubens’(so runs the press release).
The loans list is certainly impressive, including over seventy paintings, drawings and sculpture, from a wide range of museums in Australia, Europe and the United States (Galleria Borghese, Uffizi, Vatican, Brera, Bargello, Prado, Hermitage, Metropolitan, and Kunsthistorisches Museum, Vienna).
Among the major painters alone are Caravaggio (‘Judith and Holofernes’ from Palazzo Barberini, Rome), Veronese, Correggio (‘Martyrdom of Four Saints’, Parma Pinacoteca), Titian and Sebastiano del Piombo.
Canvases by Rubens from lenders worldwide are included.
Met searches for a new drawings curator
NEW YORK.
For the past few months, the Metropolitan Museum of Art has been trying, without success, to find a drawings curator to replace Jacob Bean, who has just retired.
The sixty-eight year old Bean was curator of the department since its inception in 1960; previously all drawings were acquired through the Department of European Paintings, and it was on Philip Pouncey's suggestion that the Metropolitan decided to form a separate department.
Making do with little funds, Bean is responsible for the museum's unusually rich holdings of seventeenth-century Italian and eighteenth-century French drawings, featuring the best representation in America of drawings by the Carracci, Il Volterrano, Pietro da Cortona, François-André Vincent and François Lemoine.
After such drawings became fashionable (and thus more expensive) in recent years, Bean had been concentrating on filling in gaps in the Metropolitan's collection of nineteenth-century French drawings, purchasing sheets by the academic painters Henri Lehmann, Isadore Pils, Ferdinand Cormon and Hippolyte Flandrin.
The Met's first choice for Bean's successor was George Goldner, the curator of drawings and paintings at the J. Paul Getty Museum.
Goldner toyed with the offer, but decided to stay on at the Getty after negotiating a new contract that allowed him to remain in his hometown of New York most of the year (with short stays in Malibu), in effect managing and adding to the Getty's collection in absentia.
Other candidates proposed have included Nicholas Turner of the British Museum, Andrew Robison of the National Gallery, Washington, Marguerite Stuffmann of the Städelsches Kunstinstitut, Frankfurt (Goldner's suggestion to the Met), Gandolfi expert Mimi Cazort of the National Gallery of Canada, and Bean's own assistant curator, William M. Griswold, whose youth is considered by some to be a liability.
Other possibilities, Douglas Druick and Suzanne McCullagh of the Art Institute of Chicago would, in the opinion of many, be wonderful for the Met, though it appears highly unlikely either would leave Chicago where, in the words of one collector, ‘they are treated like gods’.
Perhaps the Met's problem lies in the present state of museum affairs, where the ideal curator combines impeccable scholarship and connoisseurship with a golden ability to raise acquisition funds and attract and nurture prospective donors.
Few curators in any field can do this much, and one wonders if the job of Drawings Curator at the Metropolitan Museum, in its present form, is unfillable.
Paris
Jacquemart-André Director and Curator cleared of theft and mismanagement
Three hundred and twenty-five items reported missing by government inspectors turn up in cupboard on site
PARIS.
Three hundred and twenty-five works of art reported missing from Paris's Musée Jacquemart-André in an inventory published in April 1991 by the Cour des Comptes the lofty body responsible for controlling public finance have not only been found, but never left the museum according to a second survey carried out by order of a Paris court.
The first inventory was ordered by the Cour des Comptes from the Institut de France, which is responsible for the museum, after Lydie Huyghe, its curator in chief, allegedly refused to supply one in November 1990.
The task was handed to a Ministry of Education civil servant, Christine Solans, who reported 325 objects to be missing and what she mysteriously described as ‘diverse dysfunctions of the Institut de France’.
She also claimed on television that 152 old drawings had disappeared.
They had in fact been reported missing as early as 1952, well before Lydie Huyghe took over and to everyone's embarrassment were found in a cupboard in a corridor during the latest inventory.
That survey was carried out by a court-appointed expert and completed by an inspection of the museum on 14 February by order of the instructing magistrate in charge of the affair.
This was done in the presence of Lydie Huyghe and her art historian and académicien husband René, the Director of the museum.
Its conclusions made the findings of the Cour des Comptes appear preposterous.
But the huge and well publicised scandal of the intervening nine months had entailed the sacking of the Huyghes and the indictment of Lydie Huyghe for ‘complicity in embezzling public funds’.
Jean-Paul Scarpitta, her ‘cultural adviser’, meanwhile had been indicted for ‘forgery and embezzlement of public funds’ and only released from bail of FFr1.2 million after the second inventory.
Ten days after the inspection of the Musée Jacquemart-André, however, the Cour des Comptes caused further amazement by publishing a communiqué which contradicted its own inventory of April 1991 and simply ignored the one ordered by the instructing magistrate.
It claimed that not 325 objects but 463 objects were missing from the museum.
The Huyghes immediately announced they were bringing charges on two counts because the communiqué constituted a violation of professional secrecy and because it could influence legal investigations.
The blunders of the Cour des Comptes may be due to the fact they worked on the basis of an often vaguely worded inventory of 1912.
To make matters worse, most of the contents of the Musée Jacquemart-André were evacuated during the last war.
The Huyghes' administration of the museum, which had an average of only fifteen to twenty visitors a day, has been widely criticised as dusty, to say the least, the heavy-handedness and the sheer malice of the campaign against them may be due to clan warfare within the Institut de France and may also have political roots Jean-Paul Scarpitta, for example, was a personal friend of Président Mitterrand's wife Danièle.
Madrid
Museo Nacional Reina Sofía at last lives up to its name
National collection of modern and contemporary art will open in May after a seventeen month delay
MADRID.
From May the Museo Nacional Reina Sofía will at last be what its title implies, a national museum exhibiting a permanent collection of modern and contemporary works of art.
Although the Museum has put on a large number of successful temporary exhibitions, the display of its permanent collection has been subject to difficulties and delays.
The Director, María Corral, intends to display some 200 works, including paintings, sculptures and installations, out of the approximately 9000 objects in the collection.
The previous Director, Tomás Llorens, had originally planned for the permanent collection to open in January 1991, but a variety of circumstances, including differences with the Ministry of Finance and a change of Directors, have conspired to delay the opening for seventeen months.
In the meantime the purchase grant of the Museum has been cut by nearly fifty per cent to Pta300 million (£1.7 million; £2.9 million) which does not go very far when acquiring modern works.
‘Over the past hundred years there has never been a real commitment to the formation of a contemporary art collection and the cost of establishing one has not been given much thought’, says Corral.
‘The government's proposals on patronage and sponsorship [the so-called Ley del Mecenazgo or Patronage Law]may provide an important boost for the Museum if it actually becomes law’.
The first half of the twentieth century will be represented primarily by Spanish art and will draw on the Miró and Dalí bequests.
The second part, which comes right up to the 1980s, will be international in character and recently acquired works by Fontana, Schnabel, Newman, Kelly, Gordillo and Navarro will be exhibited.
Corral generally prefers buying from commercial galleries rather than auction houses and she often consults the artists about the works the Museum intends to buy.
The permanent collection will be exhibited on the second floor of the Museum and its opening will come during the year when Madrid has been selected as the Cultural Capital of Europe.
An intensive programme of temporary exhibitions has also been organised by the Centro Reina Sofía for 1992.
They include shows on Millares, Popova, Therrien, Gober, Serra and a thematic exhibition called ‘Confrontaciones’.
Paris
Sculpture comes in from the far reaches of the Pavillon de Flore at the Louvre
I.M. Pei, designer of the pyramid, also to roof over the courtyards with glass for works from the Tuilerie
PARIS.
All the Louvre's sculptures are to be moved out of the remote Pavillon de Flore in the south-west wing and rehoused after being divided, for the first time, into French and non-French works.
The former will be exhibited in newly renovated rooms in the Richelieu wing on the north side the former Ministry of Finance looking onto the rue de Rivoli while two new galleries will be set aside in the Pavillon just south of the Pyramid, for the display of Northern European and Italian sculpture.
To make room in the Pavillon Mollien, a long-lived temporary exhibition of Neo-classical sculpture will be removed from the galerie Molière and nearby workshops transferred to the Richelieu wing.
Guy Nicot, the Louvre (and Elysée Palace) architect currently supervising work on the Museum's Cour Napoléon will leave his offices on the first floor of the west side of the Cour Lefuel (once the apartments of Napoléon III's Master of the Horse) to make way for Dutch and Flemish sculptures; German pieces will be housed underneath on the ground floor.
Italian sculpture will also be housed in the galerie Molière with Ancient to fifteenth-century sculpture on the ground floor and fifteenth-century to Canova just upstairs.
The French architectural team François Pin and Catherine Bizouard have been put in charge of renovation of the Cour Fuel, once a stable yard.
Restoration work beginning this summer should be complete by autumn next year.
Work on dismantling the first pieces of sculpture in the Pavillon de Flore began in January this year; their installation in the Richelieu wing is also due to be finished by autumn 1993.
Renovation work there, following the project of U.S. architect I.M. Pei, is being carried out under the aegis of French architect Michel Macari.
The construction of glass roofing over the three courtyards, all of which will be used to show sculpture, is nearing completion.
The former premises of the sculpture department in the Pavillon de Flore will be used meanwhile by the Ecole du Louvre and the Museum's restoration workshops.
Ground floor rooms in the wing will be converted into between 800–900 square metres of temporary exhibition space, particularly well suited for paintings on account of the light which is predominantly from the north, and with a separate entrance to avoid congestion.
The decision to abandon the Pavillon de Flore as a permanent exhibition space goes back to an official report drawn up before I.M. Pei started work on renovating the Museum and building his pyramid.
The report, by Jérôme Dourdin, noted in particular how tiring and discouraging it was for visitors to walk all the way out to the Pavillon de Flore to see the sculptures and then have to hike back again to visit the other collections in the Museum.
In the light of the report the Louvre, knowing that it would inherit the Richelieu wing from the Ministry of Finance, due to move to new premises in the east end of Paris, began to study the best way to redistribute its collections.
The curator-in-chief in charge of sculpture, Jean-René Gaborit, asked that the courtyards of the Richelieu wing be covered so that his department might at last have the space to show pieces from stores and also sculptures brought in from the Tuileries gardens and elsewhere, many of them suffering from atmospheric pollution.
I.M. Pei, who immediately approved the idea of glass roofing, found it posed particularly difficult technical problems relating to drainage and air conditioning.
The western Cour Marly in the Richelieu wing will be used solely for Marly sculptures.
The central Cour Puget will house a display of Martin Desjardins' sculptures originally made for the place des Victoires in Paris ‘to the glory of Louis XIV’.
Only the tips of the fingers of the equestrian statue of the King have survived.
But the Louvre owns four of the victorious Monarch's sculpted captives which have lived in the park at Sceaux, plus some of the place des Victoires bas reliefs and medallions.
It was lack of space on the ground floor of the Richelieu wing which I.M. Pei has redesigned in such a way as to supply maximum visibility, which inspired the department of sculpture to split their collections into French and foreign.
‘We follow along the same lines as the department of paintings and the result will be a collection of sculpture…. enjoyable to view’, Curator-in-Chief Mr Gaborit said.
Prado acquires ex-Christie's de la Tour from Agnew's
MADRID.
George de la Tour's ‘Blind Hurdy-Gurdy Player’, bought by Agnew's at Christie's on 13 December for £1,870,000, is to join the collection at the Prado.
The painting will be included in an exhibition until 30 April of works acquired over the past ten years.
During this period, the Prado also bought a ‘Family Portrait’ by Adriaene Thomaz Key (1558–89) for Pta76 million.
Both paintings were purchased with money left to the museum by Manuel Villaescusa.
The legacy also helped to pay for Sánchez Cotán's ‘Still Life with game, fruit and vegetables’, painted in 1602.
More than eggs from Fabergé
WASHINGTON, D.C. In an effort to ease the economic woes precipitated by the dissolution of the Soviet Union, many of America's premier museums recently sent food and supplies to their Russian counterparts.
Spearheaded by the Fabergé Arts Foundation, the relief effort collected about five tons of powdered milk, cereal, dried fruit and dehydrated soup donated by staff members of the Metropolitan Museum of Art, the Museum of Modern Art, the National Gallery of Art, the Corcoran Gallery of Art, the Hirshhorn Museum, the Walters Art Gallery and the Hillwood Museum.
Employees of the Art Institute of Chicago and the J. Paul Getty Museum contributed personal cheques, and the sole foreign participant, the Thyssen-Bornemisza Foundation of Lugano, Switzerland, made a cash contribution.
The Thomas J. Lipton Foundation, an adjunct of the tea and soup company, helped with shipping costs, and Finnair Cargo gave a special reduced rate on transporting the goods from New York to Helsinki.
From Finland, the food was trucked to St Petersburg and Moscow, where Fabergé Foundation representatives coordinated distribution to personnel from six Russian museums: the Tretyakov Museum, the State Historical Museum, the Pushkin Museum, and the Kremlin Armoury, all in Moscow, and the Russian Museum and the Hermitage in St Petersburg.
The Kremlin Armoury and the Hermitage sent their trucks to pick up the shipments at customs, and to make the rounds in their respective cities.
All told, about 2,000 people benefited from the relief programme.
The Fabergé Foundation is a Washington, D.C.-based non-profit group involved with preserving the St Petersburg house of jeweller Carl Fabergé, and converting it into a museum.
The more the Morgan grows the more it stays the same
NEW YORK.
The neo-Renaissance palazzo designed in 1902 by McKim, Mead & White for the legendary financier, philanthropist and collector J. Pierpont Morgan (1837–1913) is one of the city's most treasured landmarks.
So when expansion plans were announced several years ago, notwithstanding the restraint with which the library goes about its business, there was some cause for alarm.
Now that the $30 million project is completed, however, visitors will find not much seems to have changed at all.
Exhibition space was not needed the library eschews blockbusters, and its permanent collection of books, manuscripts and works on paper cannot be exposed to light too often.
What the Morgan really lacked were adequate facilities behind the scenes.
And that is what the Morgan gained.
The expansion nearly doubles the library's space.
It links the original building's 1928 annex and the 1854 Morgan House, a Victorian mansion just to the north, recently acquired by the trustees for $15 million.
This forty-five room brownstone once the home of J.P.
Morgan Jr., who in 1924 established his father's library as a public institution now houses a book shop, education centre, lecture hall, staff offices and a conservation studio three times the size of the old one.
The space between the old building and the Morgan mansion has been converted into a marble-paved court with plantings, a fountain, and seats, all beneath a forty-two foot high curving glass-and-steel roof.
Designed by Voorsanger & Associates, Architects, this 3,400 sq.ft. enclosure will eventually host chamber music concerts and a café, and once the greenery climbs the stark walls will become a cool retreat for museumgoers.
Inside, in the original 1902 library, Morgan's study is fully restored as is the newly lighted East Room with its vault murals by H. Siddons Mowbray and two-storey glass-and-wood cabinets shelving a hoard of rare volumes.
The only new exhibition spaces are the modest Clare Eddy Thaw and Forecourt Galleries, both of which will receive rotating exhibitions from the too-little-seen permanent collection.
Future temporary exhibitions include ‘Sketching at Home and Abroad: British Landscape Drawings, 1750–1850’(6 May–2 August) and ‘Fra Bartolommeo: Master Draughtsman of the High Renaissance’(11 September–29 November).
Jason Edward Kaufman
Brazilian Imperial Museum reopens
PETROPOLIS (RIO DE JANEIRO).
The Imperial Museum, founded in 1943 by President Getulio Vargas, has recently been restored and refurbished.
The museum includes a library and archives documenting the reign of the Orléans-Bragança family; it receives 300,000 visitors a year and plays a key role in the artistic and cultural life of Brazil.
The latest addition is a room devoted to Princess Isabel, daughter of Pedro II, who is fondly remembered by the Brazilians for her part in abolishing slavery.
The room is furnished and decorated in period style.
On one wall hangs ‘The Oath of Princess Isabel’, a painting by Victor Meirelles of Lima executed in 1872 to celebrate her first regency.
Instruments of torture feature somewhat incongruously alongside porcelain, glassware and fans owned by members of the imperial family.
Also on show is a collection of daguerreotypes and photographs relating to the life and work of the princess.
Private bequest funds Munich shopping spree
MUNICH.
A bequest by gallery owners Otto and Etta Stangl has enabled the Bayerisches Staatsgemälde Sammlungen to acquire nine major modern works for the Staatsgalerie Moderner Kunst.
Among them are three paintings by Paul Klee: ‘Full Moon’(1919), ‘Nocturnal Plants Growing’(1922) and ‘Garden with Birds’(1929); two by Max Beckmann: ‘Woman with a Mandolin’(1950) and ‘Winter Landscape’(1934); Ernst Ludwig Kirchner's ‘Mardersteig Brothers’(1922); Emil Nolde's ‘Girls in their party dresses’(1918); Alexei von Jawlensky's ‘Mediterranean Coast’(1907) and Ludwig Meidner's ‘Suicide’(1912).
All the works bequeathed by the Stangls are to be re-examined by experts and the results of their labours will be seen in a comprehensive exhibition planned for the end of 1993 whose aim will be to highlight both the international importance of the collection and the activities of Otto and Etta Stangl.
As gallery-owners, the Stangls did much to encourage Art Informel and the work of the ‘Zen’ group.
A room in the Staatsgalerie Moderner Kunst's new building is to be named after the couple.
Strang Print Room re-opens at University College
LONDON.
University College, London, possesses one of the oldest and finest art collections among British universities.
The collection owes its origin to a major bequest of drawings and sculptures by the neo-classical artist John Flaxman in the 1840s and was further enriched by a bequest of German graphic works by George Grote in 1872.
Grote's collection is rivalled in Britain only by Windsor and the British Museum and includes fine prints by Dürer and Cranach.
A fine group of English watercolours also came to the College in the nineteenth century through Henry Vaughan, and modern British art is represented by works of Slade School teachers and pupils, among them many works by Henry Tonks and his contemporaries.
Although first opened in 1981, the Strang Print Room operated under restricted hours and never fully exploited its potential until the recent appointment of Nicola Kalinsky, formerly at Dulwich College Gallery, as curator.
Now the Print Room is open during term time from 1.00 to 2.15 on weekdays and in addition from 1.00 to 5.00 on Tuesdays and Thursdays.
Closed to the public in the holidays but open by appointment (phone 071–387 7050 ext. 2540).
Bavarian Nationalmuseum continues to grow
KEMPTEN (BAVARIA).
The Alpenländische Galerie, a new branch of the Bayrisches Nationalmuseum, is now open to the public.
More than 130 late-Gothic altarpieces, sculptures and paintings are shown in the baroque surroundings of the former stables (built in 1730) of a prince-abbot's residence.
Most of the works of art are owned by the Bayrisches Nationalmuseum which methodically distributes its wealth to new museums like this in Bavaria (see The Art Newspaper No.13, December 1991, p.6).
Some temporary loans from other sources complete the display.
The emphasis is on alpine works of the late-Gothic period from about 1340 to 1540, with the schools of Ulm and Augsburg dominating.
A fully illustrated catalogue of all exhibits is available.
Benefactor creates DM21 million museum for Bremerhaven and fills it
BREMERHAVEN.
The city authorities of Bremerhaven have signed an agreement with the Bremen businessman and art collector Hans Grothe, whereby the industrialist will pay for the construction of a new contemporary art museum (likely to cost DM21 million (£7.3 million; $12.7 million) and will endow it with his collection of contemporary art works.
Considered to be quite unique, the collection consists of paintings and sculptures by Joseph Beuys, Georg Baselitz, Jörg Immendorff, Imi Knoebel, Markus Lüpertz, Blinky Palermo, A.R.
Penck, Sigmar Polke, Gerhard Richter, Ulrich Rückriem, Hanne Darboven and Anselm Kiefer.
For its part, the city has made available a site overlooking the Rickmers shipyard and will cover all the costs of creating and equipping a sculpture park.
In all the city's contribution is likely to cost DM20 million.
In addition local authorities will have to meet the annual bill for personnel and administration, and the on-going expense of maintaining the museum buildings and exhibits.
Widow of aircrash Senator donates $10 million to Yale
NEW HAVEN, CONNECTICUT.
The Yale University Art Gallery has received $10 million from the widow of Senator John Heinz III of Pennsylvania.
Teresa Heinz, who serves on the gallery's board of governors, donated the sum in memory of her husband, a Yale graduate active in supporting the gallery, who died in a plane crash in Pennsylvania last April at the age of fifty-two.
The gift is the largest since the gallery's founding in 1832.
Gallery Director Mary Gardner Neill has yet to determine how the money will be spent, but she told The Art Newspaper that the $10 million will count towards the Yale campaign, a major university-wide capital drive to be announced in early May, seeking $1.5 billion by 1997.
Ms Neill hopes to raise another $15 million for gallery improvements, such as refurbishing the Louis Kahn building, upgrading climate control, and exploring ways to increase gallery space.
She is hopeful there will be further gifts to endow the curatorial departments.
Ms Neill told The Art Newspaper that in addition to the money, Mrs Heinz has just given Yale sixteen American nineteenth-century paintings by some of the period's most renowned and valued artists.
Included are three works by Martin Johnson Heade, two by Albert Bierstadt, two by Sanford Robinson Gifford, and examples by Frederic Edwin Church, George Inness, John F. Kensett, Jasper Cropsey, Eastman Johnson, William Francis Edmonds, John Califano, Seymour Guy and Edward Henry Potthast.
‘The addition creates a new strength for us in American nineteenth-century genre painting’, says Ms Neill.
She notes that the Heinz family has been extraordinarily generous to the gallery over the years.
For example, Senator Heinz's father, Henry J. Heinz II, permanently endowed the directorship in 1982.
The late Senator, a former member of the gallery's governing board, was also a collector of Dutch and Flemish still lifes, recently shown in Boston and Washington, D.C. 
For the record
Art and government
Count down to 1993 and the United States of Europe are you prepared?
Everything you need to know but have been too bashful to ask
Read this and keep it if you're an artist, a dealer, an auctioneer, a collector, a museum curator, an academic, a publisher, an advertiser, a sponsor, a restorer, an architect, a lawyer or an arts administrator inside or outside Europe
Thirty-four cultureless years?
Until the Maastricht Treaty last December, which included the first ever explicit references to culture, the EC had no formal competence in cultural matters.
The intention of the founding fathers was never merely economic, however.
Robert Schuman, former Prime Minister of France and one of the signatories of the European Coal and Steel Community Treaty (1951) wrote: ‘Europe before being a military alliance or an economic entity must be a cultural community’, and the Treaty of Rome (1957), which underlies the whole being of the EC, says that the signatories are ‘determined to lay the foundations of an ever closer union among the peoples of Europe’.
Very much on the British initiative, and spurred by fears of economic decline, in the mid-1980s the EC countries decided to implement the provisions of the Treaty of Rome concerning the internal market by 1992.
Until then, only the customs union had been completed.
In 1985, Lord Cockfield, the British Commissioner, put forward a detailed white paper to abolish physical, technical and fiscal barriers in order to create a single integrated market throughout the twelve member states.
Its proposals will have significant impact on the arts from the abolition of customs posts at frontiers to the approximation of VAT on works of arts and antiques.
The determination and remarkable technical expertise of Lord Cockfield and the dynamism and tough political skills of his successor, Martin Bangemann, have been crucial in the implementation of the programme.
At present, almost 80% of the 280 or so necessary legislative measures have been adopted and by the end of the year it is expected to be 90%.
The Maastricht Treaty provisions for culture were adopted against this background.
The most important is the culture clause which lays down that the EC shall:
take the cultural aspect into account in all its policies
promote culture, respecting diversity
support various measures including heritage conservation
foster cultural co-operation among member states and with third countries.
Because of the reservations of some member states, notably Germany and the UK, the clause clearly restricts the scope of Community action.
Any action has to be additional to member states' own policies; it has to take into account the views of the region; it has to be adopted unanimously by the Council, and the European Parliament (EP) can veto it.
The Commission is careful to stress that it has no intention of developing a grand ‘European Cultural Policy’.
Indeed, it is giving the impression of being much less ambitious and much more practical than in the past.
It is considering three main areas:
1
The organisation of culture within an integrated market:
measures to improve the information available about cultural activities
creation of networks
support for training programmes
measures to increase access
measures to favour sponsorship
2
Further specific measures in the field of heritage conservation (see below) and the translation of literary works;
3
Strengthening relations with non-EC countries, in particular those of Central and Eastern Europe.
The implementation of the packet depends on funding.
DGX is aiming at increasing its current budget of ECU95 million by about 30%, but after negotiations with member states it may well only be in the region of 15%.
Keys to the labyrinth
Finding out about who does what in the EC and how the Brussels institutional web works is a complex and costly operation.
While the Community is relatively open by the standards of some national bureaucracies, its sheer tortuousness creates a seemingly impenetrable wall between the ordinary citizen and the Brussels  officials .
In order to break this down, good information sources are the key.
They are few and expensive.
The best daily or weekly news briefings on EC affairs are produced by two competing Brussels-based news services, Agence Europe and European Report 1.
Both subscriptions cost about £800 per year and both have the nasty habit of being so voluminous as to go largely unread.
Both are available in several languages, although the quality of translations particularly of Agence Europe out of French is unreliable.
The engagingly eccentric editorials of veteran Brussels-watcher Emanuele Gazzo, founder of Agence Europe, gives his fly-sheet the decided edge in terms of amusement value.
His news service is also more interesting in terms of content.
Reference works for, and directories to, the Community are proliferating rapidly.
Their standards vary greatly.
Most of them include complete lists of the members of all the institutions and their senior staff, with addresses and telephone numbers.
Some include potted guides to Euro-jargon and decision-making, with compendia of recent important legislation.
Everyone who has regular dealings with Brussels needs at least one such directory.
The best overall guide of this kind, in any language, remains the oldest and the cheapest: the quarterly journal Vacher's European Companion, available only by postal subscription, from Vacher's, Berkhamsted, at £35.50 annually.
Add to that a good ‘who's who’ of EC officials and you have the makings of a basic Euro data-base.
The best is probably Dod's European Companion, although its coverage is still a little quirky.
Two directories worth considering are Europa Publications' The EC Encyclopedia and Directory 1992, which costs a mere £155 and Chapman's European Directory, at £65.
Both provide Vacher's style material ‘plus’, in a more attractive and reader-friendly way.
The great problem however with such books is that their information dates very quickly.
Similar publications are becoming available in French.
The clearest and easiest to use is the Guide pratique du labyrinthe communautaire by D. Gueguen (Apogée, Rennes).
More comprehensive is the Annal des Communautés Européennes (Delta, Brussels).
In Germany, there are good reference books such as Europa Transparent by M. Brücker and Andrea Przyklenk (Dekker & Müller) and Europa von A bis Z by W. Weidenfeld and W. Wessels, published by Europa Union Verlag.
This Bonn publishing house produces two very useful collections, ‘Europäische Schriften’ and ‘Europäische Studien’, devoted to the history, institutions and policies of the EC.
For readers more interested in the substance of EC policies and decision-making processes, the best first stops, both available as cheap and cheerful paperbacks, are John Pinder's European Community: Building of a Union (Oxford) and Kevin Featherstone's The Successful Manager's Guide to 1992 (Fontana).
By contrast, the over-hyped Times Guide to 1992 now seems to have outlived its usefulness.
More specifically, Who does what in Europe? by Rod Fisher (Arts Council) lists the sources of finance for the arts available from the EC among other international institutions.
A couple of handy dictionaries exist in French.
Pascale Fontaine and Henri Malosse have published a short A to Z survey called Les Institutions Européennes (Retz), whilst François Visine has written Dictionnaire de l'Européen (Visine), a much longer and now somewhat dated, but still very useful book.
The first volume of the new Oxford Encyclopedia of EC Law is quite outstanding in explaining the constitutional basis of the EC's emerging political system.
It is a labour of love by Professor A. G. Toth and primarily for specialists.
Notwithstanding the 1992 euphoria, EC books do not yet feature very prominently in the high street.
The best bookshop is the Librairie Européenne in Brussels, while the London School of Economics bookshop in London makes a good second.
These are the Euro-culture men
Jean Dondelinger, Luxembourgeois, Commissioner for Information, Communication and Culture since 1989.
He is a lawyer with a diplomatic career.
He was Luxembourg's Permanent Representative to the EC from 1970 to 1984, when he became Secretary General of Luxembourg's Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
He chaired the negotiating group on the Single European Act and was vice-chairman of the international conference on satellite television frequencies
Martin Bangemann, German, Commissioner for the Internal Market and Industrial Affairs (DGIII) and Vice-President of the Commission since 1989.
He is a lawyer by training and a liberal.
A former member of the Bundestag, he was an MEP from 1973 to 1984, becoming Chairman of the Liberal and Democratic Group from 1979 to 1984.
He then became German Federal Minister for Economic Affairs and president of his own party, the Freie Demokratische Partei
Carlo Ripa di Meana, Italian, Commissioner for Environment, Nuclear Safety and Civil Protection since 1989.
He is a Socialist, a journalist and regional politician.
He was chairman of the Venice Biennale from 1974 to 1979 and served on the board of La Scala of Milan.
From 1979 to 1984 he was an MEP.
In 1985 he became Commissioner for Information, Communication and Culture
Europe and the rest of the world
Europe has repeatedly been accused of cultural imperialism, of being a trade fortress and a rich man's club.
Partly to counter these charges the EC has constantly tried to develop its relations with other countries and this applies also to cultural relations.
Its largest cultural programme is with the African, Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) countries.
The treaty Lomé IV lays down that the two groups of countries should co-operate also in cultural matters, both in the wide, anthropological, sense of the term and the narrow one of the arts.
The Commission has approximately ECU25 million at its disposal for this purpose over 1990–95.
For instance, under Lomé III the Institute of National Musems of Zaire was backed by a grant of ECU300,000.
Cultural cooperation with other developing countries is not equally well structured, but the Commission is bidding for ECU5 million to build it up.
The EC will be running cultural cooperation programmes as a result of the association agreements with Poland, Hungary and Czechoslovakia.
In particular, the Czechoslovakian agreement carries a cultural clause which covers conservation, training and special events alongside the audiovisual sector.
The EC earmarked ECU1.4 million last year and ECU1.5 million this year for these programmes.
In a recent speech, Colette Flesch, Director-General of DGX, said the EC should ‘concentrate its co-operation and support on intelligent development of cultural projects integrated into national, regional, and local development policy’, rather than on financing a few big prestige projects, or simply subsidising the old Communist subsidies system which those countries can no longer afford to finance.
Eastern Europe Poland, Hungary, Czechoslovakia, Bulgaria, Romania and, before the troubles, Yugoslavia receive further help through the ECU785 million PHARE programme.
This is mainly concerned with economic restructuring and agricultural development, a considerable part of it linked to the environment.
But some of these projects clearly also have to do with the problem of conserving the built heritage.
For instance, PHARE is spending ECU15.5 million on the study of pollution levels in Upper Silesia whose air-borne pollution is affecting the historic town of Krakow.
PHARE also provided ECU70.5 million in 1990/91 to TEMPUS (Tran-European Mobility Scheme for University Studies) which involves the exchange of staff and students between Eastern European countries and at least two member states.
You too can master the essential jargon
MEMBER STATES
The European Community (EC) is composed of the twelve member states.
The member states form the key governing bodies of the EC: the European Council and the Council of Ministers.
The final word on the adoption of all EC proposals is with the latter.
The member states appoint the Commissioners, the judges and Advocates General of the European Court of Justice, the members of the Economic and Social Committee and those of the Court of Auditors.
Their representatives form the European Investment Bank.
The electorates of the members states elect the European Parliament
EUROPEAN COUNCIL
This is composed of the Heads of State or Government of the member states.
It meets at least twice a year to decide the overall political and economic priorities of the EC, to resolve the most controversial outstanding issues within the Community and to discuss world affairs generally.
The European Council is not to be confused with the Council of Europe, based in Strasbourg, and founded in 1949 to organise cooperation between European parliamentary democracies and raise awareness of what Europe means in cultural terms (by means, for example, of a series of large exhibitions, of which the Vikings show currently in Paris is one, see p. 13).
This is not an EC body, despite the EC having adopted its symbol, the circle of stars
COUNCIL OF MINISTERS
Ministers from each country for the different departments of state meet in Council to discuss and decide on measures.
The Presidency of the Council changes every six months.
Each member state takes it in turn in alphabetical order: currently it is Portugal, and from July onwards it is the UK.
The Council decides either unanimously or by qualified majority depending on the subject matter.
According to the latter system each country is given a number of votes in relation to its size and to gain a majority a proposal has to obtain fifty-four votes out of a total of seventy-six and be approved by at least eight member states.
Since 1986 the use of qualified majority has been progressively extended, in particular to most measures intended to complete the internal market i.e. the 1992 programme.
Once the Maastricht Treaty enters into force next year, some further policy areas will be subject to majority voting.
Measures to encourage cultural co-operation will have to be decided unanimously.
In its work, the Council is assisted by a Secretariat and a Committee of Permanent Representatives known as COREPER.
The latter, which brings together the twelve ambassadors accredited to the EC, is a crucial decision-making body.
THE COMMISSION
The Commission is, broadly speaking, the civil service of the EC.
It is formed by seventeen Commissioners the larger countries providing two and the smaller ones, one each who run twenty-three main departments called General Directorates (DG).
Eleven DGs are concerned with, or touch upon, fine art and heritage matters.
The Commissioners are politically appointed and as a collegiate body establish policy priorities separate from those of the Council.
They are appointed for four years.
The Commission is pledged to act independently of national or sectional interests.
It takes decisions by majority vote.
It executes Council decisions and ensures that EC rules are correctly observed.
It is politically accountable to the European Parliament, which may dismiss the Commissioners en bloc.
THE EUROPEAN PARLIAMENT
The EP is composed of 518 directly elected members.
Since the first direct elections in 1979, it has gradually increased its powers to supervise the Commission and to amend budgetary and legislative proposals.
Originally these powers were largely advisory, although it could always sack the Commission and throw out the annual budget by a two-thirds majority of all its members.
With the entry into force of the Maastricht Treaty, the EP's approval will also be required for the Commission to enter office.
In the budgetary field, the Parliament is able to exercise considerable influence on non-agricultural spending, e.g. social, regional, research and development.
Through its legislative powers, the EP can amend proposals in all areas.
Under the Maastricht Treaty a conciliation procedure between Council and Parliament will be introduced and the Parliament will gain a final right of veto.
Areas covered will include culture.
The EP will also appoint an Ombudsman to whom European citizens and residents will have access for redress in cases of maladministration.
THE ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL COMMITTEE & THE COMMITTEE OF REGIONS
The first has existed since the setting up of the EC, and the second was created by the Maastricht Treaty.
They are both advisory committees with very limited power, which give a voice to representatives of the professions, unions, and regional and local authorities.
THE EUROPEAN COURT OF JUSTICE AND THE COURT OF AUDITORS
The Court of Justice is composed of thirteen judges and four Advocates Generals, who guard the interpretation and application of the Treaties and EC laws, over which it has final authority.
It hears complaints and appeals brought by or against EC institutions, member states or individuals, and gives preliminary rulings on cases referred by the national courts.
In 1986 a further Court was attached to it, in order to relieve its workload.
The latter has limited powers to make judgments in the first instance, subject to the right of appeal to the the Court of Justice.
The Court of Auditors, composed of nine members, examines the accounts of the Community, watches over financial management and assists the EP and the Council in exercising control over the implementation of the budget by the Commission.
EUROPEAN INVESTMENT BANK
The EIB provides loans and guarantees in most economic sectors to promote the development of poorer regions, to restructure industry and assist member states in common projects, usually in the infrastructure field.
COMMUNITY MEASURES
There are three legislative instruments with binding force.
A Regulation is binding in its entirety and directly applicable in all member states.
One area in which it has been widely used is agriculture.
A Directive binds member states to certain specific objectives, but leaves them to implement the necessary measures through national laws.
This legislative instrument is used in particular to bring various national legislations closer together (approximation), such as those governing the return of works of art illegally exported.
A Decision is a binding administrative measure used in individual cases to implement the Treaties where the institutions themselves are responsible, such as the Commission decision to grant aid to the UK coal industry.
COMMUNITY FINANCE AND ‘DELORS II’
The EC is financed by tariffs and levies, the total yield of which cannot currently exceed 1.2% of the EC's GNP.
Jacques Delors, President of the Commission, has recently presented a package to finance the measures adopted by the Maastricht Treaty over the next five years.
In this so-called Delors II the percentage would rise to 1.37%.
The budget is planned to rise by 30% from ECU66.6 billion in 1992 to ECU87.5 billion in 1997 to allow greater spending on regional aid, foreign policy, farm reform and a strengthened research and training effort to sharpen competitiveness.
The arts and the heritage may benefit particularly from the latter.
The package is yet to be approved by the member states and will be toughly negotiated.
RELATIONS WITH NON-EC COUNTRIES
Relations with so-called third countries are more or less formalised.
The EC has recently signed association agreements, involving reciprocal rights and obligations, common action and special procedures, with Hungary, Poland, Czechoslovakia, which are being ratified.
The EC also has a longstanding relations with African, Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) Countries, signatories of the Lomé Convention.
The first of these aid and trade agreements was signed in 1975 and has been renewed four times.
Sixty-nine ACP countries have signed the so-called Lomé IV.
The knottiest problem: art export
Negotiations over the art export arrangement within an integrated market have reached a crucial phase and national delegations are negotiating toughly over the Commission's proposals.
From 1 January 1993, member states will only inspect imports and exports at their frontiers on a spot-check basis, so it will be more difficult to stop the illegal export of works of art.
Some member states, particularly Italy, Spain and Greece, fear a haemorrhage of art works from their territories and from the EC as a whole.
The UK, on the other hand, fears that any new arrangement may be a burden on trade; it has by far the largest share of the Community art market and a liberal export system.
Greece, Spain and Italy have highly restrictive export systems and a weak art market, with illegal trade rife.
The Commission has tried to find a compromise between the ‘protectionist’ and the ‘liberal’countries.
It has put forward two revised proposals: a directive on the return of cultural objects unlawfully removed from the territory of a member state, and a short regulation on the export of cultural goods (see The Art Newspaper No. 16, March 1992, p.2).
Both proposals, little changed in respect to the previous, have been controversial within the Commission itself and are still causing problems among the member states.
The directive says that member states shall return ‘cultural objects’ which have been unlawfully removed from the territory of another member state.
It lays down definitions of what is a cultural object in terms of age and a value threshold.
It also says that it has to be a ‘national treasure under national legislation in the context of Article 36 of the Treaty’, thus by and large respecting each country's right to define a national treasure as it pleases.
The directive also applies to objects not returned at the end of a lawful temporary export.
It sets up a committee to advise the Commission on any revision of the criteria and enjoins member states to co-operate in seeking any illegally exported cultural object and in assisting in its return.
The member state from which the object has been illegally exported the ‘requesting state’ can take the possessor of the object to court in the country where the object is located the ‘requested state’.
It can do so only within five years from becoming aware of the location of the object and the identity of the possessor, and within thirty years of the illegal removal.
The directive applies only to objects illegally exported after 1 January 1993 unless the member state wishes to extend its obligations.
If the object is to be returned, the purchaser shall be entitled to fair compensation provided he exercised due care in the purchase.
Once the object has been returned, the ownership law of the requesting state will apply.
The cost of the court proceeding and any compensation will be borne by the requesting state, which, depending on national legislation, may have recourse to the person responsible for the illegal export.
The regulation on the export of cultural goods outside the EC says that they will need a licence.
It defines a cultural good by the same criteria as the above directive.
This definition does not affect each nation's own definition and the regulation does not apply to trade between member states.
The export licence will be issued by the member state in which the good is ‘lawfully and definitively located on 1 January 1993’ and thereafter by any member state to which it has been ‘lawfully and definitively’exported.
The regulation also sets up a Committee composed of representatives of the member states to advise the Commission on drafting the uniform document for the licence and on revising the definition of a cultural object.
The main areas of disagreement concern the directive and, in particular, the list of categories with their value and age limits.
As far as state-owned items are concerned, Italy, Greece, Spain and Portugal oppose any time limit on requests to return an illegally removed object, on the grounds that it would be inalienable.
The requirement that member states should co-operate to find and return such objects has also encountered the opposition of the UK and Germany.
Nonetheless, the atmosphere around the negotiating table seems to be positive and the two proposals are likely to be adopted before the summer break.
THE MONEY YOU PAY
The VAT conundrum
‘At the moment the situation is completely chaotic.’
So says a EC expert describing the negotiations over Value Added Tax on the sale of works of art, antiques and collector's items.
VAT is a form of turn-over or sales tax, which is passed along the production chain and is eventually borne by the consumer.
The approximation (bringing closer together) of the VAT systems and rates by the member states is one of the most important planks of the 1992 programme.
It is also one of the most controversial, complex and obscure.
Last December, member states were only able to agree over a transitional VAT arrangement, which according to a high-ranking Commission official amounted to a failure.
There is as yet no final agreement on rates, but there is a working hypothesis of a minimum standard rate of 15% and a minimum reduced rate of 5%; no maximum rates would be set.
Because of these problems, discussion of the directive concerning second-hand goods and works of art (for VAT purposes considered one and the same) was postponed.
Moreover, some of problems caused by this directive concern the second-hand car market rather than works of art.
The present Portuguese Presidency is however pushing for a decision and has put forward a compromise solution.
The Commission proposes a margin scheme, i.e; VAT to be applied to the margin between the selling and the purchase price, not to the full price.
This would make the European art market more competitive and, in particular, it would encourage the art trade in those member states which at present charge VAT on the full price.
The scheme would apply to works of art, collector's items and antiquities; it would not apply to precious metals and stones nor to works supplied by their authors or inheritors, all of which would pay VAT on the full selling price.
This definition of works of art is controversial and so are the exclusions.
In particular, the art trade fears that the exclusion of precious metals would have a devastating effect on the silver market.
Furthermore, the margin scheme applies only to goods sold by taxable dealers who have acquired them from a private individual or a very small dealer or a body exempt from VAT.
Agents and auctioneers are to be treated as dealers, with VAT charged on the margin, rather than the commission.
The art trade has argued effectively against this provision and now the Commission and the Portuguese Presidency acknowledge that special arrangements should be applicable to sales by public auction.
The proposed arrangements however are rather obscure.
At least seven countries believe that the margin scheme is the only system that can be applied within one member state.
Most countries also accept this scheme for trade between member states, but there is considerable disageement over how the tax should be administered.
As far as works of art are concerned, four, perhaps five member states including the Presidency and the UK, believe that this tax should be collected at origin rather than at destination.
Another four countries are against it.
The arrangements for trade with non-EC countries ‘is the real problem’, according to a Commission expert.
The Commission had proposed to exempt imports and tax exports on the margin, which the art trade welcomed.
The Commission argued that this was the best system because it would avoid both tax evasion and double taxation.
In particular, it would encourage the repatriation of works of art and the conservation of the European cultural heritage.
Taxation on importation, on the other hand, would impose a considerable fiscal burden on the importer, which would put the European markets at a severe disadvantage in relation to the US and Switzerland.
It would also give an advantage to non-EC purchasers of European heritage.
Only four member states, however, were in favour of the Commission proposals.
The majority, including France, was against, while the UK was in favour.
The Portuguese Presidency has now reversed the Commission's proposal, putting forward that VAT should be charged on imports, but that exports should be exempt.
This approach would be in line with the current practice of most EC countries, with the exception of the UK and France.
It would also be in line with previous EC VAT measures, but the art trade is adamantly opposed to this option and it also argues that its combination with the margin scheme is unworkable.
The Commission, however, raised the possibility that importers (e.g. an auctioneer) could benefit from the temporary importation arrangements: VAT would be payable only if the item were sold, and it would be deductible.
This device might provide the basis of a compromise solution.
The VAT rate to be applied to works of art is also a matter of debate.
At least six member states would accept the standard rate.
Some, in particular France and Germany, would like to give preferential treatment to living artists (and possibly also to the artists' heirs) when selling their own works.
The UK argues that the rate is a matter for the member states to decide.
THE MONEY YOU CAN GET
Funds available for the built heritage
The largest source of grants is the European Regional Fund (ERDF).
Over the period 1980–86 it spent ECU33.64 million on seventy-two projects concerned with safeguarding the architectural heritage.
The main beneficiary was the UK, which received grants of ECU21.7 million as part of its rebate on over-contributions to the EC budget, followed by Italy with ECU8.9 million.
Greece, Ireland and Belgium also received funds.
In 1991 the Palacio do Beaux Sejours in Benefica received ECU 0.5 million from the fund for renovation to house the city study centre.
In 1989 Conisborough Castle in South Yorkshire was given ECU 0.151 million for the construction of a heritage and visitor centre with audio-visual facilities.
As the examples indicate, these are not straight conservation projects.
Under the fund's rules grants are given to projects if they promote the development of declining or under-developed regions, improve their infrastructure and create jobs.
For instance, the Conisborough project is justified in terms of expanding tourism.
Currently the Commission is, however, considering giving grants towards pilot restoration projects in Venice, invoking the special clause of the structural funds which allows for grants to urban areas outside declining or under-developed regions.
London has benefited from this in the past.
Similar considerations apply to the loans granted by the European Investment Bank under the title of urban renewal.
For instance, in 1989 the EIB lent ECU12.3 million to Genoa to restore its Ducal Palace and convert it into an arts centre to attract tourists.
A spokesman for the bank stressed that it is difficult to identify the EIB's specific contributions to heritage.
It contributed to the financial package for the land consolidation works above Catanzaro and for a sophisticated park and ride system for Orvieto, both in Italy.
The two projects are primarily environmental and transport projects, but also contribute to the preservation of the historic city centres of the two towns.
Grants specifically for heritage are provided by the small Historic Monuments and Site Fund run by DGX.
Since its inception in 1984, the Fund has spent ECU14 million on 176 projects.
For instance, in 1990 Glasgow received ECU 0.13 million to restore two Georgian terraced houses.
The grants are usually tied to a theme and conditions.
In 1991 this was the industrial heritage, including work on the fourteenth-century watermill and workshops of the Prodromos Monastery in Timios, Macedonia, and on the eighteenth-century Royal French Flag Manufactory in Dijonval, Sedan.
This year the theme is the conservation of monuments and their immediate environment.
DGX also contributes towards the restoration of buildings of exceptional significance.
Since 1983 it spent a total of ECU5.3 million for this purpose.
The lion's-share of these funds ECU3.5 million has been spent on the Parthenon and the Athens acropolis, mainly reassembling and consolidating stonework.
The EC has also contributed to the restoration of the MountAthos monastery, to the reconstruction of the Chiado area in Lisbon, destroyed by the 1988 fire, and to the renovation of a building of the Coimbra University intended for the European College.
Further funds flow from the Kaleidoscope programme.
Since its inception in 1991 it has had ECU2.9 million to spend in order to increase the knowledge of the culture and heritage of the Community countries and to support artistic innovation.
It finances hundreds of projects and events, such as heritage classes for children in Spain, Italy and France, and European Heritage Day.
Finally, since 1989, DGX has granted a few scholarships to specialise in restoration and conservation.
Total expenditure in this field has been ECU 0.72 million.
Both DGXII (Science, R&D) and DGXI (Environment) have schemes which touch upon the heritage.
DGXII, as part of the EC's large R&D programme, supports projects which study the impact of environmental factors on the heritage.
For this purpose the current research project has about ECU6 million to spend over a period of two and a half years.
The previous programme provided ECU 0.342 million over three years to the School of Conservation of the Royal Danish Academy of Fine Arts in Copenhagen to develop a standard test to evaluate the stability characteristics of metal objects from archaeological sites.
The funds available for such projects are expected to increase substantially.
DGXI is also developing muscle in this area.
The Green Paper put forward by the Commissioner, Ripa di Meana, proposes that the EC should provide more substantial financing for the conservation of historic buildings and areas of European significance as well as study whether a EC listing system  would be feasible and beneficial.
So far DGXI has mainly supported studies, seminars and networks between cities to explore urban management problems.
Artistic subsidies: open to all?
The adoption of the cultural paragraph at the Maastricht Summit last December was not the only outcome of Maastricht relevant to the cultural sector.
Maybe even more important is the revision of Article 92 of the EC Treaty, which sets out the following magic formula:
‘Aid to promote culture and heritage conservation may be viewed as compatible with the single market where such aid does not affect trading conditions and competition in the Community to an extent that is contrary to the common interest.’
This regards the question as to whether or not national cultural support measures conflict with the principle of free competition, the cornerstone of the EC Treaty.
By including this new phrase in Article 92 member states have apparently retained complete freedom to administer cultural subsidies and funds, and guide their cultural policy in whatever direction they choose.
However, what we are dealing with here is a magic formula of a type which has characterised legislation from Brussels before.
The Commission and the member states can draft as many biblical texts as they like, but the European Court of Justice has the last word and provides us with the ultimate truth.
In some respects European law is based more on case law than on statute.
At the moment, therefore, interpreting the new treaty involves a degree of extrapolation from case law yet to come a difficult business.
Cultural support measures by member states have a centuries-old tradition behind them.
Today most states have subsidy and funding structures for the promotion of national art and culture, but tradition appears to run counter to the reality of the EC Treaty.
Before the recent revision of Article 92, state-financed support measures, in whatever form, violated the principle of free competition.
Therefore they had to be prohibited.
Film-production funds, for example, could no longer be considered compatible with EC law, nor could support funds for the visual arts and for authors and translators of literary works (the latter being particularly important in the smaller language areas of Europe).
Funding and subsidy schemes were only to be allowed provided they were open to all artists in the Community.
This, of course, is no basis for national cultural policies.
On the other hand, no funds and no subsidy schemes at all would mean an end to cultural policies.
However, things are never only black or white.
The European Commission did accept support measures in Denmark and Greece, for example, on condition that these did not include nationality requirements (discrimination on grounds of nationality is in any case forbidden by Article 7 of the Treaty).
Here financial support could not be given directly to Danish or Greek film makers, but was still permissible when used to promote the development of Danish or Greek film-making in general.
Recently the Commission has taken Germany to court because its law relating to the support of its film industry retains the requirement of German nationality when handing out subsidies.
The case is still in progress.
Another, slightly curious development was the Commission's judgment on the Dutch film scheme, which stipulates that only Dutch producers, or foreign producers who have lived in the Netherlands for at least two years, qualify for subsidies.
The Commission decided that this was discriminatory and demanded that the two-year residency requirement should also apply to Dutch nationals.
The conclusion is, apparently, that a residency requirement is still acceptable as a criterion for granting subsidies, while a nationality requirement obviously is not.
These cases represent an understandable but not always comforting compromise within the framework of the EC Treaty.
That is why the European Summit in Maastricht last December decided to clarify the situation.
The new text of Article 92, quoted above, now explicitly gives the member states leeway for support measures with specifically cultural objectives.
It thereby implicitly recognises that culture does indeed have a meaning different from that of beef or grain.
Nonetheless, the cultural ‘market’ too is just that a market.
Economic interests always compete with cultural considerations.
In some cultural sectors these economic interests are measured on a very large scale.
The audio-visual sector, for example, is a booming market.
This explains why the Commission wishes to exercise some degree of control over the freedom to subsidise.
Therefore it has inserted the reservation, based on ‘common [economic]interest’.
How widely this reservation is to be applied in practice has sooner or later to be defined by the Court of Justice.
For the moment, though, a certain room for manoeuvre has been considered acceptable, and has probably even been increased.
After all, subsidy schemes have to be very far-reaching before they endanger ‘common interests’.
The prohibition of discrimination on grounds of nationality remains a cornerstone of unification.
Will artists from different member states therefore be able to dip into foreign national funds again and again?
Probably not, and for the following reasons.
First, there is the residency requirement already mentioned, which member states can impose when handing out subsidies.
This has the Commission's approval.
Second, cultural funds and subsidies are not handed out wilfully.
In virtually all member states, subsidies are granted first and foremost on the basis of quality requirements.
This quality test is often applied by a panel of experts, and such tests are an element over which EC law cannot (and, of course, must not) exert any influence.
Governments within the Community, the European Commission included, do not act as judges of art.
At least, they are not expected to do so.
Finally, the same arrangements for art and cultural subsidies do not apply in all member states, and the budgets involved also vary.
It would therefore seem unfair if generous funds in one member state were plundered by artists from other, less well-endowed countries.
Funding and subsidy schemes in the member states are not harmonised, and will not be, according to the new cultural paragraph.
A special case relating to the Netherlands and Flanders, which speak the same language, is noteworthy in this connection.
The Dutch Literary Fund, which administers scholarships for Dutch writers, is now considering twenty applications from Flemish authors.
The Fund does not at present set a residency requirement, so few if any arguments are left for keeping Flemish bees away from the Dutch honey pot.
Obviously the Dutch Minister of Culture will approach her Flemish colleague with a request that Flanders reciprocate; proportionate funds are needed on the Flemish side in order to create similar opportunities for Dutch authors in Flanders.
Summing up: there is not much chance of an artist from one member state receiving subsidies from another.
It is still possible for member states to shut doors, if they want to.
The scope for member states to promote their own culture through funds and subsidies remains.
It may even have been increased by the new Article 92, in spite of the continuing ban on discrimination on the basis of nationality.
In practice, cultural matters within Europe have followed their own course.
A growing European consciousness has pervaded the arts.
This finds expression in large-scale European events, co-productions and festivals (e.g. European Cities of Culture) and also in a growing number of European cultural networks.
An active cultural policy, therefore, means creating the conditions and incentives for international cooperation and not only within Europe.
Member states would therefore be well advised to take heed of the increasing ‘Europeanisation’ of the arts and to participate actively in that process.
Peter Mulder
The anti-smoking brigade may also reduce arts sponsorship
In the last few years, the European Commission has been assessing its potential role in fostering pan-European business support for the arts.
As a first step in that direction, together with the different national sponsorship associations in Europe, it helped to create Cerec (Comité Européen pour le Rapprochement de l'Économie et de la Culture).
Cerec aims to increase pan-European, private sector support for the arts.
Other EC initiatives, however, also have indirect but nonetheless serious implications for arts sponsorship, in particular in the area of tobacco sponsorship.
The European Parliament recently voted on the draft directive to prohibit tobacco advertising.
The proposal does not refer to sponsorship as such, but it does state, in convoluted Euro-language, that ‘a ban should therefore be imposed on such indirect forms of advertising which while not actually mentioning the tobacco product, use trade marks, emblems, symbols or other distinctive elements associated with tobacco products…
Advertising made in order to publicise the sponsoring of an event…falls within the scope of the ban’.
The Council of Ministers will now have to reach a decision by qualified majority on this controversial measure.
The precise import of the text is uncertain, but Roland Bligh of Gallaher says, ‘It would seem that there is a very real risk that Gallaher sponsorship activity may be curtailed in the medium term’.
It can be very significant: for instance, Venice kept its museums, including the Doge's Palace, open for the whole of 1991 thanks to Philip Morris.
The implication for arts organisations of a ban may be similarly grim.
The directive echoes the French ‘Loi Evin’, adopted in 1991, which bans the advertising of tobacco completely, and of alcohol partially.
The ‘Loi Evin’ does not contain a specific mention of sponsorship.
As a result, brand name activity is no longer permissible whereas corporate is, or at least still goes on.
According to Emmanuelle Gorsse of Admical, the French sponsorship association for the arts, the monopolised French tobacco distribution company, SEITA, can go on supporting the arts for the  foreseeable future.
In the year 1990/91 this support was worth some FFr20 million (£2.06 million; $3.6 million).
At a European level tobacco companies are continuing to support the arts.
Sean Murray of Philip Morris said that their considerable arts programme will not be affected for a long time, and that the legislation is designed to prohibit brand promotion, not corporate publicity.
Some arts organisations like the Tate already have anti-tobacco policies.
Others, like the Royal Academy which has been a significant beneficiary of tobacco sponsorship in recent years, see the ban in a gloomy light.
Ruth Seabrook, Sponsorship Director, said: ‘It is difficult enough getting sponsors without the field of potential benefactors being reduced’.
PROFESSIONAL MOBILITY
Qualifications: let's become ever more international in the museums and universities
Article 57 of the Treaty of Rome as amended by the Maastricht Treaty requires the Council to issue directives for ‘the mutual recognition of diplomas, certificates and other evidence of formal qualification’ so that anyone who qualifies in one member state is allowed to work freely in another.
One continuing problem, however, in terms of nationals of one state seeking employment in another state is Article 48.
This says that the provision of free movement for workers does not apply to the ‘employment in the public service’.
This provision has caused a great deal of controversy since different countries have classified certain jobs as public functions, which they may not be in other countries, and this domestic classification has been used as a bar to foreign nationals applying for those jobs.
The European Court of Justice has, however, built up some case law which begins to narrow the definition of what is meant by ‘in the public service’.
It held, for example, that Italy was in breach of its obligations under the Treaty when it required that researchers employed by the Consiglio Nazionale delle Ricerche had to be Italians because they were civil service posts.
The European Court also decided in favour of two Spanish and British foreign language tutors at the University of Venice, who had been denied contracts of indefinite duration on the grounds that the posts were in the public service and that they were not Italians.
The European Court overrode Italian civil law and stated that it did not consider these posts to be in the public service.
These decisions have meant that museum professionals, art historians and others in the art sector cannot be refused employment in another member state by reason of their foreign nationality unless the post ‘involves direct or indirect participation in the exercise of powers conferred by public law in the discharge of functions whose purpose is to safeguard the general interests of the State or of other public authorities’.
As regards training activities, the Council resolved in 1988 that conservation and restoration were ‘priority areas’.
Apart from the scholarships granted by DGX (see article on heritage) there have been no other specific measures.
A Council resolution of 7 June 1991 also emphasised separately the importance it attached to the training of arts administrators and agreed to encourage existing initiatives in this area at a European level.
It also called upon the Commission to co-operate more closely with the Council of Europe and UNESCO on such initiatives in Europe.
ARTISTS' RIGHTS
Fifty-year copyright may be extended to seventy years
The duration of copyright may be extended across the European Community to a uniform seventy years from the year of death of the artist or author.
The EC Commission has just put forward proposals to this effect.
They are likely to be welcomed by Germany and France, but there is already a considerable lobby against them by Italian book publishers who would like to retain existing rules as to when material enters into the public domain.
Artists obtain certain rights, collectively known as copyright, on the origination of any artistic work.
The primary right is to prevent any unauthorised ‘reproduction’, but this right extends not just to restricting an exact duplication or a pirate copy of the particular work, but to any reproduction, in any form, such as book illustrations, catalogue reproductions and even representations in another medium such as a photograph of a sculpture.
Reproduction can be authorised by granting a copyright licence.
The protection period however does expire eventually and, thereafter, the copyright holder has no further rights; the work is then ‘in the public domain’ and can be freely reproduced and adapted without payment of a royalty.
At present there are varying degrees of protection within the EC.
The standard UK period of protection is for the life of the author and fifty years.
In France the post-mortem period is, typically, fifty years but those authors and artists affected by the two World Wars were granted a prolongation of the copyright term, giving an effective expiry of just over sixty-four years after their death.
Germany, on the other hand, has a number of different duration periods.
Simple photographs, perceived to have little artistic quality are afforded copyright protection for only twenty-five years after death whereas editorial photographs and ‘artistic’ photographs are given periods of protection of fifty years and seventy years after death, respectively.
The varying periods of copyright have caused difficulties: Paul Klee for instance, who died in 1940, is in copyright in France and Germany and therefore monographs on the artist and other reproductions of his works require a royalty to be paid on the books circulated in those countries.
However, this does not apply to books from the same print-run circulated in the UK since his works have now come into the public domain in that country.
‘The aim is that the creative function, which is necessary for European identity will be protected’, he has said.
‘We cannot have a situation where no more books are written, where no more scenarios of films are made, or more music is composed.
It is also very important economically, not just for the creativity in itself.’
Although the period of protection for copyright may be extended to a uniform period, the extension of the term would not renew or re-establish copyright in any works where copyright may have expired.
There may remain other discrepancies in the treatment of copyright works within the EC.
The UK, for instance, now permits copyright works of art to be reproduced for the purposes of advertising their sale.
This allows auction houses and galleries to reproduce these works of art mostly twentieth-century works without the need for permission of the copyright owner and without paying a reproduction fee.
France, however, does not yet have this provision and catalogues, posters and advertisements, showing works for sale still need to be cleared through the relevant collecting society and a reproduction fee paid.
In 1991, the Maurice Utrillo estate obtained civil and criminal orders against Sotheby's France and its then president, Julian Barran, for the unauthorised reproduction of Utrillo works in Sotheby's catalogues circulated in France.
The draft directive is likely to be adopted by Council in the autumn and would not come into force before 1993.
Member States would normally be given eighteen months within which to incorporate the directive objectives into their domestic laws, but it may well be that in this case a shorter period is specified.
Can Venice be put under EC authority?
Last October the Commissioner for the Environment Carlo Ripa di Meana suggested placing Venice under EC authority to over-come the inefficiency of the Italian authorities (The Art Newspaper No.15, Feb 1992, p.1).
The EC does not have the powers to do this.
The idea bears some analogy to the 1951 European Coal and Steel Community which brought these industries under an international authority to defuse the conflict of interest between Germany and France which was held to have been responsible for two world wars.
Ripa di Meana's idea would, however, require an international treaty whereby Italy would relinquish sovereignty over the town in exchange for the other member states financing its revitalisation.
How the French auctioneers keep Sotheby's and Christie's at bay
France's 441 auctioneers (commissaires-priseurs), the most protected and privileged of Europe, might have been faced in 1993 with the biggest shake-up since their status was established by decree of Henri II in 1552.
According to Articles 52–54 of the Treaty of Rome, all nationals may live and work and conduct their business freely in any of the member states.
In other words, foreign auction houses should have  been able to start holding auctions in Paris in 1993, and as the two big auction houses are much more powerful and widely expert than any French auctioneering partnership, the commissaires-priseurs had good reason to be frightened.
As it is, they can still hide behind Article 55 of the same treaty, which says that ‘activities taking place in the exercise of public authority are not subject to the Treaty of Rome’.
This is because technically they are State officials.
The French government actually wants this archaically hide-bound professional body to reform itself and become more competitive, but is expecting it to come up with a solution itself.
In the meanwhile, the cautious and complex decrees of the first liberalising steps decided last year were ratified by the Prime Minister last month.
They still guard the interests of the smallest and most protectionist of the country's auctioneers who would be bankrupted by an open market.
They dismay the big auctioneers, such as Jacques Tajan of Ader-Tajan, and the modern paintings specialist Guy Loudmer, who believe competition from foreign countries not only to be beneficial to native companies of their importance, but also essential for Paris's development as an art market.
The new texts mean that by 1993, Sotheby's, Christie's and Philllips will still only be able to prospect, but not sell, in France.
The national monopoly has disappeared and auctioning in France has been opened up to other Europeans, but auctioneers will remain officers appointed by the Minister of Justice.
They will, under certain restrictive conditions, be allowed to practise anywhere in the country, instead of only in their place of residence (or abroad), as previously.
Auctioneers will still be required to buy a licensed auctioneer's office at anything from FFr500,000 (£51,000; $92,000) to FFr20 million (£204,000; $368,000), and that right will be reserved for persons but not firms, thus still excluding the likes of Sotheby's and Christie's.
VAT rates of 5.5% and 18.6% on imported works of art, peculiar to France, are also dissuasive, as is the French droit de suite tax of 3%, which may one day be extended to the whole of Europe.
‘France is the only big art market still closed to us.
It was worth £350 million last year.
The 9% buyer's premium is a big step in the right direction.
But we don't want to break the door down; we will come when the whole of the French auctioneering profession is ready to welcome us’, says François Curiel, Director of Christie's Europe.
That is expected to be in about four to six years.
Nicholas Powell
Droit de suite, opposed by the British, remains on the EC agenda
Droit de suite remains on the Commission's agenda for 1992, although in view of its extensive programme in copyright-related matters there are unlikely to be any substantial recommendations or conclusions before next year.
Droit de suite is a levy payable on the sale of any paintings, sculpture or other work of art.
This is usually a percentage of the total sale price and is paid by the seller direct to the original artist, or his/her estate.
The rationale is that it gives artists a share in the value of their work as and when it is resold by dealers and galleries.
The royalty was first introduced in France in order to assist widows of artists who were killed in World War I. Although France and Germany are now the main countries where this royalty operates, it is on the statute books of another eight European countries within the EC at present; only the UK, Ireland, the Netherlands and Greece do not have laws relating to a resale royalty.
The royalty is usually between 3 and 5% of the selling price, payable by the vendor, provided it is above a threshold figure, which is very low in some countries, e.g. FFr100 (£10.30; $17.40) in France.
At a hearing held by the Commission in November 1991, the majority of national experts agreed that there should be a threshold ranging from ECU150 to 1,000 (£107-£714; $186–$1240).
Some also felt that there should be ceiling on the amount payable or that the rates should be degressive in relation to the price.
Germany also has alternative arrangements whereby art dealers and auctioneers may elect to pay VG Bild-Kunst (the relevant collecting society) a sum equal to 1% of their turnover in relation to all works sold by them which were created after 1 January 1900.
The monies go to a pool out of which droit de suite claims of German and foreign artists are met.
The United Kingdom is a signatory to the Berne Convention which includes a provision that an artist should share in the ‘economic success’ of their work after its resale.
The 1977 Whitford Committee Report however, reviewing UK Copyright law, dismissed a proposal for droit de suite stating that it was not fair, logical or practical for such a concept to be introduced into the UK.
The current UK Copyright Designs and Patents Act, which came into force in 1989, makes no mention of droit de suite.
The Commission held a hearing in Brussels on 21 November last stating that, as part of their wish to harmonise copyright and neighbouring rights throughout the EC, they were turning their attention to the question of droit de suite.
The Commission's brief has not been to consider what is in the best interest of art dealers nor whether the royalty is a useful means of helping artists.
It is merely concerned to ascertain if there is a material distortion of trade in the EC by reason of differing royalty laws and, accordingly, under Article 101 of the Treaty of Rome, it is then to take steps to eliminate the distortion.
Unless a turnover system were to be introduced, such as the optional arrangements in Germany, the royalty would only operate in relation to works which are still in copyright works of art either produced by living artists or those who have died within the last fifty years.
Sales by galleries and auction houses dealing in, say, Picasso and Matisse will be caught, but sales by galleries dealing in, say, British pictures from the turn of the century, such as Augustus John and Sickert, may be made without the royalty being paid, since the pictures are now out of copyright.
However, there is a proposal to extend the copyright term to seventy years across the EC (see article on copyright).
At the hearing some national experts came out strongly in favour of a system also extending to drawings, etchings, engravings sculptures, original photographs and, possibly , one-off designs of furniture and craft.
Although the royalty may apply to any ‘resale’, it is anticipated that it would not apply to the first sale by a gallery of a contemporary artist.
The Society of London Art Dealers and the European Modern Art Dealers Federation (Fidoao) are both opposed to any further introduction of the concept in Europe.
As François Curiel of Christie's Europe pointed out, it would discourage the selling of contemporary and recent art in Europe and reinforce the American market.
For recent developments in the US, see p. 17.
European Commission favours exhibition royalty for artists, and adherence to Berne and Rome Conventions
The European Commission believes that it is of great importance for the completion of the internal market that a further protocol including the right of artists to claim an exhibition royalty be attached to the Berne Convention.
An exhibition royalty is similar to a performance royalty, whereby a royalty is paid whenever a piece of music or a play is broadcast or performed in public.
The Berne Convention is the principal copyright convention, to which eighty-four countries are signatories, and by which the adherents undertake to give a minimum copyright recognition to creators within their jurisdiction.
The idea of a payment for public exhibition was first developed in Sweden during the late 1960s and is based on the idea that the exhibition of paintings and other works of art is a service to society and, accordingly, the artist should receive some form of exhibition payment.
The principle was confirmed at the Eighth Congress of the International Association of the Arts held in Baghdad in 1976: ‘Works by living artists exhibited in or on public buildings, galleries, museums and other public sites and which continue thereby to provide a service to the public should be subject to a continuing form of remuneration to their creator (comparable to performing rights for theatrical or musical works paid to author and composer) so long as he or she is alive and the work continues to be a public amenity’.
Subsequently, on the initiative of Mark Boyle, the international sculptor who exhibits as part of ‘The Boyle Family’, the proposal was accepted in principle by the Arts Council of Great Britain.
A working party chaired by Lady Vaizey was set up in 1977 to look into the question of making such payments, but although it produced a paper on the subject, no further action was taken.
Discussions in that year indicated a typical payment of £250 ($435) for a one-man show.
No mention of an exhibition royalty is made in the current UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act (1988).
The United States already has the right in the US Copyright Act of 1976.
This was included after considerable discussion and strong recommendations being put forward by the US Register of Copyright, which referred to ‘the enormous potential importance of showing, rather than distributing, copies as a means of disseminating an author's work’.
Following a short hearing organised by the Commission at the end of January, a meeting of a committee of experts was held 10–18 February by the World Intellectual Property Organisation (WIPO).
This was to consider whether a protocol to the Berne Convention should be prepared and if so, what its content should be.
One of the questions the committee considered was whether an ‘author of a literary or artistic work should have exclusive right to authorise the public display of the original work or a copy thereof, that is to say to display the work directly (exhibition) or indirectly, that is to say by means of a device (example: a screen)’.
If such rights were introduced, this would allow artists legitimately to charge a royalty either on public exhibition or where their work is displayed on a visual display unit.
Although the European Community as a body cannot be party to the Berne Convention (since it is not a nation state), the Convention nevertheless specifically concerns the EC.
On 14 February the Commission presented an amended proposal for a Council Decision stating that:
All member states shall by 31 December 1992 ratify or accede to and comply with the Berne Convention (Paris Revision) and also the Rome Convention (which relates to phonograms and broadcasts)
In copyright matters, the Community ‘shall be guided by the principles and act in accordance with’ the two Conventions.
This amended proposal has the full support of the European Parliament.
Mark Fisher, the UK Labour Party Shadow Minister for the Arts and Media, has already stated that they are looking independently at various ideas for funding living artists and admitted that they would be considered an exhibition royalty ‘earlier and more enthusiastically’ than other methods such as droit de suite (qv).
DATA PROTECTION
‘We are writing to ask you whether you would like to receive junk mail?’
The EC Commission has proposed a directive on data protection, which may have extremely restrictive implications for fund-raising by art bodies.
The draft directive, which echoes current German legislation, would extend detailed data protection laws to all twelve EC member states.
At present only seven, including the UK, have such laws.
The draft directive is currently being considered by the European Parliament.
The EP rapporteur Geoffrey Hoon (UK, Labour) explained: ‘The collection and processing of data permeates the daily life of almost everyone in the European Community, concern grows over possible abuses.
History used to be written only about the activities of the small group of men and women who held positions of power.
It is no exaggeration to say that today in the EC it would be possible to write a detailed personal history of every man, woman and child from the information contained in a variety of computer files.
Such a situation poses a threat to privacy which this draft directive quite properly addresses’.
The draft directive has, however, been criticised because not only would it extend data protection to manual data such as card indexes exempt under much existing legislation but it would also have a substantial impact on charities which depend on direct mail to get support and sponsorship.
The proposal may also cause difficulties in the following areas:
Client lists held by art dealers and auction houses detailing purchases, preferences and special interests
Data-base information on living artists
Mailing lists of potential sponsors and Friends
The exchange of lists and contact sheets between arts organisations with similar aims
There may be a limited exemption for non-profit-making bodies and foundations, provided that the data is used only ‘as part of their legitimate aims’ and ‘on condition that they relate only those members and corresponding members who have consented to being included therein and that they are not communicated to third parties’.
Accordingly, the reciprocal exchange of membership lists may require a specific consent from all those persons on the lists.
The position may, however, be resolved in another way by allowing individuals the right to opt out, rather than requiring the relevant organisation to obtain specific permission from the person on the list first.
Revised proposals are expected from the Commission later this year, before they are put back for a second reading at the European Parliament.
Since they are highly controversial, it is possible that the Council will not be able to approve the directive before next year; then member states will have two years to comply with it.
HOW TO LOBBY THE EC
Byzantine procedures and inefficient information systems but friendly
As the EC role increases, many people are asking what they can do to influence its decision-making process.
Badly drafted legislation betraying a startling ignorance of an issue or a sector make the experts itch to get involved and enlighten the Eurocrats.
Despite its bad press, the European Commission is an open, welcoming and surprisingly small bureaucracy.
Whereas the French Ministry of Culture alone has 7,000 officials, the entire European Commission has less than double (12,911) to deal with all policies.
The cultural unit of DGX has less than thirty staff.
Its workforce is multinational and multi-disciplinary and highly qualified academically, but few of its officials have extensive work experience outside the EC institutions.
When, for instance, one official has to prepare proposals to harmonise VAT on second-hand goods (which includes works of art) he is likely to have little idea of the workings of an auction house.
Sitting in Brussels, his information sources are very limited so that, if the legislation is to be effective, the official depends on information brought to him from outside.
Unlike national civil servants who are bound by strict rules on secrecy, the Brussels officials are happy to trade information and ideas in return for expert input.
This is lobbying.
A growing band of trade associations, pressure groups, company representatives and independent consultants now stalk the corridors of the Commission and the Parliament, talking to officials and politicians in the hope that their views and interests will be taken into account as the draft legislation passes through the system.
The best lobbying is early, well-informed and targeted.
Good lobbyists know, at an early stage, when an important directive is being drafted.
This means keeping close tabs on what is happening in Brussels.
It also means getting to know the official responsible for the drafting of a legislation and establishing a working relationship with him.
As the directive moves through the legislative system, the lobbyist will follow it.
The proposed directive goes to the European Parliament for comment and amendment, where the lobbyist will brief and advise the MEPs.
Simultaneously, the national government officials will start negotiation and the lobbyist should also brief them.
A high-level meeting with a Minister on an important issue can reinforce the message and add political weight
The objective at every stage of lobbying is to provide comments and reactions to those who influence the legislative process.
Even if the lobbyist is not entirely successful in putting across his point of view, he may have limited the potential damage of the new legislation.
The problem of lobbying for the non-specialist is the Byzantine procedures and the inefficient, often nonexistent, information systems of all the European institutions.
EC information centres in national capitals try to be helpful but are frequently understaffed, understocked and ill-informed by Brussels.
However, help is at hand from other sources.
Government departments can provide considerable degree of information.
Most trade associations such as the Design and Artist Copyright Society now have an understanding of EC issues.
Your local MEP will guide you to a colleague with specialised knowledge on the culture, tax or copyright issue which interests you.
When your needs become more specific, there are a host of consultants, lawyers, accountants and public affairs specialists who can help.
Little however replaces first hand experience.
A trip to Brussels to meet the responsible officials can turn up a mine of information.
Cultivate these contacts, keep informed and the doors will open.
Exhibitions
Kassel
David, Bacon and Arte Povera: it's a Documenta of certainties
The ninth version of this five-yearly exhibition runs from 13 June to 20 September.
Denys Zacharopoulos, one of its three curators, says: ‘The museum is like a voodoo fetish, the artist a sorcerer but also a prisoner’
PARIS.
We asked Denys Zacharopoulos, one of the three assistant curators, under the leadership of Jan Hoet, of Documenta IX, for further enlightenment about the 1992 version of this seminal exhibition, being held at Kassel from 13 June to 20 September.
Mr Zacharopoulos, Documenta IX turns its back on the 1980s.
How will this be reflected in the structure of the exhibition?
Since the last exhibition in 1987, there have been enormous political, economic and ideological changes.
There has also been a change in art, and the art market.
Artists, too, have changed, some of them choosing new areas to investigate.
Change has also affected the way we organise and set up exhibitions.
One of the distinctive features of ‘Documenta IX’ is the way we selected the 186 artists taking part.
Although he has always given strong leadership, Jan Hoet has not acted by divine right but more like a president, encouraging an on-going debate between the exhibition's four curators.
A constructive dialogue of this kind would not have been possible in the 1980s, when such discussion tended to be ideological in character, rather than purely practical, as in this case.
As a result, each artist was chosen for at least four reasons, but with a common denominator: we decided to present individuals operating from an independent position, whose work has a certain degree of complexity and cannot be reduced to one or two key ideas.
The theme of the exhibition is ‘The artist, the work and the viewer’.
Have you already decided on the various locations where this theme is to be explored?
A number of locations will be involved.
First, there is the Fridericianum.
This building serves as a point of reference, alluding in its monumentality to the idea of art as drama.
Then, in contrast, there is the Ottoneum, originally a baroque theatre and now the home of the Natural History museum.
Its soothing atmosphere is ideally suited to those artists whose work has the power of illumination, synthesising matter and thought: Spalletti, Mucha, Therrien, Baumgarten.
The new Documenta-Halle, backing onto the Friedrichsplatz, now forms an ideal bridge between the other two buildings.
Designed by Jochem Jourdan and Bernhard Müller, it has a sort of central nave, fifty metres long and sixteen wide, with three adjoining rooms.
Here, works of different kinds can be shown in spiritual unity, just as in a church a fourteenth-century painting is perfectly compatible with a baroque altar.
This building will house works by Mario Merz, Rollof, Panamarenko, Richter, Bustamente, Prince and others.
The museum function of the Neue Galerie will be explored through the work of those artists who deal in the language of art: the museum as a box of wonders is a theme developed by Paolini, Gerhard Merz, Kosuth and Steinbach.
In contrast to the museum as a public building, we have found a really ‘private’ venue, a former fur shop opposite the Fridericianum.
Here, a single artist Pistoletto symbolises the tension between the individual and society.
The museum (in this case the Neue Galerie) is a historical body.
Into it, as into a voodoo fetish, artists stick imaginary pins.
At the same time, it can be a temple to art: in the tower of the Fridericianum (the tower as metaphor of holiness and imprisonment) we shall be presenting six artists who, in our view, have revolutionised art and won a place in the collective memory: David, Gauguin, Newmann, Giacometti, Beuys, and a living artist whose identity you will discover in due course.
Others featured individually are the young Hamburg artist Wolfgang Strack, who uses the language of comic strips and will be giving his own version of the art of the last thirty years in the Hauptmann-Schule building; and the American Max Neuhaus, who will be exhibiting on the main staircase of the AOK, a building erected in the 1950s and recently listed as being of architectural interest.
Neuhaus's art is dematerialised, consisting of sounds and vibrations, which will pervade the visitor as he surveys the other exhibition buildings from the top of the stairs.
For this reason, we see the AOK as the heart of the whole event.
Will there be a recommended itinerary apart from the buildings you have already mentioned?
We have tried to avoid repeating the formula of the ubiquitous open-air sculpture exhibition.
We are, nevertheless, proposing a relaxing walk in an ‘impressionistic’ landscape: a series of temporary pavilions will accommodate works in transparent materials bathed in natural daylight.
Two of the artists involved are Dan Graham and Isa Genzen.
Are all the artists showing works specially created for ‘Documenta’?
On the whole, yes, though it is difficult to think of an artist tailoring a picture to the requirements of an exhibition.
Francis Bacon is considered as a somewhat hallowed artist.
His presence at an exhibition devoted to the contemporary has taken many people by surprise…
I believe that a ‘Documenta’ exhibition should be based on artists of proven worth, or relatively so.
In any case, we maintain that Bacon amply fulfils the criteria of absolute consistency and independence from ideology.
In a way, his work is far more contemporary than that of many more recent artists and their experiments.
On this question of proven worth, what criteria did you adopt in choosing the five artists for the historical section housed in the tower of the Fridericianum?
There was no definite concept.
But, as Hoet, Baere, Tazzi and I discussed the exhibition, at a certain point it became clear that one of the best ways to talk about art is to let art speak for itself.
We remembered that a certain painting by Gauguin posed the question ‘Who are we? where do we come from? and where are we going?’.
Then we thought of David's ‘Death of Marat’, because, in my opinion, that painting contains the idea of the artist putting his own life on the line.
With Beuys, we chose an artist who shows how it is possible to be creative, even in the absence of objects and forms, by offering a living experience, an active space.
We all agreed on Giacometti, because the ‘Naso’ sums up the idea of potential space as a work of art, and that is the basic assumption of ‘Documenta IX’.
Almost all the practitioners of Arte Povera are represented among the 186 artists selected.
They are certainly artists of proven worth, but who came to the fore twenty or so years ago.
Is this ‘recall to arms’ a vote of no-confidence in more recent Italian art?
There is one thing I should make clear: ‘Documenta’ is not the Venice Biennale.
From the beginning, it set out to counter nationalism in art.
It is a fact that, on occasions in the past, officials in certain countries with Nazi, Fascist or Communist regimes have sent works representing the party line to international exhibitions.
‘Documenta’ is not even an attempt to sum up contemporary art, but is an expression of very personal viewpoints.
The term Arte Povera was coined to express the idea of artists exercising the greatest possible freedom to explore, not to serve as a definition.
Twenty years on, we see how that intention has been pursued in the work of Calzolari, Fabro, Merz, Kounellis, Paolini, Pistoletto and Zorio.
And, returning to the question of proven worth, these are all artists with an international reputation.
And as for age, Zorio, for example, is not much older than Sandro Chia.
I must repeat, it is not the purpose of ‘Documenta’ to choose representatives from different countries: the Italian artists involved certainly cannot be said to represent Italy.
But, while we are on the subject, please note that the Italians Bagnoli, Spalleti, Salvadori, Liliana Moro, Mariella Simoni and Trinci are also included, and they have nothing to do with Arte Povera.
It was not at all easy to make our selection, and some people are bound to disagree.
It is said that one of the merits of ‘Documenta’ this time round is that, with four much-travelled curators, it is truly international in its scope, and that for the first time it takes account of artists not operating in the great ‘art capitals’…
I have never been of the opinion that an artist is great simply because he works in New York or Paris.
With the intensification of international traffic, it is possible to discover new talent in any part of the world.
This is an age of insecurity…
It is difficult for artists working at a time of crisis to achieve a rounded representation of reality.
Artists nowadays live in all parts of the world and the idea of a ‘centre’ has been superseded.
It is truer than ever that art is not only a metropolitan phenomenon.
And yet, ‘Metropolis’, the exhibition organised last year by Rosenthal and Joachimedes in Berlin, was presented as a prognosis of the coming decade.
What is a prognosis in medical parlance?
A number of facts, from which you draw a conclusion, a synthesis.
Looked at in this way, ‘Metropolis’ was a good collection of ‘facts’.
As a prognosis, I would say it presented many worthwhile and up-and-coming artists.
It was a good exhibition of objects and situations.
But it was static, like an old picture, not a living organism.
It showed how categorisation by discipline installations, painting, photography and so on can still work effectively as a way of organising an exhibition.
But, once the prognosis had been made, there was no analysis, no report on the patient's prospects.
In what ways will ‘Documenta IX’ differ from previous versions and from recent international exhibitions of major importance?
Ever since 1972, each version of ‘Documenta’ has been organised by a different team.
The team works for a period of five years, with one eye on the recent past and the other on the immediate future, with the result that a whole decade is given critical consideration.
However, the exhibition does not necessarily refer back to the previous event, and there is hardly ever a sense of continuing from where the previous exhibition left off.
This is clear if we look back over the years.
‘Documenta’ was born to take stock of a situation that official art had consistently overlooked, in the days when, for instance, Pollock and Giacometti could not yet be found in museums.
Therefore ‘Documenta’ was called a hundred-day museum.
There is no need for this today, since even young artists have a place in such institutions.
Then Harald Szeemann proposed a new approach, allowing for personal mythologies.
In 1982, Rudi Fuchs came up with an accurate analysis of the new avant-garde movements in painting, and in 1987 Manfred Schneckenburger drew our attention to what I would call sociological considerations: art and culture, art and design, and so on.
Our aim this time is to free the exhibition from its ball and chain, abolishing any kind of categorisation and seeking a natural relationship between the spectator and art not a contemplative relationship but an active one trying to create complicity between the work of art and its beneficiary.
We want to organise a living exhibition.
We are not just presenting a series of artistic achievements, but seeking to make every possible connection between the works themselves, the space in which they are exhibited, and the senses of the viewer.
In answer to your question, then, and with the works not yet in situ, I would say that we have to rely more on sensitivity than on geometry.
186 names for the museum of a hundred days
The list of artists participating in Documenta IX
Marina Abramovic (Yugoslavia/Holland), Absalon (Israel/France), Richard Artschwager (USA), Francis Bacon (Great Britain), Marco Bagnoli (Italy), Nikos Baikas (Greece), Miroslaw Balka (Poland), Matthew Barney (USA), Lothar Baumgarten (Germany), Jean Pierre Bertrand (France), Michael Biberstein (Switzerland/Portugal), Guillaume Bijl (Belgium), Dara Birnbaum (USA), Jonathan Borofsky (USA), Louise Bourgeois (USA/France), Herbert Brandl (Austria), Ricardo Brey (Cuba), Tony Brown (Canada), Marie José Burki (Switzerland), Jean Marc Bustamante (France), Michael Buthe (Germany), Pedro Cabrita Reis (Portugal), Waltercio Caldas (Brazil), Pierpaolo Calzolari (Italy), Ernst Caramelle (Austria), Lawrence Carroll (USA), Saint-Clair Cemin (USA/Brazil), Thomasz Ciecierski (Poland), Tony Clark (Australia), James Coleman (Ireland), Tony Conrad (USA), Patrick Corillon (Belgium), Horia Damian (Rumania), Thierry de Cordier (Belgium), Raoul De Keyser (Belgium), Richard Deacon (Great Britain), Silvie & Chérif Defraoui (Switzerland), Wim Delvoye (Belgium), Eugenio Dittborn (Chile), Helmut Dorner (Germany), Stan Douglas (Canada), Marlène Dumas (Holland/South Africa), Jimmie Durham (USA), Mo Edoga (Nigeria/Germany), Jan Fabre (Belgium), Luciano Fabro (Italy), Belu-Simion Fainaru (Israel), Peter Fend (USA), Rose Finn-Kelcey (Great Britain), Flatz (Austria), Günther Förg (Germany), Fortuyn/O'Brien (Holland), Michel François (Belgium), Erik A Frandsen (Denmark), Vera Frenkel (Canada), Katsura Funakoshi (Japan), Isa Genzken (Germany), Gaylen Gerber (USA), Robert Gober (USA), Dan Graham (USA), Rodney Graham (Canada), Angela Grauerholz (Canada), Michael Gross (Israel), George Hadjimichalis (Greece), David Hammons (USA), Georg Herold (Germany), Gary Hill (USA), Peter Hopkins (USA), Rebecca Horn (Germany), Roni Horn (USA), Geoffrey James (Canada), Olav Christopher Jenssen (Norway), Tim Johnson (Australia), Ilya Kabakov (Russia), Anish Kapoor (Great Britain), Kazuo Katase (Japan/Germany), Tadashi Kawamata (Japan), Mike Kelley (USA), Ellsworth Kelly (USA), Bhupen Khakhar (India), Per Kirkeby (Denmark), Harald Klingelhöller (Germany), Kurt Kocherscheidt (Austria), Peter Kogler (Austria), Vladimir Kokolia (Czechoslovakia), Joseph Kosuth (USA), Jannis Kounellis (Greece/Italy), Mariusz Kruk (Poland), Guillermo Kuitca (Argentina), Jonathan Lasker (USA), Jac Leirner (Brazil), Zoe Leonard (USA), Eugène Leroy (France), Via Lewandowski (Germany), Bernd Lohaus (Belgium), Attila Richard Lukacs (Canada), James Lutes (USA), Ingeborg Lüscher (Switzerland), Marcel Maeyer (Belgium), Brice Marden (USA), Cildo Meireles (Brazil), Ulrich Meister (Germany), Thom Merrick (USA), Gerhard Merz (Germany), Mario Merz (Italy), Marisa Merz (Italy), Meuser (Germany), Jürgen Meyer (Germany), Liliana Moro (Italy), Reinhard Mucha (Germany), Matt Mullican (USA), Juan Muñoz (Spain), Hidetoshi Nagasawa (Japan/Italy), Christa Näher (Germany), Bruce Nauman (USA), Max Neuhaus (USA), Pekka Nevalainen (Finland), Nic Nicosia (USA), Moshe Ninio (Israel), Jussi Niva (Finland), Cady Noland (USA), Manuel Ocampo (Philippines), Tony Oursler (USA), Panamarenko (Belgium), Giulio Paolini (Italy), A.R.
Penck (Germany), Adrian Piper (USA), Michelangelo Pistoletto (Italy), Hermann Pitz (Germany), Sigmar Polke (Germany), Stephen Prina (USA), Richard Prince (USA), Martin Puryear (USA), Royden Rabinowitch (Canada), Rober Racine (Canada), Philip Rantzer (Israel), Charles Ray (USA), Martial Raysse (France), José Resende (Brazil), Gerhard Richter (Germany), Ulf Rollof (Sweden), Erika Rothenberg (USA), Susan Rothenberg (USA), Thomas Ruff (Germany), Stephan Runge (Germany), Edward Ruscha (USA), Reiner Ruthenbeck (Germany), Ulrich Rückriem (Germany), Remo Salvadori (Italy), Joe Scanlan (USA), Eran Scharf (Israel), Adrian Schiess (Switzerland), Thomas Schütte (Germany), Maria Serebriakova (Russia), Mariella Simoni (Italy), Susana Solano (Spain), Usmane Sow (Senegal), Ettore Spalletti (Italy), Haim Steinbach (USA), Pat Steir (USA), Wolfgang Strack (Germany), Thomas Struth (Germany), Sugar Janos (Hungary), Yuji Takeoka (Japan/Germany), Robert Therrien (USA), Philippe Thomas (France), Frederic Matys Thursz (USA), Niele Toroni (Switzerland/France), Thanassis Totsikas (Greece), Addo Lodovico Trinci (Italy), James Turrell (USA), Mitja Tusek (Switzerland), Luc Tuymans (Belgium), Micha Ullman (Israel/Germany), Juan Uslé (Spain), Jan Vercruysse (Belgium), Bill Viola (USA), Henk Visch (Holland), James Welling (USA), Franz West (Austria), Rachel Whiteread (Great Britain), Christopher Wool (USA), Yook Geong Byung (Korea), Heimo Zobernig (Austria), Gilberto Zorio (Italy), Constantin Zvezdochotov (Russia)
Paris
Ellsworth Kelly honoured at the Jeu de Paume
Late Forties Abstraction described in show touring to Münster and Washington
PARIS.
Ellsworth Kelly first saw Paris in 1944 at the age of twenty-one after the Normandy landing; the young marine cannot have imagined then how important that city was to be to his artistic career.
He was the last of the Americans loyal to the city when New York was assuming its predominant role in the contemporary art world.
In the Fifties and Sixties Kelly spent time with Adrian Maeght and the artists associated with the publisher.
He researched Romanesque art, studied wall paintings from Saint-Savin to Tavant, the Louvre collections and Byzantine art.
Alfred Pacquement and Jack Cowart of the National Gallery, Washington, the curators of the exhibition (at the Jeu de Paume until 24 May), have focused on Kelly's early years, the late Forties and Fifties, when he was developing his Abstract manner.
They have therefore been able to present a number of little known works: paintings, collages, drawings and a previously unexhibited series of photographs.
In 1949, during a stay at Belle Ile, Kelly produced his first Abstract works, taking as his starting point a window frame or patches of moss on a wall.
‘Instead of making a painting which interpreted an object or depicted its content’, he recalls, ‘I found an object and ‘presented’ it just as it was’.
In 1952, a year after his one-man show at the Galerie Arnaud, he began to produce his large-scale monochromes, represented here by ‘Color for a large wall’, loaned by the Museum of Modern Art, New York, and ‘Kite II’, now at the Beaubourg.
Morellet, Monet as experienced in his studio at Giverny, and Le Courbusier discovered at Marseille were the final French enthusiasms of Ellsworth Kelly.
Before it travels to Washington, the exhibition will be at the Westfälisches Landesmuseum in Münster (dates yet to be decided).
Panza di Biumo's pieces in Lugano
LUGANO.
The Museo Cantonale d'Arte, Lugano, Switzerland, kicks off its 1992 exhibition programme with a selection of recent acquisitions from the collection of Dr Panza di Biumo (many of whose pieces are now also in the Guggenheim, New York) which began in the 1950s with the purchase of works by Tàpies and Fautrier.
The exhibition runs from 11 April to 5 July and includes the work of Ford Beckman, Sol LeWitt, Joseph Kosuth, Robert Barry, Stuard Arens, Tim Ebner, Ettore Spalletti, James Hyde, and other young artists.
Whitney shows a post-modern joker
NEW YORK.
The Whitney continues its round robin of mid-career retrospectives for media artists with ‘Richard Prince’, an eighty-five work survey of fifteen years' worth of work by the forty-three-year-old ‘appropriationist’.
Mr Prince made his mark ‘re-photographing’ snippets from magazine ads, but has lately advanced to painting monochrome canvases inscribed with the texts of mistold jokes.
The exhibition coincides with wood and fibreglass casts of automobile hoods.
‘Richard Prince’ remains on view at the Whitney from 1 May to 12 July.
Thirty years of Baselitz on tour
MUNICH.
Until 17 May, the Kunsthalle is hosting a major retrospective of the work of Georg Baselitz comprising 120 works (mainly paintings and drawings, but also some sculptures in wood) from public and private collections in Europe and America.
It is seventeen years since the first Baselitz retrospective, which was also held in Munich.
The present exhibition covers thirty years of artistic activity concentrating on the different themes which have marked his career.
The catalogue is published by the Hirmer Verlag and edited by Dr Siegfried Gohr, who also selected the works to be exhibited.
After Munich the exhibition will be at the Edinburgh National Gallery of Modern Art from 30 May to 12 July, then at the Museum für Moderne Kunst, Vienna, from 23 July to 13 September.
At last the great Salien dynastic show
SPEYER.
After several postponements, ‘The Saliens and their imperial rule 1024 to 1125’ can now be seen at the Historisches Museum der Pfalz in Speyer until 21 June.
The show illustrates in two large sections the period from the election in 1024 of the first Salien king, Konrad II, to the death in 1125 of his great-grandson Emperor Heinrich V. The first, introduced by historical maps of the period, illustrates the everyday life and working environment of people of different social strata.
Models of houses and objects of daily use are contrasted with weapons, jewellery and elaborate dresses of the rich.
The second section, devoted to the political powers of the period, opens with the splendours of the imperial court: precious manuscripts and goldsmiths' work, and models of royal residences and churches.
Highlights are two gold treasures, the ‘Schatz von Hiddensee’, sixteen pieces of gold jewellery which were found on the shore of the Baltic, and the twenty-five piece set of jewellery of the empress Agnes.
Medals, seals, manuscripts reliefs and sculptures document the competition of princes and nobles with the Salien rulers.
One section of the exhibition is devoted to the church.
Two aspects, its leading role as patron of the arts, and its growing power and ambition in its relationship with the kings, are amply documented.
The exhibition closes with the important social and constitutional developments of the period: the development of towns (with a section devoted to the Jewish communities); the institution of the civil service; the beginnings of German federalism; and the first electoral laws are among the aspects which document how the hundred years of Salien rule shaped German history to come.
Florence
The magnificent Lorenzo
The season of exhibitions about Lorenzo and Medici patronage opens with fifteenth-century Renaissance drawings in newly restored rooms at the Uffizi
FLORENCE.
The most important of the exhibitions staged to commemorate the fifth centenary of the death of Lorenzo de Medici is undoubtedly ‘Il Disegno Fiorentino del tempo di Lorenzo il Magnifico’(Florentine drawing in the time of Lorenzo the Magnificent) at the Gabinetto Disegni e Stampe at the Uffizi (8 April to 26 July).
There are two reasons for this: first, it provides a complete and convincing display of the art of drawing in the second half of the fifteenth century, with outstanding exhibits lent by major collections worldwide.
Second, it sees the inauguration of six new rooms in the Uffizi Gallery.
This new exhibition area is the first stage of the Nuovi Uffizi complex, which has been subject to delays even though the funds have long been available.
The restoration work, requested by the museum's management with this exhibition in view, was carried out in just three months, at a cost of L560 million (£259,000; $450.5).
When the show is over, the rooms will become the permanent setting for eighteenth-century paintings.
The present exhibition consists of 180 drawings by Florentine Renaissance artists, including Filippo Lippi, Benozzo Gozzoli, Domenico Veneziano, Antonio del Pollaiuolo, Verocchio, Perugino, Botticelli, Ghirlandaio, Leonardo and Michelangelo.
The exhibition is divided into fourteen sections including ‘Drawing from sources: Ancient and modern models’; ‘Life studies’; ‘Drapery’; ‘The Grotesque’; ‘Preparatory cartoons’; ‘Landscape’; ‘Architectural drawings’ and ‘Scientific studies’.
The two final sections are reserved almost exclusively for Botticelli, with three illustrations for Dante's Inferno and a series of monochrome on canvas studies for ‘The Adoration of the Magi’, which has been rescued from the Uffizi storerooms and restored for the present exhibition.
The exhibition's organisers are Annamaria Petrioli and Gianvittorio Dillon.
The catalogue is published by Amilcare Pizzi.
The restoration programme undertaken in the town itself to celebrate Lorenzo the Magnificent has included work on the Palazzo Medici Riccardi.
The collection of antique tablets, inscriptions and small bas-reliefs housed under the arcades of the first courtyard was installed in the palace by the Riccardi family following their purchase of the palace from the Medici in 1659.
According to Cristina Acidini, who directed the work, the idea of arranging the pieces in an elaborate setting, punctuated at intervals by corbels and caryatids, was probably suggested by the sculptor Foggini, who had been commissioned to restructure the Palazzo at that time.
The present cleaning and refurbishment has made it possible to appreciate the variety of the materials involved, the range of colours, and the subtle interplay of stucco and ancient marble.
The restoration has also revealed the way the archaeological elements were doctored to make them fit together as a sophisticated whole.
Discussions are underway as to whether to reinstate the Vasca del Tribolo (at present on display inside the palace) in the left hand arcade.
The restoration programme is being funded by the Banca Toscana.
Inside the palace, restoration work has begun of some areas of the Sala di Luca Giordano under the direction of Mina Gregori, Professor of Art History at the University of Florence.
Areas of bright stucco work have been found over the first layer of tempera.
Meanwhile, over at the Spedale degli Innocenti, also from 8 April, you can see ‘L'Architettura dell'età del Magnifico a Firenze e nel territorio toscano’(Architecture in Florence and Tuscany in the time of Lorenzo the Magnificent).
Organised by Gabriele Morolli and Cristina Acidini, it includes architectural ornament, fine capitals and pilasters, two sophisticated wooden models of buildings commissioned by Lorenzo, and codices and rare editions of texts by Alberti.
The exhibition proposes some new historical approaches.
The cult of classicism and the ancient world is, of course, central to an understanding of Lorenzo, but far from remaining a theoretical and private interest, as was generally thought until recently, prestigious architectural commissions were part of his clearly defined political programme.
The financial means at Lorenzo's disposal did not, however, equal those of his father, and his early death and the subsequent convulsions of the Florentine State meant that many commissions did not progress beyond the planning stage.
According to Morolli: ‘The seed sown by Lorenzo eventually came to fruition in Rome in the time of his son Giovanni, the future Pope Leo X. Seen in this light, Bramante and Raphael are the products of Florentine taste’.
Paris
The Vikings and their European role at the Grand Palais courtesy of the Council of Europe
Exhibition to explore the continent's roots sails on to Berlin's Altes Museum and Copenhagen's Nationalmuseet
PARIS.
The Vikings have come to town, courtesy of the French Foreign Ministry, the Council of Europe and the Nordic Council of Ministers.
A major exhibition, ‘From Viking to Crusader: the Scandinavians and Europe 800–1200’ is being held at the Grand Palais until 12 July, supported by related events at the Swedish, Danish and Finnish cultural centres.
The politics behind these mighty Council of Europe shows are always complex.
Professor Roesdahl, of Aarhus University, Denmark, who is one of the chief organisers, explains that Scandinavian scholars had been planning a major show on the Vikings for some time, and the French became involved because they had also wanted to hold such an exhibition, partly to examine the Viking role in Normandy.
Negotiations were conducted between the French Foreign Ministry (and its cultural branch, the Association française d'action artistique) and the Nordic Council of Ministers.
The international Consultative Committee for the cultural programme of the Council of Europe, made up of European museum directors, chose the exhibition to be the next in the series of twenty-one shows which has included ‘The French Revolution and Europe’, also held in Paris (1989), ‘The Portuguese discoveries and Renaissance Europe’(Lisbon, 1983) and ‘Gothic art in Europe’(1968).
The scholarly committee of the exhibition includes leading Viking experts from all the Scandinavian countries, together with Wilfried Menghin and Arnold Muhl of the Museum für Vor- und Frühgeschichte, Berlin, and, leading the French side, Jean-Pierre Mohén, Conservateur du Patrimoine and former Director of the Musée des Antiquités Nationales.
More than 600 artefacts will be on show at the Grand Palais, lent by German, Danish, Icelandic, Polish, Swedish, Norwegian, British, Irish, and Russian museums.
The presence of objects from St Petersburg, Moscow, Novgorod, Kiev and Odessa ensures a wider geographical perspective than was possible at David Wilson's exhibition at the British Museum in 1984, tracing the Viking expansion eastward as far as Iraq.
From the other point of the compass, the finds from a Canadian village have led the organisers to postulate that the ‘prairie country’ of Norse myth may have been Newfoundland, discovered 500 years before Columbus.
According to Jean-Pierre Mohén, ‘The exhibition also breaks new ground in covering the whole period from the eighth century to the early Middle Ages.
It therefore explores the effects of Viking expansion in Europe and shows a new nation emerging from the clash of pagan nordic civilisation with the medieval Christian world’.
Boats so essential to Viking power and influence are the subject of the introductory section.
The exhibition is set out on three floors, each concerned with a different aspect of Viking culture.
The first reconstructs scenes from everyday life, depicting activities such as hunting, fishing, commerce and crafts, in northern lands during the Viking period, with the help of household objects and tools.
It also portrays the warrior aristocracy and includes the rich spoils of conquest: iron axes and swords inlaid with engraved silver, hoards of coins and gold jewellery.
Royal tombs, complete with carved wooden furniture, embroidered fabrics, precious ornaments, which have survived because they were protected by tumuli, introduce the theme of Viking paganism, attested by amulets, Valkyrie statuettes and a Swedish funerary stela.
Relations between the Vikings and European civilisation is the theme of the second part of the exhibition.
Latvian tombs, hoards of treasure found in Estonia, jewellery, statuettes and household articles discovered in Poland, together with objects from the Byzantine and Islamic worlds illustrate how this people of warriors and merchants expanded eastward as far as the Caliphate of Baghdad, while excavations in ‘Norman’ territory (at Downham in Norfolk and in the vicinity of Rouen) provide proof of Norse expansionism in another direction.
Finally, Christian influence on Viking art is demonstrated by works in wood and stone: a large number of baptismal fonts, the carved doors of a Norwegian church, the gilded altar of Lisbjerg, the polychrome Virgin of Mosjo, illuminated missals and gold and ivory reliquaries.
The catalogue is coordinated by Professor Roesdahl.
Consisting of 617 illustrated pages and a large number of essays, it is available in French, German, English and, of course, the Scandinavian languages.
The publishers of the English editions are Thames and Hudson, and Rizzoli for America.
Another exhibition on a Viking theme devoted exclusively to boats can be seen at Rouen's Musée des Antiquités from 1 April to 29 June.
The Musée de Normandie at Caen is also playing its part, from 20 June to 14 September, with an exhibition entitled ‘Les Barbares et la Mer’(The Barbarians and the sea).
Berlin
Germans torn between admiration and shame
‘Degenerate art’ reaches Berlin after touring US
BERLIN.
Germany's Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher has opened an exhibition entitled ‘Degenerate Art the fate of the avant-garde in Nazi Germany’, now in Berlin after receiving widespread acclaim in the United States.
The opening ceremony at the Altes Museum in central Berlin was attended by journalists from all over Europe and excited Berliners.
Many people had been nursing faint hopes that the exhibition, which took Stephanie Barron five years to assemble, might be transferred to Berlin after Washington.
But the fact that it eventually arrived in Germany was largely thanks to two German MPs, Ursula Seiler-Albring and Ina Albowitz.
The two worked unstintingly to obtain the DM 3 million (£1,034,000; $1.8 million) in sponsorship needed to bring the exhibition to Berlin.
Since it was primarily a historical display rather than an art exhibition, the Deutsches Historisches Museum was chosen as a venue, particularly as it was already experienced in working with American museums.
The decision was also influenced by the fact that when the museum was founded in 1987, it was clearly specified that it would include other nations' views of Germany and its history.
There was much excitement even at the press preview.
Visitors were torn between admiration for the art of Expressionism (Stephanie Barron's reconstruction excludes Cubism, Constructivism and Dada) and shame at the barbarism of those who denounced, seized and destroyed these works of art.
The opening night was so packed that it was hard to move, but visitors were able to appreciate the strikingly contemporary aura of these works.
What they could not appreciate, because of the crowds, was the atmosphere created by leading American architect Frank O. Gehry.
His carefully chosen materials created an air of menace even without the denunciatory graffiti.
Asked for her views on the exhibition, one elderly woman who had been friends with many of the Expressionists described it as ‘both exciting and deeply moving’.
She said that Berlin had been very fortunate to follow Washington in hosting the exhibition, and praised the close co-operation with the United States and the way in which art was combined with documentary material.
Of other visitors interviewed, only two schoolchildren expressed concern that the exhibition might attract the wrong kind of public.
‘In these difficult times, with Neo-Nazis terrorising foreigners and anyone with differing views, there's a danger that Fascists will come here to find out what degenerate means’.
A middle-aged man spoke highly of the efforts to place the exhibition in its historical context.
And one astonished young woman asked what was degenerate or obscene about artists like Nolde, Chagall, Marc, Macke, Kirchner or Heckel.
Although public awareness of the Third Reich is probably greater in Germany than in the US, the organisers were right not to cut down on the documentary material.
The material was carefully selected and organised to give a clearer understanding of this often hazily remembered period of German history.
One critic of the show said that the exhibitions held in many German cities in 1987 made all this ‘ritualised remembrance’ pointless.
‘We long ago used art to lay the ghost of the past to rest and condemn Nazism’.
But the overall reaction from the public was very much on the side of the organisers.
Leonardo and Venetian painting at Palazzo Grassi
VENICE.
Palazzo Grassi is holding its first exhibition devoted to a single artist, Leonardo da Vinci, ‘Leonardo and Venice’(until 5 July).
The exhibition has been co-ordinated by the Venetian Soprintendente, Giovanna Nepi Sciré, with a committee including Giulio Bora, David Alan Brown, Gianvittorio Dillon, Jane Roberts, Françoise Viatte and others.
Inevitably, Leonardo is represented by his drawings, with particular impetus from Giuseppe Bossi's collection which the Venice Accademia bought from the Abbott Luigi Celotti in 1822.
Its highlights were the famous ‘Vitruvian Man’ and studies for the Battle of Anghiari, and almost the entire corpus of studies connected with this lost decoration is assembled for the exhibition.
The exhibition promises to present important new angles on this aspect of Leonardo studies.
In conversation with The Art Newspaper Signora Nepi Sciré commented, ‘The first section on the drawings will constitute the exhibition's most important part, and provide the links for the other exhibits, among which there will be five paintings by Giorgione.
This is the first occasion when one of Palazzo Grassi's exhibitions has been so closely linked with a Venetian public institution.
This important breakthrough gives us hope for the future’.
Leonardo's only documented visit to Venice was in April of 1503, and his influence on the Veneto is not easy to document precisely.
This exhibition examines his impact not only on the visual arts but also on literature and science.
In this context, scientific examination of his drawings in the exhibition has revealed pentimenti, to date less considered in drawings than painting studies.
The first section is devoted to the work of the painter himself, offering more than sixty drawings exhibited thematically (relation to specific paintings, the human figure, human profile, caricature, and armaments) and showing their influence on Giorgione, whose attributed ‘Christ carrying the cross’ from the Scuola di San Rocco is shown along with the Accademia's ‘La Vecchia’.
A room is devoted to ‘The Last Supper’, and two to Leonardo followers active in Venice, Andrea Solario, Agostino da Lodi and Francesco Napoletano.
Leonardo's equestrian bronze from Budapest will figure in the section entitled ‘Between Venice and Milan: the role of Sculpture’, and a final section is mainly devoted to Cesare da Sesto.
There will be a colloquium on Leonardo's drawings at the close of the exhibition.
The Royal Academy shows Calder in the first British show for thirty years
LONDON.
The small retrospective exhibition of Alexander Calder in the Sackler Galleries of the Royal Academy, until 7 June, is a rare and welcome opportunity for a British audience to meet one of the most popular and distinctive of modern American artists.
Widely known for the large painted steel sculptures which brighten plazas and lobbies throughout the United States, and for his regular appearances in the New York salerooms, he is surprisingly unfamiliar in a London context and has not been treated to a museum exhibition in this country since the Tate Gallery's survey of 1962.
By contrast, his work is more widely appreciated on the continent and he was the subject of a major exhibition at the Centre Georges Pompidou in Paris in the winter of 1989–1990.
This exhibition has been sent from the Whitney Museum of American Art in New York, where it was seen at the end of last year in a larger version and under the title ‘Celebrating Calder’.
Drawn, with one exception, from that museum's rich collection of material, which, in size and importance, surpasses both the Guggenheim Museum and the Museum of Modern Art, it travels to the IVAM Centre Julio Gonzalez in Valencia (12 September–8 November) and to Korea's Sonje Museum of Contemporary Art (21 June–19 September 1993).
In addition to twenty-seven sculptures on all scales and from every period in Calder's long career, the selection includes a strong representation of works on paper ink drawings, gouaches, etchings and lithographs one oil painting, ‘Fireman's Dinner for Brancusi’(1926), and several examples of his jewellery.
Among the early works in the exhibition are four wire sculptures including ‘The Pistil’(1931) and ‘Varese’(1931), one of those deceptively simple but convincing portrait heads.
Predictably, Calder's miniature ‘Circus’, which he created in Paris in 1926, was deemed too precious and fragile to join the exhibition's circuit, but the Royal Academy is screening the film of the artist commanding his ring of performers in 1961.
‘Calderberry Bush’(1932) is the exhibition's earliest mobile, a term of description provided by Marcel Duchamp for his moving sculptures.
In place of a new catalogue, the Whitney Museum republished Calder's Universe, the book which served for its more comprehensive retrospective exhibition of 1976, the year of the artist's death.
The Royal Academy is publishing a pamphlet with essays by John Russell and Stephen Bann.
Goya the printmaker in Rennes
RENNES.
A sizeable exhibition of Goya prints at the Museé des Beaux-Arts et d'Archéologie shows 218 prints from the ‘Caprichos’, ‘Desastres’, ‘Tauromachia’ and ‘Proverbios’series.
The prints have been lent by the Madrid-based Fondacion Juan March, founded in 1955 with the aim of encouraging artistic and cultural activities.
Up to now the Fondacion has organised over 350 exhibitions and awarded more than 500 bursaries for research and events.
‘Goya: L'Oeuvre gravé’ runs until 14 June.
The spirit of Ukraine in Canada
HAMILTON.
The centenary of the first settlement of Ukrainians on Canadian soil is being celebrated by the Art Gallery of Hamilton with ‘The Spirit of Ukraine’(9 April–15 June).
Canadians of Ukrainian descent now number over 750,000, the country's fifth largest ethnic group, many of whom live in Winnipeg where the idea for the exhibition was developed by Carol A. Phillips, Director of the Winnipeg Art Gallery.
More than 120 paintings dating from the fifteenth to the twentieth century have been loaned from The State Museum of Ukrainian Art, Kiev, the majority nineteenth-century portraits and genre scenes but also some fine icons such as‘The Miracle of Saint George’, second half of the fifteenth century, from the Church of the Elevation of the Holy Cross, Zvyzhen (Galicia), and a group of avant-garde works from the private collection of the Kiev collector Ihor Dyehenko.
The style of the works on show seems to have touched a chord in Canada: the art critic of the Hamilton Globe and Mail commented that the spirit of Ukrainian art was ‘similarly expressed in a regional synthesis of (or reaction against) art styles currently prominent at the creative centre.
In the case of Canada, that centre has long been New York’.
Courtauld gets new prints & drawings study room
LONDON.
A new room for the study of the 7,000-or-so drawings and 27,000 prints which make up the Courtauld collection will make these works widely available for the first time.
Not all the items have yet been catalogued and work is in progress on this but much of the Witt material is in handlist form and other material can be found in the catalogues of previous Courtauld exhibitions.
The study room will be open from Monday to Wednesday 2–5.30pm by appointment, tel: 071 873 2921.
The current exhibition is ‘Hogarth and Piranesi: engravings and etchings’(until 7 June) which includes more than thirty engravings by Hogarth given to the Courtauld by Sir Robert Witt in 1933 and fourteen Piranesi etchings from the First Edition of the ‘Carceri’ series bequeathed to the Courtauld by Count Antoine Seilern in 1978.
The timetable of interesting exhibitions planned for the Courtauld this year includes ‘Sixteenth-century Bolognese Drawings’(18 June–31 August); ‘Kokoschka in the Princes Gate collection: Drawings, Prints, Books’(9 September–28 October); ‘Mexican nineteenth-century prints’(6 November–20 December), the latter a loan collection which will also be shown at the Banco de Mexico, the Mexican Embassy and Richmond College.
Subjects for 1993 include Boudin at Trouville, Thomas Gambier Parry and Views of Montreal.
Expressionism in Manchester: prints to pub crawls
MANCHESTER.
As part of the city's International Festival of Expressionism the City Art Gallery is showing ‘The Expressionist Face: Graphic Art in Germany 1905–1925’ from 12 March to 4 May.
Around eighty prints from mainly British collections illustrate the depiction of the human face in a range of print media.
The exhibition includes posters borrowed from the Imperial War Museum in London, and book illustrations, but concentrates on the quintessential Expressionist graphic technique, the woodcut.
A group of seventeen prints has been lent by Chemnitz, Manchester's twin town, the first such loan of its kind.
Artists on show include Heckel, Beckmann, Kollwitz, Pechstein and Kokoschka.
The exhibition has been organised by Howard Smith, Senior Keeper in the Exhibitions Department, with a short catalogue by Felicity Lunn.
It is sponsored by Lufthansa with additional support from Germany, and by the Henry Moore Foundation, which usually supports sculpture shows but was pleased to help this exhibition of graphic art.
Elsewhere in the city several Expressionist Pub Crawls have been organised to promote the work of eight local expressionist artists, whose paintings were on show in six pubs.
The inaugural crawl was led by Mark E. Smith, lead singer of the Mancunian pop group The Fall.
Overall, organiser David Fisk claims the Festival is well on its way to recovering its £500,000 costs.
Everything you've never wanted to see
WALSALL.
The museums and art galleries of England's Midlands will be playing host this spring to a series of exhibitions featuring the often bizarre collections of local residents.
The idea originated at the Museum and Art Gallery of Walsall in 1989 when local people were invited to display their own collections.
The response was alarmingly overwhelming: from hundreds of applicants sixty-four people aged from six to eighty were invited, displaying over 16,000 items, from Madonna memorabilia to airline sick bags.
The show attracted 10,000 visitors in seven weeks.
The idea has been expanded into a Peoples Show Festival and  similar exhibitions, featuring over 200 different collections of tens of thousands of items, will be held at fourteen different venues from Cheltenham to Stoke on Trent.
If the idea of thousands of plastic bags, pigs, pianos, Lego models and copies of the Beano gladdens your heart, this is clearly the festival for you.
Everyone else has been warned.
Doucet etchings at Fondation Gianadda
MARTIGNY.
An exhibition of 160 prints from the Fondation Jacques Doucet is at the Swiss Fondation Pierre Gianadda until 8 June.
The prints have been chosen from more than 10,000 in the Fondation Doucet collection.
A tailor by trade, Doucet donated his outstanding collection to the University of Paris early this century.
He also handed over a magnificent library which is now the Bibliothèque d'art et d'archéologie.
The exhibits, ranging from Goya to Matisse and dating from 1799 to 1933, show the development of the art of etching.
They are among more than 3,000 prints to be restored by the Fondation Gianadda, which, in return, will have the opportunity of introducing the Doucet collection to the public.
Commentary
Relative values
Let them take their art with them into the afterlife
What is the point of restoring modern art?
Is it reasonable to treat a Rauschenberg as if it were a Leonardo?
Achille Bonito Oliva, respected Italian critic of contemporary art proposes a dignified exit for contemporary works of art
ROME.
There are many modern examples of artists taking a nonchalent attitude to their own work.
Duchamp did not bat an eyelid at the destruction of his ‘Large Glass’, while Munch deliberately exposed his famous pictures of ‘The Scream’ to the severe northern climate.
Even so, and despite public scepticism, contemporary art is protected with just as much zeal as are the works of the Old Masters.
The fact that attempts are made to restore it is positive proof.
Italy, with its exceptional public and private collections, must be the greatest museum in the world.
Despite general neglect of the country's heritage, restoration is a popular topic for debate, perhaps as compensation for the lack of action.
The restoration debate starts from the assumption that art is immortal visible evidence of historical and cultural greatness.
Restoration is seen as a struggle against the forces of change and decay, which respect neither man nor materials.
Centuries after their creation, we intervene to limit the deterioration of frescoes, painted panels, canvases or marbles, and to preserve for posterity not just an empty shell but the enduring substance of a work of art.
This homage to the past can be seen as an expression of respect for the artist's original intent, for his ambition to prolong his existence through a work created according to artistic rules, with chosen techniques and materials.
Artists in this tradition have always striven to celebrate the present by prolonging it into the future.
Contemporary art, on the other hand, especially the art of this century, has chosen to overthrow tradition.
It employs unconventional techniques and materials, even to the extent of transient use of the human body.
Pursuing the concept that art and life are one, modern artists have chosen to use degradable materials concerned more with the nightmare of the present than with the recognition of generations still to come.
From Duchamp's ready-mades to Dada and Futurist soirées, from Rauschenberg's assemblages to American-style happenings, from French neo-Realism to Italian Arte Povera, much of contemporary art seems to reject the idea of permanence, the profound yearning for immortality which inspired the art of the past.
Thus we have a varied and respectable repertory of urinals, rags, earth, pipes, plastic, neon tubes and bedpans.
The paradox is that restorers are now making as much fuss of these ephemera as one would expect of older and more permanent works.
Burri's ‘Sack’ is now on a par with Leonardo's ‘Last Supper’, Warhol's Brillo boxes with Michelangelo's ‘Prisoners’, and Flavin's light effects with those of Caravaggio.
How is it that restorers seem unaware of the poetical use made of materials or the philosophical and existential reasons that have led contemporary artists to adopt synthetic, ephemeral and deliberately short-lived substances for compositions frequently accompanied by the casual and uninspiring caption ‘Untitled’?
The answer lies in the centrality of the idea in Western civilisation.
We tend to see the history of art as an ordered succession of works appreciated for and judged by their conceptual content.
Form is simply the vehicle for intellectual expression, which would otherwise remain invisible.
Seen in this light, restoration is a kind of patching up of iconographical clothing, as valid for the grand vestments of the Old Masters as for the everyday wear of modern art.
But since this idea-centred vision of art is applied indiscriminately, we have reached a laughable state of affairs.
Art, of whatever period, is an interpenetration of form and matter.
The two elements cannot be divorced: the soul cannot be saved separately from the body.
One could argue that it is on this account that the restorer applies his efforts to the material element of the work.
An artist both creates and clothes the physical expression of his idea.
If the garment becomes torn, it is possible to repair it, taking account of the artist's underlying intent.
But much of contemporary art is not conceived in this spirit.
The artist has deliberately chosen transient materials.
Why then attempt to patch up an old overall as if one were repairing a sumptuous evening dress?
If this is our approach, we force a work of art to last beyond its time, depriving it of the freedom to disintegrate, become a piece of junk, or just an old paint stain.
Instead, it is hospitalised in a museum, to be visited by the public, who pretend to relate to the work as if they recognised in it something of eternal value.
We are in thrall to the uniquely Western illusion of cheating time by investing the temporal with immortality.
We refuse to accept the human and inevitable tragedy of aging, even in the case of contemporary art, which we condemn to an unwanted permanence, despite its attempt to go the way of all flesh.
In this case, restoration is akin to the cosmetic procedures adopted by the American film industry, intent on transforming classics shot in black and white into full technicolour a facelift for the linguistic corpse left by the director.
Of course, it is different if we intervene solely to restore the material condition of a work of art after it has been damaged by external forces such as an accident or vandalism.
Since we have had to accept the loss of many works of art in the past, why not begin to humanise our relationship with contemporary creations?
Why not respect the intention implied by the choice of impermanent materials and the adoption of quick and casual techniques?
To be truly modern means to accept the process of change without pathetic attempts to prevent it from running its course.
The restoration of contemporary art is little more than a childish effort to arrest artistic expression at its moment of birth a mistaken longing for eternal youth.
We should not try to transform the modern artist into an Old Master, making his work last beyond the life-span of the materials he himself chose for it.
Far better to respect the work's impermanence and its desire for a dignified end.
I would humbly propose that the contemporary artist be laid to rest along with his works: a royal burial of the kind once given to emperors in eastern lands, whose slaves and worldly possessions accompanied them on their final journey into the unknown.
Barking dogs
A little knowledge of restoration is a dangerous thing
Giorgio Bonsanti, the Director of the Opificio restoration centre in Florence, deplores the recent spate of uninformed criticism of conservation projects
FLORENCE.
Restoration is a subject which rouses strong feelings: witness the recent court case following James Beck's outspoken criticism of the cleaning of the tomb of Ilaria del Carretto.
In that particular case the judges pronounced in general on the right of free speech, but did not go so far as to appoint experts to ascertain whether the accused was right in his criticism or not (see The Art Newspaper No.14, January 1992, p.1).
Public and press interest in restoration is certainly at a high point at present but in many cases a little knowledge seems to be a dangerous thing.
A weekly magazine, L'Europeo, published a piece on the problems of restoration and reproduced a photograph of a panel by the sixteenth-century Ferrarese painter Ortolano, in the Pinacoteca Capodimonte, with a caption describing it as Leonardo's ‘Last Supper’.
Realising its error at the last minute, the magazine just managed to insert a back-page acknowledgement of its gaffe but not to correct the offending caption.
In the same article, art historian Mina Gregori said of Antelami's ‘Months’ at Parma that they had lost their Romanesque contours and were now quite indistinguishable; later she wrote that: ‘Antelami's ‘Months’are now ruined: unsightly puppets robbed of their Romanesque contours’.
A few years earlier, Alessandro Conti wrote in similar vein of Fra Angelico's frescoes at San Marco in Florence, saying that they had been permanently disfigured.
Again on Bruno Zanardi's restoration of Antelami's ‘Months’, Fiorella Minervino wrote that the marble had lost its characteristic surface veining; in her opinion, this was probably due to the use of a chemical solvent to extract the metallic salts which had appeared on the surface, or it may have been caused by some kind of abrasive treatment.
Of another restorer working on similar sculptures, Minervino claimed that he ‘stopped long before he reached the skin of the marble’.
In another case Alessandra Melucco Vaccaro, a well-known and respected archaeologist at the Istituto Centrale per il Restauro in Rome, wrote that during restoration work on Wiligelmo's reliefs at Modena, the original polychrome was brutally scratched away; when Raffaella Rossi Manaresi of Bologna's Cesare Gnudi open-air sculpture conservation centre ventured to reply, she was virtually told that, as a chemist, she should keep to her own field.
Examples of other, similar, pronouncements are plentiful.
Professional restorers, art historians and journalists equipped with variable degrees of real technical expertise are currently all equally ready to take up the cudgels in causes of this kind.
Their statements seem to have a number of points in common: first, they tend to be expressed in inappropriate circumstances, for example , someone makes a contribution to a congress, and someone else feels compelled to make an immediate reply.
A popular weekly magazine is hardly the place for heavyweight confrontations between experts, which can only leave the general public feeling confused.
Second, the tone of such statements brooks no reply, and in any case the author's argument is rarely couched in reasonable terms or supported by adequate evidence.
Third, the author has generally seen little or nothing of the actual restoration work, yet, once it is finished, presumes to assess it with unshakeable authority.
Finally, the author uses language which frequently shows distinct signs of improvisation: for instance, in the sentence quoted earlier on the treatment of marble, it is difficult to know what exactly is meant by the ‘skin’.
Of course, not all these points apply in every case, but I am often aware of one or even two of them.
It would seem that the restoration profession has not been able to keep its nerve in the face of the rapidly growing attention it has received in recent years, and is reacting in an undisciplined way.
Restoration is a field requiring exceptional skills and qualifications.
As such, it is a barometer of the degree of civilisation a people has attained, combining as it does a great artistic tradition with the latest scientific research.
It is potentially one of the most edifying aspects of our society, a great asset in terms of building a positive image, but the behaviour of some of the people working in this profession, evident in the sort of bad manners quoted above, leaves much to be desired.
This is no way to promote real debate, reflection and research, and I would like to invite all those involved in restoration work, in whatever capacity, to help raise the tone of the discussion.
Let confrontation be passionate, but civilised; let controversial opinions be expressed with clarity, if necessary with forcefulness, but with an open mind and willingness to understand the viewpoints of others.
Otherwise nothing useful will be achieved and, instead of debate, we shall descend to the level of vulgar slanging matches.
I am sad to see uncivilised attitudes gaining ground in the profession we love, and I would invite everyone concerned to fight against such trends.
When they prevail, they rob our work of serenity and balance, and we all suffer.
Obviously one does not want to get involved in discussing individual cases, but I must make one exception and express the perplexity with which I read such drastically negative judgements on Zanardi's work at Parma.
When I examined the statues at the Antelami exhibition in 1990, I had no sense that they had been cleaned excessively.
I was glad to find the original material in what I took to be splendid condition, still clearly bearing the marks of the sculptor's chisel.
The stone (not a marble, but some kind of limestone) looked just as one would expect after an operation to remove dirt and accumulated grime, and I do not see why this aspect of the work should give rise to so much concern.
Unless restorers are completely incompetent or unscrupulous, they are in any case unlikely to remove actual stone from a sculpture in sound structural condition while cleaning it.
Photographs, of course, can be used to prove just about anything, but those that have been published would seem strongly to confirm that there was no damage to the stone, and that judgements to the contrary are simply unfounded.
The lesson that emerges from this affair is surely that more than ever before, there is a pressing need for complete openness and accountability when restoration work is undertaken.
Bodies commissioning such work (Soprintendenze, local authorities) must take steps to inform the public of what is being done and how, and to facilitate access to the site.
When this is current practice it will be far more difficult for someone to take the stage once the work is finished and start making pronouncements of dubious value.
Cultural leadership
‘Art has become a reflection of the rents in the very idea of a common culture’
A former member of the NEA analyses the ideological malaise behind the present crisis in US government funding of the arts
NEW YORK.
This year's Republican Party primary elections mark the first time that the controversies of the past three years over the National Endowment for the Arts, the federal agency charged with arts support, have entered the realm of American presidential politics.
After his strong showing in the February New Hampshire primary, Patrick Buchanan, President Bush's very conservative challenger, made it clear that he will use the NEA and its avant-garde grants as an issue as the primaries wend their way across the nation in the coming months.
The immediate result of the New Hampshire election Buchanan got almost 40% of the vote was therefore the resignation three days later of NEA Chairman John Frohnmayer, a politically well-connected Oregon lawyer with what turned out to be surprisingly little political skill.
Frohnmayer had been nominated by Bush in the summer of 1989, a few months after the NEA controversy began with the popular outcry against its indirect support for ‘Piss Christ’, Andrea Serrano's photograph of a plastic crucifix submerged in a container of urine.
A short time after the Serrano affair, the Corcoran Gallery in Washington, D.C., cancelled ‘The Perfect Moment’, an NEA-supported showing of the photographs of Robert Mapplethorpe containing, inter alia, detailed representations of homoerotic and sado-masochistic activities.
The NEA continued to make the headlines with equally controversial grants, including a panel-proposed award, later rejected by Frohnmayer, to performance-artist Karen Finley, who in one of her acts smears her scantily-clad body with chocolate to symbolise man's inhumanity to woman.
Last spring, the NEA was roundly criticised for its support of ‘Poison’, a film with a strong homosexual content.
Just now it has been condemned for supporting Queer City, a collection of works by ‘noted gay writers in New York City’(this phrase is Chairman Frohnmayer's own).
The response from political conservatives in general and the religious right in particular to these goings-on at the hitherto (almost) sacrosanct NEA has been unvaryingly hostile.
Amidst all the conservative demands for legislative restrictions on what the agency might support, President Bush selected Frohnmayer as the new NEA chairman to replace the Reagan-appointee Frank Hodsoll, who had wisely departed some months earlier for the more peaceful climes of a top job at the Office of Management and Budget, the White House department concerned with enforcing its fiscal policies on an often recalcitrant federal establishment.
From the beginning, Frohnmayer seemed to be trying to please the avant-garde artistic community while at the same time proclaiming his own high moral stance he actually is the possessor of a degree in Christian ethics from the University of Chicago.
As the months of his NEA tenure lengthened into years, he sometimes reversed his positions, and even his supporters found it difficult to know just which problematic grants he would end up supporting, and which he would finally reject.
In any case, the language coming from the Chairman's office was usually that of pure political correctness, with many attacks on censorship and on what he saw as the benighted enemies of art.
But Frohnmayer seemed to have the President's confidence, and until Buchanan's remarkably strong showing against Bush in the New Hampshire primary, his position had seemed reasonably secure.
After New Hampshire, however, Frohnmayer had to go, and despite all the publicity surrounding his departure, it is remarkable how few arts advocates have protested, and how many have seemed to heave a quiet sigh of relief.
It goes without saying that Frohnmayer's resignation has solved nothing.
The chief problems of the NEA the attempt to please every constituency, the absence of firm administrative control, an ossified panel system rife with artists and administrators sitting in judgment on each other 's grants, even if not on their own, and above all, the lack of a clearly articulated policy as to what should be supported remain, and will surely bedevil anyone brought in to run the agency.
I spent the years from 1983 to 1988 as a member of the National Council on the Arts, the NEA's advisory board; it was the Council's task to vote on every grant, though in the end the law required the final decision in each case to be made by the Chairman.
In my time which coincided with Frank Hodsoll's two terms as Chairman the agency ran smoothly, and few grants of a clearly scabrous nature ever managed to make it up from the panels, past the Chairman's gimlet eye, to the Council.
It must be said, too, that the early and middle 1980s, at least as compared to the late 1980s and the early 1990s, were a remarkably placid time, without the edge brought to American cultural and artistic life by demands for sexual and gender liberation and by AIDS-induced desperation.
Yet even in those halcyon days the signs of trouble were there for those with the will to see them: the multi-media and multi-disciplinary avant-gardes were beginning to show up every NEA programme area; the clamour for the funding of life-styles rather than art as traditionally defined was becoming louder, and the accepted definitions of art and the arts were everywhere coming under attack in grant applications as well as in panels.
My own favourite example of this attack, and the contradictions that came with it, was that as Council members we were asked both to take pride in an NEA-sponsored and adulatory film about the graffiti that were then disfiguring the New York City subway system, and to support lavishly the great American museums whose distinguished collections were (and remain) a standing rebuke to the so-called experimental art of which graffiti were then such a beguiling component.
That was fun, compared to what is going on now at the NEA.
The current problems of the NEA are not simply, or even mainly, the intellectual, aesthetic and administrative problems I have referred to earlier.
The NEA is now the arena in which it is possible to view in microcosm the unglueing of American social life.
Art, so far from being a unifying force in the nation, has become a reflection of the rents in the very idea of a common culture.
Ethnic and sexual minorities, along with feminists and racial separatists, have discovered that art is not just a means of expression, but also a means of proclamation and legitimisation.
Because in American life there is now no social agreement on the fundamentals of behaviour and morality, there is now equally no consensus on the fundamentals of the art that in the past has sprung from just such social agreement.
The basic and sorry fact about the grants with which Frohnmayer had so much difficulty was that they expressed not only the unity of American life, but the fissures within it.
What the NEA and Frohnmayer's troubles have made clear is that only leadership, intelligent, proud and committed, can explain to the American people what great art, validated by time and genius, can bring to heal a split society.
Curiously, in being less than art, the new ‘cutting-edge’ art has turned out to be more than art.
It would be wrong, as we accept the fact of this message, to accept its content.
The NEA awaits leadership, as does America.
Archaeology and Conservation
Sculpture conservation
‘There is little hope that the Taj will survive without considerable damage to its surface’
A leading stone conservator describes the decay he has observed over just ten years
LONDON.
Concern at the effect of atmospheric pollution on the Taj Mahal is rising as the marble displays increasingly visible signs of erosion and yellowing.
A tonne of sulphur dioxide is now pumped into the atmosphere every day by a government-owned oil refinery at Mathura, less than thirty miles from Agra, while traffic fumes encircle the Taj every day.
There are 179 legally registered iron foundries nearby and, during the winter, smoke from the fires of Agra's six million inhabitants adds to the acid content of the air.
Additional problems are created by the heaviness of the monsoon rains which not only wash the sulphur dioxide and oxides of nitrogen out of the air and over the marble but further erode any weaknesses in the stone.
The former head of stone and sculpture conservation at the Victoria and Albert Museum has been aware of the problems since a visit he made to Agra in 1985.
At the time he made a report to the then Keeper of the Indian Section, Robert Skelton, who passed it on to the Indian authorities.
My first visit to the Taj Mahal was in 1975.
As a conservator in Europe, involved with the treatment of stone and marble affected by the ravages of twentieth-century pollution, I was delighted when I saw the great marble buildings at Agra seemingly unaffected by such problems.
Having examined the marble buildings of Rome and Athens, it was refreshing to see white marble outdoors still bearing some resemblance to its original seventeenth-century appearance.
Sadly, when I returned to India in 1985, I arrived at Delhi airport in a thick smog.
I was told that the wind was blowing in a different direction that day and that this smog (caused by the local power station) always occurred when this happened.
When I moved on to Agra I found that the appearance of the buildings there had changed noticeably.
In those parts of the buildings that were protected against the rains a yellow film, like nicotine staining, had built up on the marble.
This staining on marble is the result of dry deposition from sulphur dioxide gases produced by the burning of fossil fuels.
Where this gas had combined with the monsoon rains it had produced weak solutions of sulphuric acid and these had etched the exposed architectural surfaces to a dead white.
Although this damage was noticeable on most of the buildings in Agra, it was having the most dramatic effect on the Taj Mahal.
The building was originally constructed as a brick core which was then covered with thin slabs of marble tied to the brick by means of ferrous cramps.
The combination of movement in the brick core, ingress of moisture and the corrosion of iron cramps has produced numerous cracks in the marble skin which have further weakened the structure.
The illustration shows the devastating effect on the marble produced by structural movement and the ingress of acid rain.
The white Makrana marble of which the Taj is built is of a different structure from the Carrara marble of Italy with which we are more familiar.
It is composed of large crystals, like bath salts, whereas Carrara is formed of very small crystals, like fine sugar.
This means that instead of powdering as Carrara does when eroded by pollution, Makrana marble breaks down in clusters, producing ugly craters.
As pollution in India is set to rise with the growing pace of industrialisation and the increasing ownership of motor cars there is little hope that the Taj will survive without considerable damage to its surface and a need for continuous restoration.
Pollution is no longer simply a product of local industry; it often moves in continental drifts as weather patterns change.
Clearly the only way to preserve the Taj and the other buildings at Agra is to reduce pollution significantly.
However, to say this to a country which is only just beginning to enjoy the benefits of industrialisation is not easy.
The worst that could happen is for someone to suggest a ‘magic’ solution.
Those of us who have looked at the development of treatments for decaying stone during the past twenty years have had to learn the lesson that there are no ‘magic’ solutions.
However brilliant our modern technology may seem, the best way to care for the Taj is to monitor its behaviour, try to reduce pollution and develop a team of conservators and craftsmen who can care for the building, carrying out maintenance and repair where necessary but not to do anything that pretends to be final.
Florence
Piazza della Signoria paved with the bodies of arts administrators
Judge sentences the officials responsible for the new and insensitive surfacing of the Piazza della Signoria
FLORENCE.
The extraordinary court case in which the chief officers of the Florentine Soprintendenza and others were accused of causing damage to the national heritage by laying new paving in the Piazza della Signoria ended on 21 February with suspended sentences distributed all round.
All the defendants, with the exception of Giorgio Bonsanti, Soprintendente at the Opificio delle Pietre Dure, and Otello Conti, the director of the company contracted to lay the new paving, were found guilty of violating the law which makes provision for ‘damage to national archaeological and artistic heritage’(Article 733 of the Penal Code).
The Judge declared that the defendants had behaved negligently and without due concern for the preservation of the Piazza.
The suspended sentences are as follows: one month for Antonio Paolucci, the Florentine Soprintendente and two months for his deputy, Paolo Mazzoni, as well as for Francesco Sisinni, Director-General at the Ministry of Cultural Heritage, Emma Micheletti, a Ministry inspector who has now tended her resignation, Angelo Cavani, the former Soprintendente for the architectural heritage and Paolo d'Elia, chief engineer of Florence City Council.
Apart from these functionaries, the politician Paolo Cappelletto, former chair of the building committee of Florence Council has also received a two-month sentence.
The recent paving of the Piazza della Signoria was undertaken by the City Council with the advice and support of the relevant heritage authorities and replaced the paving laid by the Grand Duke of Tuscany, Ferdinand III, in the late 1790s.
Ferdinand's paving, in its turn, had replaced the fourteenth-century brick floor which can be seen in Renaissance painted views of the Piazza and which many feel should have been brought back.
A committee has now been set up to lobby for the restoration of the medieval paving and an invitation has been issued to the public to show its support by sponsoring a brick at L10,000 a time (see The Art Newspaper No. 16, March 1992, p. 13).
Despite the sentencing it is not entirely clear whether the accusation of ‘bad restoration’ relates to the possible damage which may have been inflicted on the original paving of the Piazza or to the outcome of the entire campaign.
Italy is of course the country where anything is possible, but legitimate concern has been expressed at the way in which the young Florentine judge has seen fit to take upon herself a role which properly belongs to the competent institutional authorities that of evaluating the appropriateness and the implementation of a particular restoration project.
Appeals will surely ensue but in the meantime we may well sympathise with those Soprintendenze who feel tempted to put all restoration work on hold in the fear that in carrying out their proper duties they may find themselves being sentenced as criminals.
London
Poor Pompeii
A touring computer exhibition distracts from the site's desperate underfunding
LONDON.
April 1 sees the arrival at the Accademia Italiana of an exhibition of artefacts from Pompeii that has already toured Houston, New York and Malmö.
Organised by the Italian Ministero per i Beni Culturali, the Soprintendenza Archeologica of Pompeii and IBM, the aim of ‘Rediscovering Pompeii’ is not to make money for the deplorably underfunded administration of Pompeii itself.
Rather it has the magnanimous ambition of offering the public a hands-on experience of the recent computerisation of all the data relating to the excavations.
Twelve interactive computer terminals allow visitors to take an ‘electronic walk’ through Pompeii's forum, theatres, amphitheatre, villas and baths, seeing them from various perspectives.
There will be rotating images on screen of some of the exhibits and a time-lapse sequence of the Vesuvian eruption.
Touching the image of a jug on the screen will provide information about the object itself as well as background information on Roman food and eating habits, banquets and recipes.
The programmes on the computers, also accessible to visitors to Pompeii itself in the small museum at Boscoreale, are the culmination of what is known as the Neapolis project.
In 1986 the Italian government initiated an extensive programme for the evaluation and recovery of Italy's cultural and artistic heritage, involving public and private enterprises and using the most advanced technology available.
IBM and Fiat Engineering were invited to participate and in 1987 the interdisciplinary Neapolis project was set up to focus on the vast archaeological site of Pompeii.
Experts in archaeology, cartography, architecture, art history and anthropology were brought together to ‘electronically preserve’ and analyse the excavated remains.
Despite being the most visited archaeological site in Europe with 1.4 million visitors annually, rising to a probable 2 million if non-ticket buyers are included the Soprintendenza that administers Pompeii only receives around £700,000 ($1.2 million) per annum from central government to spend on the fabric of the site.
Damage from the earthquake of 1988, which weakened an enormous number of the standing buildings, has still not been repaired.
Large numbers of villas are closed, side streets are roped off and access to the site is considerably restricted compared to the situation before the earthquake.
Professor Baldassare Conticello, the Soprintendente, estimates that at this rate it will take two generations before the whole of Pompeii is once more in a stable condition.
Excavation work has been suspended except for intensive investigation of the Casa degli Amanti Castati in the Insula of Menander.
There, botanical analysis of the carbonised seeds and charred remains of thin wooden fencing found in the soil has allowed the garden of the interior courtyard to be reconstructed.
Increasingly, it is this type of study, rather than more expensive excavation, which is allowing new discoveries to be made at Pompeii.
Objects brought to light in previous excavations and now in the small museum in the middle of the site will also be on show in the exhibition.
Among them are domestic objects such as colanders, pruning hooks, needles, dice, and bowls still containing olives, barley and figs.
The transparent epoxy resin cast of the body of a young woman known as ‘the Lady from Oplontis’ reveals her bracelet and purse holding coins, rings and gems.
Central to the visual display will be the reconstruction of a room with wall paintings representing idealised garden scenes.
The exhibition closes on 21 June.
Florence
Boboli Gardens declared a museum
Only $25,000 p.a. at present to care for great Renaissance garden
FLORENCE.
The traditionally parsimonious Florentines, always depressed by the appearance of the Boboli Gardens, are furious about the forthcoming entry charge (L2000 is rumoured as likely) in spite of vaunted annual concessions for residents.
Italy's Ministero per i Beni Culturali and the Comune of Florence has announced that the celebrated hillside gardens of Boboli which frame the Pitti Palace are to become ‘verde pubblico’ and ‘spazio museale’.
Within this proposed intervention, that will give the works of art contained in the gardens the status of museum objects, may lie very positive elements, provided Disneyland is firmly held at bay.
The gardens, designed by Bernardo Buontalenti and il Tribolo for Cosimo de' Medici and Eleonora di Toledo, are in a run-down state.
Recently, there has been a flood of scholarly publications on the gardens,(centred around the 1989 conference on the theme financed by the Cassa di Risparmio of Florence).
Domenico Valentino, Florence's relevant Soprintendente for such matters says, ‘If we go on like this, we'll end up with a huge mass of literature relating to Boboli, but lose the gardens themselves’.
With only nine gardeners, and a derisory annual budget of L30 million (£14,000; $24,300) this seems scarcely surprising.
Until sufficient funds are available and Boboli's status is more clearly defined, the maintenance of the 120 Renaissance and post-Renaissance sculptures and fifty-five antique sculptures, in addition to several garden buildings and the vast array of plants, will remain piecemeal.
With violent polemics about sculpture conservation raging throughout Italy, there is a strong case for all Boboli's statuary being substituted by copies.
Boboli is only one of several historic gardens in or close to Florence which are in a lamentable state of maintenance: these include the Giardino dei Semplici, that of the Villa Medicea at Castello, and Pratolino, which is being restored.
Great Florentine private gardens such as the Giardino Corsini sul Prato and the Parco Torrigiani are still maintained without state funding.
Computer simulates travel knocks
WASHINGTON.
A computer programme designed to ensure perfect  transportation conditions for works of art has been devised by an art restorer at the Laboratory of Analytical Restoration at the Smithsonian Institute, Washington.
Marion Mecklenburg's programme, named Ansys, determines the effects that shock, vibration, temperature change or hygrometric levels can have on each component of the object.
Using techniques developed in the aeronautics industry it can assess the complex structure of particles applied to canvas, and by reconstituting the tensions that a painting suffers in each area can simulate an image of the canvas when attacked by different elements.
A similar programme for sculpture should soon be available.
Arundel Marble in the singular for the Ashmolean
OXFORD.
Many important pieces of Graeco-Roman sculpture from the collection of Thomas Howard, Earl of Arundel (1585–1646) were presented to Oxford University by the Howard family the ‘Arundel Marbles’.
Other pieces were variously dispersed, but two were recognised recently by Denys Haynes,(then of the British Museum), at Fawley Court, Henley-on-Thames, and are now in the Ashmolean.
To mark the display of Graeco-Roman sculptures in the Museum's Randolph Gallery (funded by the former head of the Metropolitan Museum's Antiquities Department, Dr Dietrich, and Mrs Joyce von Bothmer), the Museum has now purchased a fragmentary circular marble altar relief probably of the late fifth century BC.
Around 1619, the fragment had been given, along with other marbles by the Earl of Arundel's grandson, the Duke of Norfolk, to a former family servant.
Giambologna's Fata Morgana setting to be restored?
BAGNO A RIPOLI (FLORENCE).
The attention drawn to Giambologna's marble ‘Fata Morgana’ sold at Christie's London on 13 September 1989 appears to have hastened the recreation of the sculpture's original setting on a hillside outside Florence.
A committee is to tackle the restoration of the small grotto constructed in the sixteenth century in the grounds of the villa celebrated in Borghini's treatise, Il Riposo.
In spite of the local Comune's siting of a modern aqueduct through the grounds of the former villa,(leaving the oddity of a twentieth-century industrial ruin within a sixteenth-century one) a grotto, three fountain niches with inscriptions, and a tabernacle formerly frescoed by Allori all survive.
Extensively studied by several scholars, the restoration will be in the hands of the Soprintendenza ai Beni Architettonici and Florence University under the architect Vincenzo Vaccaro.
Estimated costs will be L200 million (£92,464; $161,812).
Despite the fresco's disintegration, the condition of the grotto is not disastrous, and it appears that the Soprintendenza hopes to instal a marble copy of Giambologna's Venus-like figure when the restoration is complete.
Italy acquires a second government-recognised conservation school
FLORENCE.
Earlier this year, the Italian Chamber of Deputies' Cultural Commission approved in outline the regulations for the new Restoration School of the Opificio delle Pietre Dure.
The legislation marks a major achievement for the school whose courses have been suspended since 1987 due to bureaucratic problems caused by a lack of legal status.
It is also a major achievement for the Director of the Opificio, Giorgio Bonsanti who has campaigned for this since his appointment in1988.
The school will open its doors in January of 1993, and in the meantime regulations will be drawn up governing internal administration, application procedures, and criteria for the selection of teachers.
This will be done in collaboration with the other major government-recognised school in Italy, the Scuola del Istituto Centrale del Restauro in Rome.
The Opificio courses will last for three years plus one ‘finishing’ year, with specialisations in all fields of restoration, including paintings; sculpture; metalwork; frescoes; textiles; and terracotta.
The school's new status will also allow the staff of the Opificio, some of whom are still classed as operai, or workmen, to acquire new qualifications.
Of the fifteen places that will be open to students every year, two or three will be reserved for foreign students.
Books
Impressionism
Wildenstein's Monet catalogue now complete
Five-volume project ends with the works on paper
With the publication of the fifth and final volume of his catalogue of Monet's life and art, Daniel Wildenstein and his family foundation, now to be known as the Wildenstein Institute, has brought to completion the mighty project which has occupied his attention for more than fifty years.
So exhaustive has been his research, and its presentation in the catalogue, that it is difficult to imagine any circumstances in which this great work of reference can be surpassed for many generations of scholars.
It is also an indispensable tool in the art market: no Japanese will contemplate buying a Monet unless it is in the Wildenstein catalogue.
The first four volumes, published between 1974 and 1985, dealt with Monet's long career chronologically and listed and illustrated nearly 2000 paintings, culminating in the series of canvases which the artist prepared for installation in the Orangerie.
The new volume ties that information through its comprehensive indices, but also serves as a catalogue of Monet's drawings, sketchbooks, pastels, caricatures and curiosities, which include three tapestries woven, with his approval, from his designs, and fragments of pictures which appear to have survived the ruthless pruning which he inflicted on works of insufficient merit.
Illustrating twenty-six such fragments which have crept onto the art market in recent years, Wildenstein states that they were preserved against Monet's instructions and drily declares that they have no artistic worth.
He refuses to provide them with entries or numbers in his catalogue.
If the artistic information of the new volume is less spectacular than the dazzling material which filled the previous volumes, it carries, nevertheless, much historical interest.
Two of the sketchbooks, dating from 1856 and comprising, in total, forty-seven pages of careful studies of houses, landscape and sailing boats in and near Le Havre, are the earliest record of Monet's art.
Other sketchbooks contain swift pencil notations which correspond to oil paintings, although it is not entirely clear what function they served and whether Monet consulted them at any later stage in the evolution of his compositions.
His pastels, of which Wildenstein lists 109 mostly undated sheets, show that, even if he did not match the delicacy of Monet or the textural subtlety of Degas, Monet could, on occasions, use the medium in an exciting way.
The series which he executed of the River Thames in January and February 1901 is particularly successful in this regard and stands comparison with his related oil paintings of the same subject.
These sections are preceded by a supplement listing sixty-one canvases which have come to Wildenstein's notice in recent years, often as discoveries in the salerooms.
It is a nice reward from a trade which will have been one of the leading beneficiaries of his published research.
None of these pictures constitutes a really important recovery but the list includes work of the calibre of a Honfleur harbour subject which had belonged to Mary Cassatt's brother and which was sold by one of his descendants at Christies in New York in November 1991 (Lot 26).
A tantalisingly short chapter, merely the basis, as Wildenstein recognises, for further study, introduces Monet as a collector of works by Renoir, Cézanne, Berthe Morisot and other contemporaries.
More than one-third of the new volume is filled by various indices which must make Monet the most fully cross-referenced of artists.
A list of exhibitions from 1858 to 1990 includes the useful feature of identifying which works were shown by exhibition catalogue number and by their number in Wildenstein's own catalogue.
For readers seeking an even more comprehensive portrait, there is a thirty-three page bibliography.
ArtScribble
Ouch!
The Middle Ages were punctuated by a series of earlier revivals usually centred round courts like those of Charlemagne and Frederick II.
They were preludes to the true Renaissance and its humanism.
The distinctive sensitivity towards the antique that occurred in Italy is understandable because even today wherever one walks one is bombarded by fragments of ancient sculpture, remains of buildings and inscriptions, reminders of Rome's grandeur.
Hiram Powers in America and Italy
Hiram Powers is not only a major monograph on one of America's most significant artists of the nineteenth century, but also a catalogue of more than 200 portraits of members of international society who found themselves in Florence from the 1840s until the 1860s.
These tourists ordered not only busts of themselves but replicas and versions of the artist's fourteen or so separate ideal works including: ‘Eve Tempted’(1839–42); the ‘Greek Slave’(1841–1843); ‘Proserpine’(1843; 1844–49); ‘America’(1848–9) and ‘California’(1850).
His ‘Greek Slave’ is one of the most important works in American sculpture.
Powers, primarily self-trained as a sculptor, was born into a farm family in Woodstock, Vermont and settled in Cincinnati, Ohio in 1819.
Through the auspices of several influential mentors, his career was launched in Washington in 1835-6 where he modelled, among others, ‘Andrew Jackson’ and ‘John Calhoun’.
However it was in Florence, where he moved in the autumn of 1837, that his reputation was made.
Part of his success was due to the spectacular tour of the ‘Greek Slave’ which began in London in 1845 and subsequently toured the American cities as well as the famous London Crystal Palace Exhibition in 1851.
The ‘Greek Slave’ drew world attention to America for being able to produce an artist capable of equalling and even bettering his international rivals.
The saga for Richard Wunder began in 1967 when he was in Florence finalising the arrangements for the purchase of the Powers' studio and archives.
These had been kept intact for almost a century by Louisa Greenough Powers Ibbotson and her descendants.
The letters and casts are now in the National Museum of American Art, Smithsonian Institution, Washington, where Wunder was a Director at the time.
The resources of Powers' archives, which have been used in the biography, in addition to the author's extensive photographic record of the art works, and the detailed entries for each work, make these volumes an indispensable tool in American history and art.
A catalogue of stolen art from Venetian churches
Piero Pazzi, Curator of the Basilica of Santa Maria Gloriosa dei Frari and the silver department of the Museo Diocesano, Venice, has produced a catalogue of 224 stolen, lost or damaged works of art originating from Venice or from the Triveneto (here defined to encompass the area once covered by the Republic of Venice and including Bergamo, Brescia and Crema).
Each artefact is documented, with details of place of origin, date, artist, size, date it was stolen and a black and white illustration.
Most of the items are church ornaments, but there are also paintings and sculptures.
Free copies of the book are to be issued to parish priests throughout the region and it includes an appendix with details of the relevant articles of Italian law which will assist them in recovering their lost items.
In his introduction Piero Pazzi discusses some of the more piquant examples: in the aftermath of the Second Vatican Council well-meaning but misguided parish priests broke up their own collections to help the poor.
The liturgical silver and the fourteenth-century Relic of the Passion from San Giacomo dell'Orio, together with the 5,000 relics housed in the church of San Tomà were lost in this way, as were the altar and other church furnishings from San Giovanni Evangelista.
More generally Pazzi's introduction calls down fire and brimstone on those who damage works of art or try to appropriate them for their own collections.
The book makes poignant reading: volume 2 is in preparation.
1991 Minda de Gunzburg and ASDA Prizes
PARIS.
The $25,000 Minda de Gunzburg Prize has been awarded to the authors of the exhibition catalogue Perspectives: Saenredam and the Architectural Painters of the 17th Century, by Jeroen Giltaij, Guido Jansen and others.
This exhibition was held at the Museum Boymans-van Beuningen, Rotterdam, in 1991, and the catalogue offers the most comprehensive study to date of Dutch architectural painting by both major and minor artists from Saenredam and Emanuel de Witte to Gerard Houckgeest.
It also presents fresh material on the function, patronage and iconography of this area of painting.
The ASDA Prize of $10,000 was awarded to Jiri Svestka, Tomas Vlcek and others, authors of the exhibition catalogue accompanying ‘1909–1925 Kubismus in Prag’ held at the Kunstverein für die Rheinlände und Westfalen in 1991, and at the National Gallery in Prague in 1991–92.
This exhibition and its catalogue were the first to show the whole spectrum of Czech Cubism's attempts to create a universal style in literature, music, theatre and cinema as much as in the visual arts.
Relations with France, and the Prague-Vienna-Berlin axis are examined, as are the activities of the collector Vincenc Kramar and the many important Prague exhibitions between 1911 and 1922.
The distinguished international jury included Sydney J. Freedberg, Michel Laclotte, Pierre Rosenberg, Jennifer Montagu and Seymour Slive.
Professor Carlo Bertelli will replace Neil MacGregor on the jury for 1992.
Russian libraries are selling books
ST PETERSBURG.
Alarm-bells are sounding for Russian book dealers.
Although it is common knowledge that the authorities sold a great many works of art from Russian museums to foreign buyers during the 1920s and 1930s, it is rather less well-known that the book reserves of Russian libraries were similarly violated.
This is how the world-famous Codex Sinaiticus, a gift to Tsar Alexander III and one of the oldest known Greek bibles, turned up outside the country.
The pride of Russia's manuscript collection, it was legally acquired in 1933 for £100,000 by the British Museum.
The private Bodmer collection in Geneva is now the home of what was the only surviving Russian example of the 1455 Gutenburg Bible, bought for the Imperial library in the middle of the last century.
One of the best collections of Russian books outside the country, now housed in Harvard University library, is made up of books from libraries of the Tsarist country estates, often with the author's dedicatory inscription.
In spite of a change in political outlook, the ravaging of national book treasures did not stop in the post-war era.
Books were frequently part of ‘non-monetary’ exchanges.
The chronic shortage of currency for the acquisition of contemporary foreign publications has been cited as justification.
Izvestia has recently devoted an article to this subject and to the current state of affairs, entitled ‘Foreign companies get their hands on Russia's national library treasures’.
The piece was written by two of St Petersburg's biggest specialist book dealers, Alexander Garfunkel and Nikolai Nikolayev.
They chronicle current attempts to continue what they see as an amoral practice.
Enterprising officials resort to all sorts of tricks to obtain unusual books to sell or exchange for foreign rarities.
The writers report that several such attempts were made by the management of the oldest national book archive in Russia, the Academy of Sciences Library in St Petersburg.
The books concerned were duplicate copies of eighteenth- and early nineteenth-century books, even though not all of Russia's principal libraries contained copies of these books.
Intervention by the library committee has prevented the sales for the time being but it will be difficult to monitor such activities in the long term.
Applications invited for the Banister Fletcher Awards for publications on architecture
LONDON.
The British Architectural Library is inviting nominations for the annual Sir Bannister Fletcher Awards of the Authors' Club for the best book published on architecture or the fine arts during 1991.
The prospective author must be British or resident in Britain and the book must have been published by a British publisher or a publisher with a British branch.
Previous winners have included Nikolaus Pevsner, John Harris, Michael Levey and, in 1990, Eileen Harris with Nicholas Savage.
Nominations for the prize (awarded at the end of October) should be sent by 1 May to the British Architectural Library, RIBA, 66 Portland Place, London WIN 4AD.
The Art Market
London
Star Old Masters at Christie's
Besides Holbein, a Canaletto, Rembrandt and Zoffany from historic British collections
LONDON.
Although there now appears to be some question of the Holbein being withdrawn, on Wednesday 15 April Christie's hope that the three star pictures of their Old Masters sale will be the now-notorious Holbein, Canaletto's ‘The Old Horse Guards, London, from St James's Park’ and Rembrandt's ‘Daniel and Cyrus before the idol of Bel’.
All come from private vendors.
Five days previously, on 10 April, they hope to sell another private possession, the Sutherland family's ‘Colonel Mordaunt's Cock Fight at Lucknow’ by Zoffany, painted for Warren Hastings.
The estimates for these first three pictures (Canaletto and Rembrandt, upwards of £5 million, Holbein upwards of £15 million) leave all the other pictures in the sale far behind.
A Salvator Rosa ‘Self portrait’ and Goltzius ‘Crucifixion’trail behind with estimates of £200–300,000, followed by a Niccolò di Tommaso triptych at £150–250,000, and a small Claude ‘Twilight Landscape’at £80–120,000.
Has there been a connection between the appearance of these outstanding pictures for auction and the possibility of government legislation to introduce listing of masterpieces to check their export from the U.K.?
Or is this merely an unexpectedly concentrated pay-off for Christie's long-standing (since 1766) rapport with the oldest and grandest British families?
The Canaletto comes from the Harris Family Trust.
It is the largest work of his English period and shows the Old Horse Guards building shortly prior to its demolition in 1749–50.
Christie's expects it to establish a new record price for his work.
‘The Holbein case’ has undoubtedly taken the focus off the Canaletto and Zoffany, which are arguably also strong candidates for British national collections.
Canaletto views of London of this quality are as rare as the Holbein.
The painting was offered to the National Gallery, who turned it down but did not then offer it on to either the Tate or another likely candidate, the National Gallery of Scotland.
The Tate had already expressed interest in the work.
The Zoffany was offered to the Tate, who want it but all of whose energies are at present devoted to acquiring another work by Zoffany, the Willoughby de Broke ‘Family at Breakfast’.
The Rembrandt is the property of Peregrine Eliot, Ninth Earl of St Germans.
Complete with provenance reaching back to the artist's lifetime, and in the present owner's family since 1690, this painting's attribution to Rembrandt has never been questioned.
The picture-seller's scourge of the moment, the Rembrandt Research Project, describes it as ‘a very well preserved and authentic work, reliably signed and dated 1633’.
At the time of going to press, behind-the-scenes negotiations were taking place between the National Gallery and the Marquess of Cholmondeley in the hope that a last-ditch solution could be found.
London
Sale of historic armoury may stimulate the market
First part of the Schloss Dyck Gewehrkammer to be sold on 15 April
LONDON.
Christie's on 15 April will be offering the first part of one of the most famous private armouries (or Gewehrkammer) to remain in Germany.
It was formed over the seventeenth to the nineteenth centuries by the Princes zu Salm-Reifferscheidt-Dyck, and displayed at Schloss Dyck, their picturesque Rhineland ‘water-castle’ in the north-west of the country near Düsseldorf.
This is an exciting moment for museum curators and collectors of antique firearms.
The salerooms have not seen such a fine private collection sold since the great suite of sales at Sotheby's in the 1970s (the William Goodwin Renwick collection from America, arms released from the Saxon Royal Armouries at Dresden, and the smaller but comparable Gewehrkammer of the Counts von Giech).
Christie's are hoping that this will provide a much needed fillip to the subject.
The majority of German castles had their own private armouries, handed down over generations, which contained sporting weapons for the use of the family, their retainers and their guests.
Very few remain intact today, having been dispersed mainly between the wars.
However, one pair of Italian wheel-lock pistols, now in a collection in America, is all that has been allowed to leave Schloss Dyck until now.
Otherwise it is as complete as it was over a century ago, with no less than 700 lots being offered for sale in two parts.
The sale catalogue illustrates a fascinating photograph of the 1877 Historismus installation of the collection by the reigning prince, Altgraf Alfred (1811–88).
Museologically laid out in a grand salon with painted ceiling, Renaissance-style fireplace and chairs, the guns are seen to line the walls in racks, with trophies of stags' heads above.
Below the dado rails hang crossed pairs of pistols, the rest of the room furnished with punt guns on swivels, hunting flags, bear rugs and ornate glass-topped tables to show the more precious pieces.
The armoury was founded by Altgraf Ernst Salentin (1621–84) who inherited and began restoring the castle in 1645 following the damage of the Thirty Years War.
However, the bulk of it was brought together by his son, Franz-Ernst (1659–1727) and, in turn, the latter's great-grand-son, Josef (1773–1861).
Many of the grandest names in European gunmaking are represented including the so-called ‘Meister der Tierkopfranke’, Armand Bongarde of Düsseldorf, Hieronymous Borstorffer of Munich, Moritz of Kassel, Desgranges of Paris, Philippe de Sellier of Liège, and Jan Flock of Utrecht.
There are a number of pieces of museum quality including a pair of mid-seventeenth century Swiss flintlock pistols attributed to Felix Werder of Zurich, with his characteristic gilt-brass barrels and butt caps.
This pair is especially rare being the maker's only known double-barrelled pistols (est. in excess of £50,000).
A wheel-lock rifle of circa 1680 is signed by the ivory sculptor-gunstocker Johann Michael Maucher of Schwäbisch-Gmund; although well represented in museums, Maucher pieces make rare appearances at auction.
Overlaid with delicately carved plaques of high and low relief ivory and inlaid with engraved mother-of-pearl, this gun crosses the boundary between a scientific instrument and a work of art (est. in excess of £60,000).
The most eccentric gun must be the wheel-lock rifle with its barrel encased in glass.
Signed and dated 1688, it is extraordinarily rare, especially in such good condition; there is another example by the same maker, Johann Gsell, but that one, unsurprisingly, retains only a fragment of original glass,(est. £15–20,000; part II of sale).
There will be numerous less expensive pieces for collectors, including the plainer wheel-locks, and also an intriguing group of guns by little known local makers, retained as Court gunsmiths by the family well into the nineteenth century (est. ranging from £500–15,000).
At the time of the Sotheby sales in the 1970s, there was an active group of private collectors.
There has been a dearth of fresh material on offer at auction since and the fine things have tended to change hands privately.
In addition, the number of convincing fakes and restored pieces in circulation have made new collectors wary.
With Schloss Dyck, the provenance is impeccable; each weapon has its 1906 catalogue inventory number and many have the family stamp of two addorsed salmon (Salm).
The only drawback, in a subject where condition is paramount, is that a number have suffered from over-zealous cleaning by the resident armourers.
However, the strippings and restorations are recorded in dated pencilled notes on stocks or in butt-traps which helps recreate a gun's personal history.
Perhaps the main question is whether the market in its present state can absorb such a wealth of material over such a short period.
The second sale is planned for later this year.
New York
Dealers v. artists in the re-sale royalty debate
US Copyright Office holds second hearing to gather opinions over droit de suite
NEW YORK.
On 6 March the Copyright Office conducted the second of two hearings to gather testimony for the recommendations it will eventually make to Congress on artists' re-sale royalties.
The first hearing was held on 23 January in San Francisco.
Currently the United States does not have a droit de suite, a law that mandates that artists receive a percentage of the price of a work each time it changes hands.
(The state of California, however, has had its own such law for fifteen years, which awards an artist a 5% royalty on the appreciated value of a work.)
Proposals for an American droit de suite seek resale royalties of around 5%, paid by the seller of a work of art on the appreciated value of that work (for European practice, see p. 10).
Support for the enactment of a law creating resale rights for visual artists is strong, however, not just among artists but also among US legislators involved in arts policy at the national level.
Debate among those legislators will begin this summer or autumn, once a report on the feasibility of a droit de suite is submitted to Congress by the Library of Congress Copyright Office.
As one might expect, the debate in the art world is already fierce, with artists on one side demanding a share in the profits they claim their works have created.
The dealers and auction houses are on the other side, saying that any national droit de suite in the United States would create a huge administrative morass for the benefit of a few already-wealthy artists that would help drive the US art market overseas or underground.
At the New York hearing, Sanford Hersh, a visual artist and the executive director of the Adolph and Esther Gottlieb Foundation, which makes grants to needy artists, argued that a droit de suite in the United States would inevitably raise the unconscionably low incomes of visual artists in the US.
Hersh argued that resale rights would help stabilise artists' incomes and such stability, he maintained, ‘would probably result in more and better art from artists freed from some of the anxiety of performing on a tightrope without a safety net’.
Representatives of the Artists Rights Society, Volunteer Lawyers for the Arts, and New York Artists Equity, agreed that resale rights were important creative incentives and suggested that visual artists' royalties be administered in a manner similar to the administration of royalties for musicians, composers and writers.
The opponents maintained that the secondary market serves only a tiny fraction of American artists, most of whom are already quite rich.
‘What is yet to be demonstrated is that there is any substantial number of contemporary American artists who are themselves living in reduced circumstances while their work is simultaneously commanding high prices on the secondary market’, argued Stephen Weil, deputy director of the Hirshhorn Museum in Washington D.C. and a respected authority on art law.
Gilbert Edelson, chief counsel for the Art Dealers Association of America, compared the effect of a droit de suite in the United States to a proposed increased gasoline tax designed to conserve fuel by reducing consumption.
‘The major effect would be to make those works, which are already the most difficult to sell, works by younger artists who are not well-known or who have not established themselves, even more difficult to sell.
These are the artists who most need help and support, particularly now’.
Contemporary artists favour a droit de suite with near unanimity, even though their work rarely finds a secondary market.
One artist testified at the Copyright Office's January hearing in San Francisco that a $55 royalty on the sale of a sculpture enabled him to buy materials for a new work.
Artists' organisations, already mobilised for battles over censorship and cuts in public funding, could very well prevail politically over lobbying efforts by dealers, auction houses and museums.
It should be noted however that the latter recently succeeded in having a 7% resale royalty provision dropped from the federal Visual Artists Rights Act of 1990.
London
English Victorian painting index
Middle-of-the-range works have maintained their appeal, even as to the kind of collector who bought them when they were painted
LONDON.
English painting as a whole was not as hard hit in the recent shakeout as American or French painting.
Prices had not climbed as fast in the first place and were less dependent on volatile international buying.
Even so, the 37% drop in the Victorian sector is far more serious than the 9% setback that followed the 1979–81 boom.
The artists in the index are a cross-section of landscape and genre painters that appeal to solid middlebrow taste and are bought today by the businessmen and professional people of the kind who bought them when they were painted.
Atkinson Grimshaw prices were inflated in 1989 and 1990 by demand from dealers holding exhibitions but dropped by no less than 56% in 1991 when that demand was satisfied.
Even so Grimshaw's work has outperformed the index with a climb of 500% since 1975.
Other notable falls last year were 58% for Benjamin Leader, 49% for William Shayer and 52% for George Smith.
The modest Japanese demand for Grimshaw and a few other Victorian artists such as Henry Parker, Breanski and David James is now subdued, though Christie's expect Japanese dealers to take about 5% of a Victorian sale.
Some 90% of all Victorian pictures are bought by British collectors though a few Italian and even French dealers were active at London's December auctions.
The sold percentages of Christie's and Sotheby's in 1991 averaged just 71% even though reserves had been pushed 20% or so below the boom levels of 1988/89.
Throughout last year the salerooms saw an increase in educated private buyers checking on condition and provenance, and shunning paintings consigned by the trade.
Salerooms too have been resisting over-exposed trade pictures unless at realistic reserves.
The recent shortage at auction of outstanding examples of Victorian painting is put down to vendors' unfounded fears that prices for even the best must have suffered.
Salerooms are at pains to point out that such paintings are now fetching as high or higher prices than ever.
Artists in the Index: Atkinson Grimshaw (+500% since 1975), Benjamin Leader (+170%), Edmund Niemann (+180%), Sidney Richard Percy (+510%), Henry Redmore (+520%), George Smith (+290%), George Turner (+720%), Frederick William Watts (+370%), James Webb (+280%).
Statistical Method: The 1975 base figure for each of the ten artists in the index is the average price of the central 80% of paintings by that artist sold at auction during the 1973/74, 1974/75 and 1975/76 auction seasons, as reported in Art Sales Index published by Richard Hislop.
Index figures are calculated for each artist in each succeeding year.
The exclusion of the top 10% removes from the sample potentially distorting prices paid for exceptional works; removing the bottom 10% eliminates seriously damaged works and others of doubtful authenticity.
Where too few examples of an artist's work were sold in any one year, the calculations have been based on a series of overlapping pairs of years.
Daniel Pabst table spotted in Sotheby's sale
NEW YORK.
Among the few surprises in a generally lacklustre sale of nineteenth-century furniture and decorative arts at Sotheby's New York on 13 February was a walnut library table, simply catalogued as ‘American Walnut library table, third-quarter 19th century, Probably Philadelphia’, and estimated at $4–6,000.
Nearly every member of the aesthetic Mafia (numbering no more than five people in the room and two phone bidders) who saw it believed that the table was the work of the important Philadelphia cabinetmaker Daniel Pabst (1826–1910).
Nothing terribly unusual about something slipping through a saleroom, yet five months earlier Sotheby's had recently sold a similarly designed, if less beautiful, walnut writing desk by Pabst (designed by the great Philadelphia architect Frank Furness and made for the Philadelphia philanthropist Henry C. Gibson).
Neither the authorship nor the commission were known to Sotheby's then, and it too had a similarly low estimate.
That table sold to dealer Meg Caldwell (who had spotted it in a photograph of Gibson's library in Artistic Houses, the great 1883 photographic compendium of notable American interiors of the day).
One would think that Sotheby's might have learned from their oversight five months earlier, but they didn't have a clue again.
It didn't matter in the end, as it sold to dealer David Petrovsky (underbid by Caldwell) for $44,000, who has of yet not discovered it in any photographic reference.
Droit de suite: latest developments in Germany
DÜSSELDORF.
On 21 January a decision was reached by the Düsseldorf Oberlandesgericht (Court of Appeal) on the case of Gotthard Graubner, a friend of Joseph Beuys, who had been successfully sued by Beuy's widow for the resale fee arising from the auction of works of art by Beuys which realised a total of DM1.4 million at Christie's London in June 1989.
Mrs Beuys had invoked the German law regarding droit de suite whereby a percentage of the sum realised by the sale of a work of art goes to the artist or his heirs (The Art Newspaper, No.12, November 1991).
The Court of Appeal overturned the lower court's ruling, stating that because the actual sale of the works took place outside Germany, German copyright law (of which droit de suite is a part) was not applicable.
The court stated: ‘The copyright law is governed by the principle of territoriality, which means that in order for German law to apply, at least a portion of the auction must take place in Germany’.
In Switzerland on 27 January the lower chamber of the Swiss parliament (the Nationalrat) voted against the introduction of a droit de suite arrangement for modern and contemporary works of art.
The proponents of the law had proposed a fee of 5% of the sale price of the object to be paid to artists or their survivors for fifty years after the artist's death.
The measure was opposed by major Swiss dealers and auctioneers including Kornfeld in Bern.
In the United States the US Registry of Copyrights began hearings in San Francisco on 23 January as part of a study on the feasibility of a droit de suite system.
At the moment only California operates such an arrangement.
Fiftieth anniversary sale: the Epstein Family Collection, Swann Galleries Inc., N.Y.
NEW YORK.
Books are at the heart of long-lived auction businesses: Sotheby's started with books in the eighteenth century, and the first founders of Christie's also auctioned off famous libraries such as that of Dr Johnson in 1785.
In March 1942, Swann Galleries Inc. conducted their first book auction in New York.
Today with thirty-five sales a year, covering antiquarian and modern books, autographs and manuscripts, photographs, works of art on paper, and judaica they are America's major specialist book auctioneers.
Swann Galleries has chosen to celebrate this fiftieth anniversary on 29 and 30 April with the sale of a major book collection which reflects closely the interests of its founder, Raymond Epstein.
A Chicago engineer and architect, he started collecting in the 1950s the books he loved as a child, and then moved on to literature, science and judaica.
This sale of over 500 of the finest works from the 10,000 volume Epstein Family Collection include: a first edition, first issue of Beatrix Potter's Peter Rabbit of which only 250 were privately printed (est. $25–35,000); Adam Smith's Wealth of Nations (est. $15–20,000); Samuel Johnson's Dictionary of the English Language (est. $6–9,000); Charles Darwin's Origin of the Species (est. $8–12,000); and a presentation copy of the piano score of Rhapsody in Blue, 1929, inscribed by Gershwin to the English author John Galsworthy (est. $3–4,000).
Caroline Butler 
London and Taipei
‘Right now Hong Kong provides three ingredients for a healthy market’
As Sotheby's holds its first auction in Taiwan, Julian Thompson, Chairman of Sotheby's Asia, keeps all his Oriental options open for after 1997
LONDON and taipei.
On 22 March Sotheby's held its first auction in Taiwan at the Shin Kong Museum of Art in Taipei.
Consisting of eighty-five lots of modern Chinese paintings, it was expected to realize in excess of $2million (NT$50million).
Sotheby's has been holding sales in Hong Kong since 1973, starting initially with porcelain and then, in 1976, offering a separate painting category; the initial one sale a year was extended into two annual sales in each category.
Sotheby's first Hong Kong sale of contemporary Chinese art was held in 1980.
Their Taipei office in Taiwan opened in 1982, and is headed by Rita Wong.
In London in early March, Julian Thompson, Chairman of Sotheby's Asia, reflected on the rationale behind the new initiative.
‘Over the past few years, we have noticed that the buying strength for modern and contemporary Chinese paintings executed in Western media namely oil on canvas and sculpture and influenced by Western painting, had the strongest following among Taiwanese collectors.
This established client base for what the Taiwanese call the ‘first generation’ artists those who were first inspired by Western modern painting styles and methods, suggested the need for a Taiwan-based secondary market which we, as an auction house, could provide.
In this first sale, approximately three-quarters of the consignments are devoted to ‘modern’ or ‘first generation’artists (for example Kuo Po-ch'uan, Li Shih-ch'iao and Xu Beihon).
The existence now of eight to ten established galleries in Taiwan selling first generation paintings and catering to the contemporary market indicates the potential size of the market to which we can appeal.
We have not jumped quickly into this area, but have been including gradually, in the context of our Hong Kong sales, more and more contemporary works.
Our Hong Kong painting sales now have a higher proportion of contemporary paintings influenced by Western techniques and subjects than paintings in the traditional Chinese style and media (watercolour and ink paintings in scroll and album formats depicting landscapes, flowers, or Buddhist and figure themes).
We have intentionally been cautious in our Taipei sale, only including a small selection of the contemporary paintings’.
And what of the broader issues: 1997, Hong Kong and the art market?
Thompson reflected, ‘Right now Hong Kong provides three ingredients for a healthy market: first, its central location; second, the absence of import and export restrictions; and third, the lack of restrictions on the transfer of money.
Of these, the import/export issue is the most critical.
We (along with our rival colleagues at Christie's) had hoped to succeed in including antiques and works of art in the clause of the new Hong Kong basic law which guarantees the exportability of certain types of financial assets after 1997.
But for obvious reasons, an advance commitment by the Chinese mainland government on such a delicate subject proved impractical; it was a long-shot at best.
I want to clarify that for us Hong Kong has been an excellent location for selling Chinese art and our sale in Taiwan in no way represents a change of heart.
We have not made any far-reaching contingency plans for after 1997; indeed so much has happened in China in the last two years that has shifted the mood from gloom to optimism; today Hong Kong is a booming economic zone and is regarded as the mediator between the Western and Chinese economies’.
The Hong Kong stock market surged ahead 42% in 1991 alone, not to mention the property markets; and Deng Xiaoping's visit to the special economic zone bordering Hong Kong earlier in February was seen internationally as indication of the government's commitment to pursuing links with Western market economies.
But should the climate change, ‘an auction house is in an ideal position to adapt quickly.
All we need is an office, secure storage and a good international hotel with suitable function rooms.
For example, Singapore, although a small market, offers no obstacles of any kind.
And while Taiwan prohibits the export of antiques (items over one hundred years old), it does allow the import of antiques for exhibition purposes; it is therefore conceivable that the government might alter its restrictions to allow antiques to be imported for sale and subsequent export’.
Paris
Cautious sales in a buoyant market
Good pickings for private collectors at Drouot auctions
PARIS.
Drouot salerooms may have seen none of the spectacular sales which are so good for promotion.
But the first auctions to be held after the traditional annual Christmas and January economic freeze showed the market to be surprisingly buoyant.
Estimates were cautiously low and there were good results for interesting, good quality works, many of which were well suited for private collectors.
Books, as ever in Paris, fared well: Eric Buffetaud auctioned off the eleventh part of the library of Colonel Daniel Sickles, an American who lived in France, collected nineteenth- and twentieth-century books and left 8,000 works valued at FFr200 million when he died four years ago.
The two day sale netted FFr3,424,000 (£353,000; $611,000) with only FFr511,000 (£52,000; $91,000) bought in.
Jean-Louis Picard's sale of one hundred works from the collection of Cécile Eluard, the daughter of poet Paul Eluard and Gala, on 20 February, totalled FFr 2,598,500 (£265,100; $464,000) with only 11% (FFr289,000) bought in.
A particularly fine and richly illustrated fifteenth-century prayer book sold for FFr650,000 (£66,300; $116,000).
The first important modern paintings sale of the year held by Guy Loudmer on 16 February contained nothing to compare with the outstanding works featured in his sales during the height of the speculative boom two or three years ago.
Loudmer's total earnings for 1991 plummeted to FFr 161,500,000, a tenth of those for 1990.
Nothing sold for more than FFr500,000, and the sale netted FFr6,681,000 (£681,700; $1,193,000), with eighty-three of the 116 lots sold and FFr2,380,000 (£242,800; $425,000) worth bought in.
Private French bidders, much in evidence, bought 75% of the works with ten foreign dealers accounting for the rest.
Loudmer fared extremely well meanwhile with a two day sale on 22–23 February featuring watches by Cartier and from the collection of sculptor Arman which totalled FFr 11,587,000 (£1,182,300; $2,069,100).
February was a particularly rich month for older, modest quality and easily affordable paintings.
Pierre Cornette de Saint Cyr sold an unusual interior scene, ‘Le couronnement de la rosière’ by the rarely found seventeenth-century French artist Jean Michelin for a mere FFr125,000 (£12,700; $22,300).
Loudmer, anxious to diversify, also branched out into old paintings and netted FFr 2,410,000 (£245,900; $430,300) with FFr1,297,000 bought in at sale on 10 February.
Competition for a charming winter scene with a vague attribution ‘entourage de Lucas van Uden’ pushed bidding to FFr 55,000 (£5,600; $9,800), far above the top estimate of FFr 15,000.
Auctioneers Rieunier and Bailly-Pommery, whose sales are never spectacular but regularly of good quality, contained thirty-two old and modern paintings in a sale of 24 February which also offered musical instruments, furniture, carpets and sculpture including a Bourdelle ‘Heraklès archer’ dated January 1921 which sold for FFr800,000 (£81,600; $142,800), well above its estimate of FFr500,000.
This sale proved yet again that religious art has difficulty finding bidders.
A Baptism of Christ by sixteenth-century Venetian artist Carlotto Carliari sold for only FFr30,000 (£3,000; $5,300), within its estimate, a seventeenth-century oil on copper of the Holy Family attributed to the ‘entourage’ of Sassoferrato went for FFr29,000 (£2,900; $5,100) and a Virgin and Child attributed to eighteenth-century French painter Jean Restout went under the hammer for FFr 22,000.
A far more commercial decorative village scene by eighteenth-century Flemish painter Théobald Michau, on the other hand, reached FFr150,000 (£15,300; $26,700) while ‘La Mort de Getta’, by the French neo-classical painter Jacques-Augustin-Catherine Pajou sold for FFr 360,000 (£36,700; $64,200).
More modern works fared better: a sketchy pencil drawing by Toulouse-Lautrec almost doubled its estimate to reach FFr50,000 (£5,100; $8,900) and a small, late and unremarkable Renoir Provençal landscape raised FFr 1 million (£102,000; $178,500).
But two Boudin oil paintings of ships at Le Havre and Deauville and a pastel of Trouville failed to sell.
French museums were aware of the quality going under the hammer, too.
Paris's medieval Musée de Cluny pre-empted a late fifteenth-century French oil on panel ‘Presentation in the Temple’ prudently estimated at FFr 200–250,000 but pushed up to three times as much by competition between French and British dealers.
And the Louvre pre-empted for FFr 1 million a painting from the mid-sixteenth-century Persian manuscript ‘Fâl-Nâme’, part of the collection of Garith Windsor sold by Audap Godeau and Solanet on 21 February.
Amsterdam
X-ray techniques date Rembrandt prints precisely
‘In Sotheby's N.Y.
last May 28 out of 80 prints were later impressions’
AMSTERDAM.
Nine out of every ten etchings by Rembrandt were printed after his death, the last edition appearing in 1906.
Some of the plates had been sold to publishers and other artists during Rembrandt's lifetime, and they, no doubt, are also responsible for at least some of the prints executed before 1669, the year of Rembrandt's death.
The eighty-one plates still extant and now in the possession of the museum of Raleigh in North Carolina, were acquired during the eighteenth century by the French amateur engraver Claude-Henri Watelet who in turn sold them to Pierre-François Basan.
He and his son are largely responsible for the countless impressions of Rembrandt's graphic works, repeatedly reworking the plates so that Rembrandt's authorship of them has become something of an ethical dilemma.
This has caused the prices of Rembrandt prints to vary significantly according to the date of the impression.
Another factor to complicate the issue, are the forgeries on the market made from nineteenth-century heliographic reproductions printed on seventeenth- century paper.
This is where the newly established Foundation for Paper Research has stepped in.
In 1968 the art historian Biorklund dismissed the usefulness of watermarks in the authentication and dating of Rembrandt prints, the reason being that there were over 400 of them and that no clear pattern had emerged with regard to the dating of the prints themselves.
The general consensus on this matter was left undisturbed until 1984 when Mr Theo Laurentius, an art dealer who specialises in Rembrandt prints, became convinced that the paper on which the etchings were printed did after all hold the key to their authenticity and thus to their value.
The problem was, however, that the ink often obscured the watermark as well as large sections of the paper which could show up the idiosyncrasies of the particular mould used (the point being that the hundreds of paper mills in existence at the time not only had their own watermarks but that each particular paper mould had its own variations in the structure of its wires).
These differences could obviously prove useful in identifying batches of paper made by the same mould.
On top of this it is known that any one mould would only be in use between seven and fifteen years.
All these facts concerning the particular mechanisms of the paper industry added together meant that it was quite unlikely that Rembrandt would buy two batches of paper prepared by the same paper mill using the same mould.
Laurentius discussed the problem with his dentist Mr van Hugten and together they experimented with various methods of X-ray photography and beta-radiography in order to record the structure of the laid paper accurately, without interference from the ink.
Now they have developed, with the help of Professor Van Aken of Utrecht University, a simple method of Roentgen photography, whereby a low-powered X-ray (220 volts exactly, which are converted to 5000 volts) passes through the paper and exposes the negative directly behind it to the exact amount of radiation needed to show up the detailed structure of the impression left by the mould and the watermark.
Now Mr Laurentius travels about with an antiquated set of hospital X-ray equipment with which he is able to take a detailed picture within seconds.
In collaboration with Mr Filedt Kok and Mr Pieter Schatborn of the Rijksmuseum in Amsterdam he has photographed the complete collection of Rembrandt etchings in the printroom, making some 2000 exposures, and has been able to put together a detailed picture of Rembrandt's use of paper.
For his drawings Rembrandt made use of any old piece of paper lying about which was suitable.
But because of the nature of the printing process, Rembrandt was both methodical and economical with the paper he used, buying a ream (480 sheets) at a time, and often printing three etchings onto one sheet.
Thus it is possible to build up an accurate map of which etchings were printed together and so establish their place in a general chronology.
This systematic approach has now reached the stage that Filedt Kok, Schatborn and the initiator, Laurentius, feel that the time is ripe to publish their findings and the conclusions which can be drawn from them.
A book on the subject is expected within a year or two.
The research has already revealed some interesting facts about Rembrandt which have hitherto been overlooked.
For instance the chronological grouping of particular watermarks has revealed that a small portrait of Petrus Sylvius, Saskia's cousin, was printed twice: once in 1637, which is the date below Rembrandt's signature this was on the occasion of Sylvius's move from Amsterdam to Friesland after he had been received as a minister of the church and again, in an unaltered state still carrying the date of 1637 much later, in 1653.
This turns out to have been the date of Sylvius's death.
Laurentius is now collaborating with the technological giants Philips in Eindhoven to perfect the image of the X-ray using computer-boosting techniques, so that a clear positive print of the watermark and the structure of the paper can be achieved.
The establishment of the Foundation for Paper Research last August initiated a programme whereby certificates of authenticity, under the control of a board of trustees, are issued with every Rembrandt print passing through the Foundation.
The first certificate was issued in October.
All in all these developments have had a very mixed reception.
The auction houses may anticipate an effect on prices, although early and late impressions are already clearly differentiated in catalogue descriptions.
According to Laurentius in fact, twenty-eight of the eighty Rembrandt prints offered for sale by Sotheby's in the spring sales in New York last May, were late impressions.
Less forgivable is the attitude taken by some museums who are frightened of the consequences of having their collection screened.
One collector even suggested to Mr Laurentius that no one was really waiting for these new techniques and that it would be better for everyone if he stopped.
But it is too late for that now.
New York
The field where subject is everything
Results of nineteenth-century painting sales
NEW YORK.
One lesson learned from the results of the February nineteenth-century painting sales in New York is that, as in perhaps no other paintings field, subject is everything.
The natty questions of authorship that plague the Old Master market often as not leave collectors of nineteenth-century paintings unfazed.
If it's a pretty, fleshy nude, or a charming bouquet of roses, or a view of a canal, if it serves as effective decoration without taxing the mind too much, then its success at auction is assured, providing the consignor isn't too greedy.
While both Christie's and Sotheby's did not have the rich assortments of seasons past (Sotheby's even resorting to smaller groupings of lots on a page) there were enough out-of-the-ordinary canvases to make both sales notable successful.
Christie's braced themselves for the golf fanatics for their 19 February sale, which featured three paintings by Sir John Lavery, one of them being a vista of the famous Golf Links, North Berwick (est. $60–80,000), which sold to London dealer Titus Kendall for $110,000 (£63,200).
Another London dealer paid the same price for Lavery's ‘The Veranda’, depicting Charles Stuart Carstairs, Chairman of the Board for Knoedler's, at leisure with his second wife and family (est. $50–70,000).
A more sentimental genre was represented by Arthur John Elsley's ‘Goodnight’, of a night-gown attired little girl bidding farewell to her pets, a huge Saint-Bernard and her pups, which surprisingly sold to a French collector for a very strong $160,000 (£91,900)(est. $60–80,000).
A more prurient depiction of childhood was Bouguereau's ‘Retour des Champs’, of a tousled-haired girl carrying a bundle of what seems to be herbs, which sold for $180,000 to the trade (£103,400)(est. $100–150,000).
Bouguereau has not been selling well at auction in recent years, and it is possible that the recent exhibition at Borghi & Co. in New York has stimulated a revival of interest in his work.
The centrepiece of Sotheby's sale on 20 February was an exuberant depiction of a masked Ball at the Paris Opéra by the little-known Belgian painter Charles Hermans, consigned by an East Coast educational institution.
A splashy Belle-epoque tableau literally bursting at the edges with tumbling patrons leaping from the stage, frantic dancers, several pairs of identical twins and top-hatted gentlemen consorting with masked beauties, it was most entertaining decoration, and seemed reasonably estimated at $100–150,000, though it sold to an American collector (widely believed to be Iris and Gerald Cantor) for a stunning $650,000 (£373,500).
One of the more unusual pictures was a superbly painted scene of a nursery interior with two young girls warming themselves by the hearth by the rather underrated Gaston de Latouche.
One of the more engaging aspects of this artist's work is its cheerful, slightly perverse fantasy, where satyrs hitch rides on the back of coaches and nudes swimming in eighteenth-century fountains are menaced by long-necked swans.
‘La Nursery’ may be a further example of his slightly naughty bent, for the deceptively sentimental though well-painted mood of two girls is irredeemably spoiled by the youngest child, who in the very centre of the composition, squats on a potty.
‘If he had just painted a cushion instead!’ sighed one viewer, as it was bought in at $140,000 (£80,459)(est. $25–275,000).
The Trausnitz Venus leaves for Washington
LONDON.
The so-called Trausnitz Venus, which was offered for sale at Christie's on 10 December but failed to raise a single bid, has now been bought by the National Gallery in Washington.
Although the V&A's sculpture department tried to keep the sixteenth-century bronze statue in the country, it seems that it was not felt to be of sufficient merit to meet any of the Waverley criteria governing rules on the export of works of art from Britain.
Torville and Dean take note: Ravel's Bolero for sale
PARIS.
The original manuscript of Ravel's Bolero will be offered for sale on 8 April at Drouot Richelieu by auctioneers Laurin, Guilloux, Buffetaud and Tailleur.
It has been valued at around £95,000 ($165,000).
The document was found among the many original musical manuscripts left by Lucien Garban, an intimate friend who kept up a fascinating correspondence with the composer.
When Garban's heirs moved to America, they took their father's archives with them.
As well as a transcription of the Bolero for four hands and two pianos, two of Ravel's waltzes have been discovered among the documents.
The French State may intervene to acquire the whole collection, which also includes 108 letters signed by the composer.
Works on paper comes to the Armory
NEW YORK.
One of the most eagerly anticipated art events in the spring in New York is Sanford Smith's fourth annual Works on Paper Fair, featuring ninety-seven print, drawings and photography dealers from Europe and America.
It runs from 3 to 5 April at the Park Avenue Armory (Park Avenue at 67th Street).
Opening times on the Friday and Saturday are 11–8; on Sunday 11–7.
Admission is $10, a three-day pass $20.
There will be a benefit preview on 2 April for the National Down's Syndrome Society, tickets $15.
For more information call 212–460 9330.
Dealers & Galleries
London
‘The greatest sadness is losing the possibility of supporting young artists’
Wolfgang Fischer takes leave of his London gallery after twenty years
LONDON.
The last show to be mounted by Wolfgang Fischer and his wife Jutta at their King Street Gallery will be of David Tindle's paintings, including the ‘Madame le Goalher series’, which opened last month.
This was not pre-arranged; it happens however to be the last before the lease runs out.
The decision not to renew the contract with the landlords Hill Samuel was taken in the light of rising costs and declining sales.
Dr Fischer talked to The Art Newspaper's contemporary art correspondent, Roger Bevan.
What are the reasons for your decision to close the gallery in King Street?
Wolfgang Fischer: One has to distinguish between general and specific reasons.
In general, the margin between running costs and profit in the current two-year recession has become increasingly narrow.
In particular, it is the cost of the very expensive contemporary exhibition programme that has forced us to admit that we are, in the final analysis, running this as a public service.
Specifically, I would like to point out that we are using the option of a ‘break clause’ in our lease which can only be utilised until May 1992.
Negotiations with the landlords regarding a reduction of their rent demand of £100,000 per annum have been unsuccessful, and had we not used this break clause we would have been committed to the new conditions of the lease way into the twenty-first century.
Do you expect to reopen a gallery at a later date?
Should the current tide turn, we will think about it with great pleasure and renewed confidence.
Your question is really a question regarding the duration of the present recession which with the exception of our economic astrologers nobody can answer at present.
Will any of your present staff continue to work for you?
In our forthcoming activities as private dealers we will require no more than an administrative infrastructure.
Therefore the majority of our current staff will have to look for other employment.
What arrangement are you making with the contemporary artists whom you represent?
Without functioning gallery premises it will not be possible to represent the majority of our artists.
We will try, however, to advise them to the best of our abilities with particular emphasis on representation by other galleries.
What do you consider were the gallery's greatest successes in twenty years of business?
In my view the successes were finding great works of classical Modern art and placing them in important collections such as Gustav Klimt's ‘Portrait of Gallia’ in the National Gallery, London (the only painting by Klimt in England); Oskar Kokoschka's ‘View of the Thames’1926, one of his first London views, in the National Gallery of Wales, Cardiff; Ernst Ludwig Kirchner's ‘Three Nudes’, in the Art Gallery of New South Wales, Sydney, Australia the only great Expressionist painting in Australia; Henry Moore's ‘Reclining Figure’, one of his three monumental carvings.
Fischer Fine Art paid the highest price ever for a work by a living sculptor for this (US$ 250,000 at Sotheby's, New York in 1972) getting into the Guinness Book of Records, and selling the sculpture within a month.
I also count a number of trendsetting exhibitions among my achievements, such as: ‘Tatlin's Dream’(Russian 1920s Avant-garde art); ‘Frank Lloyd Wright’; ‘Vienna Birthplace of Modern Design’; ‘Apocalypse and Utopia’(major German Expressionist works); and various exhibitions of the work of the Austrian Expressionist Egon Schiele.
In general, making the English public aware of the important trends in Central and Eastern European countries between 1910 and 1930 is a goal that I have pursued throughout my dealing career.
What is your opinion of the current state of contemporary art, in this country and internationally?
I see an ever growing tendency towards, on the one hand, public art, and on the other transient art such as‘land art’ and a passion to experiment with the mechanics of all kinds of visual media.
Installations, last seen on a major scale at the ‘Metropolis’ show in Berlin, have now reached dimensions that require spaces which the individual private collector simply does not have.
This marks a partly successful tendency to fuse art for the masses with avant-garde elitist aesthetics.
These concepts are relevant both locally and internationally; a more traditional conception of art is, however, still more prevalent in England the continuous success of the Royal Academy Summer Exhibition seems to be an indication of that.
I think that the forthcoming ‘Documenta’ in Kassel will determine whether there are buying niches left for the contemporary collector.
Why are there so few collectors of art in the United Kingdom?
This question would need to be asked in a more specific way.
There are perhaps more collectors of antiques in this country than anywhere else in the world.
Contemporary art, however, is traditionally in a difficult position here.
One major reason for this is an unfractured insistence on known traditions that have existed for centuries; the absence of revolutions and occupying armies in Britain and therefore the lack of radical new beginnings as in Germany and Central Europe after World War I has had this effect.
Are there any circumstances which might change this state of affairs?
As long as young pro-European forces can continue to develop in this country, I think that a positive change in attitude is possible.
Increased tax exemptions for gifts to museums would also be very helpful.
What will be your areas of activity as a private dealer, and what markets will you be targeting?
I will concentrate, together with my wife, on areas I have been dealing in and know well, such as Expressionism, Viennese Art before 1914, with Schiele and Klimt, history-making design and outstanding drawings and watercolours.
In general, the market I hope to target will be tomorrow's market which has shrunk to the healthier structures of the early 1980s.
New York
Cautious optimism after the Armory Art Show
Art Dealers' Association says 70–80% of dealers ‘did some business’
NEW YORK.
Much has changed since 1989 when the first annual Art Show was organised to help members of the prestigious Art Dealers' Association of America cash in on a booming art market.
‘There was a sense the dealers were losing ground to the auction houses’ relentless PR blitz’, says O. Kelley Anderson, a dealer and the fair's director.
So sixty-four dealers packed the cavernous 7th Regiment Armory on Park Avenue with the best of Soho and 57th Street, giving less experienced or timid buyers easy access to everything from Old Master drawings to contemporary sculpture.
The results were overwhelming: ‘So much was sold the first night it was almost scary’, recalls Gerald Stiebel of Rosenberg and Stiebel, Inc.
That was 1989.
After the bubble burst and concerns about the market grew, annual Show results  became closely watched indicators of market strength.
Although no official statistics are ever provided, there has been a general downward trend in sales from the peak in 1989 to 1991 when potential buyers were uneasy about the economy and the Gulf War.
This season no great turn around was expected: for the first time the Show's organisers had had some difficulty filling the sixty-four available booths.
But by 2 March, the end of the Show's five day run, many dealers were actually smiling.
Attendance figures slipped, falling 8% to 11,000, but a lot of those who showed up came with cheque book in hand.
The Art Dealers' Association estimates that 70–80% of dealers did ‘some business’.
Many sales were admittedly quite modest and overall results cannot compare with those of the glory days of 1989, but nobody was complaining.
‘It's much better than last year’, said Jeffrey Loria, who sold ‘The Illustrious Dream Maker’, a painting of 1959 by Max Ernst for $850,000, probably the Show's top price.
Mary-Anne Martin, a New York dealer who specialises in Latin American art is known to have sold ‘Still Life with Watermelons’, a 1935 painting by Rufino Tamayo, to a Mexican collector for $800,000.
Guy Stair Sainty, an Old Master dealer who had sold nothing in any previous Art Show, sold seven pictures the first day, and is reported to have sold at least one painting in the high six figure range.
Sainty, like many others, had scaled down this year, leaving the million dollar plus pictures at home.
Dealers in modern and contemporary work also geared their offerings to a more modest pocket book: André Emmerich Gallery offered ‘Art for Young Collectors’ and Paul Gray of Chicago's Richard Gray Gallery acknowledged that his ‘prices are lower’.
Gray also reported making three sales ‘three times as many as I made last year’.
‘We've already paid for our booth and have a serious bite on a really big picture,’ says Gerald Stiebel.
‘The general feeling around here is: we've finally turned the corner.’
New York
Feigen's Guercino
Until 20 April
NEW YORK.
Just when you thought the Guercino anniversary celebrations were all over, along comes Richard Feigen's celebratory exhibition (until 20 April) at his New York gallery.
Featuring Guercino's paintings and drawings, it coincides with the major exhibitions at the National Gallery of Art, Washington (until 17 May).
Remarkably, Feigen has managed to assemble enough first rate examples (several from museums) to make yet another look at this seventeenth-century Emilian master worthwhile.
Among the pictures are the only known independent self-portrait of the artist, the wonderful Suida-Manning ‘Repentant Magdalene’, on loan to the Metropolitan in the mid 1970s and not publicly seen since, the ‘John the Baptist visited in prison by Salome’, the prime version of a composition of which a later replica by the artist is in the collection of Sir Denis Mahon (exhibited in London last year), and the master's only known still-life, a ‘Memento Mori’, from Feigen's private collection.
Feigen has been unusually fortunate in obtaining loans from several museums, which as a group, do not often lend to dealer exhibitions.
Prime among these are the ex-Althorp ‘St Luke displaying his painting of the Virgin and Child’, one of the most engaging late pictures by the artist, from the Nelson Atkins Museum in Kansas City, and the ‘Landscape with the bath of Diana and the death of Actaeon’ from the Boymans-van Beuningen Museum, Rotterdam.
The exhibition also includes a smattering of drawings by Guercino lent by other dealers and museums, and is accompanied by a catalogue.
(Richard L. Feigen and Co. 49 East 68 St. New York N.Y.
10021)
Paris
Henry Moore at home in Galerie Didier Imbert
The sculptor's private life on show
PARIS.
Modern and contemporary art dealer Didier Imbert is staging an exhibition of the private art collection which Henry Moore kept in his house Hoglands at Much Haddam until his death in 1986.
Financed to the tune of $1 million by Imbert himself, the show is entitled ‘Moore Intime’ and is scheduled to run 2 April–24 July in his gallery on the avenue Matignon.
The exhibition will transfer to the Sezon Museum in Tokyo for a three-week stay in September and tour Japan for nine months.
Imbert, who has known Moore's daughter Mary since 1985, has spent three years working in collaboration with her to organise the exhibition which, in its latter phases, has employed a team of forty people.
It features 500 works which formed Moore's home environment, none of which have ever been seen by the public before, and is curated by Solange Auzies de Turenne who is also in charge of the exhibition of monumental Moore sculptures running at Bagatelle in Paris from 10 June to the end of September.
Architect Christian Germanez has recreated whole rooms from Hoglands.
Moore's sitting room has been reconstructed on the ground floor complete with his favourite armchair, bookcase, work table and all the works of art it used to contain, shipped over from storage in Britain plus a colour photograph reproducing the view he enjoyed out of his window.
The sculptor's bedroom and his workshop, the latter on loan from the Moore Foundation with which Imbert maintains a good professional relationship, have been recreated in the basement.
Imbert insists the small and intimate aspect of the exhibition is what fascinates him.
‘Moore is really not well known in France and that was one of my motivations in mounting this exhibition.
I also want to show how Moore's genius consisted of moving from a small object, a pre-Columbian sculpture, a piece of rock or a sea shell, towards large-scale sculpture.’
Among the exhibits are twenty original terracotta pieces, studies for larger scale sculptures, many on a mother and child theme.
Imbert is also showing forty-two drawings and watercolours by Moore spanning his career from early realistic sketches of 1921 through surrealistic studies of the 1930s to the last works of the 1970s.
Moore's own art collection, including several Courbets and Daumiers, drawings by David, Degas, Millet and Redon, Rodin watercolours, three Nabis-period Vuillard paintings and oils by Rouault will also be displayed.
Imbert has decided not to sell anything from the show because of the poor state of the art market, and with Editions du Regard is publishing a book of the exhibition which will sell, at a loss, for FFr 250.
Imbert regards ‘Moore Intime’ as a long-term venture which he will exploit over the next ten years in France, Japan and the US.
‘It's when things are economically difficult that the time is right to mount operations like this’ he said.
Society of London Art Dealers
These are our terms
Diamond jubilee clarity
LONDON.
The Society of London Art Dealers (SLAD) has just issued its diamond jubilee yearbook where it outlines the conditions and terms of sale which it recommends to its members.
The Society now comprises nearly one hundred dealers, including such old established firms as Agnew's, Colnaghi and Leger Galleries.
To belong, a dealer must have been in business for three years and have a proven reputation for expertise.
The membership is reviewed annually.
Under the restrictions of the Office of Fair Trading, SLAD cannot compel its members to conform to the terms and conditions the Society recommends and members are free to amend them individually for clients.
These terms and conditions are, however, intended to serve as guidelines, and for them to be valid, the purchaser needs to be made aware of them.
Dealers can choose to print them in their catalogues, display them, or print them on their invoices.
It has taken several years of animated discussions among the members and their respective lawyers to arrive at these terms and conditions, which are also intended to be in line with the code of conduct adopted last year by the European federation of art dealers, FIDOAO (Federation Internationale des Diffuseurs d'Oeuvres d'Art Originales).
The most interesting condition occurs under item 9 (Liability of seller): Under the Trade Descriptions Act, SLAD may not stipulate the period of time of this warranty, but it recommends that its members guarantee the authenticity of what they are selling for a period of six years.
If convincing contrary evidence is presented within that period, they should come to a settlement with the buyer.
The auction houses only offer a limited five-year guarantee (this was first introduced by Sotheby's in New York in September 1973).
Should a dispute arise between the seller and the buyer, the matter should be referred to a mutually agreed Queen's Counsel [a senior lawyer]whose decision would be binding.
The terms and conditions also address such grey areas such as what happens if the buyer has possession of a work, but has not completely paid for it when it is stolen (the liability is the buyer's), and the duty of such a buyer who has partially paid for a work, to store the work separately from his own goods, not to export it, to retain the seller's identifying marks, and to allow the seller or his agent access to the work.
In clearly stating the terms of conditions of sale, SLAD has given some backbone to the dealers' frequently invoked claim that they ‘guarantee their goods (unlike the auction houses)’.
In the past, just what such backing entailed was not always clear and when disputes arose, the outcome was not usually made public.
Around the galleries
A selection of the commercial shows on this April
LONDON
Nauman's sculptures at d'Offay
Post-merger show at Turske Hue-Williams
Judging from his recent contributions to the Carnegie International in Pittsburgh and to Robert Storr's ‘Dislocations’ for MOMA in New York, Bruce Nauman is working in top gear and his new wax or metal sculptures and his video installations look as sharp and fresh as the art of any of his contemporaries.
In the Eighties, he made a remarkable body of neon art and it is that side of his activity which forms an exhibition at Anthony d'Offay (to 16 May).
Among the eight examples drawn from the gallery's stock are ‘Life Death/Knows Doesn't Know’, the great wheel of contradiction formerly owned by Charles Saatchi, and ‘Seven Virtues Seven Vices’, in which corresponding pairs such as Hope and Envy or Lust and Faith are illuminated or dimmed in an apparently random sequence.
There is a ‘Marching Man’, and some smaller works including ‘Normal Desires’, ‘Suite/Substitute’, and ‘Double Poke in the Eye’, the multiple which Nauman created for New York's New Museum of Contemporary Art in 1985.
With its diary committed to Anselm Kiefer in June, the much-postponed Jeff Koons show is now scheduled to launch the new season in September.
In other galleries in Dering Street, Annely Juda is showing three artists in an exhibition titled ‘Floor→Wall→Floor’(6 April–23 May).
As yet unfamiliar to a British audience, they are Darren Largo from this country, and two German sculptors, Werner Haypeter and Gloria Friedman, who lives near Dijon and has been the subject of a recent exhibition at the Moderne Kunst Museum in Vienna.
Grob has selected an exhibition of works on paper (9 April–9 May).
In the main gallery, there will be sheets by Joseph Beuys, Baselitz, Mark di Suvero, Bridget Riley, David Nash and Richard Kidd, while the entrance hall will be hung with material by Gauguin, Bonnard and Brancusi.
In Bond Street, Michael Hue-Williams at Turske Hue-Williams relaunches his exhibition programme following his merger with Veith Turske in Zurich.
His artist is Franz Gertsch (2 April–29 May), whose recent curriculum includes an exhibition which travelled from MOMA to Washington's Hirshhorn Museum and to San Jose, and a different exhibition at the prestigious Lenbachhaus in Munich in 1991.
A survey at the Nationgalerie in Berlin follows in 1993.
There are six large and uniquely inked woodcuts of portrait heads or landscape cut from planks of cherry wood with a technical skill which resembles the art of mezzotint.
At a time when galleries are retrenching or closing, it is nice to be able to report this exciting European link forged by the energetic Hue-Williams, and to note the arrival of Marianne Holtermann, private dealer in modern and contemporary art, who has opened an office above Bolger Carpets at 31 New Bond Street.
Although she posts a ‘by appointment only’ notice, she is marking her move with an exhibition of graphic work by Brice Marden (to 29 May), timed to match the Tate Gallery's survey.
Among sheets from different periods of his career, she offers for sale the series of six ‘Cold Mountain’ etchings (1991) inspired, as were the recent paintings, by Chinese calligraphy and Tang Dynasty poetry.
In Cork Street, there are several mixed exhibitions.
They include a selection of conceptual material at Victoria Miro under the title of ‘Instructions and Diagrams’(9 April–8 May).
Among the artists are Robert Morris, Lawrence Weiner, Ian Hamilton Finlay, Hamish Fulton and Stephen Willats.
Mayor is showing British Surrealism (to 22 May) drawn from the estate of Roland Penrose and other private sources.
There is ‘Duck’, a polished bronze version of the cast concrete sculpture created by Henry Moore in 1927, ‘Movement in Space’, an oil painting by Eileen Agar, a selection of pictures by Ceri Richards, and work by John Armstrong and John Tunnard.
Kenny Scharf belongs to a group of East Village artists which came to notice ten years ago and included Keith Haring and Jean Michel Basquiat.
Well known through his contribution to the Whitney Biennial in 1985, when he decorated the public lavatories, and from exhibitions with Tony Shafrazi, he has never shown in this country, but Edward Totah makes the correction when he presents ten large canvases and twenty-six smaller pictures (7 April–23 May).
Scharf's work is a collision of styles and imagery.
He works with a mixture of screeprinting and paints and his current work is rich in depictions of dinosaurs and automobiles.
The catalogue includes a text by Brooks Adams.
John Davies has not exhibited in London since 1984 when he converted Marlborough into an arena of circus figures, although the Sainsbury Centre in Norwich mounted a survey in 1985 and he showed in his gallery's branch in New York in 1989.
A new exhibition is scheduled for the autumn but Marlborough Graphics have arranged an exhibition of his drawings (15 April–2 May).
In total, there are thirty sheets in a variety of media, with large portrait heads remaining his predominant theme.
In Millbank, Long and Ryle are showing four large polychrome wood portraits by Matthew Spender (3–30 April) with twenty related drawings and other studies of the landscape near Siena where the artist lives.
The exhibition coincides with the publication of Within Tuscany (Viking Penguin), Spender's account of his working and family life woven into chapters of historical information.
Raab is presenting twenty portraits by Ian Hughes (2 April–2 May), previewed at the gallery's booth at Art 92 in Islington in February.
The key to the series is Kafka, the philosopher with whose neurotic obsessions Hughes has identified.
Other pictures reinterpret, in thickly brushed oil paint mixed with sand and matches, portrait details from the art of Velazquez, Ribera, Georges de la Tour and other Old Masters.
Hughes created a good impression with his exhibition at the Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art in 1989.
A trained psychiatric nurse, he is the current artist in residence at the Royal Edinburgh Hospital.
Sylvia Stevenson has written a characteristically informative text for the catalogue.
Andrew Kalman's Crane in Sloane Street has taken its cue from the Royal Academy and has accumulated a collection of works by Alexander Calder (to 1 May).
In addition to a selection of gouaches and ‘The Cross’(1948), an oil painting with a strong debt to Miró, there are mobiles and stabiles.
The following exhibitions have been mentioned in this column in previous months and deserve attention before they close: Karsten Schubert's changing selection of works by gallery artists, marking his Fifth Anniversary in business in Charlotte Street (to 25 April); a survey of paintings by Andrzej Jackowski, including his three versions of ‘The Beekeeper's Son’, at Marlborough (to 21 April); new paintings by Luciano Castelli at Raab (to 25 April); and Craig Wood's dot paintings at Laure Genillard (to 25 April).
New York
Overlays at the Louver
Rauschenberg, Johns and Salle
The Louver Gallery has this month cleverly devised a show which overviews this underlying notion in so much recent painting.
Called ‘Overlay’, it includes work by Rauschenberg, Wallace Berman, John Baldessari, Jasper Johns, Matt Mullican, Allen Ruppersberg and, of course, David Salle.
It's on until 18 April.
‘Behind Bars’ at the new, huge, non-profit Threadwaxing Space on Broadway is not as you might suspect a show of political art about prisoners' rights or even about the exotic lives of cocktail waitresses but rather about the stripe in art.
More precisely, about the-stripe-repeated in art.
Curated by Meg O'Rourke and continuing until 28 April the show includes work by, among others, Dennis Ashbaugh, Jacqueline Humphries, Sean Scully, Suzan Etkin, Stephen Westfall, Ricardo d'Oliveira, Wolfgang Staehle and Karin Sander.
More than thirty works by Balla, Boccioni, Marini, Medardo Rosso, Fontana and Manzó figure in ‘A Short History of Modern Italian Sculpture’ opening on the 22nd at Baldaccio-Daverio and lasting until 6 June.
There's an illustrated catalogue with essays by Paolo Baldacci and Ronny Cohen.
Rachel Adler has gathered together ‘Designs for the Avant Garde Theater’ at her gallery, opening 9 April.
Among other delicacies on view, until the end of May, are no less than seven ballet costume designs by Natalia Goncharova dating from 1916 and studies for costumes by Pavel Tchelitchew for a production at the Streina Theater in Istanbul in 1920.
There's also one of Alexandra Exter's extraordinary marionettes and an example of one of Sonia Delaunay's costumes for a slave in a 1918 revival of Diaghilev's ‘Cleopatra’.
Titus Moody, the curmudgeonly New Englander on Fred Allen's old radio show, used to say in regard to television that he didn't hold with furniture that lights up.
What would he say of the masses of modern art that you have to plug in in order to fully appreciate?
Of, for instance, Keith Sonnier's new metal-and-light structures at Castelli and 65 Thompson St (until 25 April) or of Stefano Arienti's styrofoam-and-neon installation at Jay Gorney (until 2 May)?
Or of the light sculptures of Thomas Skomski at Rosa Esman (until 18 April)?
His mind would likely have blown a fuse at the Jon Kessler show, at Luhring-Augustine until the 25th.
Kessler, known for his ingeniously mechanised and electrified constructions, this month ups the ante with a piece called ‘Music Box’ which has got something for the ears as well as for the eyes.
At Postmasters (until 25 April) Perry Hoberman introduces viewer-activated assemblages involving adaptations of quotidian household objects.
Willie Cole, at Brooke Alexander from 8 April to 16 May tortures home appliances with heat.
Look for a scorched toaster and a burnt hair-dryer, among other modern artifacts.
Everyday objects are of course the stock-in-trade of Arman, whose retrospective at the Brooklyn Museum continues until the 26th of this month.
Coincidental with that event are the two gallery shows, one at Sonnabend and the other at Marisa del Re.
At the former there is a mini retrospective of the artist's ‘accumulations’(earliest from 1962, latest from last year) while at the latter there is ‘Cycles’ not a meditation on the passing stages of an artist's life but, more prosaically, about the leg-propelled two-wheeled conveyance.
Both shows run from the second week in April until 2 May.
Allen McCollum is a sculptor of conceptual bent.
He makes vast series of variations on given sets of conditions.
There is a room chock-a-block with drawings by him in the ‘Allegories of Modernism’ show at MOMA right now, and a room chock-a-block with objects at John Weber (until 18 April).
The objects in question are a series of dinosaur bones reproduced in plaster and painted in 750 permutations of a set of colours.
He calls them ‘Lost Objects’.
Mark Dion, at the American Fine Arts Co, puts his conceptual installations to the service of our threatened ecology (11 April-4 May) as does Yoko Ono hers in new sculptures entitled ‘Endangered Species’ at Vrej Baghoomian (18 April-15 May).
More traditionally modernist is the work of Michael Steiner.
New bronzes by him are at Salander-O'Reilly (until the 28th) and the new forged iron pieces of Martin Chirino appear at Borgenicht until 2 May.
Shari Dienes has over many decades produced a steady stream of ingeniously constructed found-object assemblages often involving glass, mirrors and boxes.
With her extended white cloud of frizzed hair she has been a constant, if sometimes startling, presence in the New York underground art scene for many a year.
Now in her early early nineties, she's back again at A.I.R.
her longtime gallery until the 18th with new work.
Walter de Maria has always rummaged about in the realm of the mystical and this month at Gagosian (downtown) until 9 May he shows his ‘5–7–9’ series, betraying a continued interest in numbers and, according to the gallery, psychic phenomenona.
The show consists of one installation, a piece consisting of dozens of 50 cm-high three, five and seven-sided steel rods placed in upright groups on granite bases.
James Lee Byars, who is no slouch himself in the mystical department, deploys white marble balls at Mary Boone (until the 25th).
He calls it ‘The Thinking Field of One Hundred Spheres’.
Would you say that politically conscious art is ‘conceptual’?
Perhaps not in the sense of de Maria or Ericson and Ziegler but surely so in the sense that the idea of it often takes precedence over all other of its aspects.
It's a kind of work encountered with more and more frequency in New York galleries these days.
Andre Emmerich has realist William Bailey's newest exactly-so tablescapes in one of his spaces and in the other works by the eminent British painter William Scott.
Donald Sultan, who atypically showed sculpture in his last exhibition, returns to painting at Knoedler while Bryan Hunt, known as a sculptor, atypically attempts paintings at Blum-Helman (uptown).
All of these shows continue until 25 April.
New paintings though lately they seem more like coloured sculptures fixed to the wall by Elizabeth Murray are at Paula Cooper until the end of the month and Pat Adams, whose abstractions seem to result from a collision of the macro- and micro-cosmic, is at Zabriskie with twenty new paintings beginning 15 April and continuing until 15 May.
Every year the technology of photography becomes more and more complicated.
Barbara Ese pays all of that no attention whatsoever.
She has for sometime been fixated on photography at its most basic.
She uses only the pinhole camera or, as it was known in pre-photographic times, the camera obscura.
She manages to make something intriguingly complex with a great economy of means and her newest work may be seen at Curt Marcus until the end of the month.
Nancy Burson also works with a kind of pinhole camera in her case the commercially produced ‘Diana’ box cameras of the 1940s and 50s.
There is no focusing device, no lenses to change: you just open and expose.
For her show at the Jayne M. Baum gallery she has photographed portraits of children at Montifiore Hospital who suffer from cranio-facial deformities.
Many of them have been printed on metal, as 2 in. square daguerreotypes.
Drawings by Bill Jensen and Myron Stout are at Washburn, by Sidney Goodman at Dintenfass (all until 9 May) and by David Salle at Gagosian (uptown) until 25 April.
Drawings by sculptors Jonathan Silver are at Victoria Munroe until 25 April and by William Tucker until the end of the month at David McKee.
Berlin
Audible, edible, and visible music
The unusual ‘gelbe MUSIK’ gallery
BERLIN.
It can be difficult to get hold of records of the latest non-mainstream contemporary music, let alone illustrations of the state of the relationship between such music and the visual arts.
But not so in Berlin where both subjects are offered in the same place.
The gallery ‘gelbe MUSIK’ has been catering for the specialists and the curious for ten years and celebrates its anniversary this spring.
It consists of only one small white room which doubles as shop, library, and exhibition space on Schaperstraße 11.
The gallery's name (‘yellow music’) goes back to Wassily Kandinsky who wrote about the aggressive force of the ‘sound’ of the colour yellow which ‘unsettles, and stings’.
The gallery is owned and run by Ursula Block (her husband, René, was Josef Beuys's gallerist).
She stocks recordings, scores, composer's writings, and reference literature.
She regularly puts on exhibitions of works in the shop window and on the walls which question the borderline between music and visual arts.
Sometimes the frontier is crossed by musicians and writers, sometimes by visual artists.
Recently, she showed the score of ‘Dream House’ by La Monte Young.
The minimalist composer writes much of his music for small spaces.
In 1989, Ursula Block organised with Michael Glasmeier the show ‘broken music’ with visual artists' variations on the theme of the (vinyl) record.
A typical exhibit, Thomas Kapielsky's witty ‘Käseplatte’ is an object the size and shape of a record (platte) which also looks like a section of a round cheese (Käse); but the thing visualises at the same time an untranslatable German pun (while ‘Käseplatte’is normally a selection of cheeses in a restaurant, ‘Käse’is also colloquial for crap which can of course refer to music as well as to art…).
On a somewhat more disturbing note, Timm Ulrichs contributed a handsome set of ‘records’ made of sandpaper.
The exhibition also featured chocolate records by Peter Lardong.
They could be seen, eaten, and listened to that is until the show went on tour to Australia.
Ursula Block reports that they melted on the way.
The gallery stocks more and more compact discs but according to Mrs Block the new medium does not appear to inspire visual artists yet.
PARIS
Lending an ear at Louis Carré
Auricular art by Tomio Miki
Until the middle of next month, Louis Carré et Cie is featuring three Japanese artists, Tomio Miki, Shintaro Tanaka and their younger colleague Shinro Ohtake.
Miki, who died fourteen years ago, was obsessed by the form of the ear, producing casts which endowed that organ with symbolic complexity and mythological significance.
Tanaka's latest works are the culmination of a process that has brought him from the flat and serial minimalism of lines of white cement blocks to such imposing works as ‘Scenery comes vertical’, a bronze obelisk placed in front of a painting depicting the course of the Nile.
Ohtake has recently been experimenting with objets trouvés, transforming them into architectural forms; these are not, however, completely divorced from the spirit of the assemblages, collages, ink drawings and graffiti typical of his earlier work.
Germaine Richier, who died in 1959, has long been neglected in France.
Until 25 April, Odermatt-Cazeau is exhibiting thirty or so of her finest metamorphic sculptures; she combines elements from the human, animal and vegetable realms to create magma-like forms which are both fragile and monumental.
After exploring Alfonso Ossorio's New York period in the Fifties and Sixties, Zabriskie is showing works by Mary Frank, inspired by folk stories, the Bible and classical myth.
Until 15 May, Gerwald Rockenschaub is exhibiting at Gilbert Brownstone.
In the larger exhibition area, the Austrian artist has created an architectural structure of monochrome agglomerate tiles and pieces of carpet of every shape and colour, while the smaller room accommodates a three-dimensional work in plexiglass.
Thaddaeus Ropac is showing work by Arnulf Rainer until the end of the month, while Yvon Lambert has replaced Jean-Charles Blais and Sergio Fermariello with Ashley Bickerton and On Kawara, whose work can be seen until 12 May.
Farideh Cadot offers us the penetrating lyrical vision of the late Daniel Tremblay, who worked with a range of disparate materials.
In recent years.
Patrick Faigenbaum has been immortalising the ancient noble families of Rome and Naples in cruel photographic portraits.
So unflattering are they, their subjects appear to have been caught off guard.
Yet, it is clear that the photographer has in fact got them to pose, dressed up in their smartest clothes.
Singly and in groups, these aristocratic figures look down on us from the walls of the Crousel-Robelin-Bama gallery, proud survivors of a vanishing world.
Meanwhile, the neo-conceptualism of General Idea is at the Montenay until 25 April.
Lelong is exhibiting a score of canvases on the theme of the tree by Pierre Alechinsky, characterised by lively, flowing brushwork.
To coincide with the exhibition, which runs until 8 June, the Belgian artist is bringing out two books: Lettre suit, published by Gallimard, and Travaux d'imprimerie, by Galilée.
Monumental sculptures and architectural drawings are on the programme at Villa Blanche, until 16 May.
The artist is Bernard Quentin, master of every form of calligraphy and written code: from the cuneiform alphabet to hieroglyphs, from ancient graffiti to Chinese ideograms.
Forms of writing are the central concern of this painter, sculptor, architect and designer, who was the first to experiment with electronic graphics and to exhibit inflatable furniture.
Drawings and small-scale sculptures by Quentin can also be seen at Galerie B. Until 9 May, Samia Saouma is showing scenic constructions photographed by Olivier Richon; the sumptuous atmospheres he creates are ambiguous, pregnant with allusions to the iconography of ages past.
In contrast, until 16 May Hadrien Thomas continues to feature Bruno Ceccobelli, who, true to the aesthetics of Arte Povera, constructs his poliptychs and icons from everyday materials.
Until 10 May, the Di Meo brothers are presenting ink drawings and gouaches produced by Joseph Suma in the years 1924 to 1970, thereby supplementing the retrospective being staged by the Musée d'Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris.
Until 2 May, Claude Bernard is showing paintings and watercolours by Giorgio Morandi, while the Galerie des Archives has opted for recent canvases by the American Lydia Dona.
Liliane and Michel Durand-Dessert are exhibiting works by Luciano Fabro, many of them on show for the first time.
They can be seen until the middle of next month.
Arman is featured at the Beaubourg Gallery, until 6 May.
His bronze sculptures have the appearance of objects retrieved after many centuries on the sea bed.
The exhibition ends with a series of engravings of dismantled bicycles and broken violins fragments of our civilisation to be discovered by the archaeologists of the future.
Finally, Nikki Diana Marquardt presents Jacques Fournel, an artist totally absorbed by his own ego.
For years, he has been producing images of himself in different guises: from ancient Roman busts to self-portraits done in the styles of famous artists.
Art Market
Landseer and Zoffany
London, Christie's, 10 April.
Included in this sale of British pictures will be Sir Edwin Landseer's ‘The Cover Hack’, which is estimated to realize £120-150,000 ($215–265,000), and ‘Mr George Marriott on his bay Hunter taking a fence’, which is estimated to make £80–100,000 ($140–180,000).
The celebrated ‘Colonel Mordaunt's Cock Fight’, commissioned by Warren Hastings and painted between 1784 and 1786 by Johan Zoffany, is also to be put on offer, estimate on request.
Under northern skies
Amsterdam, Sotheby's, 14 April.
The focus in this sale of 19th-century European paintings will fall on northern European works and a selection from The Hague School.
A Dutch canal scene by Isaac Israels is estimated at DFl.80–120,000 (£25–40,000; $40–70,000) and a street scene in a Jewish neighbourhood by Samuel Verveer is expected to sell for DFl.40–60,000 (£12,500–20,000; $22–35,000), as is another street scene, ‘Spui in The Hague’ by Floris Arntzenius.
Togetherness
London, Christie's, 14 April.
An undoubted highlight of this Old Master drawings sale is the previously unknown drawing of ‘Two Lovers’, by Parmigianino, executed in his late manner (est. £30–40,000; $55–70,000).
A similar sum is expected for a landscape drawing by Fra Bartolommeo entitled ‘A farm on a ridge’, dating from 1508, which, like other similar landscape drawings by the artist, appears to have been drawn for pleasure.
A group of four drawings by Guercino, all from the same collection, is also included.
The best, a study for the lost painting ‘The Vision of St Clare’ of circa 1618, is ‘St Anthony of Padua (?) holding the Infant Christ and kneeling before the Virgin, attended by two angels’, bears the estimate of £30–50,000 ($55–90,000).
Another of the sheets is ‘Studies of the penitent Magdalene’, in which she is shown in two stances, kneeling before a crucifix and asleep (est. £12–18,000; $21–32,000).
Fifty-eight new varieties
London, Christie's, 14 April.
This special afternoon sale will put on offer an album of fifty-eight previously unknown drawings by Henry Fuseli.
These came to light when a couple brought the album in for valuation without knowing the artist's identity.
The collection was assembled by Miss Harriet Moore after the death of the artist, whom she had probably met through his friend William Lock, and is varied both in date and subject matter.
The drawings are expected to realize £300–500,000 ($550–900,000) in total.
Still over the water
London, Sotheby's, 14 April.
The highlight of this sale of British ceramics and glass is certain to be the Gregson of Tillierfour Jacobite ‘Amen’ glass, used to toast the exiled Stuarts, which is estimated to fetch £30–40,000 ($55–70,000).
A Jacobite wine glass, enamelled with a portrait of Bonnie Prince Charlie and one of eight thought to have been made in Edinburgh around 1765, is expected to make £15–20,000 ($25–35,000).
A disguised Jacobite glass with ‘God bless Prince Charlie and down with the Rump’ engraved under the rim is estimated at £3–5,000 ($5,500–9,000).
Early British pottery is represented by a Delftware tulip charger made in London in the late seventeenth century (estimate £6–8,000; $11–14,000).
Vintage cat
New York, Sotheby's, 14 April.
A large selection of vintage prints will be on offer in this sale of photographs, including possibly the first print of André Kertesz's silver print of ‘Chat Noir’(est. $50–70,000; £30–40,000) and a group of four works by Tina Modotti: a platinum print, circa 1926, entitled ‘Woman carrying Olla’(est. $40–60,000; £25–35,000), silver prints of a ‘Mexican peasant boy’ and ‘Campesinos’(both est. $20–30,000; £11–17,000) and a platinum print from the early 1920s entitled ‘Lily and Bud’(est. $7–10,000; £4–5,500).
Sunrise in the morning
Tokyo, Sotheby's, 14 April.
This sale of nineteenth and twentieth-century and contemporary Western prints and paintings by Japanese artists will include ‘Meeting the Dawn’, by Hishida Shunso.
The painting dates from around 1903–05 but was only rediscovered last year in New England, where it had been bought for $175 in 1905 when the artist made a trip abroad to find a new audience for his Nihonga work.
It is now estimated to sell for Yen 25 million (£110,000; $200,000).
Ray fixes image
New York, Christie's, 15 April.
This sale of photographs will include ‘Portrait of Jean Cocteau, 1924’, by Man Ray (est. $20–30,000; £11–17,000) and ‘Wooden Horses, 1929’ by André Kertesz (est. $15–20,000; £8,500–11,000).
Also on offer is the original paste-up of a photo montage by Herbert Bayer ‘In Search of Times Past (1959)’.
Lady is for sale
Amsterdam, Christie's, 22 April.
A painting by Isaac Israels is the highlight of this sale of nineteenth-century European pictures.
‘Lady in Red’ was painted between 1924 and 1926.
A winter landscape by Andries Schelfhout painted in 1857 is expected to make DFl.200–300,000 (£60–90,000; $100–160,000).
Bedtime
Monaco, Sotheby's, 26 April.
This sale of twentieth-century decorative arts will have a strong furniture section, which will include a bed, dressing table and a pair of bedside tables from the same Louis Majorelle suite.
All are in mahogany and applied with gilt-bronze orchid decorations.
The suite was made in Nancy in around 1900 and is now expected to fetch FF1.2–1.8m (£120–180,000; $215–320,000).
A Modernist bookcase by Jacques-Emile Ruhlmann and Jean Dunand in black lacquered wood, silver plate and glass is estimated at FF500–700,000 (£50–70,000; $90–125,000), while a Daum and Majorelle glass and bronze lamp in the form of a highly stylized flower, is estimated to make FF400–600,000 (£40–60,000; $70–100,000).
Victor ludorum
New York, Sotheby's, 27 April.
Certain to attract attention in this sale of English and Continental silver is a George I silver race prize dish by Paul de Lamerie in the form of a salver-on-foot, bearing the arms of Anthony, Earl of Herold and engraved ‘Won at Burford the 5th of July 1722’.
The dish is expected to realize $80–120,000 (£45–70,000).
A pair of George III wine coolers made in 1811 by Paul Storr are estimated at $50–60,000 (£30–35,000), while a George III honey pot cover and stand, made in 1799 by John Robins, is expected to make $8–10,000 (£4,500–5,500).
Morris carpet
London, Phillips, 28 April.
The feature in this sale of English and Continental furniture and carpets is a Hammersmith carpet designed by William Morris in 1883.
It is one of three with this design, each of which has a different central motif and surround, and has never been published before.
The carpet was acquired from Morris & Co. by the uncle of the present owner around 1890 and is estimated to make £30–50,000 ($55–90,000).
A Regency carved giltwood Dolphin centre table surmounted by a specimen marble top (d.93cm, ht.86cm) is estimated at £20–30,000 $35–55,000), while a ‘dragon’ group Bakshaish carpet (ca.1850, 372x280cm), from Persian Kurdistan, is expected to fetch £4–6,000 ($7–10,000).
Hearth and home
London, Phillips, 28 April.
William Duffield will take pride of place in this sale of British and Victorian paintings with his ‘Still life of a blackcock, a woodpigeon, a stein and a sumptuous display of fruit’(signed and dated 1857, oil on canvas, 112x142cm), which is estimated to fetch £30–40,000 ($55–70,000).
Also in the sale, bearing the same estimate of £20–30,000 ($35–55,000) are two paintings by Arthur John Elsley, ‘Tea Time’(signed and dated 1904, oil on canvas, 84x60cm) and ‘More Haste less Speed’(signed and dated 1899, oil on canvas, 94x84.5cm).
Impressionist from down under
Melbourne, Christie's, 28 April.
‘Cruach en Mehr, Matin, Belle Ile en Mer’(oil on canvas, 60.4x73.5cm), by John Peter Russell, exhibited at the Salon d'Automne in 1905, is sure to be the top lot in this sale of Australian pictures.
Coming from a French private collection, the painting is expected to fetch Aus$400–600,000 (£170–250,000; $300–450,000).
Also attracting interest is Arthur Boyd's ‘Frightened Bridegroom II’(signed, oil and tempera on muslin laid down on masonite, 137x183cm), painted in 1958.
It is expected to fetch in the region of Aus$250,000 (£100,000; $180,000), while his ‘Girl asleep in a steam’(signed, oil and tempera on masonite, 121.9x137.2cm), of 1960, is estimated to make Aus$60–80,000 (£25–35,000; $45–60,000).
‘Skipping girl of Fitzroy’, by Charles Blackman (signed and dated 1954, oil on board, 116.2x88.7cm) is estimated to bring Aus$30–40,000 (£12,500–18,000; $22–32,000).
Jewish incunabula
Tel Aviv, Sotheby's, 28 April.
The top lot in this sale of Judaica is a Dutch Passover Haggadah (Haggadah shel Pessach) on vellum, illustrated by an unknown artist in Amsterdam in 1737.
The text is in Ashkenasi Hebrew with Yiddish translation and includes the only known notations in a Hebrew text (est. $80–90,000; £45–50,000).
A copy of the Haftorot, with a comment by Abraham Ibn Ezra and printed in Constantinople in 1505, is expected to make $40–50,000 (£25–50,000).
Sharing the same estimate of $25–30,000 (£14–17,000) are two books printed in Naples between 1486 and 1487: a Book of Job, with a commentary by Levi Ben Gershon, and a Book of Proverbs, with a commentary by Immanuel Ben Yakov Shlomo.
Dating from the same period but bearing the slightly lower estimate of $20–26,000 (£11–15,000) is a book of the Five Scrolls, with Daniel, Ezra, Nehemiah and part of Chronicles and a Commentary by Rashi and Joseph Kara.
Eastern sorrow
London, Sotheby's, 29 April.
Standing out in this sale of the Baron and Baroness Bachofen von Echt Collection of Indian paintings is a small picture depicting an illustration from the Rasamanjari.
Painted around 1660–70 by an unknown artist working in the state of Basohli in the Punjab Hills, the work shows a young woman returning home to find her lover gone, and is estimated to fetch £80–120,000 ($140–210,000).
A Kangra picture of circa 1780 depicting the God Krishna tending cattle with some cowherds is estimated at £30–40,000 ($55–70,000), while a scene from a tiger hunt in Kotah, by Hans Raj Johi, dating from circa 1850, is expected to make £60–80,000 ($100–140,000).
A Company School watercolour portrait of ‘Kala as a trooper’ is estimated at £20–30,000 ($35–55,000).
Made to order
New York, Christie's, 29 April.
In this sale of French furniture eighteenth and nineteenth-century work is set off by pieces especially created by François Linke for the 1900 International Exhibition in Paris.
These include a display cabinet, expected to sell for $200–300,000 (£110–170,000), and a bed, estimated at $100–150,000 (£55–85,000).
Western Oriental script
London, Sotheby's, 30 April.
This sale of Oriental manuscripts and miniatures will include a Qur'an dated 556 AH (1160 AD) written in Maghribi script on vellum.
Originating in Andalucia, the Qur'an is estimated to sell for £100–150,000 ($180–265,000).
A particularly small Qur'an section dating from 393 AH and still with its original Persian binding is expected to make £60–80,000 ($100–140,000).
A drawing attributed to the Persian artist Dust Muhammad, dating from the mid-sixteenth century and depicting the first scene from the tale of ‘Haftvad and the Worm’, bears the estimate of £25–35,000 ($45–60,000).
Restoration work
London, Christie's, 8 May.
Featuring in this sale of timepieces is a Charles II olivewood oyster and parquetry longcase clock from the workshop of Joseph Knibb, which is expected to realize £50–70,000 ($90–125,000).
A George II ebonised small bracket timepiece by George Graham of London is expected to sell for £10–15,000 ($18–25,000) and a Victorian engraved giltmetal, malachite and lapis lazuli miniature mantel timepiece in the form of a Chiffonier, by Thomas Cole, is estimated at £7–10,000 ($12,500–18,000).
Frozen world
London, Sotheby's, 8 May.
This year's annual sale of photographs and related material includes pieces from the collection of the Reverend Calvert Jones.
One of the highlights is a sketch book containing prints taken in the 1840s of people, ships, rigging and a street scene, which is estimated to sell for £20–30,000 ($35–55,000).
From the twentieth century comes a vintage print by André Kertesz, ‘In Mondrian's Studio’, taken in Paris in 1926 and estimated to fetch £25–35,000 ($45–60,000).
A selection of prints by Robert Frank is also on offer.