

Britain cannot police bad Italian laws
Britain is not enjoying its presidency of the European Council.
The problems of the last months are making such celebratory gestures as the David Hockney EC stamp, and John Major 's £6 million European festival of the arts (almost ignored by the media) seem pathetically out-of-tune.
Being President also means that it is unsporting to fight too hard for one's corner on any given issue, as a dignified referee-like stance is required.
The British art trade would, however, like some serious fighting to be done to prevent its leading position in the world art  market from being eroded by proposed EC provisions.
One draft directive the trade is worried about regards the return of cultural treasures unlawfully removed from another member state (see The Art Newspaper No.16, March 1992, p.1).
On the face of it one might say that an upstanding, law-abiding trade should have nothing to fear where this is concerned; they should simply not deal in masterpieces without a provenance.
It is when one comes to look at the application of the directive, and, in particular, at the small print of some other member states' legislation, that one sees it is not so simple.
At the nub of the matter is the fact that the Southern EC member states tend to have laws relating to the protection of their national heritage which are centralising and confiscatory.
In Italy, for example, every cultural good over fifty years old, regardless of value, requires an export licence.
A further group of works and not even the relevant authorities know how many, except that it runs into hundreds of thousands are ‘notified’; that is, they may not even be lent, restored or sold within Italy, let alone exported, without the permission of the authorities.
As said before, there is no complete list of these items, no visual catalogue.
Needless to say, these are laws more honoured in the breach than in the observance.
Now what this directive is doing is to put the onus on each EC country to police every other EC country's system relating to cultural goods.
And since, in practice, it is through the UK that by far the largest numbers of works of art are imported and exported, it looks at though, in effect, it is going to be Britain that will have to police Italian laws.
For example, for Article 4 of the proposed directive to be implemented, Britain would have to introduce legislation allowing for the searching of premises to hold and seize items which another country says there are ‘reasonable grounds for believing’ have ‘been unlawfully removed from its territory’.
This would almost certainly be seen in Britain as constituting an infringement of private property rights.
Even more alien to the spirit of British law, is a recent amendment to the Directive which enables a member state to declare an object a national treasure ‘before or after its lawful removal’, and therefore take retrospective action at the point of sale or at any time subsequently.
These are just two of many aspects of this Directive which give serious cause for concern, and it is not just Britain, but also Germany, Holland and Belgium that have reservations.
The Directive must be sent back to the drawing board.
The protection of what is truly important to the culture of the whole of Europe is too serious a matter to be left to unrealistic laws.
It requires the cooperation of every citizen, and no law which unreasonably infringes the freedoms of that citizen can be expected to be effective.
Cultural property
World War II ends for a small town in eastern Germany
Its treasure dispersed in 1945, reunited in 1992, returning home in 1993
BERLIN.
Ancient church treasures of gold, silver, ivory and rock crystal; enamelled, filigreed, and bejewelled, which were stolen from Quedlinburg by a US army lieutenant in 1945, have been returned to Germany, and the whole contents of the treasury some fifty works has just gone on display in the Kunstgewerbemuseum until 30 May 1993.
In 1945 some of the boxes in which the treasures of the conventual church of St Servatius had been stored were discovered to have been broken open, and twelve of the precious objects were missing.
It was over forty years before a trail led to Whitewright, Texas, where they were being offered for sale by the descendants of Joe Tom Meador, the lieutenant in question, who had died in 1980.
The first item to be retrieved, in 1989 through the negotiations of the Kulturstiftung der Länder (the federal heritage funding body), was the tenth-century Samuel Gospels, with their golden calligraphy and jewel-studded cover.
The remaining eleven works arrived back in April this year after an out-of-court settlement by the Kulturstiftung and the Ministry of the Interior.
Quedlinburg is now an unimportant town in the formerly East German Land of Sachsen-Anhalt, but it had its decades of glory in the early Middle Ages when it was closely connected with the German imperial court.
From the tenth to the thirteenth centuries, the abbesses were all from the imperial family or the highest nobility.
It was then that the church treasury was showered with gifts of the finest reliquaries and liturgical items goldsmiths could make.
The theft has ultimately brought a bonus to the church of St Servatius.
The West German agencies, having gone to such trouble to retrieve the missing items, have decided that the treasury needs to be brought up to scratch, so the Kulturstiftung der Länder, the clothing stores C.&A.
Brenninkmeyer, together with funding from the federal government and the Land, are paying for the work to be done before the treasures go back on display in Quedlinburg next summer.
As to the pieces themselves, the Samuel Gospels were conserved by the Bavarian Staatsbibliothek, while the rest was treated by the restorers in the Berlin Kunstgewerbemuseum.
A catalogue has been published by Nikolai Verlag, Berlin, and costs DM58 (DM 30 p/b).
The whole is a tribute to the diplomatic skills and national divisions of the Generalsekretär of the Kulturstiftung, Klaus Maurice, whose view of German culture transcends normal politics, as his recent enabling of the British Library to buy the complete series of Tauchnitz classics shows; for at the time when he retrieved the first piece of the treasure, Quedlinburg was still behind the Wall.
New York
Art means dollars but it may take Madison Avenue PR to persuade the Big Apple
The Metropolitan Museum spearheads a campaign to convince big business of the financial rewards of support for the arts
NEW YORK.
If there were ever any doubts about whether the arts were good for the economy of New York City, a new study seeks to prove that they are.
The Metropolitan Museum of Art has just published a survey of visitors to the retrospective of the works of Georges Seurat, which the Met organized with the Grand Palais a year ago.
The Met found that the 642,000 who visited the show spent an estimated $313 million on hotels, restaurants, and transportation while they were in New York City.
Two-thirds of those visitors came to New York specifically to see the Seurat show.
The 550,000 visitors to the Met's ‘Mexico: Splendors of Thirty Centuries’ in 1990–91 ended up spending around $250 million in New York.
The economic impact of the arts in New York has not however been obvious to the city's business leaders or to its city government, says William Luers, president of the Metropolitan Museum.
In late September, the Met, along with leaders of about forty arts organizations, held a press conference to demonstrate the importance of the arts to the New York economy, using the data of the Seurat study.
One outcome of that event was the announcement that an expanded and updated version of a 1983 regional study, Arts as an Industry, would be conducted by the Port Authority of New York.
That study is expected to document the role of cultural institutions in creating employment and attracting businesses to New York City.
So far says William Luers, business leaders have become more receptive to the arts as a component of economic development: the New York Partnership, a business organization, is participating in the Port Authority study, which is expected to cost $650,000.
Political leaders, Luers says, have been harder to convince.
While the city administration of New York Mayor David Dinkins has viewed museums and performing arts funding as an opportunity to promote cultural diversity, the city's government has largely ignored the arts as a sector for economic development.
At the core of this debate is the precariousness of state arts funding throughout the United States, and the threat of reductions in public funding at a time when cutting the government's colossal budget deficit is a national priority.
When legislators look where cuts can be made, arts budgets are often the first to come under scrutiny.
In New York City the focus is on the approximately $171 million budget of New York City's Department of Cultural Affairs, distributed annually to museums and other institutions.
Cuts to that budget when the Dinkins administration took power forced the Met to impose a hiring freeze and close some galleries.
The Brooklyn Museum sacked employees, cancelled exhibitions, and closed one extra day a week.
Other institutions dependent on city money fared even worse.
At the same time, funding from the New York State Council for the Arts was reduced by 56%.
Implicit in the economic development argument made by the Met and other institutions is the notion that, if museums bring revenues to the city, increased funding from the city will enable those museums to bring in even more money.
Citing one example, Philippe de Montebello estimated that spending in New York by visitors to the Seurat show alone brought New York tax revenues of about $31 million.
The Met receives about $13 million a year for operations from New York City, $3 million less than it got two years ago.
It takes more than a shoestring to keep an essential component of the economy strong, say the Met, and other institutions concur.
Crucial to the promotion of arts funding in New York is the role of the Department of Cultural Affairs.
Critics charged the agency's former head, a  crony of the mayor, with watching in silence while arts budgets were gutted.
The current commissioner, Luis Cancel, disputes that version of events, and pledges to place the arts' economic role at the center of an effort to secure more funding or at least resist further budget cuts.
With this effort to deploy support for the arts in New York has come a proliferation of arts alliances, organizations and advisory committee.
On the national level, a group called the National Cultural Alliance will launch what promises to be an earnest three-year ‘public awareness’ advertising campaign early next year.
Its populist mission is to ‘challenge the fallacy that the arts and humanities belong only to a few’.
The $25 million campaign, showcasing art as ‘an essential component of a healthy society’, will be developed by the Advertising Council, a non-profit group of volunteers from the advertising business.
Enlisting the help of Madison Avenue to plead the case of culture to the American public may show just how desperately cultural institutions need support.
London
The Turner Prize field
An abundance of talent, a hint of sensation
For perhaps only the second time since the Turner Prize was inaugurated in 1984, the jury, comprising Nicholas Serota, Director of the Tate Gallery, Marie-Claude Beaud, Director of the Cartier Foundation, Robert Hopper, Director of the Henry Moore Sculpture Trust, Time Out's art critic, Sarah Kent, and collector and director of CNN's European operations, Howard Karshan, has compiled a genuinely balanced short-list of artists whose work will be shown in an exhibition opening at the Tate Gallery at the beginning of this month (4–29 November) and from whom a winner will be announced at a formal dinner taking place at the museum on 24 November.
Channel 4, the sponsors of the £20,000 prize, will repeat its live television coverage of that event and preview the artists and their work in a documentary being transmitted on 3 November (9.00–10.00pm).
The four short-listed artists are Grenville Davey, Damien Hirst, David Tremlett and Alison Wilding, each of whom has produced an impressive body of work in recent years and is beginning to enjoy international recognition, but none of whom will be familiar to a wider audience.
Hirst, at twenty-seven the youngest of the four contenders, is the finalist who has attracted greater publicity in the last twelve months.
Considerable interest and debate surrounded his exhibitions at the ICA (see The Art Newspaper No.13, December 1991, p.9) and the Saatchi Collection (see The Art Newspaper No.16, March 1992, p.7), where he installed ‘The impossibility of death in the mind of someone living’, a fourteen-foot tiger shark suspended in formaldehyde solution in a steel and glass tank, and seven other sculptures.
With a working career spanning barely four years, he is the list's sensation.
His rivals work at a quieter pitch, making art that is predominantly abstract.
They have been nominated for exhibitions which have been held outside London or abroad.
It is likely that Alison Wilding will capture the fancy of pundits and punters, as much for her surprising omission from last year's highly controversial short-list (see The Art Newspaper No.12, November 1991, p.3), as for the quality of the work which she showed at the Tate Gallery, Liverpool, and the Henry Moore Sculpture Trust, Dean Clough, Halifax, the two exhibitions which secured her nomination.
United States
The President's cultural policy
LONDON.
Traditionally the arts have not played much of a role in U.S. presidential policies, as America believes, even more than Britain, in an arm's-length approach on the part of the State.
Federal funding for the arts occupies a tiny part of the national budget, but in the last administration became a cause celèbre when the question of National Endowment for the Arts' occasional support for provocative and sexually explicit art aroused the fury of conservatives led by Senator Jesse Helms, who whipped up popular support for a move to curb or cut the N.E.A.'s budget.
Bush gave in to this  movement , invoked at that time by presidential contender Patrick Buchanan, when he sacked the chairman of the N.E.A. John Frohnmayer this spring (The Art Newspaper No. 17, April 1992, pp.1,2).
This is the background to what Clinton says clearly and unambiguously and Bush says in a more round-about way on the subject of the arts.
Bill Clinton
We believe that the arts should play an essential role in educating and enriching all Americans.
We will help the arts become an integral part of education in every community, broadening the horizons of our children and preserving our valuable cultural heritage.
A Clinton-Gore Administration will ensure access to the arts for all of our citizens.
As President and Vice President, we will defend freedom of speech and artistic expression by opposing censorship or ‘content restrictions’ on grants made by the National Endowment for the Arts.
We will continue federal funding for the arts and promote the full diversity of American culture, recognising the importance of providing all Americans with access to the arts.
From ‘Putting People First’, the Bill Clinton-Al Gore manifesto
George Bush
The culture of our Nation has traditionally supported those pillars on which civilised society is built: personal responsibility, morality, and the family.
Today, however, these pillars are under assault.
Elements within the media, the entertainment industry, academia, and the Democrat Party are waging a guerilla war against American values.
They deny personal responsibility, disparage traditional morality, denigrate religion, and promote hostility toward the family's way of life.
Children, the members of our society most vulnerable to cultural influences, are barraged with violence and promiscuity, encouraging reckless and irresponsible  behaviour .
This undermines the authority of parents, the ones most responsible for passing on to their offspring a sense of right and wrong.
The lesson our Party draws is important that all of us, individuals and corporations alike, have a responsibility to reflect the values we expect our fellow citizens to exhibit.
We must recognize that the time has come for a national crusade against pornography.
Some would have us believe that obscenity and pornography have no social impact.
But if hard-core pornography does not cheapen the human spirit, then neither does Shakespeare elevate it.
We call on federal agencies to halt the sale, under government auspices, of pornographic materials.
We endorse Republican legislation, the Pornography Victims Compensation Act, allowing victims of pornography to seek damages from those who make or sell it, especially since the Commission on Pornography, in 1986, found a direct link between pornography and violent crimes committed against women and children…
Government has a responsibility, as well, to ensure that it promotes the common moral values that bind us together as a Nation.
We therefore condemn the use of public funds to subsidize obscenity and blasphemy masquerading as art.
The fine arts, including those with public support, can certainly enrich our society.
However, no artist has an inherent right to claim taxpayer support for his or her private vision of art if that vision mocks the moral and spiritual basis on which our society is founded.
We believe a free market in art with neither suppression nor  favouritism by government is the best way to foster the cultural revival our country needs.
Talking law
The Thyssen Collection was granted export documents before even entering Spain
Further details of the 1988 contract between Spain and Baron Thyssen
LONDON.
The Thyssen museum opened in Madrid on 9th of last month to fairly general self-congratulation in the Spanish newspapers, qualified by the hope that the paintings would remain there at the end of the nine and a half years loan/rental period (The Art Newspaper No. 21, Oct 1992, pp.1, 6).
However, a paper read at the International Bar Asssociation meeting in the summer by the Spanish lawyer on the Thyssen Foundation's board, Rodrigo Uria, and Richard Turnor, of the firm of Allen and Overy acting for Baron Thyssen, reveals that the Baron has been concerned to keep his options open: not a single work of art was sent into Spain until it had already been granted its export licence out of Spain.
The question of the freedom to re-export the works of art was in fact the main stumbling block in drawing up the contract with the Spanish State in 1988.
What redress would the Baron have if the Spanish State simply declared the works of art to be Spanish patrimony, as it is a principle of public international law that a Sovereign state enjoys immunity from legal proceedings abroad?
To reassure the Baron, the Spanish State has waived its sovereign immunity in respect of actions for the recovery of the paintings.
It has further participated in the Thyssen-Bornemisza Collection Foundation, which is a legal entity formed to undertake joint responsibility for the custody of the paintings.
The Spanish State has subcontracted to the Foundation many of the rights and obligations under the loan agreement.
Importantly, the Foundation does not enjoy the privileges of immunity of the Sovereign State.
Even this provision is not cast iron, however, as the Spanish State could ‘move the goal posts’ and change the law to render the  agreement unenforceable.
The solution has been found by submitting the agreement to English law, widely thought to be the fairest and most flexible, and therefore used for many international transactions.
In case of a dispute, a tribunal of arbitrators will be created from senior EC lawyers (other than from Spain) or from Canada or the US.
The Spanish State also had its concerns: as it was investing so much in the collection, who was to say that the Baron had perfect title to all the works?
Lawyers in many different countries therefore embarked on the massive job of checking title to all the works of art  acquired after the compilation of the catalogue in the Thirties.
Finally, in 1988 Sotheby's valued the entire collection in case of loss, damage or destruction.
It is worth noting that Allen and Overy, the London solicitors acting for the Baron, are beginning to acquire a certain reputation for themselves in the art world.
They also acted for the Trust which owns Canova's ‘Three Graces’, so nearly exported from the United Kingdom in 1989, and for Lord Northampton in his acquisition of part of the Roman Sevso treasure, at present the subject of a legal dispute in the New York courts.
Catalonia
Walter Benjamin falls victim a second time to German policy
PORT-BOU (BARCELONA).
Plans to commission a monument to the German-Jewish philosopher Walter Benjamin have been abandoned under pressure from the Bundestag.
Benjamin, who was born exactly one hundred years ago, fled to Spain in 1940 to escape Nazi persecution.
Informed on by the Spanish police, he committed suicide rather than be captured by the Gestapo, by taking an overdose of morphine.
His book, The work of art in the age of mechanical reproduction,(published 1936 in German: Das Kunstwerk in Zeitalter seiner technischen Reproduzierbarkeit) was one of the first works to use deconstruction as a method of analysis and has been highly influential on today's generation of artists who incorporate texts into their art (for example, Joseph Kosuth).
The commission for a new tomb for the philosopher, to replace the simple stone that marks his grave on the Catalan coast, had been given to the Israeli artist Dani Karavan in 1989 by the Arbeitskreis Selbständiger Kulturinstitut and was to be financed to the tune of DM1 million by the German Foreign Ministry.
In design it was to be a narrow flight of steps descending a steep slope, partly below ground, that ended abruptly above the sea at a vertical plate-glass wall.
This has now had to be shelved with the arrival of a Diktat from the Bundestag criticising both the excessive cost and the involvement of the Foreign Ministry.
Looks like
This must be one of the most blatant cases of ‘appropriation’ in the world of contemporary art.
Born in 1966, Anthony Auerbach studied at the Camberwell School of Art, the University of Witwatersrand, the Bezalel School of Art, Jerusalem, the International Environment Institute of the Foundation of International Studies and the University of Malta, and the Ruskin School of Art, Oxford.
The result of this considerable effort is a body of work of startling similarity (left) to that of Frank Auerbach (right), to whom he is in no way related.
His seeming determination to be confused with the distinguished British artist is evident in the recent press release advertising an exhibition of his work in which he refers to his emphasis on non-commissioned portrait drawings which ‘entail months, even years, of work with the sitter, while very little peripheral material such as smaller studies, sculpture, and etchings is allowed to emerge from the studio’.
Those familiar with the work and working methods of Frank Auerbach may find all this oddly familiar.
Conference for the restoration of Croatia's heritage
LONDON.
The Courtauld Institute of London and the Institute of Advanced Architectural Studies of the University of York are co-hosting a six-day study tour and workshop, 23–25 November and 26–28 November respectively, titled ‘Post-War Reconstruction and Conservation in Croatia’.
The study tour, based in London, is for an invited group of conservators, craftsmen, planners and architects working in Croatia to assess the expertise on offer in the U.K. The workshop in York is additionally for other interested people and groups involved in conservation.
For further information contact Anthea Brook (Courtauld Institute) on 071–873 2726.
A new TV channel for the arts in Europe
PARIS.
A new French-German television channel called simply ‘Arte’ is to broadcast programmes on the visual arts, theatre, dance, music, cinema and documentaries on the European frequency formerly occupied by Italian media magnate Berlusconi & C. The channel has been created from the merger of two public networks, Arte Deutschland TV GmbH (Germany) and la Sept (France) and should soon be transmitted throughout Europe.
Among the sixteen members of the consultative committee are Michel Laclotte, Director of the Louvre and Peter Glotz, a member of the Bundestag.
The programmes are transmitted from 19.00 hours until midnight.
Among the first documentaries, programmed for Fridays, is a three-part series on European civilisation seen through the history of colour; a portrait of Gaudí's life; and a viewing of the exhibition ‘Manifeste’ at the Pompidou Centre.
Art and opera
Hockney's light and shadows
‘Die Frau ohne Schatten’ at Covent Garden
LONDON.
Richard Strauss's opera ‘Die Frau ohne Schatten’ which opens on 16 November at Covent Garden will be London's biggest art event this month.
David Hockney's set designs are the first he has done for Covent Garden.
They were commissioned by John Cox who worked with Hockney at Glyndebourne and who is now Production Director of the Royal Opera.
Cox approached Hockney in autumn of 1988, thinking that the dramatic content of the opera and its central theme of creativity would suit Hockney's imagination.
In creating the prototypes for the full-scale sets Hockney worked directly onto models in his Los Angeles studio: first a small 1:25 scale model on which to rapidly work out ideas, then a large model at 1:8 scale which incorporates a sophisticated lighting console and into which figurines are inserted.
Using a range of lighting  possibilities and figure positions on stage, which Hockney synchronised with a recording of the opera, he was able to produce a video of ‘Die Frau’.
Both the video and the pieces of the 1:8 model have been used in London to create the sets, in which Hockney has used bright colours and strong abstract shapes to striking effect.
Although the commission for the designs came from London, ‘Die Frau’ is a co-production with Los Angeles Music Center Opera.
All Hockney's fees have been paid by Los Angeles, to whom Covent Garden have paid rental for the sets.
Hockney however retains possession of his models.
The opera will be performed in Los Angeles in September1993.
In London, it is at Covent Garden on 16, 20, 23, 25 and 28 November.
Letters
I disagree with Ginsburgh and Schwed on econometrics
I read the article entitled ‘Can the art market be subject to econometrics?’
(The Art Newspaper, No. 20, July-Sept) with great interest.
Due to the importance of this economic issue, I would like to inform other readers that a critique of this article is available if they would like to write to me.
Our title was ‘Only some of the truth: ‘We must protect the artist's name, image and market’’
I enjoyed reading the review by James Hall of Piero Manzoni, Catalogue Raisonné (The Art Newspaper, No. 20, July-September, p.16), not just as publisher of the catalogue and of the first monograph on the artist (Milan, 1967), but also as a friend of Piero Manzoni, in his private and his public life together we did Tavole di accertamento (1958–60), published in 1962.
I feel that I must clarify (I don't presume to think that all your readers will have read the catalogue raisonné) my intentions, and those of the authors in embarking upon this book.
Piero Manzoni, Catalogue Raisonné is the fruit of the critical activity and historical and technical research conducted by Galleria Blu over twenty-five years in an attempt to reconstruct the truth by separating facts from hypotheses and interpretation.
The book falls into two parts: the first is a reconstruction of the artist's life and work as they relate to the cultural trends of their time, through about 500 contemporary writings, mostly unpublished, from people who were close to Piero: friends, intellectuals, historians and artists world-wide.
The few oral statements reported in the text are clearly marked as such so that no one can be in doubt as to their hypothetical nature.
The second part is the most complete and up-to-date account so far of works by Piero Manzoni, organised in tandem with the biographical/historical part, documented by 1101 pieces and divided typologically for ease of consultation and to explain the artist's modus operandi.
The catalogue includes the works on paper, drawings, projects, models, multiples and the complete list of ‘living art works’.
May I quote in its entirety the sentence from which you extracted your sub-title: ‘In order, on the one hand, to make use of the catalogue easier, and on the other, to keep certain material confidential to protect the artist's name, image and market every work is accompanied by a caption which gives only the principal facts from the archival entries’ This seems to me to be quite clear and explanatory of common practice in the writing of captions.
Frankly I cannot see what is enigmatic about a caption or about defining one's practice.
If, as the sub who wrote the title suggests, there is another side to the truth, then we would be happy I first of all, and then those who admire Manzoni to see reliable and contemporary documents which prove it.
Stolen-to-order-theft on the increase
LONDON and weimar.
It was reported on 14 October that eight sixteenth-century paintings valued at £25 million had been stolen from Weimar Castle in the former DDR.
Five were portraits by Lucas Cranach the Elder (1472–1553), including Martin Luther as Junker Jörg and Princess Sybilla of Cleves as a bride, and three by his followers.
All were owned by the city of Weimar which, unable to afford the insurance premium, had relied on a private security firm and improved alarms to guard the valuable works.
The raid however took only ten minutes and the thieves escaped undetected after sawing through iron bars on a basement window to enter, removing the eight works and fleeing in time to avoid the police cordon flung round the city.
The speed and precision of the theft makes it likely that the paintings were stolen under orders from a private collector.
Two weeks before, on 30 September, Houghton Hall, home of the Marquess of Cholmondeley (former owner of the Holbein ‘Woman with a Squirrel’ purchased by the nation earlier this year), also witnessed a major burglary.
In what must be considered the most serious theft from a country house since the loss of the Beit Collection paintings from Russborough, Co.
Wicklow, in 1986, paintings and objects valued at millions of pounds were stolen by thieves who drove across fields to reach the house at 3.30 am.
The most significant item taken was ‘The White Duck’ by Jean-Baptiste Oudry, the second most important picture in the Chomondeley collection after the Holbein, with a value probably in the region of £3–5 million.
In addition to the three paintings a Louis XV clock, two Louis XVI clocks and a Louis XVI ormolu-mounted Sèvres vase by Antoine Dulac were also taken.
Loss adjusters Tyler and Co. are offering a substantial reward for information leading to the recovery of the missing objects.
Any information should be passed on to Richard Mangnall of Tyler and Co. on tel: 071 377 0282.
The al-Sabah collection comes home
KUWAIT.
Looted by Sadam Hussain in September 1990 during the Gulf War, the contents of the al-Sabah collection of Islamic art the Dar al-Athar al-Islamiyya have now returned to Kuwait.
The collection's director and owner Sheikha Hussa al-Sabah was recently interviewed in the London-based journal Eastern Art Report.
In the interview she expressed her enormous relief at the return of the collection built up by her husband Sheikh Nasser Sabah al-Ahmed al-Sabah since 1975 and now totalling around 20,000 items.
However she noted that about 200 items had been lost or severely damaged.
Details of these items will be included in her official claim to be lodged with the United Nations.
The collection was returned after negotiations between the Kuwait and Iraqi governments and the UN; following these a representative of the al-Sabahs was sent to Baghdad in September 1991 to arrange the return of the collection and also that of the Kuwait National Museum.
The objects were flown back in a UN cargo plane.
The task ahead is now to reconstruct the building which housed the collection; both it and the Kuwait National Museum were practically destroyed during the conflict.
Most of the collection's archives, photographs and research material have been returned but its computers and software were lost.
Similarly, while the contents of the library were returned, its records were not.
Museums
London
Should the Tate Gallery split?
We asked leading figures in the art world whether the Tate should divide into the British Collections and a museum of international modern art: all but one were in favour
LONDON.
This month the Trustees of the Tate Gallery are meeting.
Apparently they have already made up their minds, to separate one of the odder, although at times stimulating, hybrids of the museum world: the Tate as the gallery of British art and the Tate as the gallery of modern art, and they may well unveil their decision then.
For the Gallery, this is just the latest phase in a process of rethinking itself with every generation.
The art critic and Tate trustee David Sylvester remembers such a split being discussed thirty years ago, while, by contrast, the last director, Alan Bowness liked the Tate as a conglomerate of small galleries: a sculpture museum; the Turner collection; British painting; contemporary art, and so on.
The gallery's present director, Nicholas Serota, is facing up to the fact that today, excluding the Turners, only one-fifth of the collections can be on display at any time.
If funds are to be raised for more space, then the gallery must decide what that space would be for.
It seems that the masterplan, compiled by former Tate curator Richard Francis, is recommending that the existing galleries be given over to British art, from the sixteenth century to the present day, while another building, either already in existence, or to be built, but in either case not far from Millbank, will become the gallery of modern art.
A flow of art between the two is envisaged, so that Francis Bacon, for example, could be in both, or only one of them, at any given time.
The increase in space would allow a far greater representation of eighteenth-century painting, as well as many nineteenth-century classics such Millais' ‘The boyhood of Raleigh’ and ‘Ophelia’, both long in store.
On the modern side, more space would enable the gallery to keep more of its classics permanently on display the Rothko room and the gallery's strong holdings of Abstract Expressionists, for example although the present policy of regularly rehanging pictures in different contexts would continue.
A new building could also face up to the logistical problems presented by so much contemporary art: vast canvases, dispersed installations, massive weights (the Serra sculptures currently on show required the floor to be shored up), and ultra-sensitive materials.
The administration would remain united, at least for the present, with Nick Serota as director for both.
The Tate holdings
British Collection:
2369 paintings
172 reliefs and sculptures
Modern Collection:
1602 paintings
17 installations
231 reliefs and sculpture
David Sylvester, art critic
If we were to do things in the French style, in a rational and centralised way and there's a lot to be said both for and against that we would join the Victoria and Albert Museum's holdings of British art to the Tate.
Could we do that, I'd be entirely in favour of splitting the Tate.
If we did, I'm very attracted to the suggestion that Battersea Power station should house the modern part: what a suitable purpose for one of our truly great contributions to the Modern movement!
But the difficulty of getting there by public transport is a real problem.
David Posnett, Leger Galleries, dealer in eighteenth- and nineteenth-century British painting
If Nick Serota can raise the money for his plans then I would support them, provided the bulk of the historic British collection was on display.
Paul Johnson, journalist
Lumping British art with international modern art under the single roof of the Tate has always been anomalous and is now becoming intolerable.
The powers that be at the Tate tend to be more interested in ‘the modern’ than in the British tradition, so many fine or interesting British paintings are rarely if ever displayed, and to get through to those that are one has to wade one's way through off-putting modernist rubbish, with the risk of tripping over artistic piles of bricks or tearing your clothes on sharp bits of dustbin sculpture.
So let us split them up, have two collections, two directors and two galleries.
But the British collection should stay in the Tate, which is a suitable building, and the modern stuff should be moved to a specially designed emporium where it should feel at home.
David Landau, art historian and editor of Print Quarterly
Yes, the Tate should split.
It makes no sense as it is now, as neither of its collections can be displayed properly.
All non-British pictures before World War I should be transferred to the National Gallery, and those later in date to a new Modern Art Museum.
Of the British paintings, I would transfer a choice of the best (up to World War I) to the National Gallery, where they would be seen, as they deserve, among the best of all other Western Schools.
With the remainder, a full, comprehensive survey of painting in this country during the last four centuries should be created.
I believe there are enough pictures to represent this School adequately in three collections, as I would naturally expect the best of post-World War I British pictures to be present in the new Modern Art Museum.
Thus, some of the best examples of British painting could be seen in the National Gallery and the Modern Art Museum, while the less important, but, for some, equally interesting, would have ample space of their own.
John Richardson, author of A Life of Picasso
The Tate collections have long needed to be split: traditional British art in the present building; modern British (twentieth-century, or post-1945?) and foreign Schools elsewhere, except perhaps for the jumbo Moore bronzes, which could be recycled for a Thatcher monument, or other suitable purposes.
To allow for confrontations across the years and maximum cross-pollination, these divisions should not be too rigorously enforced; nor should other public collections be raided in the name of institutional uniformity.
I hate art ghettoes.
Leslie Waddington, Waddington Galleries, dealer in modern and contemporary art
In my view the Tate should probably divide into two separate entities, one for British art and one for Modern art, although I presume that certain British artists would be present in both collections.
In New York there are four museums which are involved in twentieth-century art: the Museum of Modern Art; the Metropolitan; the Guggenheim and the Whitney, this last being the only one that exclusively shows American art.
They are run by separate trustees and staff and compete in various ways.
When the Tate divides up, the two sections should likewise be totally divorced, which would avoid the centrality of power being in too few hands.
Giuliano Briganti, art historian and art critic
It seems to me to be right to make the Tate into a museum entirely devoted to British art, from its beginnings down to the present day.
If the English paintings in the National Gallery could be included (and I imagine that is not possible), it would make for a truly remarkable museum a real tribute to the ‘Englishness of English art’.
Lord Gowrie, art critic and Chairman, Sotheby's Europe
I think the modern collection should be rehoused (the present building does not suit it), but as close to the Tate as possible.
Werner Schmalenbach, founding director of the Museum of Nordrhein-Westphalia
I think the idea of splitting the collection of five centuries of British art from the modern section is a good one.
There are two reasons for this: first, the collection of international modern art and the British historical collections are out of proportion with one another, and if they were separated, that problem would disappear.
Second, a purely national collection is not governed by such high criteria of quality as an international collection must be.
This means that there are two parameters.
I would not, however, make the separation too rigid.
There should be a few outstanding British artists in both sections, even if it means a kind of devaluation of those British artists represented only in the national collections.
Robert Rosenblum, art historian and art critic
Loving both Augustus Egg and Pablo Picasso and visiting them for decades under the same roof, I feel sentimental about tearing them asunder forever.
Nevertheless, both logic and practical reality now demand the divorce of such odd couples, and I can only concur, though with a compromise recommendation.
I believe that the British historical galleries should conclude in the late nineteenth century (c. 1880), and everything later should be integrated with the international modern collection.
Since the British holdings far outnumber the foreign ones, the shuffle will have to be deft; and clearly, secondary British works will have to be displayed together in subordinate spaces.
But as far as possible, the best British artists should join a global chorus if only in temporary, experimental ways.
Sickert, for example, might be seen with Vuillard; Lewis with Severini; Collins with Klee; Wadsworth with Dalí; Nicholson with Morandi; Sutherland with Lam; Hamilton with Warhol, etc.
I have always cherished British insularity, but the Chunnel is coming and the EC is here.
Pierre Schneider, journalist and art historian
If Paul had known what was to befall him on his way to Damascus, he would have taken another road.
There are people who wouldn't dream of visiting a museum of British art, others who think modern art is unspeakable.
Being unexpectedly faced by samples of one or the other could convert some to forms of expression which they might have ignored for the rest of their lives.
The splitting of the Tate seems logical.
Has logic ever produced a good museum?
Sir Anthony Caro, artist
For years it has not been clear exactly what the Tate is.
Americans I have known have seen it as a kind of Whitney, but that's not really right.
Britain does need a proper, tip-top museum of modern art; and that does mean splitting the Tate.
For British artists it's important that they should be able to match their work against the best international modern art.
A museum of modern art would mean that we would have to up-grade our holdings and get more important twentieth-century works.
Just think what Stuttgart, say, was able to put together in just over a decade.
Of course, it will mean that modern art will need to be given far more importance in this country, as indeed it is in some European countries.
Both the building and the collection will need money from the government and elsewhere.
But I do believe that Nick Serota and the Tate chairman Dennis Stevenson have the sense of purpose and the energy to make it happen.
Sean Scully, artist
I'm not really in favour of splitting the Tate.
I've grown up liking it the way it is, with the English art constantly juxtaposed with that from other places.
That seems healthy.
I don't think the English need to nurture their sense of isolation; that already seems to be quite mature.
However, if it's being done to honour British art rather than to satisfy the mundane demands of space packaging, that could be quite interesting.
It depends on what the motive is.
Henry Meyric Hughes, director of Exhibitions Department, the South Bank Centre, London
The arguments for splitting the collections at the Tate have been thoroughly, and convincingly, rehearsed.
However, this can only be successfully achieved along undogmatic lines and in a spirit of goodwill and co-operation between our leading national institutions.
Two aspects which will need careful consideration will be the future role of the Tate Gallery's outposts, in Liverpool and elsewhere, and the special exhibiting needs of work produced in the last twenty to thirty years.
There may be good arguments for establishing a ‘Temporary Contemporary’ in London, where the Tate Gallery could share an involvement with other institutions in restoring London to a position of eminence on the international contemporary art scene.
Anthony Gormley, sculptor
The art of our time is expansive: its need for space and light is particular and reflects the conditions in which it is produced.
I think division is a good idea since the present Tate building, apart from the major Duveen galleries, cannot answer that need.
The new building must be able to do the job properly.
Old industrial buildings can often do this better than purpose-built ‘museum’ architecture because they are closer to the conditions in which work is made today.
My favourite candidate as a building for twentieth-century art would be, not Battersea Power Station, but the old London Electricity Board Bankside generating station on the Southbank opposite St Paul's, at present empty and for sale.
It is a strong late work by Gilbert Scott with hundreds of thousands of square feet of top-lit space.
Paris
Contemporary art is not pulling in the crowds
The attendance figures at the Jeu de Paume and other museums are tiny, while the critics reopen attacks on contemporary art
PARIS.
In June 1991, the Jeu de Paume reopened its doors, this time as an exhibition centre devoted to contemporary art.
With its recent exhibition programme Robert Gober, Pierre Dunoyer and Raoul Ruiz, Broodthaers, Laffont, Oiticica the latest of Paris's public galleries has certainly not made any concessions to fashion or facility.
Nor has it drawn large crowds, apart from the 105,000 visitors who attended the inaugural exhibition featuring the work of Dubuffet's latter years.
It is interesting to note that the Jeu de Paume's attendance figures are very similar to those of the two other Parisian institutions devoted to contemporary art: the Galeries Contemporaines at Beaubourg and the ARC, which is part of the Musée d'Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris.
There is a slight difference, in that these two bodies have their own collections, enabling them to balance the already established with the experimental; accepted values with more hermetic themes; the modern with the contemporary.
At the ARC, although the Panza di Biumo Collection drew over 40,000 visitors, an exhibition of the work of Sophie Galle, G. Forg and P. Faigenbaum was viewed by only 5,200.
At the Centre Pompidou's Galeries Contemporaines, just over 30,000 attended an exhibition of the German artist Ruscha, while figures for the joint Weigman-Lavier and Toroni-Vilmouth events were 32,000 and 42,000 respectively.
There is simply no comparison with the vast numbers who queue for Seurat, Toulouse-Lautrec and Giacometti.
In short, the Parisian public is hardly on fire with enthusiasm for contemporary art.
(A possible exception is the FIAC art fair, which is regularly crowded with visitors of all kinds).
There is, of course, nothing new in this, but the lack of interest is more noticeable because public galleries are nowadays subject to closer scrutiny and receive subsidies from local government.
Or, as Alfred Pacquement, director of the Jeu de Paume, observes, it may be because, ‘the 1980s fostered the illusion that a proliferation of exhibitions and museums, together with the overnight success of certain artists, indicated a reconciliation between the general public and avant-garde art, more than a century after the historic rift’.
The fact remains that the debate on contemporary art seems to have entered a new dimension, with doubt being cast wholesale on the quality and content of recent trends, and on the good faith of the public institutions which give them space.
With special reference to the material being exhibited at Beaubourg and even more so at the Jeu de Paume, the authoritative journal Esprit entitled one of its issues earlier this year ‘The crisis in contemporary art’, denouncing the fraudulent behaviour of Duchamp's grandchildren and the flood of historicism that has swamped art criticism.
The writer Jean-Philippe Domecq took up the theme, maintaining that as many as 95% of contemporary works are no more than boring illustrations of even more boring theoretical points.
And the worst of it, in his view, is that no one has the courage to condemn what is happening, since ‘cultural consensus can no longer distinguish between intolerance and discernment, opening the gates to an era of ‘freedom without choice’’.
On the whole through symposia, seminars and articles in the specialised press French art critics respond with scorn to attacks of this kind, considering them expressions of a dangerous, reactionary way of thinking.
But, at the same time, there is growing concern about the role of taste in aesthetic choice and about the fate of analytical criticism.
Jean-Marie Schaefer, for example, writing in L'art de l'âge moderne, l'esthétique et la philosophie de l'art du XVIII siècle à nos jours (Modern art: aesthetics and philosophy in art, from the eighteenth-century to the present day), is critical of a lack of coherent criteria for making value judgements, finding fault more with the theories justifying the works than with the works of art themselves.
Even Pacquement admits that, in recent times, contemporary art has been viewed with too eclectic, uncritical and almost deferential an eye.
But that is the risk one runs when, as has been the case over the last ten years, one feels duty-bound to give an immediate account of what is going on, without distancing oneself sufficiently from the subject matter.
‘This tendency has been exaggerated by a steady increase in the number of art journalists, while true critics, the sort of committed people who, twenty years ago, were instrumental in influencing public tastes, are in decline’.
Despite the climate of controversy, the Jeu de Paume team, which also includes the curators Catherine David, Danièle Hibon and Dominique Abensour, has this year adopted an even more unequivocal stance.
After Mike Kelley, Nan Goldin, Kiki Smith, Jan Sterbak and Tunga, and a retrospective of the Israeli cinema, they will be featuring Martyal Raysse, Martin Barré and David Rabinowitch, Eva Hesse and Thierry Kuntzel, and finally, for the whole of the summer, Takis.
Each exhibition will be supported by symposia and videos.
‘We aim to foster the study and reflection proper to a public institution’, concludes Pacquement ‘and to restore public confidence by rediscovering the framework of reference we all need, especially those of us in the profession’.
Toronto
Art Gallery of Ontario closed until 24 January
Expanded and renovated at a cost of C$58 million, but over 50% of staff laid off
TORONTO.
In January, after a three-year C$58 million expansion and renovation, the Art Gallery of Ontario (AGO) will become the seventh largest art museum in North America.
At present, however, the festivities seem light years away, having been eclipsed by a fiscal crisis of mammoth proportions.
In response to severe budgetary cuts imposed by the Ontario Ministry of Culture, the AGO has eliminated 244 of 445 positions and closed its doors for seven months from 4 July.
The gallery will not reopen to the public until 24 January, 1993.
The layoffs include ninety full-time (two curatorial), seventy-six part-time, and seventy-eight occasional employees, of whom fewer than one hundred are likely to be asked to return.
Even before the worldwide economic slump caused strife among cultural institutions throughout North America, the AGO was chronically underfunded by the Ontario provincial government.
The gallery receives C$8.5 million annually toward operating costs (capital improvements, exhibitions and acquisitions are separately funded).
The Culture Ministry has traditionally made up AGO deficits by dispensing end-of-year ‘band-aid’ grants ranging from C$1 to C$4 million.
Though the base grant for 1991–92 remained at C$8.5 million, nevertheless, the AGO continued to spend at 1990–91 levels, confident that the ministry would again come to the rescue.
But when the time came for the annual bail-out, the recession-strapped Culture Ministry balked.
On 3 June word came that the gallery would get no grant to cover the 1991–92 deficit, and the base grant for the current fiscal year would climb, not the desired C$6 million, but C$1 million to C$9.5 million, with no guarantee of end-of-year supplements.
Facing the need for a potentially crippling bank loan, AGO Director Glenn D. Lowry (thirty-seven, a polyglot Harvard Ph.D.
in Islamic art) cut his staff, then elected to shut down until the January reopening, at which time the museum will proceed with reduced exhibition, education, and provincial outreach programs.
The recessionary scenario has been played out in several U.S. institutions in the past two years.
First, the Detroit Institute of Arts lost 41% of its funding, laid off half its staff, and drastically reduced programs, but managed to remain partially open.
The Brooklyn Museum took a 12% cut, trimmed salaries across the board, cancelled at least one major exhibition, and closed for two weeks.
Now the Boston Museum of Fine Arts, struggling to service debt on its 1980s expansions, is staggering under the weight of a nearly $5 million deficit.
The MFA's 1992 exhibition schedule was slashed from twenty-two to fourteen shows, and the museum resorted to leasing parts of its collection to American and Japanese museums.
The Canadian crisis is part of the same trend.
Koriyama
Museum of British art opens in Japan
Collections focus on eighteenth- and nineteenth-century painting bought with £16.6 million budget
TOKYO.
As Japan has become an economically strong nation, the Japanese government has encouraged the building of national museums throughout Japan.
A new museum concentrating on British art will be opened in Koriyama city (250 km north of Tokyo) on 21 November.
Koriyama city was able to provide the museum with a budget of ¥6,400 million (£26.6 million), spending ¥4,000 million (£16.6 million) on the building and reserving the rest for acquisitions.
The architect is Takahiko Yanagisawa, who has built museums and cultural buildings in the centre of Tokyo he has also been commissioned to build the New Metropolitan Museum in Tokyo, which will be the largest museum in Japan.
The museum director, Mr Murata, states that since French paintings have become so expensive today it is no longer possible for a museum to build a satisfactory collection of them, and therefore they have decided to collect British works, focusing on eighteenth- and nineteenth-century artists.
He also thinks it is important to build such a museum, as Japan and Britain have a long historical relationship dating back to the seventeenth-century when William Adams came to Japan on a Dutch ship.
Oil painting was introduced to Japan by a British artist called Charles Wirgman (1832–91).
Wirgman influenced the development of Western-style painting in Japan by serving as the first foreign teacher to artists painting in the Western style.
English watercolours also became very popular at the end of the nineteenth-century as three English artists, Alfred East, Alfred Parsons and John Barley Jr came to Japan and taught the technique.
Koriyama Museum's collection will also include Japanese artists who have studied art in England and have been influenced by British art as well as local artists' work.
With a limited budget it has been difficult to acquire top quality works by artists on the museum's list, however they have been fortunate in being able to purchase Robert Loder's (Honorary Curator of Prints, Fitzwilliam Museum in Cambridge) collection of 363 prints, while other works were acquired from Marlborough Fine Art.
The Koriyama museum hopes to strengthen cultural relations between the two countries by organising exhibitions relating to Britain.
Last year they loaned some of their acquisitions to the Barbican Centre for the exhibition ‘Japan and Britain: an aesthetic dialogue 1850–1930’.
It is their wish to continue organising similar exhibitions in order to deepen British-Japanese understanding.
The British Museum
The Orient redisplayed in a great, gilded gallery
Leading Hong Kong businessman Joseph Hotung pays £2 million for lavish redisplay of world-famous collection
LONDON.
Jessica Rawson, Keeper of Oriental Antiquities at the British Museum, had to struggle for the gilded walls that she wanted for her newly redisplayed 2000 square-metre gallery (opening 11 November); traditionally the British Museum has had an austere, even puritanical approach to interior decoration.
She is a strong-minded woman, however; she got it and she was right.
It adds the right touch of the sumptuous and exotic to the dry Ewardian neo-classicism of the immense gallery which runs the full length of the BM's north façade.
Joseph Hotung, the businessman collector from Hong Kong who has made the complete refurbishment of the gallery possible (together with the Wolfson Foundation and the British government in their pound-for-pound funding arrangement launched in 1990), is full of admiration for it.
Hotung, whose fortune derives from international property and finance, comes from one of Hong Kong's leading families.
He is not new to the museum world, as he is on the visiting committees of the Metropolitan and of the Freer Art gallery, and he is also a collector, of Impressionist and Post-Impressionist art, and of Chinese archaic jades and bronzes.
The British Museum's Oriental collections are among the finest in the world, and Hotung used to visit the museum regularly to train his eye, always bringing with him a torch as the lighting was so dim.
This, of course, is now remedied.
One half of the gallery is devoted to China, while the other covers India and South-east Asia.
The intellectual approaches in the two halves differ.
The history of Chinese culture, from the Neolithic period through to modern China, is presented thematically, through rituals for ancestor worship, technology, calligraphy, ceramics for tea and wine, Buddhist images, and goods made for foreign trade.
Techniques of manufacture are explained, and evocative Chinese verses, of which one is given here, are disposed around the gallery.
British Museum Press is bringing out Chinese art (£14.95), edited by Jessica Rawson, to coincide with the opening.
The other part of the gallery traces the development of the three great religions of India Buddhism, Hinduism and Jainism largely through sculpture, in which the British Museum is particularly strong.
The gallery culminates in the more than one hundred second- to third-century carved slabs from the great Buddhist stupa at Amaravati.
These carvings have been off display for many years as it was discovered that atmospheric pollution, even within the museum, was eating away at the stone.
Asahi Shimbun newspapers have paid for a new, environmentally controlled area to be constructed for their display.
Here also there are new publications: Robert Knox, Deputy Keeper of the department has written Amaravati: Buddhist sculpture from the Great Stupa (£35) and T. Richard Blurton, curator, is the author of Hindu Art (£14.95).
Cultural property
All right, we have got the Koenigs Collection but we still won't tell you where
Yeltsin's Commission for Restitution begins work this month to legalise and declassify war booty
MOSCOW.
There are plenty of eye witnesses to testify to the fact that the Koenigs Collection of 526 Old Master drawings ended up in the Pushkin Museum of Art, Moscow, after being removed from Schloss Pillnitz near Berlin at the end of the war.
To this day, however, no Soviet or Russian official has admitted to this fact.
However, in an interview with Dutch television on 1 October, the Russian Minister for Culture and Tourism, Yevgeniy Sidorov, did say that the drawings had been ‘found’ on Russian soil, and that an invitation had been issued to the Dutch ambassador to come and ‘verify’the collection, which was probably moved last year to the monastery of Pavloviy Posad (formerly Zagorsk) in an attempt by the Pushkin museum's authorities to save their reputations after repeated accusations had been made against them both by Russians and the Dutch.
The 30 September also saw the first session of a specially created presidential Commission for Restitution.
Recommendations have been made for the legalisation and declassification of items formerly kept secret; for their cataloguing; their display on exhibition and the calculation of losses incurred by both parties.
Within the Commission for Restitution, which is headed by Sidorov, working groups are being set up.
The Bremen Old Master drawings collection will be handled by a group under Fedor Polenov, chairman of the Russian Parliamentary Commission for Culture.
Director of the Pushkin Museum, Irina Antonova, will head the group working on items from Hungarian museums, while the Koenigs collection will be the responsibility of a working group headed by Professor Viktor Grashchenkov of Moscow University.
Alongside the experts from the Commission for Restitution there will be input from representatives of the outside nations involved, and from the departments on whom the fate of the collections to a large extent depends the Ministry of Justice, the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Internal Affairs and the Ministry of Security.
The ultimate decisions will be taken at governmental, even presidential, level.
Legal problems especially affect the Koenigs collection.
The Russian side does not consider the legal circumstances around the removal of the collection from Holland to Germany the fact that the collection was freely sold in 1940 by its previous owner van Beuningen to the Director of the Dresden Gallery Hans von Posse to become part of Hitler's projected megamuseum in Linz to be fully clear.
Meanwhile, the Dutch point to the joint Allied declaration, including Russia, issued in London in 1943, which declared financial dealings with the enemy to be null and void.
This declaration was preceded by a series of analogous Royal Decrees issued just after the German invasion by the exiled Queen of the Netherlands and her government in May and June of 1940 (see The Art Newspaper No. 13, December 1991, p.1).
Rumours are circulating on the basis of a hint from Sidorov that the Russians are considering a counter-claim for the Malevich collection of twenty-nine paintings kept by the Stedelijk Museum, Amsterdam (The Art Newspaper No. 15, Feb 1992, p.2).
Its former director Willem Sandberg acquired the collection in 1951 from the German architect Häring who had been entrusted with the works after Malevich's return from Russia to Leningrad in 1927.
In the meanwhile, more than 130 works from the Bremen Old Master drawings collection, also removed to the Soviet Union at the end of the war, are scheduled to go on display at the Hermitage, St Petersburg, on 18 November.
The emperor's new clothes: Milan's new costume museum without garments
MILAN.
Fifteen years ago the exhibition ‘Towards a museum of fashion in Milan’ looked forward to the creation of an institution that is finally about to happen, albeit in a different form, and with radically different contents to that originally envisaged.
More precisely, this will be a museum with no contents at all: the first museum of costume entirely on computer.
Called Moda Documenta Città di Milano, it is to be sponsored by a number of influential figures in the Italian fashion world: Fabio Inghirami, president of the fashion company Efima, who has offered the museum a provisional site in the centre of the city near Castello Sforzesco; Francesco Colucci of Expo Ct, and Marino Livolsi who is responsible for the computerised cataloguing of the project.
At present the museum's director Alessandra Mottola Molfino envisages it as a huge visual archive rather than a collection of objects.
This arrangement will avoid the usual conservation problems attendant upon storing costumes.
Design update at the V&A
LONDON.
The Victoria and Albert Museum has updated and expanded its twentieth-century design collection by replacing the space known as British Art and Design 1900–1960 with a new Twentieth-century Gallery which opened on 22 October.
Spanning the history of consumer design from 1900 to 1992, it aims to explore design ideas, techniques and materials as well as individual pieces and mass-produced objects.
Over 600 pieces from the museum's permanent collection are displayed chronologically with specific themes such as nationalism and internationalism, mass-production versus craftsmanship, examined within that framework.
The project has been co-ordinated by Sue Lambert, Head of Design, Prints and Drawings at the museum and funded largely from the internal budget with a contribution of £75,000 from the Friends of the V&A.
Eileen Gray furniture, Alessi kettles, paper dresses, Swatch watches and Dr Marten's boots are among the selection.
Within the new gallery the ‘Now’ room will show changing displays such as recent acquisitions and contemporary art and design issues.
It will also be used to show work by design students inspired by the permanent collections.
The first display will be on the work of the Catalan designer Javier Mariscal, who conceived the corporate identity of the Barcelona Olympics.
Six new publications focusing on various aspects of the new gallery will appear next year, written by members of the museum staff.
U.S. museums off the hook
NEW YORK.
After a four-year battle, American museums have forced the US Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB) to abandon its request that museums record their collections on their balance sheets as monetary assets (known as capitalising).
Museums have argued that they cannot treat their collections as financial assets and that the task of valuing every item in a collection would be prohibitively expensive.
The capitalising proposal was part of a larger project by the FASB to develop consistent reporting regulations for non-profit making organisations in the U.S.
What's new at the Frick
NEW YORK.
The Frick Collection has announced a number of innovations this autumn.
Last month around fifty pieces of Chinese Ming and Quing porcelain from the original collection of Childs Frick (son of the collection's founder) were placed on permanent display in specially designed cabinets in the museum's reception area.
The pieces have previously been stored in upstairs offices and have not been seen by the public.
The gallery's Enamel Room will house a new acquisition, a bronze ‘Pietà’ by Alessandro Algardi, formerly in the collection of Victor D. Spark and recently purchased by the Frick.
It is one of only around a dozen works by Algardi in North American collections.
Finally visitors to the Frick will now be offered a twenty-minute large-screen audio-visual introduction to the collection.
Written by the Edgar Munhall, the collection's curator, it follows the life and career of Henry Clay Frick, the build-up of the collection and the history of the Frick building.
Museums discuss themselves
GLASGOW.
The issue of how to attract wider audiences to Europe's museums, and how to cater for them once past the doors, will be the topic of a European Community conference to be held at the Burrell Collection, Glasgow, from 26 to 28 November.
Entitled ‘Museums and their Public’ the conference is being organised by the Museums and Galleries Commission in collaboration with the Commission of the European Communities, the City of Glasgow, the Institute for Advanced Studies in the Humanities at the University of Edinburgh and the Scottish Museums Council.
It is the first Community-wide conference of its sort to be organised in Britain.
Topics to be debated will include how museums can increase access for the different audiences they serve without trivialising their message or damaging their collections, and how they can deal with competition from theme parks and other ‘heritage’ industries.
Museums' relationships with tourism and educational bodies will also be discussed.
The final session on the afternoon of 28 November will be open to the public.
More historic recreations at the refurbished Walker Art Gallery
LIVERPOOL.
The Walker Art Gallery has refurbished its Eighteenth-Century gallery at a cost of £120,000.
A £70,000 grant came from the Museums and Galleries Improvement Fund.
An attempt has been made to achieve a balance between the late Victorian building and the eighteenth-century style necessary for the exhibits; specially woven blue Lyons silk is used in combination with faux marbre skirting boards and appropriately designed display cabinets.
Among the thirty-eight pictures on show are portraits by Sir Joshua Reynolds and Thomas Gainsborough, work by the Liverpool-born George Stubbs and the recently acquired ‘Portrait of Mr and Mrs Fleetwood’ by Joseph Wright of Derby.
The refurbishment programme began in 1988 with the opening of the Sculpture Gallery, which won a National Art Collections Fund Award.
Museums
Whitney Museum
Basquiat as Leonardo da Vinci
Music Television and Madonna sponsor her late lover
NEW YORK.
With the current retrospective at the Whitney Museum of American Art, which runs until 14 February, 1993, the work of Jean-Michel Basquiat has received the attention that even this highly promoted artist never got in his lifetime.
Basquiat's work is also getting unprecedented praise, at least in the Whitney catalogue, where six essays compare the one-time graffiti artist who died of a heroin overdose at the age of twenty-seven to Leonardo da Vinci, Goya, Vincent van Gogh, and Jackson Pollock.
The conventional wisdom of the decade-obsessed art world sees the Basquiat show as a referendum on the 1980s, placing an artist who had been catapulted into stardom by that era's hype under the closer scrutiny that comes in a time of greater austerity.
What seems more likely is that Basquiat could be the beneficiary of a process operating in the market (and among some critics), where artists who appear able to retain their market value in the next decade are promoted and shown, whereas others considered beyond rehabilitation are ignored.
Dealers report that paintings offered by the Robert Miller Gallery, which represents the Basquiat estate, are at late-1980s prices, well above $250,000.
As the exhibition neared readiness, it appeared that Basquiat seemed most likely to survive this triage process.
So far, no artist from that period has received this kind of attention from a major museum.
(The Whitney downplays any suggestion of special treatment accorded the Basquiat show, describing the exhibition of the dead artist's work as one of a series of mid-career retrospectives.)
In the spring, the American Telephone & Telegraph Company, one of the country's largest corporations, committed $100,000 to sponsor the Whitney show.
AT&T's eagerness to identify with an artist who ran away, scrawled graffiti on walls, and became a drug addict may have little to do with the quest for positive ‘role models’ now popular in the United States.
But Tim McClimon, head of the AT&T Foundation's visual arts program, says that support for Basquiat and other ‘artists of colour’ reflects the corporation's effort in its philanthropy and marketing to reach a racially diverse public.
Besides its AT&T grant (part of a trend toward corporate funding of the work of ‘minority’ artists), the Basquiat show at the Whitney is sponsored by grants from the singer Madonna and from MTV: Music Television, the company that pioneered the now-universal music video format.
Madonna is a former girlfriend of the artist and a collector of the work of Frida Kahlo, another twentieth-century art martyr.
The MTV contribution represents a novel convergence of the art and rock-and-roll markets.
Art dealers have often dreamed of marketing artists on the scale that the music industry markets rock stars, and the Basquiat show will test whether that artist's celebrity from the early 1980s can attract a generation of museumgoers who weren't even teenagers then.
Even if that fails in Basquiat's case, a new avenue of promotion may be developing, if art and popular music audiences can be seen to overlap.
Basquiat's work has also found its way into another unlikely venue the Metropolitan Museum of Art.
While the retrospective runs at the Whitney, the Metropolitan is showing two large mural-sized paintings Basquiat made in 1985 for the Palladium, a once-chic New York City nightclub.
While Basquiat may have reached the Metropolitan and music television, the exhibition's tour after the Whitney run seems far less promising.
Given the claims made for Basquiat's historical importance in the show's catalogue, it is surprising that the retrospective has only signed up sites at the Menil Collection in Houston (11 March-9 May, 1993), the Des Moines Art Center (22 May-15 August), and the Montgomery Museum of Fine Arts in Alabama (18 November-9 January, 1994).
The show's organisers had approached more well-known institutions and had been turned down by Los Angeles MOCA, the Art Institute of Chicago, the Monterrey Museum in Mexico (which had used a Basquiat work as the cover for its inaugural catalogue), and by the Pompidou Centre in Paris.
Basquiat's estate, administered by his accountant father, still faces lawsuits from a dealer asking for $900,000 for three paintings Basquiat had promised her in 1982 but never delivered.
The estate also faces a challenge from Basquiat's former bookkeeper, who claimed to have been his manager.
Investigators report no progress in efforts to trace Basquiat's last U.S. dealer, Vrej Baghoomian, who disappeared last spring with creditors in pursuit.
Baghoomian had claimed a 50% interest in all Basquiat's work based on an agreement he and the artist made before Basquiat's death.
That allegation was dismissed by a New York surrogates court last year.
Dozens of paintings that should have gone to the estate were sold by Baghoomian soon after Basquiat's death, however, and they have not been found.
The estate's legal battles have been waged by Gerard Basquiat, the artist's father, and the attorney Michael Ward Stout.
But if a Basquiat legend is to emerge from all this activity, Basquiat père will have to alter his practice of refusing to talk to reporters.
At least three biographers have been snubbed by the elder Basquiat.
Many see the Basquiat retrospective as a referendum on the Whitney Museum's curatorial standards, but just a month before the show was to open at the Whitney, a New York weekly reported that the museum had sought to fire Richard Marshall, the show's curator, who had spent years preparing the project with Gerard Basquiat and the Robert Miller Gallery.
Marshall remains at the Whitney, however, reportedly thanks to the threat of a lawsuit from Michael Ward Stout, the same attorney who represents the Basquiat estate.
Germany, Switzerland
Arte Povera, Kirchner, Concrete art and Leipzig's first taste of the modern
All Bauhaus-inspired and with collections at the ready
MUNICH, DAVOS, LEIPZIG AND INGOLSTADT (BAVARIA).
As we reported in The Art Newspaper for December 1991 (No.13, pp.6–7) the boom in museum building that Germany had enjoyed in the Eighties is drawing to a close under the financial pressure of reunification.
Nevertheless, museums continue to open, and one is even planned for Leipzig in the East.
January 1993 sees the opening in Munich of the Sammlung Goetz, the first private museum of contemporary art in the city.
The owner, Ingvild Goetz, started collecting in the 1960s, buying works by Jannis Kounellis at an early stage of his career.
In addition the collection now includes Arte Povera and works by Mario Merz, Bruce Nauman, Robert Ryan, Agnes Martin, Ulrich Rückriem, Helmut Federle and others.
Recent purchases from the younger generation of American artists are included in this evolving body of work.
Sammlung Goetz will show changing selections from the permanent collection in a handsome new building close to the south side of the of Englischer Garten designed by Basel-based architects Herzog and du Meuron in conjunction with their partner in Munich Josef Meier-Scupin.
Constructed in wood and glass on three floors, it has five galleries totalling 372 metres in size, and a library.
Visitors will also have the opportunity to view the Goetz collection in its entirety next April when an exhibition opens at the Städtische Galerie im Lenbachhaus in a new suite of galleries being built under Königsplatz.
(Sammlung Goetz, Oberföhringerstrasse 105, München 81, Germany.)
The newly opened Kirchner Museum in Davos is dedicated to the life and works of Ernst Ludwig Kirchner, the German artist who helped draft the manifesto of the Die Brücke school in Berlin in 1905.
Considered a ‘degenerate artist’ by the Nazis, 639 of his paintings were confiscated in 1937.
Devastated, within a few months Kirchner committed suicide at his Davos home where he had lived since World War I. The museum has been designed by the young team of Zurich architects Annette Gigon and Mike Guyer who won the brief in 1989.
The construction is of glazed cubes with an interior of flexible open spaces, similar to Richard Meier's design for the new Getty Museum.
The planned Leipzig Museum for Contemporary Art was conceived back in 1987, before the reunification of Germany, as a place in which art from both East and West could be seen together a means of ending the isolation that East German museums found themselves in.
Now the wall has come down, Leipzig city council is still pressing ahead for the museum to be built, although the building funds have yet to be found and the competition to find an architect will not be until 1993.
This will be the first museum of contemporary art in the former DDR and the director-designate, Klaus Werner intends to make it a showcase of international art.
The museum already has a comprehensive library donated as a bequest from Paul Maenz, the former Cologne gallery owner, and has been given fifty-five works of art by a West German group of industrialists.
The first three have already been handed over and are by artists not formerly represented in east German museums: Ernst Wilhelm Nay, Emil Schumacher and Fritz Winter.
Klaus Werner is currently preparing an exhibition on Blinky Palermo, who was born in Leipzig.
Last June saw the opening of a new museum in Ingolstadt, a few kilometres north of Munich, devoted to concrete art the art of geometric form and pure colour espoused in the 1930s by artists such as Arp, Kupka, Vantongerloo and van Doesburg.
Set on the banks of the Danube in the former historic Donau Kaserne, or barracks, the museum opened with a collection of 120 works, planning to exhibit the sculpture outdoors on the river.
The core of the collection was a gift from  collector Eugen Gomringers, and will be augmented by permanent loans from collectors in Munich and Cologne.
With additional purchases the museum will be one of the most important for concrete art in Germany, showing works by Marcello Morandini, Leon Polks Smith, Josef Albers, Verena Loewensberg, and Peter Vogels bringing the story of concrete art up to the present day.
The director Peter Volkwein plans to mount exhibitions and encourage symposia, discussions and concerts of concrete music.
The problems of Eastern European museums
BERLIN.
This year's meeting of ICOM (International Council of Museums) Fine Art Museums subgroup took place in Berlin from 15 to 18 October, and focused on the plight of Eastern European museums.
(For the report on the main ICOM conference in Quebec in September see p. 19.)
In his introduction to the participants, mostly directors and curators of European fine art museums, the chairman, Prinz von Hohenzollern, General Director of the Bayerische Staatsgemäldesammlungen, stressed the need for practical help and exchange programmes for curators and restorers.
The restoration of four paintings from the partially destroyed National Museum of Art in Bucharest, carried out by the Rijksmuseum in Amsterdam in late 1989; fundraising, and collaboration on exhibitions were held up as examples of past successes.
Statements were made in reply by Konstanty Kalinowski, Poznan Museum; Theodore Enescu, National Museum of Art, Bucharest; Lubomir Slavicek, National Gallery, Prague; and Miklós Mojzer, Museum of Fine Arts, Budapest.
It could be seen from these that the problems faced by Eastern European museums since the decline of the socialist regimes are strikingly similar.
Works of art were seized from private homes and accessioned as museum property after World War II and, as such, exhibited to the public.
Deposits and long-term loans, given by private collectors to the museums before the war were subsequently considered State property and are now the subject of legal actions.
In one instance a picture lent from Czechoslovakia to Cologne was prevented from returning because of a claim to title made by the former owner's heir.
Miklós Mojzer addressed the problems of the art trade in Hungary, where as yet no lists exist for objects considered part of the national heritage, while Lubomir Slavicek focused on financial, management, and display problems at the National Gallery in Prague.
Theodore Enescu categorised the problems in three specific fields where help and exchange of expertise is needed: display management and scientific training, especially the updating of the museum's libraries.
Trainee programmes are needed to finance the work of eastern curators in the West.
In exchange, all participants from Eastern Europe offered internships to their Western colleagues.
The reunification of the museums in Berlin was discussed in a separate session.
Henning Bock, Director of the Gemäldegalerie in Berlin, pleaded for a pragmatic handling of the whole affair, in favour of the plans of Wolf-Dieter Dube, Director-General of Berlin's united museums, who hopes to establish Kemperplatz as a rival art complex to the Museumsinsel.
This drew opposition from the audience: Timothy Clifford, Director of the National Gallery of Scotland, asked for a rethink of the concept of a pure ‘picture-gallery’, presented without sculpture and decorative arts, while Hiltrud Kier, General Director of Cologne's Museums, warned against overriding the objections of the Berlin curators, as well as of the Denkmalpflege in charge of the buildings themselves.
The participants from Eastern Europe may well have been surprised at how lightly their Western counterparts were ready to sacrifice the traditions of the great east Berlin museums.
Till-Holger Borchert
Barnes tour of paintings given the legal go-ahead
MERION PA.
Just as the Barnes disputes seem closer to resolution, another Pennsylvania museum is seeking to challenge accepted practices and deaccession an important work of art.
The Everhart Museum of Scranton, Pennsylvania, has asked the Orphan's Court for permission to sell Matisse's ‘Pink Shrimp’(est. $3–4 million), now on view at the MoMA retrospective, at Sotheby's on 10 November, in order to fund an endowment for operating costs and acquisitions.
In the case of the Barnes, a logjam of more than a year ended on 21 July when a Pennsylvania judge ruled that the Foundation could send paintings from its celebrated collection on a tour that will include stops at the National Gallery of Art in Washington, D.C., France, Japan, and probably the Philadelphia Museum of Art.
Judge Louis B. Stefan said he had based his decision on the Barnes trustees' appeal for desperately needed funds to restore the 1924 foundation building and improve climate control.
He also ruled that the tour would be a one-time abridgement of the identure to the will of Albert C. Barnes, the collection's founder, which emphatically prohibits the sale or loan of any of the foundation's works.
Paintings are expected to come off the walls in preparation for the tour after 1 January 1993.
The tour is expected to bring in $7 million.
While many are praising the ruling for providing a chance for some to see such masterpieces as Matisse's ‘Grand Riffian’ and Seurat's ‘Les Poseuses’without the required pilgrimage to Merion, Pennsylvania, critics of the decision are echoing a warning they have offered since the Barnes attempted to deaccession works last year.
Donors, they say, will recoil from giving to institutions which turn around and sell those works.
Lois Forer, a judge and former assistant Pennsylvania attorney general, expects that the decision on the Barnes tour will encourage donors to include ‘gift over’ provisions in their bequests, allowing gifts to pass to a second institution if the first recipient of a donation violates the restrictions placed on gifts.
What future for the British naive art museum?
LONDON.
One of Jacob Rothschild's first decisions as Chairman of the National Heritage Memorial Fund was not to acquire for the nation the most comprehensive collection in England of naive art shop signs, weather vanes, country furniture, marine samplers and quilts, made between 1750 and 1900 offered by dealer/collector Andras Kalman.
This is for the moment on show at the Museum of English Naive Art in Bath, and will be given a brief airing in London from 18 to 24 November at the Olympia Fine Art and Antiques Fair.
The long-term future for the collection remains uncertain.
In U.S., by contrast, the Williamsburg Folk Museum has just been trebled in size, at a cost of $8 million.
The ‘Clanwilliam’ commode goes home to Prussia after 200 years
POTSDAM.
Christie's were gratified when, on 13 June 1991, a German transitional commode they had estimated at £250,000 (DM737,000) went for an enormous DM4,682,000.
This was the famous ‘Clanwilliam’ commode of 1785 by Johann Gottlob Fiedler, a masterpiece of parquetry veneering, with exquisite gilt-bronze mounts and surmounted by a marble intarsia slab.
Until 200 years ago it had stood in the Berlin Stadtpalais for which Fiedler had also executed the panelling, flooring and cupboards.
The building was given over to the university in 1810, and the commode entered the Clanwilliam collection in 1831.
At the auction last year the buyers were the dealers Konrad Bernheimer,(who has already been involved in the return of other important furniture to the Prussian palaces), and Achim Neuse.
The acquisition by the Land, at DM5.3 million, was made possible by grants from the federal government, the Kulturstiftung der Länder and the Munich Ernst von Siemens Foundation.
The commode is now exhibited in the Neue Kammern at Potsdam-Sanssouci.
Exhibitions
Baltimore
Not just merry peasants in the shadow of Vesuvius
The first U.S. survey of nineteenth-century Italian art for fifty years opens at the Walters this month
TURIN.
Following on from the exhibition of Italian drawings 1780–1890 seen in Washington, Minneapolis and San Francisco in 1980 and 1981, the same team of organisers and curator The American Federation of Arts and Roberta Olsen respectively have mounted an ambitious sequel, ‘Ottocento: Romanticism and Revolution in nineteenth-century Italian paintings’.
With 104 paintings by seventy artists Olsen has set out to show that nineteenth-century Italian painting, as in the preceding centuries, reflected the political events of the time.
The tensions and conflicts that arose out of Italy's struggle for unification were paralleled in the art of the nineteenth-century by the antagonism between Romanticism and Realism.
This artistic contest dominated throughout Europe, especially in France and Germany, but it was in Italy that Romanticism found its closest identification with resurgent nationalism, in this case the Risorgimento.
Olsen has therefore concentrated on four periods when the paintings connect most directly with historic events: from 1797 to 1814 when Napoleon's Empire imposed a kind of unity on the country; from the restoration of the monarchy until mid century when historic Romanticism came into conflict with Realism and gradually waned as a moving force in Italian art; the triumph of Realism in parallel with the rapid progress towards unification from 1849 to 1870; and the final period from 1870 until the end of the century when Realism evolved under wider European influences into Symbolism and Divisionism.
This show will be a revelation for the many Americans who are too young to have seen the major survey mounted by Wildenstein in New York in 1949.
More recently, artists such as Boldini, De Nittis, Segantini, Zandomeneghi and the Macchiaioli have become better known in the States, but Palagi, Favretto, Hayez and Toma are virtually unrecognised, as are many others.
At least eighty per cent of the works in the show, including masterpieces, have not crossed the Atlantic before.
They will be united with paintings from the Metropolitan, Brooklyn and Boston Museums.
The European loans are from Swiss and English collections, from the Musée d'Orsay, Versailles and the Kunsthistorisches Museum in Vienna, with the greater part coming from Italian collections, private, public and those of banks.
Highlights among the Romantic paintings are Giacinto Gigante's ‘Tempest in the Gulf of Amalfi’, Giovanni Fattori's ‘Garibaldi at Palermo’, and Gaetano Previati's ‘Paolo and Francesca’, with the Realists represented by Odoardo Borrani's ‘The seamstresses of the red shirts’, Giuseppe Pellizza da Volpedo's ‘The procession’ and Boldini's ‘James McNeill Whistler’.
The catalogue is published by the American Federation of Arts with Centro Di of Florence.
The exhibition opens at the Walters Art Gallery, Baltimore on 15 November and runs until 2 January 1993.
It travels to the Worcester Art Museum in Worcester Mass. 16 January-27 February and the Frick Art Museum in Pittsburgh 13 March-25 April.
London
Sickert, master of the Camden Town murders
Leader of the Camden Town School reassessed in large exhibition of oil paintings at the Royal Academy
LONDON.
The major survey of the paintings of Walter Richard Sickert, which opens at the Royal Academy of Arts towards the end of this month (20 November-14 February 1993) and commemorates the fiftieth anniversary of the artist's death in 1942, is the most comprehensive exhibition of his work to be staged since the Tate Gallery's centenary exhibition of 1960 and an Arts Council touring show seen in Hull, Glasgow and Plymouth in 1977–78.
It comprises 134 pictures, but no etchings nor drawings, which will be the subject of an exhibition at the British Museum in 1995, and it has been selected by the two leading Sickert scholars, Dr Wendy Barron, Director of the Government Art Collection and author of the standard catalogue of his work, and Richard Shone, Associate Editor of the Burlington Magazine.
Their selection spreads over Sickert's entire career, ranging through his music hall and theatre subjects, his studies of Venice and Dieppe and his later pictures which were based upon photographs.
Poorly appreciated during his life and for many years after his death, this period of his work was reassessed by a touring exhibition sponsored by the Hayward Gallery in 1981, but a substantial group of his later canvases has never been shown in the context of his whole development.
Special attention will focus upon half a dozen versions of the Camden Town murder paintings, including the small but particularly dramatic ‘L'affaire de Camden Town’(1908–1909, private collection), the two versions of King Edward VIII (1936, Beaverbrook Art Gallery and private collection), and the large study for ‘The Raising of Lazarus’(1929, Art Gallery of South Australia), originally executed in broad sweeps of the brush on the wallpaper of Sickert's studio.
The completed version of this famous composition belongs to the National Gallery of Victoria, Australia, and is now regarded as being too fragile to travel.
The catalogue (Yale University Press, £40 h/b, £19.95 p/b) includes an introductory essay by Shone, with additional essays by Anna Greutzner-Robins, who discusses Sickert's music hall paintings, and Patrick O'Connor, who writes of the  artist's later interests in theatre and his portraits of leading figures of the stage.
Roger Bevan
What it costs to appreciate Sickert this month
With the Royal Academy's survey of Sickert's oil paintings opening later this month, the Camden Town connoisseur should consider the following investments:
Dr Wendy Barron's catalogue of Sickert's art, the standard reference work, published by Phaidon Press in 1973 and out of print, from Thomas Heneage Art Books, £400
Iron bed (single) from the Antique Bedstead Co., £200
Ground floor and basement apartment in 6 Mornington Crescent, the house formerly occupied by Sickert, 120-year lease through local estate agents, Bairstow Eves, £97,000
‘Granby Street’(about 1906), Sickert's original oil painting of a nude model on a bed, from Browse and Darby, £100,000
Bonn borrows MoMA pictures
BONN.
The first of an enterprising new series of loan exhibitions can be seen until 10 January 1993 at the Art and Exhibition Hall, Bonn (Kunst- und Ausstellungshalle), under the curatorship of Pontus Hulten, the Halle's artistic director, who conceived of the scheme with Wenzel Jacob its managing director.
For the first in the series, seventy paintings from the Museum of Modern Art in New York have been loaned to form a survey of the key movements and artists of the twentieth century.
The Kunst- und Ausstellungshalle is funding the project; there are no loan fees to pay but it is covering the costs of  transporation and catalogue production.
Similar loan agreements are currently being worked out with other major collections both inside and outside Germany.
Works on loan include Cézanne ‘Le Chateau Noir’ of 1904 to 1906; van Gogh's ‘Portrait of Joseph Roulin’of 1889; Boccioni's ‘Unique forms of continuity in space (1913); de Chirico's ‘The Nostalgia of the Inifinite’(1913–14) and Picasso's ‘Girl before a Mirror’(1932).
Outsider Art in favour in Los Angeles
LOS ANGELES.
At a time of growing interest in the art of cultures and societies which do not form part of the Western tradition, the Los Angeles County Museum is mounting an exhibition which will examine the affinities between modern and contemporary art and the work of naive or untrained painters not belonging to the sophisticated infrastructure of galleries, museums and other international art activities.
‘Parallel Visions: Modern Artists and Outsider Art’(until 3 January 1993) unites seventy-four artists drawn from two distinctive categories.
‘Moderns’ include Paul Klee, Max Ernst, Salvador Dalí, Dubuffet, Georg Baselitz, A.R.
Penck, Claes Oldenburg and Julian Schnabel, and their work will be juxtaposed with the art of ‘Visionaries’, drawn from a variety of ethnic and educational backgrounds.
H.C.
Westermann, who died in 1981, is being treated as a special case.
Selected by the museum's senior curator for twentieth-century art, Maurice Tuchman, with his colleague, Carol Eliel, the exhibition travels to the Museo Nacional Reina Sofia, Madrid (11 February-9 May 1993), the Kunsthalle, Basel (4 July-29 August 1993) and the Setagaya Museum, Tokyo (30 September-12 December 1993).
Norwich shows British Museum drawings
NORWICH.
Until 13 December, the British Museum is lending over fifty  outstanding drawings to the Sainsbury Centre for the Visual Arts of the University of East Anglia, Norwich, for the exhibition ‘Florentine drawing in the age of Michelangelo’.
The drawings represent a selection of the museum's outstanding holdings which were shown in a larger exhibition of the same title at the British Museum in 1986.
Among the artists represented are Leonardo, Michelangelo, Raphael, Fra Bartolommeo, Pontormo, Bronzino and Vasari.
This continues the series of major loan exhibitions from the British Museum to the University of East Anglia past subjects include Benin bronzes which have been made possible due to the high standard of the exhibition space, security arrangements and environment control in Norwich, which meets the Museum's stringent loan requirements.
The present exhibition will take place in the new Lower Gallery which has been specially designed for the display of drawings.
To accompany the exhibition the university's History of Art department are arranging a conference on 27 November on the topic of ‘Drawing conclusions on value and meaning: America, Europe, China’.
Sessions will be chaired by Nicholas Turner of the British Museum and Professor John Onians of Norwich.
Subjects of papers will include: drawings and paintings as gifts in sixteenth-century China; drawings as gifts in sixteenth-century Italy; the representation of movement in drawings; the meaning of line in Leonardo's drawings and the relationship between word and image in manuscript sent to the King of Spain from Mexico in around 1611.
Speakers include Professor Roderick Whitfield of the Percival David Foundation, London, Francis Ames-Lewis of Birkbeck College, University of London and Professor Martin Kemp of Saint Andrew's University, Scotland.
Musée d'Art Moderne
Europe Part II: Germany
France comes face-to-face with Expressionism
PARIS.
The eagerness of the Musée d'Art Moderne de la Ville de Paris to promote a deeper awareness of historical and contemporary European art has been demonstrated by its series of national exhibitions.
The series continues this winter with three exhibitions on German themes (‘Parcours éuropéen II: l'Allemagne’), while a Dutch exhibition is scheduled for 1994.
The first German event (until 17 January 1993) reflects current research being carried out at ARC [Animation/Recherche/Confrontation].
It focuses on contemporary art and includes works by the most recent generations of young artists born or working in Germany.
‘Figures du moderne’ is the title of the exhibition devoted to the Expressionists belonging to the Brücke and Blaue Reiter groups.
It will continue for nearly four months (from 19 November until 14 March).
The organisers stress that the choice of exhibits has been governed by the time and place of execution of the works that brought the artists into the limelight before World War I. Between 1905 and 1914, in Dresden, Munich and Berlin the ‘key figures of the modern movement’ of the title Heckel, Kirchner, Schmidt-Rottluff, Pechstein, Mueller, Nolde, Jawlensky, Kandinsky, Marc, Macke, Klee, Münter, Werefkin and Meidner were the driving force behind Expressionism.
The works are drawn from public and private collections and include 160 paintings and sculptures, 150 wood engravings, one hundred watercolours and drawings, and a vast quantity of documents.
The most interesting aspect of this exhibition supported by the Deutscher Museumsbund (German Museums Association) and the Franco-German Cultural Council is the catalogue.
This is the outcome of the first cooperative effort in France to deal with this period of art history, with contributions from experts from both countries.
These include the philosopher Jean-Claude Lebensztejn; Georg W. Költzsch, director of the Folkwang Museum in Essen; Bernard Mercadé; Armin Zweite, director of the Kunstsammlung Nordrhein Westfalen in Düsseldorf, Lionel Richard; Jean-Michel Palmier and Magdalena Moeller, director of Berlin's Brücke-Museum.
An exhibition of the work of conceptual photographer Hans Peter Feldmann carried out in the 1960s and 1970s runs parallel to these two exhibitions.
The programme is completed by a showing of a version of Robert Wiene's ‘The Cabinet of Dr Caligari’ with orchestral soundtrack, Schönberg's ‘Pierrot Lunaire’, and a series of illustrated lectures, jazz concerts and seminars.
London
A glimpse of the B.M.'s painted courtesans
Rare paintings by Edo artists Hokusai, Utamaro and Sharaku in two instalments
LONDON.
The exhibition ‘Ukiyo-e Paintings’ currently in the new Japanese galleries at the British Museum was devised with the intent of showing that the artists of the ‘floating world’did not only produce wood-block prints.
Displayed in two parts to minimise the exposure of the delicate paintings to light (until 29 November and from 1 December until 31 January 1993) the exhibition presents over one hundred of the museum's holdings of Edo screens, hanging scrolls, handscrolls and albums dating from 1600 to 1868.
Ukiyo-e artists such as Hokusai, Utamaro and Sharaku produced these works in small numbers and largely to special commission.
This in itself was unusual, as the high-ranking patrons would have been expected to display classical scenes in their houses, leading to the supposition that these intimate portraits of courtesans were most probably on view only in the private apartments.
One such, ‘Woman washing her face’ by Utamaro (one of only two dozen paintings known by him) is arresting for the space that is allowed to resonate around the figure unlike the tightly cropped subjects in Ukiyo-e prints.
The six-fold screen, ‘Courtesans of the Tamaya House’, attributed to Utagawa Toyoharu (1735–1814), is one of only very few floating world screens and most probably was used in the courtesan's own apartment.
Four large Osaka School signboards in strikingly bright colours showing scenes from Kabuki plays were painted in the 1870s to hang outside Kabuki theatres and are also rare because they were generally destroyed after use.
An additional display in the adjoining Konica Gallery explains the technique of Ukiyo-e paintings and prints.
Timothy Clarke, organiser of the exhibition, hopes to organise a fuller show at a later date.
He is the author of the accompanying catalogue Ukiyo-e Paintings in the British Museum (£16.95 from the B.M. bookshop and £19.95 from other bookshops).
Anglo-Israeli relations flourish in Jerusalem
JERUSALEM.
Jacob Rothschild, Chairman of the National Heritage Memorial Fund and former Chairman of the Trustees of the National Gallery, has personally financed the construction of the new Supreme Court Building in Jerusalem, at a cost of around £40 million.
The building will be opened in November to considerable celebrations and a number of cultural events have been timed to coincide with the opening.
From 11 November at the Israel Museum for three months is ‘British Figurative Painting of the Twentieth Century’, an exhibition sponsored by the British Council of eighty works chosen by art historian and critic James Hyman in collaboration with Henry Meyric Hughes of the British Arts Council and the London-based art historian and collector David Landau.
The works will be displayed in the new wing of the museum, recently built to house twentieth-century art.
Many of the works are from private collections and have not previously been exhibited.
The artists range from Sickert an unknown ‘Theatre Scene’ of 1922 to 1924 to the work of young contemporary painters such as Tony Bevan and Celia Paul.
The core of the exhibition consists of works by British artists who emerged in the 1940s and 50s, including the so-called ‘School of London’ artists such as Michael Andrews, Frank Auerbach, Bacon, Freud and Kossoff.
Other artists in the exhibition include Gwen John, Stanley Spencer, William Roberts, Matthew Smith, Graham Sutherland, David Hockney, Howard Hodgkin, Paula Rego and Maggi Hambling.
The catalogue is a serious and enlightening examination of the nature of modern British art by James Hyman, which draws heavily on the artists' own words and writings.
Before leaving for Jerusalem a selection of the paintings were exhibited at Sotheby's London, on the initiative of Melanie Clore of their Impressionist and Modern Pictures department.
Asher Edelman opens small survey of Roy Lichtenstein as ‘Post-Human’ moves to Turin
LAUSANNE.
A survey of the art of Roy Lichtenstein continues at the FAE/Musée d'Art Contemporain, Pully/Lausanne, until 31 January 1993.
Curated by the Foundation's creator, Asher Edelman, with his colleague, Chantal Michetti, it comprises nearly forty oil or acrylic paintings, twenty collages and drawings and ten painted bronze sculptures, and will subsequently be shown at the Tate Gallery, Liverpool (17 February-21 April 1993).
A major retrospective of the artist's career is scheduled to take place at the Guggenheim Museum, New York, from May 1993.
Edelman's exhibition contains several important historical canvases such as‘Whaam!’(1963, Tate Gallery) and ‘Eddie Diptych’(1963, Sonnabend), as well as four pictures in the recent ‘Reflections’ series previewed at the Castelli Gallery in 1990, and one new ‘Interior’painting (1991).
A documentary section features invitation cards, posters, catalogues and other Pop ephemera borrowed from Leo Castelli's archives and the artist's library.
‘Post-Human’, the Foundation's previous exhibition, imaginatively curated by Jeffrey Deitch and featuring the work of thirty-six younger international artists, has moved to the Castello di Rivoli, Turin (to 22 November), and will then be seen at the Deste Foundation for Contemporary Art, Athens (3 December-14 February 1993) and at the Deichtorhallen, Hamburg (12 March-9 May 1993).
Paris
Latin America is très chic
Major show at the Pompidou as Botero invades town
PARIS.
The Centre Pompidou's extensive autumn programme is yet another mammoth event: eleven exhibitions devoted to the visual arts, literature (including one on the Argentine writer Jorge Luis Borges), cinema and theatre of Latin America, as well as debates, public readings, performances, a philosophy seminar, a symposium and a large number of publications.
In fact, the themes are various and, despite rival 1492 celebrations, for Europeans the artistic creativity of Latin America apart from a few great names is still largely unexplored territory.
The art of that continent has often been misunderstood, or treated paternalistically.
To remedy that Latin American artists of the twentieth century are considered in the major exhibition ‘Art d'Amérique Latine’ already seen in Seville.
The international loans were secured and the exhibition organised by Waldo Rasmussen, the director of New York's Museum of Modern Art's International Progam, at the invitation of Maria Corral (Director of the Museo Nacional de Reina Sofía).
The show is arranged by chronology and style, not by country: the artists selected not only live in Latin America but have strong cultural ties with it.
The aim is to identify the principal aesthetic sources of the continent, both within local culture and the modern world.
On the fifth floor of the Centre Pompidou from 12 November to 11 January 1993, ‘Art d'Amérique Latine’ comprises 482 works covering the years from 1911 to 1968: from the Cubism of Diego Rivera to the renewed figurative tradition of Botero, Segui, Morales and Gamarra, and the Surrealism of Lam and Matta; from the Futurism of Dr Atl to the abstract symbolism of Torres García and the two most fertile Latin American movements of the post-war period, Arte Concreto Invención and Madi.
Three rooms are devoted to Rivera, Orozco and Siqueiros and their mural painting, but only sketches, preliminary drawings and a few scaled-down paintings will be exhibited, since their monumental frescos can be viewed only in situ.
There is no lack of lesser known artists, such as José Cuneo and Armando Reveron, or the Brazilian Tarsila Do Amaral, who, having painted in the style of Léger in his early career, later incorporated indigenous influences.
In this respect he typifies the return to native sources advocated in the years 1925 to 1930 from Venezuela to Argentina.
Also included in the exhibition are sixteen canvases by Frida Kahlo, recently discovered and popularised, and kinetic works by Le Parc, Cruz-Diez and Soto.
Alain Sayag and Claude Schweisguth of the Musée National d'Art Moderne collaborated with Waldo Rasmussen on the organisation of the exhibition which travels to Cologne's Ludwig Museum from February to April 1993, before showing in New York at MoMA from 2 June to 7 September 1993.
More recent trends in the visual arts of Latin America are explored at the Hôtel des Arts, where the director is Ramón Tío Bellido.
The exhibitors are sixteen artists of various ages, some better known abroad than others.
They include Dittborn, Porter, Molinas-Campos, Rojas, Caldas, Senise and Jaar, whose works were recently on display in Seville.
In the meanwhile, works by the Colombian artist Botero are omnipresent, from the Champs Elysée to the Grand Palais (see The Art Newspaper No. 21, Oct. 1992, p. 31).
‘The Crossroads of Asia’ in Cambridge
LONDON.
With financial support from the Ancient India and Iran Trust in Cambridge, the Fitzwilliam Museum has been able to mount a loan exhibition of antiquities of ancient Afghanistan and Pakistan.
Loans of ancient metalwork, including a large proportion of coins, have come from the V&A and British Museum in London, the Musée Guimet and Cabinet des Medailles in Paris and the Museum für Indische Kunst in Berlin.
The time span of the objects runs from the invasion of Alexander the Great in 329–325 BC to the eve of the Islamic conquest in the eighth century AD.
Images of Greek gods transformed into Zoroastrian, Hindu and Buddhist deities reflect the influence of the invading Greeks on the pre-existing Iranian, Indian and nomad cultures of the region, distinctively fused in the Buddhist art of Gandhara.
The accompanying catalogue, edited by Elizabeth Errington and Joe Cribb, contains texts by an international team of scholars (320 pp. 221 b/w ills 21 col.pl. £28.50).
The exhibition continues until 13 December; check with the museum for opening times: 0223 332900.
Frederic Bazille's first major one-man show
BROOKLYN.
Frederic Bazille (1841–70) is one of the great ‘what-ifs’ of French painting.
He is best known today for his early friendships with the Impressionist elite of Renoir, Fantin-Latour, Manet, Cézanne and Monet (with whom he shared a studio for a time and discussed the possibility of organising an exhibition of their friends' works by the official salon).
His own paintings, an unusual and sometimes uneasy melding of academic style with nascent Impressionism, have generally been neglected, perhaps due to their extreme rarity only about seventy exist.
Bazille was killed a few months before his twenty-ninth birthday in the Franco-Prussian war, and since then scholars have been wringing their hands at the loss of a potential ‘great Impressionist’, discounting the possibility that he could equally have evolved into a third-rate artist like Sisley or Morisot.
Although Bazille has figured as a peripheral figure in several recent museum exhibitions on the Impressionist epoch and was the subject of a 1978 exhibition at the Art Institute of Chicago, he has never been judged as completely on his own as he is in the current show at the Brooklyn Museum, N.Y.
(13 November-24 January 1993).
Titled ‘Frederic Bazille: Prophet of Impressionism’, it is an enlarged version of a show that was held earlier this year in Montpellier, repository of the majority of the artist's works.
Chosen by Elizabeth Easton, Brooklyn's associate curator of European Painting and Sculpture, it contains sixty paintings and works on paper (among them ten recently discovered works), including the monumental ‘Bathers’ from the Fogg Art Museum, the ‘Negress with Peonies’from the Musée Fabre, Montepellier, and ‘Self-Portrait with Palette’from the Art Institute of Chicago.
Several of the works depict the artist's better known friends, notably the witty charcoal sketch of the top-hatted dandy ‘Manet at the easel’ from the Metropolitan.
The catalogue, containing essays by J. Patrice Marandel, Curator of European Sculpture at the Detroit Institute of Art (and curator of the 1978 Chicago Show), Dianne Pitman, a Bazille scholar whose dissertation was the first devoted to his work, and François Daulte, author of the Bazille catalogue raisonné, is, remarkably, the first publication on Bazille in English.
After leaving Brooklyn, the show travels to the Dixon Gallery and Gardens, Memphis, where it may be seen 14 February-25 April, 1993.
Charles Rennie Mackintosh goes Dutch
AMSTERDAM.
The Van Gogh Museum, Amsterdam, is presenting an exhibition entitled ‘Glasgow 1900’ comprising drawings, watercolours and crafts from the years 1875–1914 (20 November to 7 February 1993).
Paintings and works on paper by members of the Glasgow School of painting and by French and Dutch contemporaries will be juxtaposed, while the role of the Glasgow School of Art will be examined with particular reference to the work of Charles Rennie Mackintosh, Herbert McNair and their wives, Margaret and Frances MacDonald.
The majority of exhibits have been loaned from the Kelvingrove Art Gallery and Musem, Glasgow.
To accompany the exhibition, the Van Gogh Museum is organising a symposium on 27 November on the topic of the furniture and interior designs of Charles Rennie Mackintosh.
The famous dealer Tomás Harris and his Goya prints
LONDON.
The refurbished University College Strang Print Room, which opened last March, has mounted its second exhibition under the new regime of curator Nicola Kalinsky.
‘Tomás Harris and Goya’(subtitled: an artist, collector and connoisseur's study of the printed work of Francisco Goya y Lucientes) draws on a wealth of material drawings, paintings, prints, photographs, press cuttings and even stock books from Harris's gallery same original work by Harris loaned by the Slade where he was a student.
Harris opened his first London gallery in 1928 when only twenty years old, concentrating largely on Spanish Old Masters, and held his last and widely acclaimed exhibition ‘From Greco to Goya’ in November 1938, during the Spanish Civil War, all proceeds going to the Red Cross.
Passionate about both printmaking and Goya, Harris built up his own collection of the four Goya print series: Los Caprichos, Los Desastres de la Guerra, La Tauromaquia and Los Proverbios, now with the British Museum.
The 1963 BM exhibition of the prints, and Harris's definitive catalogue Goya: Engravings and Lithographs (published 1964), were the culmination of his career; he was tragically killed in a car accident on the eve of the book's publication.
The exhibition continues until 8 December (1–2.30 pm, Monday to Friday, and by appointment: tel. 071–387 7050 ext. 2540).
Paris
A recherché season at the Louvre
Pannini, Liotard, Byzantium and Greenaway
PARIS.
With its second centenary fast approaching, the Louvre is keener than ever to put some of the lesser-known sections of its collection on public view.
(Larger Louvre-organised exhibitions such as‘The Century of Titian, from Giorgione to Veronese’, scheduled for 20 February to 31 May, are held at the Grand Palais.)
It is also concentrating on widening the art-historical issues by studying the links between critical and historical thought and between artists from diverse cultural backgrounds.
An exhibition of the work of landscape painter Giovanni Paolo Pannini, marking the 300th anniversary of his birth, opens on 16 October.
Around fifty works drawn from about ten French collections are on show.
The scholarly Pannini, with his fondness for the Bibiena family's theatrical designs, soon gained admirers in France, where he was an enduring source of inspiration to Hubert Robert, who was his pupil in Rome.
Also currently at the Louvre are 130 drawings by the portrait painter Liotard (1702–89).
The exhibition of drawings, displayed this summer in the artist's native Geneva, will continue until mid-December.
Two exhibitions open in the Hall Napoléon on 6 November and are scheduled to close on 1 February.
The first is devoted to 1,000 years of Byzantine art and comprises nearly 350 objects from French national collections, including marbles, silks, ivories, manuscripts, icons and gold artefacts.
The second exhibition gives carte blanche to the film director Peter Greenaway who has chosen a series of works on the theme of flight, presented in a highly spectacular way.
After three years of restoration, Veronese's ‘Marriage at Cana’ is the centre of a small exhibition, until 9 November, of the discoveries made by the restorers in the course of their work.
Readers of The Art Newspaper will recall that the canvas was badly damaged in a fall last June (see No. 20, July-September 1992, p.1).
However, there is no doubt that the most important event for the museum will be the exhibition ‘Au Louvre d'après les Maîtres’(26 April to 23 June 1993) that chronicles the active role played by the Louvre in the history of art over the last two centuries.
It also examines way in which its collections have influenced not only artists such as Turner, Cézanne and Giacometti but also Mondrian, Warhol and Jasper Johns.
London
Pop artist Caulfield's pools of lights
An unexportable talent?
LONDON.
Long considered one of the leading exponents of British Pop Art, and a major figure painter of his generation, Patrick Caulfield is the subject of a survey covering his thirty-year career and opening at the Serpentine Gallery towards the end of this month (24 November-17 January 1993).
Curated by Andrea Schlieker, the gallery's Assistant Director, this survey belongs to a continuing programme of exhibitions of established British artists which has included, in recent years, John Bellany (1986–87), Maggie Hambling (1987), Paula Rego (1988), Ivon Hitchens (1989) and Victor Pasmore (1991).
Each of these artists enjoys a firm reputation in this country but wider international success has been elusive.
The new exhibition comprises thirty-eight paintings with particular emphasis being placed upon those works which Caulfield has created in the eleven years since his retrospective held at the Walker Art Gallery, Liverpool, and the Tate Gallery, in 1981–82.
Quite different from the cacophony of patterns and painting styles which characterised his work of a decade ago, they employ greater expanses of pure colour and favour passages of thick impasto laboriously built up in acrylic paints.
The dominant theme remains still-life and the  prominence of lamps and the pools of light which they shed.
The catalogue (Academy Editions) publishes essays by Schlieker and Marco Livingstone.
Bill Jacklin's New York in Oxford
OXFORD.
A survey of thirty paintings and thirty-five pastels and charcoal drawings created by Bill Jacklin in the seven years since he moved to New York in autumn 1985 opens at the Museum of Modern Art, Oxford, this month (until 10 January 1993).
Curated by the museum's director, David Elliott, and his exhibitions organiser, Chrissie Iles, the survey will be seen at the Jorge Castillo Foundation, Santiago da Compostella (21 January-13 March 1993).
Since moving to New York Jacklin has celebrated the city's trades and parades, crowds and entertainments in a series of pictures which has no match among contemporary American painters, although the city had captured the attention of the Ash Can School, Edward Hopper and, at the beginning of his career, Mark Rothko, whose subway depictions provide a point of comparison.
Jacklin's stylistic sources are, however, firmly rooted in Impressionism and the art of Seurat.
With the exception of ‘Incident on 42nd Street’(1988), the diptych owned by Metropolitan Museum and omitted for budgetary reasons, the exhibition features all of the themes which the artist has explored and culminates with a selection of canvases of Coney Island, where Jacklin has been working for the last eighteen months.
Fra Bartolommeo reaches the Pierpont
NEW YORK.
The major exhibition of one hundred drawings by Fra Bartolommeo taken from the Gaburri albums, is on at the Pierpont Morgan Library until 29 November.
Previously shown in Rotterdam the Gaburri albums are now held by the Boymans van Beuningen Museum the exhibition moved on to Boston and Fort Worth.
To accompany its New York showing, the Pierpont have mounted ‘Renaissance Florence: arts and letters’ until 29 November.
Drawn from the museum's own holdings, it includes letters from Michelangelo, Machiavelli and Lorenzo de' Medici as well as illuminated manuscripts and books.
The first book printed in Florence, a 1471–72 Virgil, the earliest printed Greek Homer and first editions of Ficino and the Divina commedia are among the items on show.
Not for sale: a Thurn und Taxis show in Belgium
BRUSSELS.
As jewels and goldsmiths' work from the Thurn und Taxis family go under the hammer this month at Sotheby's Geneva, other, even more historically evocative works of art from the collection are on show in the Belgian Archives Géneral to celebrate nearly 500 years of the world's oldest postal service, founded by the Thurn und Taxis, which began with a link between the imperial residence of the Habsburgs in Innsbruck and the court of Margaret of York in Malines, Belgium.
‘The Thurn und Taxis post 1489–1794’, organised in conjunction with the family archivist, Martin Dallmeier, includes paintings, graphic work and silver, much of which has never been exhibited before.
Among the exhibits are a triptych formerly in the church of St Sablon in Belgium, a series of graphic works by Wenceslas Hollar and the Dutch artist Romeyn de Hooch, and portraits of Frans de Tassis and Eugène Alexandre de la Tour et Tassis (until 19 December).
Fabergé revived in Unesco-decreed Fabergé year
MOSCOW.
An exhibition entitled ‘The world of Fabergé’ has opened in the exhibition hall of the Kremlin Belfry, this having been designated Fabergé Year by Unesco, and the collection of works by this famous firm being in the Kremlin Museums.
The family of jewellers was represented by a Fabergé descendant, Tatyana, who now resides in Switzerland.
However, not only works by Fabergé, including their famous Easter eggs, are in the exhibition.
There is also a wide selection of work by other Russian jewellers from the turn of the century.
The exhibits are surrounded by period costumes and photographs, and the show is to last until January.
A year ago, forty-seven-year-old Andrey Ananov of St Petersburg, now President of the firm Russian Jewellery Art, concluded a contract with the president of the toiletries firm Elida Gibbs-Fabergé by which he acquired the right to use the Fabergé name on his goods.
According to Ananov, his plans include the foundation of a major jewellery house in Russia matching Fabergé in scope.
At the moment RJA has thirty masters whose work is sold in Europe and in St Petersburg.
There are, according to Ananov, RJA Fabergé-style Easter eggs in Queen Elizabeth II's private collection, as well as those of Placido Domingo, the Kennedy family, and James Baker's wife.
Archaeology
London
Howard Carter emerges from the shadow of Tutankhamun
An exhibition at the British Museum marks the seventieth anniversary of the opening of the pharaoh's tomb and takes a close look at its discoverer
LONDON.
The exhibition ‘Howard Carter: before Tutankhamun’ which opens at the British Museum on 19 November marks the seventieth anniversary of the discovery of the tomb of Tutankhamun in November 1922.
However, the curators of the show have deliberately concentrated on the period in Howard Carter's life before he was thrust into the limelight.
John Taylor, Curator in the Department of Egyptian Antiquities in the British Museum and Nicholas Reeves, formerly at the B.M. and now Honorary Curator of the present Earl of Carnarvon's Egyptian collection at Highclere Castle, have brought together objects and documents that trace Howard Carter's Egyptian career up to 1922 and then follow the archaeologist into his retirement as consultant and dealer and finally death in 1939.
Howard Carter first went to Egypt in 1891 to work as an artist, painting scenes in watercolour of the antiquities and landscape to sell to tourists.
His interest in archaeology led him into contact with Flinders Petrie, for whom he worked as an assistant from 1892, and who gave him his first experience in excavation.
Subsequently, in 1899, Carter was offered the position of Inspector General of Antiquities for Upper Egypt, but his post with the Egyptian Antiquities service came to an abrupt end when he was held responsible for a near diplomatic incident in which disgruntled French tourists assaulted some guards at a site.
Demoted to a remote outpost, Howard Carter lived an impoverished life for several years until, in 1908, he was offered a position by Lord Carnarvon as his head of excavations.
Carter had already excavated on behalf of Lord Amherst in the 1890s, but it was during his period with Lord Carnarvan that he made his most spectacular and  significant finds, digging at Thebes and in the Valley of the Kings.
His facility for drawing became an essential tool in recording the sites that he excavated and the objects recovered from them.
In addition he was a skilled photographer and connoisseur of Egyptian antiquities, which in all made him ideally suited to an archaeological career.
The first section of the exhibition deals with antiquities found by Howard Carter or that passed through his hands.
Most of these were dispersed in the 1920s: Lord Amherst's large Egyptian collection was sold at Sotheby's in 1921, many pieces being bought by American museums, while Lord Carnarvon sold his collection to the Metropolitan Museum in 1926 for $145,000 (after teasing the British Museum with a phoney offer).
Some objects in the current exhibition have been borrowed from Highclere Castle (including part of the cache of shards and fragments of wooden sculptures found in a cupboard in 1988) and some from the British Museum itself, but many have come from further afield: the Metropolitan, the Boston Museum of Fine Arts, the Detroit Institute of Arts, the Brooklyn Museum, Cleveland, the Copenhagen Glyptotek and the Louvre.
Among the more important objects is a shabti-figure, still in the Amherst Collection, which would have represented the deceased in the underworld.
A fine example of Egyptian art of the 18th Dynasty, Carter himself thought this piece important and drew attention to it in the catalogue that he compiled for the Amherst sale.
A bronze snake around five feet long, found at Thebes in 1911 and now in the British Museum, is thought to have been used by a magician.
Significantly, it shows that Carter was discovering important objects soon after his collaboration with Lord Carnarvon began.
Also from Thebes is an exquisite obsidian and gold necklace of the 12th Dynasty, loaned from the Metropolitan, while among other loans from the Met is a solid cast copper figure of a young boy holding a silver lotus found in the tomb of a woman at Thebes, probably an idealised portrait of her younger son Amenemheb.
Two of the most spectacular objects are made respectively of gold and silver.
The statuette of the god Amun-Re, formerly in the Carnarvon Collection and now in the Met, is one of the masterpieces of Egyptian metalwork (dated from 1070–712 BC), while the large and heavy statue of a falcon-headed god, probably Horus the Elder, is one of the few examples of a cult-image to have survived from ancient Egypt.
Now in a private Japanese collection, it appeared on the art market in Egypt in the 1920s when Howard Carter was among the first to recognise its importance.
Howard Carter's own sketches, excavation notes, photographs, diaries and letters provide the historical background to the finds.
Among them are sketches of objects and copies of inscriptions made by Howard Carter of items from Lord Carnarvon's collection; facsimiles of reliefs; drawings of animals and birds copied from hieroglyphics and set alongside living counterparts; Carter's map of the Valley of the Kings used in the search for Tutankhamun's tomb; and record cards and sketches of the objects from the tomb itself.
In addition, the find of the tomb is recorded in film footage from the 1920s of the tomb's clearance, preserved in the Metropolitan Museum.
There are no objects from the tomb itself.
The exhibition continues until 31 May 1993 and is accompanied by a book by Nicholas Reeves and John Taylor.
Also titled Howard Carter: before Tutankhamun (British Museum Press, £12.95 p/b £9.95 for visitors to the museum during the period of the exhibition), it is an anthology of Howard Carter's writings illustrated by his own photographs, drawings and paintings.
Crete
Knossos 2000 launched
The exploration of an untouched site north of the Minoan palace should reveal the centre of the Roman city
LONDON.
With plans afoot for the redevelopment of part of the Cretan Knossos estate of Sir Arthur Evans, close by his former house the Villa Ariadne, a team from Birmingham University has been given the go-ahead for a new excavation.
Since Evans first dug at the site in 1900 archaeological work has largely concentrated on revealing the remains of the palace of King Minos and other buildings of the extraordinary Minoan civilisation.
Now the University of Birmingham, in association with the British School at Athens, has launched the Knossos 2000 Project, the first proper and systematic excavation of the ancient city which flourished 2000 years after the Minoan palaces on the island were destroyed.
The projected excavation, to be directed by Dr Ken Wardle of Birmingham University, hopes to uncover the centre of the Roman city, where traces of an agora and an early Christian basilica have been found.
Nearby in 1935, during the last visit of Sir Arthur Evans to Crete, a large Hadrianic villa now called the Villa Dionysos, with its magnificent mosaic pavements was found.
The first stage of the project, already complete, was a geophysical survey, which has revealed the remains of substantial stone buildings and has suggested a street plan of this part of the Roman city.
Digging will start in the summer of 1993, with the excavation of selected buildings, as well as the examination of those areas in which the survey has so far revealed nothing, but which may produce underlying Minoan levels which can be investigated in the future.
The excavation will be much larger than any recent work at Knossos and funding will be required far beyond the level usually provided by the British Academy and other research funds and foundations which traditionally support British archaeological work in Greece.
The overall cost of the project over the ten years it will run is estimated to be in the region of £1.9 million, and an appeal for sponsorship by  commercial sources and private individuals is to be launched early in 1993.
The director of Knossos 2000, Dr Ken Wardle, who has many years experience of digging in Greece and who has just completed the excavation of the prehistoric settlement of Assiros Toumba in Macedonia, commenting on the importance of the project, told The Art Newspaper, ‘Apart from the potential of the site itself, the project will provide an opportunity to focus research on the history and archaeology of Roman provincial cities in Greece, which have largely been neglected in favour of those of the Classical and Hellenistic periods’.
The ambitious project is one of the largest ever mounted by British archaeologists in Greece.
It is a fitting tribute to Evans, whose centenary of starting work at Knossos will fall during the project's duration.
The world's first artists in exhibition and congress
OVIEDO.
An exhibition entitled ‘The dawn of art: mankind's first artists’ is being planned for the end of 1993 in Oviedo.
Financing of around £2.8 million is being raised from private sources by the Fundación Principe de Asturias.
The show will coincide with an international congress of archaeologists, and it is hoped to tour it to the US, France, Japan and Germany before converting it into permanent museum.
Asturias is one of the regions of Europe richest in such archaeological material, and the show will include reproductions of cave paintings from the locality and elsewhere, together with grave goods and other moveables.
Villa and tomb uncovered in the suburbs of ancient Pompeii
SCAFATI.
Recent building work on a private villa in the countryside of Scafati, 2.5 km from Pompeii, has revealed the remains of a Roman house and tomb belonging to the influential Lucrezi family.
The square funerary monument was found to contain a series of stelae with inscriptions and five urns.
Normally made of terracotta, to hold the ashes of the deceased, these urns were unusual in being of lead, with lids, and inside having a second container of glass, also lidded, and sealed with stucco.
The typology of the glass urns, which have not been found in this region before, places them shortly before 79AD, the year of the eruption of Vesuvius which destroyed Pompeii.
The excavation of the villa, directed by Marisa de Spagnolis, has so far revealed only a portion of a room decorated with wall paintings most of the remains lie under the soil of an adjoining property.
The significance of the find lies in identification of the villa with the Lucrezi family and the evidence that this area once formed part of Pompeii's suburbs.
The local Soprintendenza in charge of archaeology in the Salerno region hopes to find the money to conduct a systematic excavation of the villa.
Queen Nefertari restored: Tutankhamun confirmed
SANTA MONICA, CA.
The Getty Conservation Institute working in collaboration with the Egyptian Antiquities Organisation has announced the completion of a six-year, $2 million project to restore the magnificent wall paintings in the 3,200 year old Tomb of Queen Nefertari in the Valley of the Queens at West Thebes (Luxor).
The paintings, generally considered to be among the finest of their kind, depict the favourite wife of Rameses II in the company of the gods on her way to the afterlife.
The tomb was robbed of its treasures at an early date but the paintings survived intact until their re-discovery in 1904 by Ernesto Schiaparelli.
The tomb will not open immediately to the public: a two year monitoring programme will attempt to measure the environmental impact of visitors on the tomb's fragile climate, with particular reference to humidity, temperature and harmful bacteria.
As an intermediate solution, the director of the Getty Conservatation Institute, Miguel Angel Corzo, has proposed the introduction of closed circuit TV which would allow visitors to view the tomb without having to enter it.
An exhibition on the project will be shown at the J. Paul Getty Museum, Malibu, from 12 November to 21 February 1993 and will include a replica of one of the tomb's decorated chambers and forty-two objects associated with the tomb on loan from American collections.
The exhibition will travel to the Centre Cultural/Arte Contemporanea, Mexico City (April to July 1993) and the Fundacio ‘La Caixa’, Barcelona (autumn 1993).
As a direct result of expertise gained by the Getty conservators in the restoration of the Nefertari tomb they have now been invited to collaborate with the Egyptian Antiquities Organisation on the restoration of the tomb of Tuthankhamun.
The wall paintings in the burial chamber of the 3,300 year old tomb in the Valley of the Kings in Upper Egypt are flaking and  cracked and need to be preserved from further deterioration.
The Getty conservators will advise and train the Egyptians specialists who will carry out most of the work.
Conservation
Liverpool
Laser sculptors
Merseyside museums lead the way in applying new technology to stone conservation
LIVERPOOL.
With the growing problem worldwide of stone decay caused by atmospheric pollution, conservators are turning to modern technology for quicker and more accurate ways to record what is still extant for posterity.
The National Museums and Galleries on Merseyside, which houses Britain's leading stone and sculpture conservation centre, is the first in this country to install the most recent development a laser scanner.
Originally invented for high resolution engineering and plastic surgery, the scanner, which employs a low-energy helium-neon (He-Ne) laser, can measure an object three-dimensionally to within a millimetre of accuracy.
The scanner is usually fixed to a circular platform on which the subject is placed.
It is motorised so that it can rapidly circumnavigate the platform, measuring distances by trigonometry as it moves to record a human head can take as little as fifteen to twenty seconds.
The information is fed directly into a computer and the digitised information printed out as a linear contour map or as a solid representation in light and shade.
Not only do accurate 3-D computer models allow information on cleaning, damage and repair to be superimposed as a record of the state of conservation of a work of art, they also allow tailor-made packing cases to be constructed for its transportation.
A more exciting spin-off still is that by feeding the digitised information into a computer-guided lathe it is possible to carve reproductions of sculptures in a variety of materials, such as wood, plaster, glass or stone.
This process has already been applied to a severely weathered stone head from Lincoln Cathedral.
In the past much damage has been done by taking moulds from sculptures in museums and elsewhere.
To be able to make an accurate replica of a sculpture without touching its surface has far-reaching implications, both for the museum replication industry and for open-air sites where stone sculpture is suffering from irretrievable decay.
In Florence, for example, statues have been taken down and housed in museums with replicas being put in their place.
The same may happen on the Acropolis, where the marble of the Erechtheum and the Parthenon is under attack from acid rain caused by air pollution, as well as the growth of a black fungus within the marble encouraged by hotter, drier weather over the past fifty years.
Lasers are also being used to vaporise the dirt from limestone and marble sculpture.
John Larson, Head of Inorganic and Sculpture Conservation at the National Museums and Galleries on Merseyside, who is also pioneering the laser scanner, has been using a type of laser developed by Loughborough University in a trial run to clean the limestone sculptures at Lincoln Cathedral.
The light from the laser is absorbed by the black dirt as energy and the heat generated burns off the carbon particles adhering to the stone.
When the laser reaches the pale stone surface the light emitted is bounced back instead of absorbed and the process ceases.
At Loughborough it has been found that the optimum type of laser for this purpose is a yttrium-aluminium-garnet crystal containing traces of the element neodymium.
The Merseyside museums have now ordered a neodymium laser for their conservation department, the £10,500 cost to be paid by the Henry Moore Foundation.
Southern France
The church consumed by corpses and salt
Notre-Dame-la-Grande in Poitiers a case study in limestone
POITIERS.
Work has begun on the restoration of the west front of the twelfth-century church of Notre-Dame-la-Grande, Poitiers.
Severe erosion of the limestone façade of the church has reached a point where some of the figures of apostles and saints on the sculptural frieze have been completely eroded.
Much of the stonework had become coated with a black layer of gypsum (calcium sulphate) and soot, while the lower levels of the façade are also affected by salt and nitrates which are causing severe damage.
On the upper levels of the church lichen deposits have reached unacceptable levels.
A programme of study and tests was started in 1979 under Michel Parent, France's Inspector General of Historic Monuments, which revealed that the church was made up of five different types of limestone, all of which reacted differently to pollution.
The present restoration programme due to be completed in 1995, is in the hands of Alain Rieu, regional conservator of historic monuments.
The total cost of the work is estimated at FFr11 million (£1,325,300; $2,306,000) of which 40% is provided by the State (Ministry of Culture); 22.5% by the town of Poitiers; 22.5% by the region of Vienne and 15% by the region of Poitou-Charentes.
The various cleaning treatments have been developed in the laboratories of Etablissements Groux of Neuville-de-Poitou.
These include the application of an anti-lichen solution followed by a delicate washing of the upper levels.
A cellulose-based paste is being applied to the gypsum deposits followed by a micro-sanding with fine alumina powder.
The most difficult aspect of the work is the removal of the salt and nitrates deposits from the stone and mortar of the lower levels of the building.
The presence of nitrates can be easily explained by the fact that human burials had taken place within the church: during the exploration programme a number of skeletons and well preserved human remains have been discovered.
The presence of high levels of salt is harder to account for; they are in fact due to the butchers' stalls and a salt seller's stall along the walls of the church from around 1730 to 1840.
Poitiers was exempt from the royal monopoly on salt and the salt trade (and contraband in it) were very active in that town.
Salt from the floors of these buildings seeped into the surrounding sub-soil and was drawn up by capillary action through the stones and mortar of the church.
Evaporating through the pores of the stone, it has left deposits which cause tensions and pressures within the structures of the stones.
To reduce salt levels and assist evaporation, interior and exterior pebble-filled ditches have been dug around the church with perforated plastic pipes designed to collect salt-charged water seeping from the walls.
In addition, the soil has been replaced around the building.
Finally, new mortar is being inserted in between the stones, involving the total reconstruction of the interior and exterior facings.
Bratislava
Episcopal myths
Mortlake tapestries hidden by wall
BRATISLAVA.
All over Slovakia precious works of art and architecture, the heritage of 700 years of Catholic history, are waiting to be discovered.
A little known but priceless work with strong British historical links is currently under restoration and will go on display in the archbishop's palace next year.
It is Ovid's story of Hero and Leander depicted in a sequence of six tapestries.
Housed at present in the Mirbach Palace, they were made in the seventeenth century at the Mortlake factory, near London, by Flemish workers, under the patronage of Charles I. The idea of a national establishment for weaving tapestries came to King James from Henry IV of France and in 1619 he sent to Flanders for the best weavers.
Three years later Francis Cleyn, the man who was to design the Hero and Leander tapestries, was chosen as designer and chief weaver to the Mortlake factory.
Cleyn became well known as an engraver and a painter in England, but these cartoons were to be his masterpiece.
Parts of the sequence exist elsewhere but it is only in Bratislava that you find the complete set.
Experts believe that they were made in Mortlake between 1630 and 1660, but it is by no means clear how and when they reached Bratislava.
No-one knew of their existence in the city until 1903, when they were found rolled up behind wallpaper in a room in the Primate's Palace, a palace built in 1779 for Archbishop Jozef Batthyany.
No reference to their existence in Europe appears in any literature of the period.
After their discovery, their beauty and value were immediately recognised and a fierce dispute ensued over ownership.
Three months previously, in August 1903, the Bratislava Municipal Council had bought the Primate's Palace for 120,000 crowns from the Archbishop's Residence in Estergom.
But on hearing of the find, the Archbishop immediately put forward the case that the original contract of sale of the Palace had not included furnishings, so the tapestries were the property of the Church.
However a Bratislava solicitor found an article which maintained that all items behind wallpapers are fixtures included in the sale, and not furnishings.
Thus the Municipal council won the proceedings and the tapestries remained in the city.
The tapestries were in remarkably good condition when found but have been sent out for restoration several times this century and final work on the last two will be finished next June.
This will coincide with the completion of intensive redecoration of the Primate's Palace, thus enabling the complete sequence of all six tapestries to be seen in their original setting for the first time in thirty years.
New chair of stained glass studies for York
YORK.
A new chair of stained glass studies has been created at York University to which Richard Marks, formerly Director of the Brighton Pavilion and Brighton Museums, has just been appointed.
For the moment part-time and funded by the University, it is hoped that a private benefactor will be able to endow the chair for a full-time professor.
One of only very few such teaching posts in Europe (a similar chair exists at Freiburg in Germany) it further strengthens York University's Medieval Studies course.
Students will be able to see stained glass conservation in progress at the nearby Barley studio, a  commercial conservation practice, and the York Glazers Trust, an independent trust closely tied to York Cathedral, both of which are leading centres for the restoration of stained glass in the United Kingdom.
Restoring Venice's basilica in time for 1994
VENICE.
The cathedral of St Mark (in its current and third version) will be 900 years old in 1994.
To mark the momentous occasion the Procuratia di San Marco, the ecclesiastical authorities in charge, are preparing a year of celebrations that will begin on 25 April 1994, the feast day of Saint Mark.
Among these are three scholarly conferences that will examine the hagiographical and ecclesiastical history of the basilica (end of April); the architecture, sculpture and mosaics (provisionally 8 October); and the scientific reports from the conservation and restoration teams currently at work on the building (April 1995).
Work is currently underway on the coloured marble floor and the crypt, with the aid of subsidies from big business.
The floor, laid down between the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, is now largely roped off from the thousands of tourists who visit the basilica each month.
Composed variously of opus sectile (marbles in a variety of geometric shapes), opus alexendrinum (large slabs of precious oriental marbles) and opus tessellatum (pictorial designs made from tesserae, like mosaic), over the centuries the pavement has buckled into a surface far from level and has suffered from atmospheric pollution as well as wear and tear of daily use.
Anxious to proceed as carefully as possible the Procuratia has engaged the conservation firm Syremont (part of the Ferruzzi-Montedison group) to assess the damage and how it can be stabilised.
In addition to composing a plan of the marbles in the floor, Syremont have used infra-red thermography to investigate the soil beneath the pavement, while deeper soundings, down to 3 metres, have been made by electromagnetic sensors.
The preliminary analysis should be complete by autumn 1993.
The crypt (which could go back to the first basilica to be built on the site, in the ninth century AD), should be completely restored within a year.
The final stage of work is on the desalinisation of the vault and walls which have suffered through the centuries from water seepage (from 1580 until 1811 the crypt was completely closed to visitors for this reason).
The French chemical firm Rhône-Poulenc have sponsored the restoration work and brought their technical expertise to bear.
In addition to treatment with chloride, the firm has stabilised the porosity of the walls and finally applied a fine film to inhibit water penetration.
Commentary
Censorship questions
‘He keeps the ball rolling while not rocking the boat’
As the catalogue comes to Britain, James Hall slates ‘The Play of the Unmentionable’, the anti-censorship installation created by Joseph Kosuth at the Brooklyn Museum
LONDON.
When the storm broke over The Satanic Verses, Salman Rushdie did a U-turn on British culture.
He had been one of the most energetic scourges of this sceptic isle, but once he was victim of a fatwah, he became an outspoken defender of the freedoms that are available in British cultural life.
So too, in less tragic circumstances, artists and intellectuals who instinctively loathed the Arts Council rallied round when Thatcher put the boot in.
In both instances it was a case of better the devil you know…
In New York, incursions on the National Endowment for the Arts have lead to some equally startling volte-faces.
Suddenly, the ineffable goodness of the NEA and public funding is being proclaimed by many whose professional lives have been spent very-nicely-thank-you in NEA-free zones in the private sector.
Joseph Kosuth's 1990 installation at the Brooklyn Museum, ‘The Play of the Unmentionable’, was one such apologia.
The high priest of Conceptual Art took a cross-section of works from the museum's collection and chicly installed them next to a range of wall-texts.
Thus Hiram Powers's ‘Greek Slave’, Jacobite wineglasses, Oriental erotica and Bauhaus furniture co-habited with quotes from historical figures such as Hitler and Rousseau and from contemporary luminaries such as Leo Steinberg and Stephen Greenblatt.
The show was seen by over 90,000 people.
The lavish catalogue that has now been produced includes an explanatory essay by David Freedberg, an art historian whose book The Power of Images was cited in the show.
According to Freedberg, the aim of Kosuth's installation was to ‘engender self-reflexiveness in each viewer's judgment about the relations between art, morality and censorship’.
For him, ‘the whole of art became the questioning of art’.
A truly political art, he realised, would not content itself with the message alone; it would it had to engage the viewer in a questioning of the nature of the institutions and the pressures they exert, and thereby subject them to the necessary critique.
Hamlet re-visited, or Art aspiring to the condition of group therapy for the chattering classes?
Nowhere does anything get subjected to the ‘necessary critique’, because neither Freedberg nor Kosuth can bring themselves to make their minds up on anything.
Their post-modern capaciousness and their pluralistic desire to see every side of an argument renders it unconstitutional to say boo to a goose.
Instead of lean convictions and supple value judgments, they treat us to a slick orgy of channel-hopping (Hiltler word-bite plus Mapplethorpe sight-bite and so on) and feed us quivering slices of deconstruction, done to a turn.
Punctuating their banquet of the senses are intellectually tipsy toasts to ‘freedom of expression’.
Wisdom has never been so truly infinite…
With one exception.
The only real whipping-boy is party-pooper Hans Haacke, the tireless toiler whose word/image exposés have shown the way that dirty money gets laundered through the art world.
Freedberg: ‘For Kosuth, then, an art such as Hans Haacke's in which the message lies primarily in the content simply reinforces the positions already held by his viewers.
It is too unambiguous.
It cannot change anyone because it fails to question its status as art and, therefore, its institutional presumptions and presuppositions’.
This is a most pathetic piece of pontification, even if we appreciate that modern artists are some of the greatest censors of art (i.e. Rauschenberg erasing de Kooning).
Haacke has provoked resignations at the Guggenheim, and storms at the Tate over Charles Saatchi.
Yes, he is more interested in exposing hypocrisy than in making arty art, but there's a need for that too.
There is a time for ambiguity and there is a time for action.
One wonders what Haacke would make of Kosuth: ‘after years wrapped up in Wittgenstein and promoted by Castelli, mothballed Master of the Ascetic-Esoteric jumps on PC bandwaggon and fills museum with bums and blow-jobs…’
The narcissistic and windy urbanity of Freedburg and Kosuth means that they fail to convince us that there is something rotten in the United States.
Where hedging of bets (‘ambiguity’) is not just feasible but desirable, we can only assume that the problem is not cancer, but hypochondria.
Kosuth's show was not called the play of the unmentionable for nothing: for Establishment Man, the whole censorship scam must seem like a glorified game-show that can be viewed with Olympian detachment, fingers poised on the remote-control button.
And for many in New York, it is a game show: in the Nineties the censorship debate is keeping contemporary art in the media spotlight, just as obscene auction prices did in the Eighties.
The artworld exploits and thrives on both.
They are duly grateful to Joseph Kosuth for keeping the ball rolling while not rocking the boat.
Conferences
The elitist French vs. the soggy multiculturalists
Highlight of the International Council of Museums meeting was Russian Culture Minister Gubenko speaking against the mass media
QUEBEC CITY.
The changing leaves and sunny weather turned this storybook tourist destination into everything it is cracked up to be.
But not even the picturesque village setting could alter the impression that the XVIth triennial meeting of the International Council of Museums (ICOM, 19–26 September) was a colossal waste of time and money.
Imagine a polyglot College Art Association conference whose concurrent sessions are scattered around town for an entire week, and you will have some idea of the confusion that enveloped the event.
Add to this a generally shallow level of discourse marked by cliché calls for ‘cultural growth’ and ‘multicultural relativity’, and you will begin to sense the absurdity of this function of UNESCO's museum arm.
The theme of the conference was ‘Museums: Rethinking the Boundaries’, and Russian Culture Minister Nicolai Gubenko gave the keynote, in English, in place of no-show Vaclav Havel.
It was one of the highlights of the conference.
Reflecting on the political upheaval of the past several years, Mr Gubenko warned against politicisation of museums and lamented widespread disregard for the 1970 Hague Convention.
Insisting that pertinent legislation must be less ambiguously worded, he noted that progress was nonetheless being made in the restitution of war booty.
He cautioned museums not to embrace wholly mass media which ‘simplify and cheapen’ the experience of art, and declared the museum's main purpose is not preservation, but ‘cultivation of the human spirit’.
After the minister's almost tender observation that ‘the process of forming a humanistic and harmonious world outlook was now upon us’, one could only gape as Reesa Greenberg, from Montreal's Concordia University, delivered an astonishing plea, entirely in earnest, that museums engage a new art audience in shopping malls.
Citing ‘the absence of significant interaction’ between the museum and the mall these two ‘sites of consumer culture’Ms Greenberg condemned ‘the Western museum's inability to acknowledge and respond to this new presence’, i.e., the mall, labelling it ‘one more episode in a history which continues to separate art and life, the past and the present’.
Ms Greenberg must surely champion Quebec's newly opened Musée de la Civilisation which greets boatloads of St Lawrence cruise ship passengers with a garish jumble of consumer items and gimmicks borrowed directly from the shopping mall.
This appallingly vapid speech was countered by Pompidou Center curator Margit Rowell who introduced a session titled ‘Museums and the Environment’ by inverting the expected ecological discussion to ask how museums will withstand the onslaught of rising attendance.
Pointing out the potential damage caused by jostling, breathing, perspiring crowds, Ms Rowell noted further that necessary protective devices destroy the visitor's feeling of intimacy with the artwork.
(She recommends special days be set aside for specialists.)
More broadly, she called on the audience to fight what she called the ‘ideological pollution’ that leads museum administrators to place profit above edification, and concluded by demanding that culture address the individual, not the masses.
Grace Stanislaus of the Bronx (NYC) Museum of the Arts delivered a demagogic, platitudinous rehash of the multicultural musings of the past decade, and was loudly applauded for p.c. effort.
The p.c.
Leitmotif of this year's conference was certainly the invocation to provide for American Indian representation in the host country's cultural life.
Unfortunately, presentations in this area were more pathetic than professional.
Despite another popular subtheme, namely the need for museums to use as much high-tech gadgetry as possible, the trade fair organised for the conferees was a flop.
Fewer than eighty purveyors of museum supplies and services took booths, and for most of the time the vendors largely from Canada and the northeastern U.S. had the Hilton basement entirely to themselves.
The convention's nearly 1,500 participants mainly Canadian, U.S., French, British, or Scandinavian preferred to devote their museological attention to the International Museum PR Committee's city-wide treasure hunt and battlefield corn roast.
Books
Books for Christmas, chosen by the Art Newspaper
£1200 will buy you all these books and catalogues selected by our staff to satisfy your present-giving duties to even the most extended family
Anna Somers Cocks
Editor
Sir David Wilson's private entertainment
Traditionally an Englishman is as much what he does in his free time as in his hours of work, and both Who's who and the obituary columns honour this fact.
The quite excellent British Museum Press, which is managing to produce some twenty scholarly titles this season, from books to accompany exhibitions to detailed descriptions of archaeological digs, has profited from the private entertainment of its former director, Sir David Wilson, to produce a delightful book of funerary inscriptions gathered by him from all over the British Isles and America.
David Wilson is, of course, a distinguished archaeologist of the Anglo-Saxon and Viking age, and he was a subtle and authoritative museum director.
He is also, like many archaeologists, a connoisseur of real ale, so it is not surprising that he singles out as a favourite this inscription from Upton-on-Severn:
Beneath this stone in hopes of Zion
Doth lie the landlord of the Lion;
His son keeps on the business still, resigned onto the heavenly will.
David M. Wilson Awful Ends: the British Museum book of epitaphs (British Museum Press, London, 1992) 96 pp. 20 b/w £9.95
Medieval jewellery, in the finest antiquarian tradition
An enormous book, containing the whole of the Middle Ages embodied in these small works.
All knowledge is particular, said one luminary of the Enlightenment, and this book exemplifies the dictum marvellously.
Every page, studded with quotations from medieval literature and archives, gives a vivid, almost palpable sense of the reality of the life of the past.
Within the compass of the types of jewellery collars, brooch designs, girdles and belts, and so on are the laws, the superstitions, the personalities, the fashions, the economics, the etiquette and the art of the whole of Europe.
Many of the photographs are of almost unknown objects; the bibliography is almost a book in itself and there is a fully illustrated catalogue raisonné of the medieval European jewellery in the V&A.
This is an unfashionable book; there is no theorising in it.
It simply assumes that the past is of consuming interest, and through its richness and rareness of reference, and the elegance with which it is written, makes it so.
A book for laymen with a taste for the recherché and all medievalists, as well as art historians.
Ronald W. Lightbown Medieval European Jewellery (Victoria and Albert Museum Publications, London, 1992) 592pp. 350 b/w 180 col. £80
The wonders in the chambers of the Soane Museum
Sir John Soane's was the collection of a working architect, and the wonderful variety of objects and works of art in the museum were used as an anthology of antique architecture and decoration as well as a teaching collection.
This book is the first to present the unique richness of the collection.
Prefaced by ground plans of the three principal floors, each chapter is devoted to one interior, reproducing drawings, watercolours and photographs of these rooms as they might have been, were and are, along with many illustrations of objects within them.
A spotlight is put on individual items, drawing attention, for example, to Giovanni Bandini's model for a figure on Michelangelo's tomb, German stained glass of 1600, a Giulio Clovio manuscript, a second-century AD Roman sarcophagus relief, a mummy case or drawings by Percier and Fontaine.
An excellent balance is struck between the rooms themselves, only moderately well-known, and the collections.
Peter Thornton and Helen Dorey A Miscellany of Objects from Sir John Soane's Museum (Laurence King, London, 1992) 128pp. 99 col. ills.
31 bw ills.
£20
Czechoslovakia: where Cubism became three-dimensional
Among the many shocks being delivered by the declining years of the twentieth century is that of discovering, after decades of thinking we were the true moderns, how modern they could already be at the other end of the century.
There is an illustration in this book which encapsulates this fault line in time: an extraordinary angular dressing table of 1912 by Josef Gocar, which would be at home in the Eighties, reflects in its mirror the ancient tripod camera with black cloth with which the photograph was taken and a photo of a Victorian lady in highnecked dress.
The other discovery we are making is of that world cut off from us for fifty years by the Iron Curtain; Simon Jervis's otherwise excellent Penguin Dictionary of Design and Designers published in 1984 does not include a single one of the leading names in Czech Cubist design: Josef Gocar, Pavel Janak, Vlastislav Hofman, Josef Chochol and Otakar Novotny.
This new book, which is about all these and more, was produced to coincide with last year's exhibition in the new Vitra Design Museum in Weil-am-Rhein.
It is a revelation of how Cubism was taken east from Paris to Bohemia, the industrial heartland of Franz-Joseph's empire, and adapted to the design of buildings, furniture and household goods which were actually built and made, not left at the visionary stage.
Edited by Alexander von Vegesack, with essays by Milna B. Lamarová, Vladimír Slapeta, Petr Wittlich, Jirí Setlik, Josef Kroutvor, Olga Herbenová, François Burkhardt, Alessandro Mendini Czech Cubism: Architecture, furniture and decorative arts 1920–1925 (Laurence King, Vitra Design Museum, 1992) 337 pp. 530 ills 268 col. £40
The united colours of the Berlin antiquities museums
These four, colour-filled volumes, produced with remarkable speed after the ending of the war-engendered rift between the West and East Berlin museums (the unification is so far only administrative, not actual), are fully aware of their historic resonance and so are suitably grandly dedicated: ‘To the Bundespräsident, Richard von Weizsäcker, friends of Berlin museums and the honorary citizens of Berlin’, they proclaim.
Anyone who remembers the soggy paper, fuzzy grey photographs and provincial texts of the publications produced by the Eastern bloc museums in the past, will rejoice at this series, with their beautiful colour illustrations of every object, intelligent individual commentaries, full bibliographies, and introductory essays on the histories of the respective institutions.
Why is it that precisely the antiquities museums, of all the Berlin museums, have rushed out these excellent guides to their about-to-be united collections?
One suspects that it is to demonstrate what the attractions of the famous Museum Island will be when the plan favoured by the Berlin museums supremo Dube but hotly contested by many museum professionals comes to fruition, for Dube has decided that the island is to be dedicated entirely to these archaeological collections, while the fine arts all move over to the western side of the city to more modern museums.
Arne Effenberg and Hans-Georg Severin Das Museum für Spätantike und Byzantinische Kunst, Berlin; Karl-Heinz Priese Ägyptisches Museum; Max Kunze et al.
Die Antikensammlung, Berlin; Liane Jakob-Rost et al.
Das Vorderasiatische Museum, Berlin (Philipp von Zabern, Mainz am Rhein, 1991 and 1992) Four vols, between 250 and 300 pp. many col. ills., each DM78
A fairy tale Christmas present for your hostess
This carefully documented book makes known for the first time a major work executed by Bakst at the end of his life: his seven scenes from the ‘The Sleeping Beauty’, a tale which fascinated him throughout his career.
The series' existence has hitherto only been known to people who visited the late Dollie de Rothschild's (died 1988) private house in London, but her heir Lord Rothschild has decided that they should go on display next year in Waddesdon Manor, the house she gave to the National Trust during her lifetime.
Besides retelling the old story in the words of Charles Perrault, the first fairy-tale writer of them all, this delightful book has chapters on Bakst and the Ballets Russes, and on James de Rothschild's commission and his life and very happy marriage to Dollie Pinto.
The social fascination of the book lies in the Key, found by Lord Rothschild while going through Dollie de Rothschild's papers, which explains who all the personages in the fairy tale paintings are.
Bakst's studies for each of the characters were with with the Key, and these are all reproduced, together with biographical notes.
James de Rothschild had left the ‘Sleeping Beauty’ panels to the Tel Aviv Museum, but Lord Rothschild, who is Chairman of the National Heritage Memorial Fund and before that, Chairman of the Trustees of the National Gallery, and who therefore has an eye out for works of art with special meaning to Britain, persuaded the Museum to cede its interest in the panels in exchange for ‘a significant sum of money’.
Diana Souhami Bakst: The Rothschild panels of The Sleeping Beauty (Philip Wilson Publishers, London, 1992) 128 pp. 67 b/w 28 col. £35
Isabel Boucher
Deputy editor
Danish Købke: the approachable face of northern painting
The appearance of this beautifully-produced book from the small New York publishing company Timken marks the first monograph on the Danish nineteenth-century artist Christen Købke.
Købke had a brief life (1810–48) and his body of work is correspondingly restricted, which no doubt has contributed to his neglect.
His achievement lay in his ability to paint portraits and landscapes of exceptional clarity: the light is translucent and northern, the colours are exquisite and apparently naturalistic despite being at times capriciously combined.
The effect is akin to Friedrich, Schinkel or Gaertner in Germany, but with greater warmth more like Chardin.
The colour plates for the seventy-six works illustrated are excellent, as is the printing by Stamperia Valdonega in Verona.
It should be added that what the author lacks in scholarly rigour (there are no footnotes and the index is skeletal) he makes up for in discursive readability and enthusiasm.
Sanford Schwartz Christen Købke (Timken Publishers, New York, 1992) 153 pp. 50 col. plates, 60 b/w ills.
$35
The British Museum's sculpture galleries plus Darwin, Winckelman, et al With the ever-rumbling debate over the restitution of cultural property in this case the Elgin Marbles in particular Ian Jenkins (Curator in the Department of Greek and Roman Antiquities) makes a convincing argument for the important ‘afterlife’ of antiquities in museums.
In the case of the BM, the Egyptian collection was acquired from Nelson's defeat of Napolean; the Elgin Marbles also because of the consequent British alliance with the Ottoman Empire; subsequent and strong diplomatic links with Greece and the Middle East brought additional sculpture; and the Royal Navy transported it all back to England.
Housed together under one roof from the early 1800s, and arranged and rearranged over the years (but always with the Elgin Marbles at the centre), the collection was the raw material from which scholars wrought theories of the ‘Progress of Antiquity’ that culminated with the Ancient Greeks or, in direct opposition, that of cultural relativity accepted today.
The role of the sculpture collections has played a powerful force in the history of ideas, which makes this book as much about nineteenth-century thought as about Bassae, Didyma, Halicarnassus, Nimrud or Xanthos.
Ian Jenkins Archaeologists and Aesthetes (British Museum Press, London, 1992) 264 pp. 13 col. pl. 90 b/w ills.
£25
How to roof a Greek theatre
This book grew out of an exploration of the roofed classical sites of classical antiquity from the point of view of an engineer the wooden roofing of course having long since disintegrated.
In addition Izenour is an expert in theatre design and acoustics and here commits his conjectural reconstructions of twenty-four sites to print with the help of detailed  architectural drawings and photographs.
All technical aspects of producing plays in these arena are considered: sound, lighting, seating systems, sight lines and acoustics.
One acoustic theory is immediately exploded: that a whisper on stage could be heard up in the back row (Greek guides conveniently fail to take the wooden superstructure into  account ).
Archaeology is not a hermetic discipline it benefits from a wide range of related sciences in piecing together the past.
Informed conjecture can make an equally valid contribution and this thought-provoking book may well lead to the revision of established theories of classical architecture.
George Izenour Roofed Theatres of Classical Antiquity (Yale University Press, London and New Haven, 1992) 234 pp. numerous figs. and b/w ills.
£65, $125
Armchair exhibition-going
The exhibition ‘Al-Andalus: the art of Islamic Spain’ was first shown at the Alhambra in Granada last spring and then moved to the Met over the summer.
This desk-bound editor missed both stops but the catalogue is large and comprehensive enough, with colour plates of all 136 objects, amply to compensate.
A total of seventeen essays cover all aspects of the seven centuries of Islamic culture in Spain, from 711 until the expulsion of the Jews and Muslims in 1492 the history of the emirate, caliphate and Taifa periods, the building of the great mosque at Córdoba, and the Alhambra itself.
Apart from the architecture the other arts which flourished so prodigiously were those of luxury objects: in the exhibition itself were jewel caskets, lustre ware, marble capitals, window screens, carpets, arms and armour and books.
Made to high standards of craftsmanship out of exquisite materials, this is a catalogue that brings vicarious pleasure in luxury living, which in itself was one of the arts of Islam.
Ed.
Jerilynn Dodds Al Andalus: The Art of Islamic Spain (The Metropolitan Museum of Art and Harry N. Abrams, New York, 1992) 432 pp. numerous col ills.
$75
Art of the Mughal emperors
As Amina Okada, the author of this book points out, there have been numerous publications on Mughal art but none that have concentrated on the individual artists.
Okada has here reconstructed the individual careers of the finest court painters to the three most brilliant emperors of the Mughal dynasty: Akbar (r. 1556–1605), Jahangir (r.1605–27) and Shah Jahan (r.1628–58).
The relation of patron to artist is examined, as are the  stylistic influences that shaped Mughal art: the Persian heritage, the discovery of western art, the elegance and aestheticism of the Mughal court, the painters of ascetics and the India of the mystics, the development of realistic portraiture during the seventeenth century and the discovery of chiaroscuro.
Where the book falls down is in its idiosyncratic layout and the poor quality of the colour reproductions (I refer to the Flammarion edition).
Such sumptuously beautiful paintings should be reproduced to the best possible standards, but nevertheless this is a fascinating volume.
Amina Okada Imperial Mughal Painters (Flammarion, Paris, and Abrams, New York, 1992) 239 pp. 100 col. 164 b/w ills.
£35, $95
Laura Suffield
Sub-editor
London, world city
Any book on London that opens with Dickens must be on the right lines.
Just a few paragraphs in and we are plunged into the fog and grime of the capital: in 1817 the American Ambassador was enveloped in a midday fog in Bond Street so thick that he felt tempted to ask how the English became so great with so little daylight.
On a visit to the Royal Exchange in 1826 Prince Pückler Muskau reported that it ‘and the whole City have a repulsive sinister aspect, which almost reminds one of the restless and comfortless throng of the spirits of the damned’.
This is the book of the exhibition at the Villa Hügel, Essen, which examined London from 1800–1840, a great age of expansion in trade and science, arts and scholarship (closes 7 November).
The docks, the University of London, the theatre in the age of Kean, the London art world, Rudolph Ackermann and British commerce are all examined in the marvellous introductory essays by Simon Jervis, Ian Jenkins, Celina Fox and others which combine detailed research with an eye for the smell and feel of the city.
The second part of the book is the detailed catalogue of the 705 pictures, drawings, prints, books, maps, costumes, scientific instruments, furniture and much more included in the exhibition.
Ed.
Celina Fox London World City 1800–1840 (Yale University Press, 1992, with The Museum of London) 624pp. 150 col. ills.
750b/w £45
John Heartfield
While still a student in Berlin during World War I, John Heartfield was known among his Dada associates Raul Hausmann, Hannah Hoch, and George Grosz among others for his uncontrollable fits of anger, usually after heavy drinking.
The young Heartfield (who anglicised his name in a break with his German heritage in 1915) would have to be tied to the chair while his companions baited him like a caged animal.
It is this anger, more or less contained, which speaks through the extraordinary images created by Heartfield in his life-long struggle against fascism and for Communism, and renders them so memorable.
Drawing on popular imagery from newspapers and magazines as well as photographs produced under his guidance, John Heartfield created satirical montages which attacked the Weimar Republic and the Nazi regime.
Among his most celebrated images are ‘The Meaning of Geneva’ showing a dove speared onto a bayonet and ‘As in the Middle Ages…so in the Third Reich’of a medieval sculpture of a figure broken on a wheel shown above a corpse twisted around a swastika.
This is the book of the exhibition which travelled from Germany to London this year and moves on to Dublin (Irish Museum of Modern Art, 21 November-10 January) before reaching America, and represents the most complete survey of his work to date.
A moving and uplifting book.
Eds.
Peter Pachnicke and Klaus Honnef John Heartfield (Harry N. Abrams, Inc.
Publishers, New York, 1992) 342pp. 83 col. ills.
206 b/w £65
Pissarro to Picasso: French colour prints
The ideal combination of glorious picture book with scholarly, authoritative text.
Written by two print scholars, Phillip Dennis Cate of the Jane Voorhees Zimmerli Art Museum, Rutgers, and Marianne Grivel, Professor of Art History at the Université de Haute Bretagne and formerly of the Bibliothèque nationale, the book accompanies an exhibition currently at Rutgers before moving to Amsterdam and Paris next year.
Forty per cent of the works in this show are from the Zimmerli Collection with the rest borrowed from the Bibliothèque nationale Paris.
The works range from images of high seriousness and merit, for example one of the rare, celebrated proof impressions of Picasso's ‘Repas frugal’(1904) printed in blue (with later signature), to the fin-de-siècle soupy soft porn of Manuel Robbe.
The book takes in the art of Mary Cassatt, Théodore Roussel, Villon and Pissarro as well as a wealth of lesser artists, many of considerable charm and skill.
The text gives full prominence to the role of the great French printers and to the publishers who promoted the vogue for colour prints.
Fully annotated with biographies of the artists, it is essential for print lovers and all those interested in this period of French art.
Phillip Dennis Cate and Marianne Grivel From Pissarro to Picasso: colour etching in France (Flammarion, Paris, 1992) 198pp. 175 b/w and col. ills.
£30
A Life of Picasso
The first volume of what must eventually be one of the great modern biographies, John Richardson's book was published last year and has now appeared in paperback.
The richness, breadth and detail of this book is astonishing: to read its pages and it's hard to put down is to be transported to the world of Paris of 1900 and the rough, dirty, vigourous life of Picasso and his cronies.
His art emerges as the product of the extreme poverty of his early years when sex was cheaper than food and where the circus stood in for the corrida.
Richardson is not uncritical of his subject or the paintings, particularly the blue period works, and certainly points up the variable quality of the paintings of the earliest years, where fully-fledged masterpieces were mixed in with hastily produced or rather gauchly sentimental pieces.
The artist's sketches and scribbles are analysed to demonstrate recurring motifs and psychological preoccupations guilt at the death of Casegemas or a mistress's abortion for example while figures such as Alfred Jarry, Max Jacob and Gertrude Stein are brought to life in Richardson's simple, flowing prose.
John Richardson A Life of Picasso, Volume 1 1881–1906 (Pimlico, London, 1992, originally published 1991) 548pp. approx 900 b/w ills.
p/b £15
Kollwitz reconsidered
If you ever thought the art of Käthe Kollwitz to be just too grim, not to say teutonic, read this book.
What emerges is not just a portrait of a great artist but also great campaigner, wife, mother, and human being.
This is the catalogue of the Washington exhibition (3 May to 16 August 1992) which included106 prints, drawings and sculptures.
It charts the artist's career from her highly accomplished art school pieces she received the full encouragement of her parents in her chosen career while her early self portraits demonstrate an artist fully aware of her own powers and potential.
Her initial training was in printmaking and her interest in social welfare in 1891 she moved to Berlin where her husband was a doctor in a poor area of the city combined in her great early cycle of six prints ‘A Weaver's Rebellion’(completed 1898).
The catalogue does much to explain the technical complexity of many of her prints (which can involve combinations of etching, lithography, transfer, textual processes and photographic screens) while the sheer beauty of her colour prints such as‘Female Nude with Green Shawl seen from behind’(1903, K.69) and the variants of the better known ‘Woman with Dead Child’(1903, K.72) one of her greatest works are well served by the excellent colour reproductions.
The three essays by Elizabeth Prelinger with Alessandra Comini and Hildegard Bachert on ‘Kollwitz reconsidered’, ‘Kollwitz in context: the formative years’ and ‘Collecting the art of Käthe Kollwitz’are exemplary.
Elizabeth Prelinger with Alessandra Comini and Hildegard Bachert Käthe Kollwitz (National Gallery of Art Washington and Yale University Press, London and New Haven, 1992) 192pp. 65 col. ills.
76 b/w £30
The exhibition catalogue of the year: Juan Gris
Less the catalogue of the exhibition than the monograph which accompanies it, Christopher Green's essay is a complete revision of the artist and his work.
In seven tightly reasoned chapters, the author lays out the traditional interpretation of Gris as it was advanced by Apollinaire, Kahnweiler, Maurice Raynal, Zervos and other colleagues and critics who had known the artist and followed his development, and then proceeds to question their assumptions by looking more closely at the works themselves than any other scholar had previously done.
As a result, he gives a slightly different portrait of a more experimental painter, dictated less by logic than intuition, and pursuing a development which was not as rigid as the artist's admirers would have maintained.
Green's text is a major work of scholarship and an important contribution to our knowledge of Cubism, one lacuna in which is now filled with the publication, in this catalogue and by Christian Derouet, of the missing correspondence from 1915 to 1920 between Gris and Leonce Rosenberg, the artist's dealer during that period.
Juan Gris continues at the Whitechapel Gallery in London until 29 November.
Charles McCorquodale
Correspondent
Scottish painter Allan Ramsay
Timed to appear at the same time as the major Ramsay exhibition in Edinburgh and London, and well in advance of the same author's catalogue raisonné, this must be one of the year's most persuasive monographs.
Written with verve and an abundance of information and insight, it firmly characterises one of the eighteenth century's most subtle portraitists.
Its authority is clearly based on Smart's intimacy with the artist's work and the many aspects which influenced it social (highly important in this case), artistic and intellectual.
The emphasis given to Ramsay's too little known Dialogue on Taste of 1755 is intriguing, since it helps to understand the paintings, and to place Ramsay's thoughts about art alongside those of his contemporary Reynolds.
Compared with the exhibition catalogue, the book's colour reproductions are very poor.
The exhibition of Ramsay's paintings that was seen in Edinburgh is in London at the National Portrait Gallery until 17 January.
Alastair Smart Allan Ramsay, Painter, Essayist and Man of the Enlightenment (Yale University Press, London and New Haven, 1992) 320 pp. 70 col. pl. 150 b/w ills.
£45, $75
The Brancacci Chapel restored
This book must be regarded as the definitive study of the chapel of which Vasari said ‘All the most celebrated sculptors and painters who worked in that Chapel became excellent and illustrious’.
This is the English edition of the 1990 Italian original.
Polemic raged around this restoration as much as that of the Sistine vault and Arezzo's Piero della Francesca frescoes, but the Brancacci may well prove the most successful.
As a celebration of the restoration, the illustrations are outstanding, in spite of a superfluity of large colour details of hands and feet.
The straightforward analysis of previous ‘dustings’, cleanings and restorations, from the fire damage of 1771 to the removal of the famous fig-leaves is particularly welcome.
Revised ideas inevitably resulting from the cleaning include new counts of the ‘giornate’ or areas of fresh plaster painted in a day.
The text deserves careful reading, since it is comprehensive and dense with information.
The inclusion of the Lasinio engravings and Cavalcaselle's notebook sketches is intriguing.
Umberto Baldini and Ornella Casazza The Brancacci Chapel, Masaccio, Masolino, Filippo Lippi (Thames and Hudson, London, 1992) 380 pp. 165 col. 27 b/w £65
Scotland's Victorian interiors
The self-imposed limitations of this ‘visual anthology of the Domestic room in Scotland culled principally from the collection of the National Monuments Record of Scotland’ apart, this intriguing little book is the first of its kind.
Its title is misleading, since the Georgian interiors are few in number, and cannot be said to give much idea of their period.
Concentration is really on the Victorian room, which is represented mainly from contemporary photographs, watercolours and drawings.
Emphasis is laid on the wide range of interiors represented, from tenement slums (are these really of such interest?) through cottages such as Burns's, to the ‘middling’ room and the grandest examples.
Of these, ironically, the grandest of all Scottish interiors, Hamilton Palace, was stripped and demolished, but is recorded by a small selection of photographs here.
Ian Gow The Scottish Interior, Georgian and Victorian Decor (Edinburgh University Press, 1992) 216pp. 233 ill. £25
Trompe l'oeil in stone
The author is particularly well-equipped to produce this book, being curator of the great Opificio delle Pietre Dure in Florence, and having already written several fundamental recent studies of the subject.
After outlining the origins of the art in Ancient Rome, she concentrates on the greatest of all the manufactories, those of Grand Ducal Florence.
This is followed by presentation of the much less appreciated production of Prague and Germany, France and the Gobelins, and the Bourbons in Madrid and Naples.
The difficulty of selecting illustrative examples from the wealth of possible choices is well overcome, and a fine balance struck between details and complete objects.
One of this book's merits is that it shows how hard stone application was not confined to the Baroque, and includes unexpected nineteenth-century examples.
A dense and no-nonsense text ensures that this will remain the basic general reference work in English, helped by the excellent technical appendices and stunning photographs.
Anna Maria Giusti Pietre dure.
Hardstone in furniture and decoration (Philip Wilson Publishers, London, 1992) 311 pp. 157 col. ills.
120 b/w £85
Return to the dix-huitième
It seems a long time since a general book on this theme appeared in English, and John Whitehead's provides an all-round introduction.
It is divided into eleven chapters dealing with aspects from clientele, designers, guilds and dealers, to the architecture and use of rooms, furniture, wallpapers and fittings.
Well-illustrated, it avoids many of the best-known examples.
It is regrettable that many of the photographs of rooms tell us little about their original appearance; a comparison of Boucher's wonderful ‘La Toilette’ with the view of the Boudoir from the Hôtel d'Hocqueville reveals this.
The division into separate sections is unquestionably useful for the  uninitiated .
As the author is a dealer, he appears to be in touch with objects which might otherwise escape attention, and this spices up what could be a tired subject.
Errors of fact deserve attention: Alderman Beckford's Fonthill Splendens was not an ‘Adam house’.
John Whitehead The French Interior in the Eighteenth Century (Laurence King, London, 1992) 256 pp. 247 col. ills.
16 b/w £30
Roger Bevan
Correspondent
Stanley Spencer resurrected
The catalogue of Stanley Spencer's oil paintings compiled by Keith Bell, Professor of the University of Saskatchewan, Canada, and curator of the Royal Academy's memorable exhibition of the artist's work in 1980, follows the proven format for such publications.
A long introductory essay discusses his themes in a chronological development and is followed by a catalogue of 455 works, with major projects and cycles, such as the Burghclere Chapel, ‘Shipbuilding on the Clyde’ or the Port Glasgow Resurrection series being treated in single entries.
Bell's essay divides into six chapters, four of which cover his figurative or narrative work, one being reserved for his portraiture, including his nude studies of Patricia, and the final chapter dealing with his landscapes and still-life canvases, the first proper study of this popular business which, surprisingly, accounted for more than one half of his entire production.
Keith Bell Stanley Spencer (Phaidon, London, 1992) 544pp. 300 col. ills.
150 b/w. £95
Matisse at MoMA: the book of the show
John Elderfield's sumptuous catalogue of the current exhibition which he has curated for New York's Museum of Modern Art will appeal to many tastes and is, as a result, this season's obligatory purchase.
As a compendium of illustrations, invariably in good colour, it gives a visual document of the artist's development unmatched by any other publication, particularly since it illustrates the small number of major works which could not be loaned to the exhibition.
Following the pattern established by other catalogues of the museum, these illustrations are divided into seven chronological sections, each of which is preceded by a detailed biographical record of Matisse's activity so that his places, projects and patrons can be identified with crisp clarity.
The catalogue's introduction is Elderfield's sixty-page interpretation of the artist, including his case for those later paintings which feature prominently in the exhibition but are usually ignored in the literature.
The major Matisse exhibition continues at MoMA in New York until 12 January 1993.
John Elderfield Henri Matisse: a retrospective (Thames and Hudson, 1992) 480pp. 320 col. ills.
272 b/w £48
The Magritte monograph
Sylvester's handsome monograph, the fruit of many years of rumination on the subject of Magritte's art, is an essay of appreciation and interpretation.
Divided into forty-four short chapters and illustrated by a large selection of good colour reproductions, it offers a convincing explanation of the artist's apparently inexplicable imagery by reference to his biography and to source material which ranges from Egyptian and Greek sculpture to Quattrocento frescoes, Symbolist pictures of the nineteenth century, film stills, pulp fiction, popular postcards and encyclopaedia illustrations.
Magritte is rehabilitated as a technician capable of surprisingly expressive passages of paint, although Sylvester's case for the Impressionist and vache pictures is unlikely to win general agreement.
The Magritte exhibition curated by David Sylvester and Sarah Whitfield continues at the Metropolitan Museum of Art until 22 November.
David Sylvester Magritte (The Menil Foundation, Mercatorfonds and Thames & Hudson, 1992) 352pp. 343 col. ills.
116 b/w £45
Bazille, as in Brooklyn
François Daulte's catalogue of the oil paintings of Frédéric Bazille, the most recent volume in the distinguished series of monographs of eighteenth- and nineteenth-century French masters published by the Bibliothèque des Arts, deals with the promising talent of a young artist who might have become one of the great figure painters of his generation, had he not died in the Franco-Prussian war in 1870, at the age of twenty-nine.
The catalogue, preceded by a conventional account of Bazille's career and development, lists and illustrates just sixty-four surviving original compositions, several of which are clearly unfinished, and one copy made at the beginning of his career and based upon a picture by Veronese in his local museum in Montpellier.
By comparison with the work which Monet, Renoir, Pissarro, Sisley and other contemporaries created in these same years, Bazille emerges as a strikingly powerful artist of group compositions, nude studies, still-life and landscape, working on both grand and informal scales, the proper student of Géricault and Courbet.
The show of Bazille's art opens at the Brooklyn Museum on 13 November and runs until 24 January 1993.
François Daulte Frédéric Bazille et les debuts de l'Impressionisme (Bibliothèque des Arts, Paris, 1992) 196pp. 62 col. ills.
112 b/w FFr 650
SuperReal celebrates British Surrealism
LONDON.
A new quarterly journal on British Surrealist art was launched on 5 October at the East West Gallery in West London.
Edited by Patricia Scanlon, it aims to catalogue the activities of British Surrealism and place the movement within its wider European context.
The first issue includes a memoir of John Banting by Peter Wills, an interview with Desmond Morris by Patricia Scanlan, several pieces on Edward Roditi, an extract from a recently published book on Lee Miller and an appreciation of Lee Miller by her son Antony Penrose and various newly-written poems, together with a few illustrations.
Clearly a serious publication, it enjoys the support of a number of leading academics on its editorial board.
There might seem to be a number of inherent problems in producing a journal on British Surrealism, namely that the possibility of live interviews will diminish as the first generation of these artists and writers die off in the next few years; secondly, there seems to be a tendency on the part of those who produce surrealist literature to make it look surrealist, although the rather bitty appearance of the present journal is probably as much to do with its very low budget (a small grant from the University of London) as with its artistic affiliations.
The next issue of the journal will appear in February 1993.
An annual subscription costs £12.
Available from SuperReal, 34 Waldemar Ave.
London SW5 5NA.
The Minda de Gunzberg Prize
PARIS.
Entries are invited for the Minda de Gunzberg prize for an outstanding exhibition catalogue on Western art from the middle ages to the twentieth century, in any language, published in 1992.
Authors, publishers and exhibition organisers wishing to submit a catalogue should send it before January 1993 to Asda, 170 Boulevard Haussmann, 75008 Paris, France.
Catalogues solely devoted to living artists are not eligible.
The main prize is worth $25,000 and this year's jury consists of Carlo Bertelli, Sydney J. Freedberg, Michel Laclotte, Jennifer Montagu, Konrad Oberhuber, Alfonso E. Pérez Sanchez, Pierre Rosenberg, Willibald Sauerländer, Seymour Slive, and Jean Sutherland Boggs.
A second prize of $10,000 can be awarded at the jury's discretion to a modestly-sized or particularly innovative catalogue.
Publications received
CONTEMPORARY ART
Ernst van Alphen Francis Bacon and the Loss of Self (Reaktion Books Ltd, London, 1992) 208pp. 99 b/w 24 col. ills.
£12.95 p/b
An interesting para-literary attempt by the Assistant Professor of Comparative Literature at the University of Leiden to re-examine Bacon's work using the notions of ‘narrativity’, the metaphors of the mirror and lamp in western iconography, death, the loss of self, and masculinity.
Obviously stronger in some areas than others the masculinity argument is particularly unconvincing the examination of critical reactions to Bacon is very welcome.
FURNITURE AND DECORATIVE ARTS
Ulrich Leben Molitor (Philip Wilson, London, 1992) 248pp, 80 col 144 b/w ills.
£70
Molitor is not a furniture maker of the Ancien Régime whose name springs as readily to mind as many others Roentgen, BVRB or Jacob although his career spanned the period 1785 to the Bourbon Restoration.
He was something of a chameleon, and readily produced pieces in the style of other maîtres, constantly adapting to the mercurial tastes of the post-Louis XVI period.
Patrons included Marie Antoinette at Fontainebleau, the Choiseul Praslins, and Jérôme Bonaparte.
Excellent plates show every conceivable aspect from his stamp to gilt bronzes and immaculate carving.
The book won the CINOA Prize in 1990, and includes a complete catalogue of Molitor's furniture.
Published in an edition of 5,000, this is clearly aimed at a precise, limited audience of mainly dealers (for whom the catalogue raisonné will prove invaluable), museums and relatively few collectors and scholars.
With this in mind, a less visually seductive format might well have allowed a more readily comprehensible layout; serious readers do not object to all illustrations being bound together rather than fragmenting the text in this way.
The translation of the English volume is erratic, and the captions' format and content need more thought.
GENERAL
Edward Lucie-Smith Art and Civilisation (Laurence King Publishing, London, 1992) 560pp. 350 b/w 150 col. ills £25
A sort of Brief History of Everything.
Offers itself as the ideal means of acquiring a basic grounding in art, architecture, painting, sculpture, literature, drama and music.
Inevitably breathless, it offer clichés instead of analysis (unlike Gombrich's Story of Art for example).
Definitely better on art than the other areas, the production is messy too many tables and boxes.
One can only admire Lucie-Smith's confidence in taking on such an undertaking, but wonder why Laurence King Publishing were keen on this project.
RENAISSANCE
Facsimile of the ‘Mira Calligraphiae monumenta’ with essays by Lee Hendrix and Thea Vigna-Wilberg (J. Paul Getty Museum, Malibu, 1992) Vol.
I, 412 pp. $125
The J. Paul Getty Museum has produced the first volume in a new series of fine quality facsimile editions of volumes from its manuscript collection.
Printed by Imprimeries Réunies, Lausanne, the books are intended for both the general public and scholars.
The first such publication is a facsimile of the ‘Mira Calligraphiae monumenta’, a writing manual with calligraphy by Georg Bocskay, imperial secretary to the Holy Roman Emperor Ferdinand I Hapsburg, written in 1561–62 and illuminated by the celebrated Flemish artist and miniaturist Joris Hoefnagel at the behest of the Emperor Rudolf II around thirty years later.
Bocskay's brilliant italic scripts reproduce prayers, canticles, psalms and passages from imperial briefs: Hoefnagel's illuminations do not attempt to illustrate the texts but visually enhance them with exquisite depictions of flowers, fruits, insects and small animals.
A few pages are produced in the virtuoso technique of white and gold on a black background.
The second part of the manuscript takes the form of two elaborate alphabets illuminated by Hoefnagel with colour borders on both recto and verso.
The manuscript remained in the imperial collection until 1612; its subsequent history is unknown until the late nineteenth century when it reappeared in a Viennese private collection.
After passing through a number of German private collections it was purchased by the Getty Museum in 1986.
The present facsimile is in two volumes: the first contains the colour plates with brief essays on the manuscript, the artists, the history of the writing model book by Lee Hendrix, the Getty's Associate Curator of Drawings at the Museum and Thea Vigna-Wilberg, Curator of Netherlandish Prints and Drawings at the Staatliche Graphische Sammlung, Munich.
The second volume, containing a detailed textual commentary, will appear in about two years time.
In conjunction with the publication, the Hoefnagel  manuscript is the centre of an  exhibition at the J. Paul Getty Museum called ‘Art and Science: Joris Hoefnagel and the Representation of Nature in the Renaissance’, from 3 November to 17 January 1993.
Further publications planned for this series include facsimiles of ‘The Book of Hours of Simon de Varie’, illuminated by Jean Fouquet, scheduled for publication in autumn 1993.
MEDIEVAL
Thomas Kren, editor Margaret of York, Simon Marmion and ‘The Visions of Tondal’ papers delivered at a symposium organised by the Department of Manuscripts of the J. Paul Getty Museum in collaboration with the Huntington Library and Art Collections, 21–24 June 1990 (The J. Paul Getty Museum, Malibu, 1992) 272pp. 261 b/w ills.
$49.95
In 1987 the Getty purchased the celebrated ‘Visions of Tondal’ illuminated for Margaret of York in 1474, presumably by Simon Marmion.
Its vivid depictions of hell have long fascinated scholars and the five hundredth anniversary of Marmion's death seemed an appropriate date to examine the manuscript and related topics such as its patron, Burgundian illumination and book collecting.
Also discussed are the library of Margaret of York and the art of Simon Marmion.
Twenty papers are reproduced and an appendix lists the contents of Margaret's library.
EIGHTEENTH-CENTURY PAINTING
Mary Vidal Watteau's painted conversations: art, literature and talk in seventeenth- and eighteenth-century France (Yale University Press, New Haven, 1992) 238 pp. 185 b/w and col. ills.
h/b £35/$50
Worthy but ultimately uninspiring re-reading of Watteau in terms of the emphasis on conversation in French art and society.
The author cites Svetlana Alpers as a particular inspiration; asks questions like: ‘to what extent and in what ways was conversation as verbal discourse actually represented in seventeenth-and early eighteenth-century images of sociability?’
Good comparative illustrations, including a gratifying number of contemporary engravings, means that Watteau survives this assault.
Christmas gifts from museum catalogues
Most expensive
Brighton Pavillion, Brighton.
Reproduction of 1810 couch in the form of Egyptian river boat.
Finished in rust lacquer with gilt trim or ‘faux rosewood’ and gilt.
Price £5,900
Most revolting
Metropolitan Museum, New York.
Stained glass window entitled ‘Autumn landscape’, based on a 1923 Tiffany design.
Hideously lurid glass panel in brass frame with matching chain.
Price $85
Most covetable
Metropolitan Museum, New York.
Garnet and seed pearl ring, based on early nineteenth-century Russian ring in the State Historical Museum, Moscow.
Price $178
Best childrens' gift
Salvador Dali Museum, St Petersburgh Florida.
Melting watch lunch box.
Stylish, clear plastic lunchbox with carrying handle, available in clear, red, yellow, purple, blue or pink.
Decorated with melting watch motif.
Price $9.95
ArchitectureScribble
Perceiving the disembodied object
Philosophical and psychological descriptions of experience and perception stress the role of the subject and the object normally disembodied subjects and real located objects.
This way of describing relations of knowledge and experience has had profound consequences in the history of the conception of subject and object.
This course tries to experiment by lifting these restrictions and asking when other elements are permitted to define the form that experience takes.
Firstly, it suggests that all experience is dependent upon fantasy and wishes; secondly, that all perception is an object, a feeling.
As such, the subject is never disembodied but is always a body.
But the body itself is always organised by fantasy.
As such, the subject contains internal objects, representations which determine the relation to what is misleadingly called external reality.
Any phenomenology of experience must address the way in which experience stands at the moment where internal fantasies cross the threshold of cultural categories.
It is at this point that we share in and are different from each other.
The description of the course ‘Bodies of Experience’ to be taught by Mark Cousins on Fridays at 10.30 in the Lecture Hall of the Architectural Association, London, during this autumn term
The Mitchell Prize winners for 1992
LONDON.
This year's Mitchell Prizes for outstanding publications in the history of the visual arts have gone to Joseph Leo Koerner and Peter Galassi.
Koerner has been awarded the 1992 Mitchell Prize of $15,000 for Caspar David Friedrich and the subject of landscape (Reaktion Books, London, and Yale University Press, London and New Haven, 1990) and Galassi the Eric Mitchell Prize of $5000 for an outstanding first book by a promising scholar for Corot in Italy,(also published by Yale, 1991).
Joseph Koerner is Associate Professor at the Harvard University Department of Fine Arts while Peter Galassi is Curator of Photographs at the Museum of Modern Art, New York.
Artemis: a new architectural press in London
LONDON.
The Swiss publisher Artemis Verlags AG has entered into partnership with London Architectural Press to form a new English-language outlet for books on architecture intended for an informed readership.
Artemis has a distinguished track record in architectural publishing and has produced the complete works of Le Corbusier and Alvar Aalto as well as the Studiopaperback series founded by Le Corbusier.
London Architectural Press is the brainchild of Kasia Paveliev, Tom Neville and Jonathon Moberly who were instrumental in the setting up of ADT Press, now owned by Phaidon.
The new venture will be aiming to make ‘each book a project in itself, so that each one has a unique quality, with format and layout painstakingly related to the kind of work being produced’ in the words of Tom Neville.
Artemis London launched itself earlier this summer with City of Objects: designs on Berlin by the controversial British architect William Alsop working with London-based abstract artist Bruce McLean.
The book reproduces Alsop's designs for the major competition to re-build the Berlin Potsdamer Platz in 1991 (won by Heinz Hilmer and Christoph Sattler).
Other books under the new Artemis imprint are a monograph on the award winning architect Zaha Hadid, and a new book on Jean Nouvel by Olivier Boissière in the Studiopaperbacks series, now produced in larger format with more titles in English.
New books on Frank Gehry, Santiago Calatrava, Morphosis and Mario Botta are scheduled.
The Art Market
London
So fine! why are they selling?
Seven Cézannes in mystery sale at Christie's
LONDON.
Speculation surrounds the motivation behind the sale of an important group of seven works by Cézanne in the London 30 November Impressionist and Modern sale.
They are blessed with the distinguished provenance of the Pellerin Collection, formed by Auguste Pellerin between 1895 and 1925.
Pellerin died in 1929 and the bulk of his collection was split between his daughter Juliette and his son Jean-Victor.
Paintings from the collection have been sold over subsequent years, some passing through the Paris art trade while a number of works entered major public collections including the National Gallery, London and the Metropolitan, New York.
The Christie's pictures have been consigned by a European private foundation which is apparently intending to purchase more works with the proceeds, a surprising reason given the importance of the present group.
The seven oils include a splendid ‘Portrait de l'Artiste’, executed in his early palette-knife technique of around 1866 and signed in bold red capitals (est. £1–1.5 million; $1.8–2.8 million); two landscapes, ‘Maison dans les Arbres (Auvers)’ of 1879 (est. £1.4–1.8 million; $2.5–3.5 million), and ‘Le Bassin du Jas de Bouffan’of 1878 (est. £1.6–2.2 million; $3–4 million); a ‘Cinq Baigneurs’of 1880–82, one of the most complete canvases from the Bathers series (est. £2.5–3.5 million; $4.5–6.5 million); and a brilliantly-coloured ‘L'Homme à la Pipe’, the only surviving study for the pipe-smoking spectator in the ‘Card-Players’, now in the Metropolitan Museum, New York (est. £1.5–2.5 million; $2.5–4.5 million).
The ‘Bathers’ is the second Cézanne on this theme to be offered at Christie's this year.
In June a late, small canvas made £720,000 (est. £400–600,000) in London.
Undoubtedly the most important group of works by the artist to appear at auction for many years, the canvases are said to be in extremely good condition.
London
Christie's to move into financial services
Under its new Chairman, Sir Anthony Tennant, Christie's hopes to plug into new markets in the Far East and South America
LONDON.
In May 1993 Sir Anthony Tennant, chairman of Guinness Plc and formerly managing director at Grand Metropolitan Plc, will replace Lord Carrington as Chairman of Christies International.
By this appointment, Christie's hopes to expand its services, particularly in the financial area.
In an interview with The Art Newspaper on 28 September, Christopher Davidge, managing director of Christies International, explained, ‘by the end of the decade we will have a whole set of new clients who will not know the tradition of Christie's and Sotheby's as does our current base.
Particularly in Southeast Asia, China and South America, there is a whole group interested in buying art who neither have experience of buying at auction nor understand our role as agents acting on behalf of buyers and sellers.
We will be competing for their business with already existing companies there which offer complete financial services.
Rather than entering into these services too late, we want to anticipate the shift and the implications it thereby brings to our business by offering services tailored to specific client needs’.
While Davidge could not at that time be more specific, he observed, ‘the appointment of Sir Anthony is intended to stimulate discussion and to help us rexamine all existing and potential services’.
At Sotheby's, Peggy Auchincloss, managing director of financial services, noted that their firm planned no change of direction.
‘Consignor loans remain the main part of our loan business, although we generally now only advance about 35% of the low estimate (as opposed to 1989 when up to 50% might have been loaned) which reflects the uncertainties of the market today.
We avoid small loans (£15,000 is the smallest) and are more likely to give advance loans to consignors of £30,000 or more.
In the last year to eighteen months there has been a drop to virtually no enquiries concerning our secured or term loan program’.
In this, the auction house lends money to owners (dealers or collectors) with their art holdings serving as security.
(Their 1991 brochure stated ‘we usually lend up to 40% of the estimated value of the works of art for a one-year period’)
While as of 31 December 1991, Sotheby's loans (both consignor and term) on their book equalled £112 million ($190.4 million), Christie's loans to consignors (they have not offered term loans) stood at £20.2 million ($34.3 million).
David Tyler, finance director of Christies International, observed, ‘during the past few years, an increasing number of vendors have come to us requesting an advance of their sale proceeds; we have been happy to meet those requests in many cases’.
Back to 1986: a crashing rejuvenation
The Art Sales Index has compiled statistics which show that the art auction market is at the same level of turn-over as around 1986.
On a global turnover of £656 million in 1991/2, the geographical break down was: U.S. 38.4%; U.K. 29.7; France 9.5% and rest of the world 22.4%.
This shows a recovery in the U.K. share as compared with 1990/91, when the figures were: U.S. 38.6%; U.K. 24.4%; France 13% and rest of the world 22.4%.
Sotheby's Japan without a head
TOKYO.
Kazuko Shiomi, head of the Sotheby's office in Japan resigned unexpectedly in September.
A descendant of an ancient, aristocratic feudal family, she had succeeded in involving numerous Japanese in the collecting of Impressionist art, which in the boom years of the late Eighties contributed heavily to Sotheby's successes.
Behind the resignation is said to be her discontent with the management style of the American board and their way of treating her market.
Certainly, this has not been yielding the same profits as four years ago, but the Japanese are not entirely absent from the sale rooms nonetheless, even though more often in order to sell than to buy.
Christie's U.S. starts selling antiquities again
NEW YORK.
Christie's New York will be auctioning antiquities after an interval of many years.
Head of the department is G. Max Bernheimer, formerly director and vice-chairman of Bernheimer's Antique Art, founded in Europe in 1864.
The inaugural sale, on 16 December, includes Greek, Etruscan, Roman and Egyptian works, among which are a Greek female head of fourth century BC and a Roman, partially draped Aphrodite of first century AD.
Paul Klee's Kandinsky at Sotheby's London
LONDON.
Sotheby's will be offering one of the two greatest paintings by Kandinsky to be offered at auction in the last thirty years.
Consigned for sale by Alexander Klee, grandson of Paul Klee who was given the painting by Kandinsky in exchange for one of his own, it is a sketch for ‘Composition VII’ of 1913, now in the State Tretyakov Gallery, Moscow, and widely considered the artist's most innovative painting of that year.
The present sketch is the only remaining preparatory canvas for that work still in private hands and in the opinion of Vivian Endicott Barnett, author of the catalogue raisonné of the watercolours, the most important work from 1913 to remain in private hands.
Estimated at around £5 million ($8.5 million), it measures 78 x 100cm.
In May 1990 Sotheby's sold ‘Fugue’ of 1914 to the Guggenheim Museum for $20.9 million.
Christie's to hold sales in Germany
LONDON.
Christie's will be holding sales in Germany next year in a number of fields, including contemporary and nineteenth-century art.
These are also the areas in which Sotheby's has held its two sales so far in Berlin.
Moscow
Drouot ready to expand into the Russian market
But until the problem of export licences is solved foreign auction houses will find it difficult to do business
MOSCOW.
At the end of July and beginning of August a group of six Drouot experts, headed by the president of the company Joël-Marie Millon, were in Moscow for almost a week offering free estimates to the Muscovites on their works of art, antiques and jewellery.
Quite a number of the city dwellers took part in their appraisal and some were invited to consign their objects to an auction that Drouot and the joint venture company Art-2000 are planning to hold later this year in the Russian capital.
The main obstacle in the way of the auction seems to be the difficulty of obtaining export licences.
The position of Drouot is clear its President told The Art Newspaper that without such a licence for at least some of the objects there will be no auction sale at all.
Sotheby's met with similar problems in 1988 and in 1990.
Their first auction in Moscow was successful because they managed to obtain permission from the Soviet authorities to export a group of Russian paintings from the Twenties and Thirties.
However, the fact that these works had not been shown to any Russian museum curators caused considerable trouble for the organisers.
The second Sotheby's auction in Moscow consequently never took place, although the objects had already been consigned.
Instead, a seminar was held in 1990 at the premises of the Soviet cultural foundation, with leading Sotheby's experts taking part.
The main stumbling block for Drouot and other auction houses that want to deal with Russia is that the old export regulations ban any external trade in works of art created before 1945.
Changes may be on the way however.
Two important decrees by Russian President Boris Yeltsin on the restitution of works of art and on the national heritage were recently published.
The latter provides for the creation of a special federal service that will deal with the export of works of art.
In addition, and for the first time, a register will be established for all works of art entering the country.
A draft law regulating the export of works of art has already been drawn up and was put before the Supreme Soviet of Russia on 10 September.
Commenting on the draft law, Russia'a new Deputy Minister of Culture, Tatyana Nikitina, points out that the new regulations will allow the export of works of art dating from the beginning of this century.
According to Mrs Nikitina, who is responsible for the national heritage, Russia is keen to take an active part in international efforts to curb the illicit export of works of art.
On another front, Russia and Turkey are working on a proposal to create a regional cultural community in the Black Sea basin.
All the necessary documents have been drafted by the two sides and the first conference of the new cultural commonwealth is due to be held at Dagomys at the end of 1992.
As for the Drouot auction, it is not clear whether it will take place at all.
But the French auction house has evidently decided to keep its foot in the door of this potentially lucrative market.
A seminar has been planned for this autumn and the Drouot Foundation has invited the Pavlovsk Museum to show its collection in Paris.
This month's currency conversions
The currency equivalents published in this issue of The Art Newspaper are based on the spot exchange rates obtained on 9 October 1992.
In these the pound sterling stood at $1.7; DM2.5; DFl.2.8; FFr8.4; L2,200; Rs50 (accurate to within 0.1 of a decimal place).
New York and London
Little scope for hope
Minor sales of modern art provide no evidence of market recovery
LONDON.
The sales of modern and contemporary art which were held in New York and London last month offered minor material which generally fetched dim prices.
Although they are an unreliable indicator of the conditions of these markets, the results cannot inspire confidence for the more important sales taking place later this month and at the beginning of December.
In New York on 5 October, Sotheby's sold 103 of 138 lots and raised $2.74 million (£1.6 million) in its sale of Impressionist and modern paintings, drawings and sculpture.
Apparently a respectable performance, prices were modest.
Just how far the market has declined in the last two years can be gauged by the performance of Henry Moore's ‘Reclining Figure No. 6’(lot 89, est. $50,000–70,000), an important bronze maquette dating from 1954 and closely related to the great elmwood reclining figure of 1959–64.
In London in November 1990, another cast from the edition fetched £58,000 a price already well short of the market's peak.
The present example fetched $47,500 (£27,700).
A middle scale version of Rodin's ‘La Defense (The Call to Arms)’(lot 16, est. $200,000–300,000) attracted the sale's highest bid of $310,000 (£181,000) when it sold to an American  institution , while Utrillo's pretty winter scene, ‘Rue à Poissy’(lot 131, est. $60,000–80,000) was the sale's most expensive painting, bought by an American dealer for $100,000 (£58,000).
Six large but dull canvases painted by Léger for the staircase of Nelson Rockefeller's Fifth Avenue apartment failed to sell (lot 84, est. $100,000–150,000).
On 8 October Christie's sold fifty-four of eighty-three lots in its sale of Impressionist and modern art and raised $894,100 (£522,000), and 108 of 155 lots in its marginally more interesting sale of contemporary art which totalled $1.92 million (£1.12 million).
A late acrylic painting by Dubuffet (lot 175, est. $80,000–120,000) commanded the sessions's highest bid of $145,000 (£84,600).
In London, Sotheby's offered Impressionist and modern art on 14 October, finding buyers for 161 of 289 lots and raising £1.08 million ($1.85 million).
It was a poor performance for paintings with Henri Hayden's ‘Nature morte à la Guitare’(lot 32, est. £50,000–70,000), a pretty if unsubstantial cubist composition of 1918, selling to a Spanish collector for £45,000 ($77,100).
Ceramic jugs and plates by Picasso proved a stronger market with all the major pieces attracting interest.
A ceramic footballer (lot 107, est. £8,000–12,000), believed to have been coloured by Picasso's own hand, fetched £24,000 ($41,100).
In a session of contemporary art the following morning, eighty-seven of 122 lots were sold and raised £1.12 million ($1.92 million), the top price being £110,000 paid by the European trade for ‘IKB 241’, a monochrome canvas by Yves Klein (lot 350, est. £90,000–120,000).
There were no bids for a large postcard piece by Gilbert and George (lot 360, est. £9,000–12,000), nor for Tony Cragg's ‘Yard’(lot 378, est. £18,000–25,000), an important granite sculpture dating from 1988 and formerly owned by the late Sebastian Walker.
The results of this sale of contemporary art at Christie's on the same afternoon, 15 October, were broadly similar, with 108 of 138 lots finding buyers and raising £1.29 million ($2.22 million).
A telephone bidder paid the highest price of £76,000 ($129,200) for a fire painting by Yves Klein (lot 47, est. £70,000–90,000).
By a clumsy piece of organisation, the contemporary sale at Christie's clashed with the sale of the contents of the Nigel Greenwood Gallery which Sotheby's had packaged as a separate catalogue.
It was a dispiriting affair, and since the material was being auctioned on behalf of the gallery's creditors, there were no reserves and auctioneer Ian Mackenzie was forced to lower as well as raise his bids in order to find buyers for each of 144 lots which raised £97,070 ($166,300).
A further thirteen lots listed in the catalogue were withdrawn before the sale.
Two paintings by Christopher Lebrun, ‘Silver Birch’ and ‘Tree and Hill’(lots 24 and 23, both est. £4,000–6,000), had the distinction of fetching the session's highest prices of £10,500 ($18,000) and £8,200 ($14,000) respectively, modest indeed by comparison with the value of the artist's work in Greenwood's exhibitions.
Adrian Wisniewskie's large pastel ‘Attack of a right wing nature’(lot 12, est. £2,000–4,000) crept to the measly figure of £2,900.
Sotheby's try again with slightly tired Constable
LONDON.
A painting by Constable of ‘Harnham Bridge looking towards Salisbury Cathedral’ which was due to be sold at Christie's last year, will be offered at Sotheby's, London, on 18 November.
It is one of only three full-scale paintings of the cathedral still in private hands.
Reputedly in poor condition when it surfaced last year ‘glossed and cleaned up’ was one description the painting has been consigned from the Wernher Collection at Luton Hoo, Bedfordshire.
Despite inclusion in the Christie's preview and plans for a pre-sale tour before the sale, the picture was suddenly withdrawn for undisclosed reasons before being catalogued.
It has now been given a £1 million ($1.7 million) estimate by Sotheby's who will be taking it to Japan prior to the sale, although the market for Constable in Japan is not particularly developed.
The pool of serious Constable collectors is small: Lord Thomson of the Fleet is the preeminent name in the field.
In 1990 Baron Thyssen bought an outstanding work, ‘The Lock’ at Sotheby's for £10,780,000 a world record for a British painting but he is not considered a likely purchaser of further works by the artist.
In December 1990 Phillip's offered ‘The Entrance to Fen Lane’, consigned by a member of the Agnew family who had left it on show at Agnew's for some years before offering it, even allowing it to appear on a television programme about the firm.
Not surprisingly, it failed to sell.
Rare Goya bullfight at Sotheby's
LONDON.
The most important oil painting by Goya to appear on the market for two decades will be offered at Sotheby's on 9 December.
Estimated at £4–6 million ($6.8–10.2 million), it was painted in Paris in 1824 for Joacquin Maria Ferrer, who, like Goya, had moved to France to escape the reign of Ferdinand VII of Spain.
The estimate for the current work is far in excess of any price yet realised for a work by Goya and the highest price achieved at auction is currently the $650,000 (£391,000) paid for a drawing entitled ‘Those who escape work end up like this’ sold at Christie's New York in October 1990.
In December 1986 Sotheby's Madrid sold a ‘Flight of the Witches’ for Pta70 million ($445,869; £313,908) which did not, however, have an export license.
On 19 May this year Edmund Peel, Madrid, offered a major portrait of the court embroiderer Juan López de Robredo with an estimate of Pta200,000 million (£1.11 million; $1.93 million), but it failed to find a buyer.
In their special Spanish sale on 28–29 May Christie's London offered a portrait of Doña Maria Teresa de Vallabriga which failed to sell at £600,000.
The present work depicts a scene during a bullfight in which the bull, having already gored two horses, confronts a tangled mass of matadors huddled behind the picador's horse.
Executed in the artist's late, expressionistic manner, the paint has been applied to the canvas with a palette knife, brush and finger or thumb covered with a rag.
Recent X-rays taken at the Courtauld Institute have revealed a large number of small pentimenti in the details of the composition.
The mood and style of the painting look ahead to the four great lithographs ‘The Bulls of Bordeaux’ executed eighteen months later when Goya was in that city: a proof impression of one of these was sent to Ferrer.
The painting has been consigned to sale by a descendant of the Ferrer family who have owned it since it was painted.
Sotheby's Peel & Asociados offer Italianate relief
MADRID.
On 27 October Sotheby's Peel and Asociados will be offering an alabaster relief ‘La Piedad’(Pieta) by Diego de Siloé which is expected to realise Pta35 million (£198,800; $338,000).
One of the foremost Spanish Renaissance artists, Siloé executed the three panels between 1519, when he returned to Italy, and 1528, when he left for Granada.
With the delicate illusionistic modelling and the intense pathos of the Madonna and Christ, the relief betrays Siloé's contact in Italy with the work of Michelangelo.
The alabaster relief, along with four panels, School of Valencia, depicting scenes from the life of St Ursula (expected to realise Pta60 million; £341,000; $579,500) are not allowed to be exported.
James II's wedding suit: a new costume record?
LONDON.
A remarkable and remarkably preserved costume will be offered for sale at Christie's South Kensington on 17 November.
Estimated in excess of £200,000, the wedding suit of James, Duke of York, later James II of England, is expected to achieve a new world record for any item of costume at auction.
The outstanding historical and artistic significance of the costume makes it an obvious target for acquisition by a British museum: the possibility of a serious bid by the Victoria and Albert Museum, perhaps with the assistance of the National Heritage Memorial Fund cannot be ruled out.
Embroidered all over with gold and silver threads, it  incorporates a Garter emblem.
It was worn on 21 November 1673 when the Duke of York married Mary Beatrice d'Este, daughter of the Duke of Modena.
After the execution of James's father Charles I, the Duke fled to the island of Jersey and the home of Sir George Cartaret.
At the wedding ceremony Sir George's cousin Edward received the suit as a memento.
The suit passed by descent through his widow's sister's family and has remained at Sausmarez Manor on the island of Guernsey until now.
It left Guernsey only once: from 1926 to 1927 it was exhibited at the Victoria and Albert Museum.
Susan Mayor, head of Christie's Costume and Textiles department commented: ‘Costume of this date is rare but seventeenth-century royal costume is surprisingly rare, and this piece can be dated exactly to a single day, 21 November 1673 when the history of England hung in balance.
It's a very exciting moment.’
Christie's London
Strong DM supports German ceramics
Maiolica as weak as the lira
LONDON.
Continental ceramics including Meissen Porcelain from the Korthaus Collection at Christie's on 21 September produced good results despite the high estimates.
The sixty-eight Korthaus lots raised £558,100 ($953,100) with 27.9% unsold by value.
The whole sale made £704,680 ($1,204,300) with 30.5% unsold by value.
Private buying or dealers bidding on behalf of private collectors dominated the Korthaus section of the sale, helping to explain the, at times, high prices.
This was the first of two planned sales from the Korthaus collection, which was formed mainly during the 1960s by one of the German industrialists active in the field during the post-war period.
The sale also included consignments from other owners.
From the Korthaus collection: a Böttger flared white beaker-vase, circa 1720, estimate £10–15,000 sold for £45,000 ($76,900) to a private collector with a dealer as the underbidder; a Meissen silver-gilt mounted gold-ground blue-and-white cylindrical tankard, circa 1730, estimate £6–8,000: surprisingly for its quality bought-in at £4,500; sold after the sale for what must have been a bargain price; a Meissen circular tureen and cover with fish handles, circa 1728, sold to a private collector for £30,000 ($51,270), estimate £12–18,000.
The handles were of rare and fine quality which was not matched by the paste; colours had suffered in the firing and were dull from overheating; a Meissen Fabeltiere fluted ecuelle, circa 1740, sold for £13,000 ($22,200), estimate £6–8,000.
It was in perfect condition, with good painting and colours.
A Meissen armorial sugar-box and cover from the Swan service modelled by Johann Joachim Kändler, circa 1738, was sold for £44,000 ($75,200), estimate £25–35,000: bidders were undeterred by the putto finial which to some appeared to overburden the more delicate moulded oval shell form with flower and armorial decoration.
Twelve lots consisted of a Meissen tea and coffee set painted in the manner of B.G. Häuer.
The decision to split the eighteenth-century service was a crime.
A slop-basin with a beautifully painted stag hunt and boar hunt, circa 1730, sold for £26,000 ($44,400), estimate £12–18,000.
A Meissen flared cylindrical chinoiserie deckelpokal and cover painted in the manner of Gregor Höroldt, circa 1725, sold for £34,000 ($58,100) to a dealer on behalf of a private collector, estimate £15–20,000.
A Meissen Chinoiserie table-bell and stand painted by Christian Friedrich Herold and Bonaventur Gottlieb Häuer, circa 1730 sold to a private collector on the telephone against a trade telephone bidder for £70,000 ($119,630); estimate £40–50,000.
This was an extremely rare piece.
Other properties in the sale included items from the Sir Thomas Barlow collection: four Urbino dishes and tazze, ranging in estimate from £5–7,000, £30–50,000, £15–20,000, £40–60,000, £20–25,000 and £80–120,000.
Only the least expensive lot sold, at £5,000.
The group fell victim to the devalued Italian lira and the now hesitant Italian market.
Estimates were fairly based on recently sold comparative examples.
Their lack of success was also due to the leaked information that the Sackler collection would come on the market next year.
Sotheby's purchase Edmund Peel and Asociados
MADRID AND LONDON.
In a move to expand and diversify its activities within the Spanish mainland, Sotheby's Holdings Inc. has purchased the Madrid auction house Edmund Peel and Asociados, with whom they have had a long-term business association.
Speaking to The Art Newspaper Edmund Peel explained that there has been a dramatic change in the law on capital gains tax in Spain this year.
This tax now decreases by 7% per year for every year an item purchased at auction remains with the purchaser.
After fifteen years this is reduced to zero.
Under the previous system, works whose value had not been declared for taxation purposes were subject to taxation on the full sale price which was a severe disincentive to sellers.
The closer alliance between the two houses (E. Peel will retain its Spanish board of directors and its current staff) would result in Spanish works of art consigned to Sotheby's in other parts of the world being returned to Spain for sale if this is felt to be the best venue.
Pooling of clients and vendors is envisaged: ‘Both parties should know what's going on at both ends’.
In addition Sotheby's experts will be drafted in to start up sales in new areas such as furniture.
On the current market situation Mr Peel noted that Old Masters continued to be the strongest area, although there had been a reduction in both size of sales and prices realised in some areas.
The opportunity to purchase works at slightly lower prices had encouraged museums back into the market.
In general he characterised the collecting of Old Masters in Spain as ‘serious, long-term, not speculative’.
On contemporary art sales undoubtedly enduring a difficult period at present he noted that even at the highest point of the market, revenue had not amounted to more than about 20% of the house's total sales.
The new organisation would aim to promote younger Spanish artists such as Gordillo, Valdès, Barcelon and Guerrero who he felt could attain the international status of the top rank names such as Tàpies and Chillida.
Mixed results at first New Delhi auction
LONDON.
The two-day sale of Indian, European and Oriental Paintings and works of art organised by Sotheby's in New Delhi was not an unmitigated success by any means.
Breaking down the results by session: the first session of nineteenth- and twentieth-century paintings totalled £556,930 ($946,780) with 46.7% unsold by value; the session of modern and contemporary Indian paintings, watercolours, drawings and sculpture totalled £125,750 ($213,775) with 17.47% unsold by value; the group of Indian and South-East Asian sculpture and works of art totalled £141,858 ($241,158) with 56% unsold; the Oriental and European ceramics, bronzes gold and silver totalled £194,315 ($330,335).
At time of going to press the results for the European enamel boxes and clocks and watches were not available.
In the first session the strongest prices were achieved for four paintings by John William Godward, of which the best was ‘Bath of Venus’(lot 54) at £52,000 ($88,400).
The poor result for the Indian antiquities section was mainly due to the failure of two major lots to sell.
These were lots 228, a South Indian bronze figure of Siva-Nataraja of around the eleventh century, estimated at Rs 75,00,000–85,00,000, and 238, a South Indian bronze figure of Sukhasana Siva, Chola, of around the twelfth century, estimated at Rs 50,00,000–60,00,000.
Among the top lots that did sell were a Gandhara life-size grey schist head of Maitreya, Pakistan, 3rd-4th century, for Rs.4,62,000 (lot 202, £9,240; $15,700); a western Indian polychrome-painted wood window and surround, Gujurat, circa eighteenth century, for Rs.3,74,000 (lot 260, £7,480; $12,700), both to anonymous buyers.
Of the 600 or so people who attended the sale, roughly 10% were non Indian.
Indian buyers predominated in the session on contemporary art while the nineteenth-century paintings attracted a mixed group of bidders.
‘Jardin à Auvers’ to be auctioned by Binoche
PARIS.
A painting of a garden at Auvers-sur-Oise by Van Gogh, finished only days before he killed himself, will become the first historical monument to go under the hammer in France when it is sold at Drouot salerooms on 6 December by Paris auctioneer Maître Jean-Claude Binoche of the firm Binoche et Godeau.
The first major work by the artist to go on the block since ‘Portrait du Dr Gachet’ reached the world record sum of $82,500,000 (£43,107,142) at Christie's New York in May 1990, ‘Jardin à Auvers’was classified as a monument historique in July 1989 French museums possess only a meagre twenty-five paintings by Van Gogh out of a total output of 879 works.
The painting is estimated at a mere FFr50–80 million, not because of the recession so much as the fact it must obviously stay in France.
Maître Binoche estimates it could have fetched FFr300 million had it been allowed out.
‘Jardin à Auvers’ is thought to have been painted in July 1890 during the last month Van Gogh spend at Auvers-sur-Oise with Dr Paul-Ferdinand Gachet the Christie's portrait of the doctor, from the collection of Siegfried Kramarsky, was done between 3 and 5 June 1890.
Measuring 64 x 80 cm, ‘Jardin à Auvers’ is in perfect condition, an extremely strong composition with sweeping curved lines, devoid of sky and using an almost pointilliste technique.
It was last exhibited in 1945 at the Stedelijk Museum in Amsterdam and was sold to its present owner, private French collector Jacques Walter, in 1954 by Wildenstein of New York who bought it from the collection of Mrs Alice Kurtz.
Its status as an historical monument will involve several constraints as well as just a low hammer price for its French or French resident purchaser.
Any restoration work must be done in the workshops of the Louvre and Les Monuments Historiques will be able to visit it.
Death duties, on the other hand, will be minimal.
‘It would have been a fascinating exercise to auction it on the free market and see how much it got, though’, said Maître Binoche.
Phillips remain cosmopolitan and continental
LONDON.
The auctioneers Phillips have asked us to point out that they are not giving up on the continent, although they are reducing their representation there (The Art Newspaper No. 21 October 1992, p. 27).
The Geneva sales of fine jewellery and continental silver are continuing (there is another on 17 November), and the offices in Zurich and Brussels are also remaining open.
New York
Going for a song?
The Richard Rodgers collection minus Hammerstein but with Ludington
Major Impressionist works from three American private collections boost the sales
NEW YORK.
Mercifully, at a time of recession when sellers are holding back in many key areas of the market, bankruptcy and death are always with us.
Sotheby's and Christie's New York are benefiting from the departure of a number of distinguished figures in the world of art and entertainment, in all cases at ripe old ages.
Following the recent death of Dorothy Rodgers, widow of the American composer, a number of Impressionist and Modern works from their joint collection will be offered at Christie's New York on 11 November.
Contemporary paintings from the same collection will be offered on the 18th and 19th of the month.
Among the modern pictures are ‘Guitare et journal’ by Picasso of 1914 (est. $3–4 million), formerly in the collection of the dancer Massine, with whom Picasso collaborated on a number of theatrical productions, and purchased by Rodgers from E.V.
Thaw and Co.
New York, in 1963.
Most interesting is perhaps an early Picasso of 1901, ‘Danseuse Espagnole’, probably painted in Barcelona but representative of the early French works influenced by Lautrec and van Gogh (est. $1.8–2.5 million).
It was purchased by Rodgers from Knoedler, New York, in 1958.
Other works in the sale include a Vlaminck ‘Still life’ of 1907, a Renoir portrait of a young girl, still lifes by Matisse and Bonnard, two landscapes and a still life by de Staël and works on paper by Matisse, Moore, Dufy, Braque, Rouault and Vuillard.
Sculpture includes a Degas dancer, a Giacometti, a table-top Henry Moore and a bull by Marino Marini.
Rodgers and his wife built up the collection without the aid of a professional adviser, purchasing from dealers and at auction.
Sotheby's New York Impressionist and Modern Picture Sale Part I will be held on 10 November and contains outstanding works from the collections of two recently deceased Americans.
‘Wright S. Ludington virtually created the Santa Barbara Museum’ says that institution's curator Robert Henning.
In 1982 an exhibition of Ludington's bequests at the Santa Barbara contained ten Asian works, nine Greek vases, thirty ancient bronzes, thirty-one Graeco-Roman sculptures, eleven Egyptian antiquities, ninety-three modern works on paper plus twenty-four prints and twenty-four Old Master and modern paintings.
Ludington died aged ninety-one in May this year and bequeathed the museum a further 175 works.
Ten more paintings from his collection will be included in the Sotheby's sale.
Wright Ludington began collecting in his early twenties; early purchases included the Matisse Fauve period ‘Collioure’ of 1905 to be offered at Sotheby's (est. $1.25–1.75 million; £700,000–900,000), bought from the Pierre Matisse Gallery for $3,000 and currently on show at the Museum of Modern Art, New York.
Other pictures from the Ludington collection include ‘Moulin Rouge oú place Blanche (Terasse de Café)’ of 1896 by Bonnard (est. $500,000–700,000; £260,000–400,000), originally the central panel of a triptych, and Vuillard's ‘Enfant à Table’, circa 1900, depicting the artist's niece Annette Roussel (est. $700,000–900,000; £411,800–529,400).
In the same sale works of similar quality will be offered from the estate of the New York designer and collector Mollie Parnis Livingston who died earlier this year aged ninety-three.
From her elegant Park Avenue apartment come Picasso's ‘Femme dans un Fauteuil’ of 1946 depicting Marie-Thérèse Walter (est. $3.5–4.5 million; £1.8–2.4 million) and a magnificent Matisse, ‘L'Asie’of 1946, also currently included in the MoMA ‘Matisse’show, depicting a three-quarter length female model in fur gown holding up a necklace, painted in reds, mauve, pink and gold, estimate on request.
A golden-toned Vuillard, ‘Madame Vuillard à Table, dit ‘Le Repas’’ of 1903, shows the artist's mother in her apartment on the rue Truffaut, est. $500,000– 700,000 (£260,000– 370,000).
Heritage sales
Recession shakes out the contents of the stately homes of England
Pitchford Hall, Sandon Park and others with Mountbatten's Broadlands as the gravest dispersal to come
LONDON.
Lloyd's losses, the recession in general, falling agricultural revenue, falling visitor figures and rising maintenance costs are shaking out works of art from Britain's historic collections.
The most heartwrenching consignor story was that of Pitchford Hall, its owners forced to raise capital following losses in the Lloyd's names market.
The house, a fine sixteenth-century timbered frame manor house near Shrewsbury, Shropshire, had been in the family for 500 years.
It and its contents came on the market after the decision by the recently resigned Secretary of State for National Heritage David Mellor who went against the advice and the efforts of the National Trust, English Heritage, and the National Heritage Memorial Fund.
According to the owner's agent, Robert Holden, the owners offered to give the house and land in exchange for £1.8 for the contents, which would have formed an enhanced tax douceur.
Eventually English Heritage joined with the National Heritage Memorial fund offering to buy the house and asking for no funding from the government (although possibly in the long term, additional monies would have had to have been found for the running of the house).
But such efforts were to no avail.
In the event, the Christie's sale of the contents on 28 and 29 September realised a low total of £1,225,724 ($2,121 729) with 12% unsold by value and the house has since sold for £1 million.
Among the items saved was a portrait of Lord Liverpool by Sir Thomas Lawrence, which did not appear in the catalogue and which has gone to the National Portrait Gallery.
Withdrawn from the sale were: a splendid portrait of Sir Francis Ottley and his family by Petrus Troueil (estimate £40–60,000) which will go to the Shrewsbury Museum; maps, portraits of Adam Ottley by Charles Jervas (estimate £3–5,000) and of his wife, Bridget Ottley, by Sir Godfrey Kneller (estimate £4–6,000), and a birds-eye view drawing of Pitchford Hall by John Bower, 1714 (estimate £2–3,000) which join the Ottley archive already in the National Library of Wales.
Among the highlights were: Arthur Devis, ‘John Cotes of Woodcote and his sons in the park at Woodcote’, circa 1745, sold for £80,000 ($138,480), estimate £80–120,000.
James Ward, ‘The Jenkinson barb’(an Arab horse) in a landscape with Pitchford Hall, oil on canvas, 1822, sold for £50,000 ($86,550).
A Regency rosewood dining table, once owned by Gladstone and used at Downing Street, presented after his death to Lord Rosebery, sold to Partridge for £38,000 ($65,777), estimate £6–8,000.
An unusual pair of William IV satinwood side cabinets sold for £5,000 ($8,655), estimate £6–8,000.
A pair of Derby peony-flower dishes, circa 1756 sold for £4,200 ($7,270), estimate £4–6,000.
A small Scandinavian cylindrical tankard on three pomegranate feet sold for £4,200, estimate £1,500–2,500 (Scandinavian tankards, both silver and wood, tend to draw a determined group of avid repatriators).
Among the high estimated lots, a pair of George I wall-sconces, with coat-of-arms in foliage and shell cartouche by Gabriel Sleath, 1717, failed to sell at £28,000 ($48,468) against estimate of £30–50,000.
Other house sales held over the last month have included Sotheby's auction on 6 October of English and Continental furniture, paintings and prints, European and Oriental ceramics and works of art, antiquities, silver, books, costumes and textiles, collectors' items and household furnishings, from Sandon Hall, country seat of the Earls of Harrowby since 1776.
The sale realised £197,366 ($340,812) with 24.57% unsold by value.
Lord and Lady Harrowby have moved into a wing to make the state rooms available for conferences and functions.
Highlights included a rosewood library plan cabinet, circa 1825, estimate £8–12,000 bought by a private collector for £17,000 ($29,356); a mahogany writing table, late George III, circa 1810, estimate £8–12,000, bought by a London dealer for £8,800 ($15,196); and oddly ten packets of Archer ‘silk’ lavatory paper, estimate £5–10, bought by an American collector for £160 ($276).
On 19 September Sotheby's sold property from Eaton Hall, Chester, at the direction of the Duke and Duchess of Westminster, who are not feeling the pinch but were clearing out their attic rubbish.
The sale totalled £184,697 ($335,302), with 8.36% unsold by value.
The best lots were a Georgian inlaid marble chimneypiece, circa 1770, sold to a London dealer for £21,500 ($38,915), and a mahogany state bed, George IV, designed by Willliam Porden, circa 1820 sold for £17,000 ($30,770) to an American buyer on behalf of the Gerald Arthur Ralph Foundation for Historic Preservation and Education.
The bed will go to Allerton Park, Knaresborough, North Yorkshire, an important Gothic Revival country house.
On 16 September Sotheby's offered the contents of Groombridge Place, Kent, a beautiful small Jacobean brick house which had been featured in the Peter Greenaway film ‘The Draughtsman's Contract’.
The sale made £1,176,409 ($2,070,479) with 3.86% unsold by value.
Highlights included an Ayra carpet (estimate £18–25,000) sold for £38,000 ($66,880) to a London carpet dealer; a pair of George II walnut side tables, circa 1745 (estimate £20–30,000) bought by a private buyer for £30,000 ($52,800); a William and Mary walnut and marquetry cabinet on stand, circa 1695, estimate £15–20,000, bought by a private buyer for £22,000 ($38,720).
In the continuing round of county-house sales, coming up this later this season are the contents of Shadwell Park, near Thetford (home of banker, racehorse owner and breeder, the late Sir John Musker: Sotheby's 21 and 22 October.
The sale includes Brussels tapestries, a Louis XV ormolu-mounted kingwood bureau plat (stamped M. Criaerd) estimated at £30–50,000; George I walnut secretaire chests on chest, circa 1725, each estimated £10–15,000; a William Morris ‘Hammersmith’ hand-knotted wool carpet, estimated at £25–40,000; and silver, plate, ceramics and garden statuary.
On 20 October, Christie's are offering the contents of Stackallan House in the Republic of Ireland, which is feeling the recession even more severely than Britain.
It includes a portrait of the artist's children in a landscape by Sir Francis Grant (est.
IR£30–40,000) and a rare Chamberlains Worcester jug with bearded mask spout, fox-head and scroll handle (est.
IR£2,500–3,000).
In London on 18 November Sotheby's will be offering works from the collection of the late Lord Mountbatten.
Further sales will take place over the winter season and will mostly include works from the private apartments at Broadlands, Hampshire, Mountbatten's home from 1939 to 1979, where rising debts and decreasing visitor numbers have led to the sales.
The principal item to be offered on 18 November is undoubtedly ‘The Iron Forge’ by Joseph Wright of Derby, painted in 1772 and purchased from the artist by Henry, Second Viscount Palmerston, whose father acquired Broadlands.
Exhibited internationally twenty times, it is expected to sell for around £2.5 million ($4.25 million), unless previously purchased for the nation.
On 9 December, a Philips Koninck landscape is being offered (est. £1–1.5 million; $1.7–2.55 million), purchased by the Second Viscount Palmerston for £34 in 1788, and on 25 November, a charming portrait by Anders Zorn of Maud Cassell, mother of Lord Mountbatten's wife Edwina (est. £100,000–150,000; $170,000–255,000).
A rare instance of international twentieth-century art from an English country house is given by three Dalí drawings from the Thirties and Forties.
One, ‘Melancholie’ is inscribed ‘Pour Lady Mountbatten, Hommages de son ami’, signed and dated 1942, and estimated at £30–40,000 (to be offered 1 December).
Silver, furniture and ceramics from Broadlands will be offered in the relevant London sales throughout the season.
London
Rare Gainsborough pastel portrait at Bonhams
LONDON.
One of only seven pastel portraits executed by Thomas Gainsborough, a portrait of Caroline, Fourth Duchess of Marlborough, will be offered at Bonhams on 18 November.
Still in its original frame, the drawing has been consigned by descendents of the sitter's family.
All the seven pastels were executed in Bath between the mid 1760s and 1770s and all seven sitters were also painted in oils over the same period.
The oil of the present sitter now hangs at Woburn while the pastel is the only one of the group to depict the sitter half length, rather than just head and shoulders.
It seems that Gainsborough produced such works as favours for important clients, but only for a short period in his career, later preferring oil on paper for smaller portraits of this sort.
In July this year Sotheby's London offered another of these pastels, a portrait of Elizabeth, Duchess of Buccleuch, which made £40,000 against an estimate of £40–60,000.
The Bonhams sheet is estimated at £50–60,000 ($85,000–102,000).
Dealers & Galleries
The ADAA thirty years on
‘We've cleaned up tax fraud, the selling of fakes, helped recover thefts, and supported freedom of expression’
As the Art Dealers Association of America's annual Armory show drew to an end we talked to Gilbert Edelson, a founder member
NEW YORK city.
Thirty years ago a handful of New York City gallery owners banded together to form the Art Dealers Association of America (ADAA).
A not-for-profit corporation in the state of New York, the ADAA today numbers 133 members in nineteen cities, and has a roster of activities ranging from appraisal services and lobbying efforts, to lecture series and the annual Art Show at the Seventh Regiment Armory on Park Avenue.
Membership is by invitation (dues are less than $1,000 per year) extended only to U.S. dealers in works of European and American fine art painting, sculpture, drawings, and prints from the Renaissance to the present.
Dealers in primitive, tribal, Oriental art, classical antiquities, and objets d'art are excluded.
Members must be reputable experts, in business for at least five years, whose exhibitions substantially contribute to the cultural life of the community.
Though mainly public gallery owners, the ADAA numbers a handful of private dealers as well, admitted because of their stature in the field or because they took their public concerns private.
Former presidents include Alexandre Rosenberg, Pierre Matisse, Klaus Perls, Eugene Thaw, Andre Emmerich, Leo Castelli, Stephen Hahn, Norman Hirschl, and William Acquavella.
For the organisation's thirtieth anniversary, The Art Newspaper spoke with Gilbert S. Edelson, Administrative Vice President and Counsel, about the founding of the ADAA and its role in today's artworld.
Who started the ADAA?
Gilbert Edelson In 1962 I was an associate working with the law firm where the late Ralph Colin was a managing partner.
Ralph believed that the dealers' role was unrecognized, that dealers as a group had a poor reputation.
Having worked closely with many dealers to form his own collection, he knew that good dealers had incredible knowledge and connoisseurship.
But the public didn't understand that.
He decided to start an art dealers organisation, and he asked me to help.
So it was a public relations effort?
It was partly a public relations effort, and partly an effort to get the voice of the dealers heard.
He persuaded the dealers at the time a fiercely independent group of businessmen who didn't like the idea of belonging to any organisations that they needed to be heard by the government, museums, and collectors.
The original members included Alexandre Rosenberg, Klaus Perls, Pierre Matisse, Sidney Janis, Leo Castelli, Stephen Hahn, Norman Hirschl, Andre Emmerich (who is now the president), and a number of dealers who are now gone Martha Jackson, Edith Halpert.
I could go on and on.
What was the specific impetus for the organization?
What really spurred it was abuses in appraisals of works of art.
Since most museums (the Getty excepted) have small acquisitions budgets, most objects come by gift.
The tax law provides for a deduction of the fair market value of the work of art.
There were two problems back then: first, collectors tend to have an inflated idea of the value of their work, and second, since they feared the IRS (Inland Revenue Service) would question any evaluation they gave, they overvalued everything, The IRS got to the point where, because of the abuses, it was prepared to recommend to Congress the abolition of the deduction for donations of works of art.
Someone had to do something.
We went to Washington to talk to the IRS and said, ‘Look, honest donors want a reputable place to get appraisals and we think dealers are best qualified to provide it’.
We devised a system whereby three dealers would be asked to give an independent appraisal, and we would average them for an official evaluation.
That's still the way we do it.
The fee is on a sliding scale according to value, and nobody who appraises for us is paid for it.
The dealers don't get a penny; they do it as a public service.
So this was the primary function of the ADAA at its founding?
There was a second problem, which was fakes.
Today there's not much of a problem, but at that time it was a little more troublesome and there was nobody doing anything about it.
There were fakes of Old Masters, Cézannes, Soutines, and even contemporary work like Jackson Pollocks.
Now Walter Chrysler was an important collector with a marvellous eye who bought some wonderful things.
He was an eccentric individual, and in 1962–63 he opened his own museum in Provincetown, Cape Cod, in which he hung the Chrysler Collection.
It had Courbet, Degas, Corot, Picasso, Braque, Matisse, Delacroix, and it got a very good review in the New York Times.
Ralph [Colin]went to see it, and he said ‘My God, a third of the pictures are beautiful, but I think two-thirds of the pictures are fakes.
They're absolutely dead wrong’.
And this show was going to travel to the National Gallery of Canada, among other places, and then maybe Mr Chrysler might try to sell some of them.
So Ralph got together a group of dealers people like Sidney Janis, Alexandre Rosenberg, Klaus Perls, Pierre Matisse.
They went to see it and came back and had a meeting one night in New York, and they made a list of the fakes.
They called the New York Times and said, ‘We want to tell you quietly that the show you gave a rave review to is filled with fakes’.
When the Times published that story it became a scandale.
The important thing we were concerned with was to keep those fakes off the market, and we were successful in that.
That was followed a few years later by the Meadows situation in Dallas, Texas, where Alger Meadows had bought from two travelling Frenchmen a whole collection of Impressionist and Post-Impressionist works which were all fakes.
They were done by that forger Elmyr de Hory who lived on Ibiza.
Word got out on that, and they were prevented from getting onto the market.
Then there was a big show of Miró in New York in the late Sixties that got a good review in what was then called The Herald Tribune.
Every picture in that gallery show was a fake.
We got together a group of important dealers and they all came over and testified, and the gallery owner said the artist was lying, but in the end the show was closed and the gallery closed.
These were fakes on a massive scale.
Then you could walk up Madison Avenue and see a fake in the window.
What could you do?
Now, with the Art Dealers Association you have a professional group that could call and say to the dealer, ‘Listen, that picture is wrong.
We assume you don't know it, and will do something about it’.
I think the risk of a fake making the rounds today is much much less than it used to be.
Was the ADAA also active in policing the art market for thefts?
Many years ago, if a work was stolen you might report it to the police or the FBI, but there was no way to get out the word to the market.
In the 1960s we started an art theft/loss notification system by which we sent to dealers, auction houses, museums, and police authorities notices of missing works of art.
Later, IFAR [International Foundation for Art Research]was formed and we turned over our files to them.
We continue to work with the police, the FBI, and Interpol on stolen works of art.
Today, how does the ADAA exert its influence and on whom?
We publish a handbook for our members, provide appraisal services, and we're active in legislative matters.
Several years ago, we worked through the New York State Sculpture Bill that makes it necessary for dealers and foundries selling multiples of sculptures to provide complete information on these objects, and warranties that the information is correct.
The same thing was created for prints about ten years ago.
These laws have been adopted by other states, as well.
Now there's the Artists' Rights Bill.
We're in favour of the part that would protect the work of art after it leaves the studio, but we've fought against the resale royalties section that would provide a share of resale profits to go to the artists.
We support whenever we can the interests of museums, both with respect to the tax laws and otherwise.
We periodically make grants to institutions.
We feel very strongly about freedom of expression, so when [in 1989]the NEA withdrew its grant to Artist's Space, within forty-eight hours we gave them $10,000 to replace it.
When [in 1990]the Cincinnati Contemporary Art Center and its director were indicted in the Mapplethorpe case and needed money for their defence, we raised about $50,000 for them in about two days.
And earlier this year we gave $10,000 to Franklin Furnace to show our support for their programme.
Does this money come from membership and appraisal fees?
Some does, and some comes from contributions and grants to the ADAA Foundation, a separate corporation.
We've also made contributions to the Frick Art Reference Library, the Archives of American Art, the Drawing Center, and IFAR, though frankly, we have very little money available for such purposes.
Has the recession taken a toll on the ADAA?
So far we have not lost any member because of the recession, largely because our membership is very stable financially.
But times are not what they were three or five years ago.
The one good thing that's come out of this is that the speculators have been shaken out.
Is the ADAA at odds with the auction houses?
Not really.
The auction houses were very successful in getting a lot of pictures in recent years, but there were a series of auctions with a very high buy-in rate, and pictures were getting publicly burned.
Now it seems a lot more are going to the dealers.
The important thing for us is to promote the good name of dealers, and even more, to promote an interest in art and collecting.
This supports not only the dealers, themselves, but also the artists, and the museums down the road.
Art Basel splits with graphics
BASEL.
After three years of operating under the same roof, the section of Art Basel devoted to contemporary prints will now move to a separate location and take place earlier than the main body of the fair.
This will allow more room in the main section of the fair where a number of innovations will be in evidence next year: a separate section for galleries exhibiting for the first time; a section for photography and publishers and a more spacious layout of stands and aisles.
The multiples section will also be enlarged to encompass artists' posters, videos, livres d'artiste and books on art.
The move to the new space in the Rundhof will also allow for exhibitions and performances of music, theatre and installations.
Edition 4/93 as the graphics section is now called, will take place from 4 to 6 June 1993, while the rest of the fair runs from 16 to 21 June 1993.
In brief: U.S.A.
Adelson galleries expand in Manhattan
NEW YORK.
The Adelson Galleries, which specialises in American Impressionism, has announced its expansion into 2000 extra square feet of exhibition space in the Mark Hotel on East 77th street in Manhattan.
The new space, which adjoins the current gallery, should be ready at the end of the month.
Apart from exhibitions from its stock of artists such as Mary Cassatt, Maurice Prendergast and John Singer Sargent, which Adelson plans to hang in the new gallery, a show of contemporary sculptor Jim Ritchie will be on from 12 November to 5 December.
ACA goes to Munich
NEW YORK.
Contemporary art gallery ACA has opened a branch in Munich on the Maximilianstrasse, the city's premier gallery location.
The Munich partner is Otto Hübner, former partner in the now closed Svetlana and Hübner.
The Munich operation will exhibit US artists represented by the gallery in New York as well as classic moderns such as Max Ernst and German Expressionists from Hübner's own stock.
Currently on show is a retrospective of Theodoros Stamos, to be followed by a show on Tom Wesselman.
There are plans for a Pollock exhibition in collaboration with New York dealer Jason McCoy.
Salander O'Reilly closes Berlin branch
NEW YORK.
According to a recent report in the ARTnewsletter, the New York gallery Salander O'Reilly is closing its Berlin branch after only nine months in that city.
The slow business environment there was cited as a reason for closing while director Lawrence Salander felt that too much time and input was required of him and his partner in order to get the project up and running.
The firm's Beverly Hills and New York outlets continue with business as usual including ‘The Art of William Blake’ in New York from November to December, with a catalogue by Martin Butlin of the Tate Gallery.
Gutekunst and Co.
Inc. open in New York
NEW YORK.
Defying the recession, a new Old Master gallery has opened in New York called Gutekunst and Co.
Founded and run by forty year old Jack Kilgore, it is a logical development of his previous interests as a collector and his successive positions as Assistant Vice-President of Christie's New York Old Master department and as a director of Richard Feigen's New York gallery.
Kilgore's speciality is unusual Dutch and Flemish pictures, among them a Leonard Bramer ‘Adoration of the Magi’ in unusually good condition for this master, which will be featured in the upcoming Bramer exhibition; Jan Steen's ‘Hagar and Ishmael in the Wilderness’; a ‘Self Portrait in Armour’by Wallerant Vaillant’; and ‘The Sense of Taste’by Jan Cossiers.
Gutekunst and Co. is at 154 East 71st St. NY.
Tel: 212 650 1149.
In brief: Europe
Meissen from Meissen at Asprey's
LONDON.
Asprey's have negotiated to show Meissen porcelain, mostly the figures, from the museum of the Meissen factory, the direct descendant of Augustus the Strong's factory, recently saved from a Japanese buy-out by renationalisation by the state of Saxony.
The museum, which is at present being refurbished, also made available its collections for the film ‘Utz’, shown earlier this year, about an obsessive collector of Meissen porcelain.
The pieces on loan to Asprey's, from 26 November to 24 December, are eighteenth-nineteenth-and twentieth-century in date.
The shop will be offering its own stock of Meissen for sale.
Callot in St James's
LONDON.
The fourth centenary of the birth of the great seventeenth-century printmaker and draughtsman Jacques Callot was celebrated in his home town of Nancy earlier this year while a selection of his prints was also shown at the National Gallery of Washington.
Now print dealer Christopher Mendez in Duke Street is honouring the artist with an exhibition of fifty-two works including an impression of his most  famous print ‘La Tentation de Saint Antoine’.
A catalogue has been produced to accompany the exhibition, which runs from 24 November to 18 December.
Foreau rediscovered at the Galerie de la Scala
PARIS.
A retrospective of works by the long neglected and little known French painter Henri Foreau (1866–1938) is being held by Paris dealers Marie-Christine Carlioz and Hélène Bucaille Feau in Galerie de la Scala from 18 November to 11 December.
Only the second ever show devoted to the artist, this one will feature forty works including two oils, drawings and large and small format watercolours at prices ranging from FFr4,500 to FFr25,000.
Foreau was a favourite pupil and a life long friend of painter Henri Harpignies (1819–1916).
His eminently picturesque and highly competent views of Paris and Versailles are also the subject of a book by Edith Herment and Eric Desmarest, recently published by Les Editions de l'Amateur in Paris.
Moscow gallery decides to form its own non-State museum of modern art
MOSCOW.
The gallery M'ARS has announced its intention to establish a non-state museum of modern art on the basis of its own not-for-sale collection.
The gallery was founded in 1988 by a group of like-minded Moscow artists.
Most of the profits from the sale of art works have gone towards the formation of the collection.
Many works have been acquired free of charge; for example, Leonid Purygin donated one of his last six works.
M'ARS specialise in a distinctive form of traditionalism, close to surrealism.
It appears that the gallery has a real chance of organising its museum; the city authorities have almost given their consent to leases on two buildings in the centre of Moscow.
Schreuder moves to Amsterdam
The Art Dealers Ren Schreuder BV, specialising in Old Master paintings of the Dutch and Flemish Schools, have moved their premises from Aerdenhout near Haarlem to a sumptuous property on the Keizersgracht in the heart of Amsterdam.
The move coincided with the publication of a catalogue marking the fifth anniversary of their firm.
(Ren Schreuder BV, Keizersgracht 241, 1016 EA Amsterdam).
Partridge shows knives and forks
LONDON.
Partridge Fine Arts Plc, one of London's most prestigious furniture dealers, will be holding their first exhibition on a single theme from 25 November.
Organised by director Timothy Schroder, ‘Inspired Variations the decorative table silver of the nineteenth century’ will be a largely selling exhibition of around eighty items with prices ranging from £100 ($170) upwards.
Mainly purchased by Mr Schroder in the UK over the last two or three years, the pieces include crumb spoons, sorbet servers, fish knives and forks, butter spades and other Victorian inventions, produced in a range of styles from neo-Gothic to rococo revival.
Partridge has previously only held annual exhibitions of recent acquisitions; a thematic exhibition of relatively low cost items was, Mr Schroder  conceded , an attempt to ‘broaden the market’ in these difficult times.
Paris
Chic, big spenders and a £1 million Ingres
A top quality Biennale des Antiquaires despite a backdrop of economic gloom
PARIS.
The devaluation of sterling, the lira and the peseta, Italian austerity measures, referendum jitters in France, a feeble dollar and no rich Americans around, news that President Mitterrand had cancer, massive attacks on the French franc by speculators: short of nuclear war, the economic backdrop for this year's splendid Biennale des Antiquaires in the Grand Palais from 17 September to 4 October could not have been worse.
Yet splendid it was in quality, and business was indeed done, despite catastrophic rumours in the press that certain Paris dealers would have to file for bankruptcy when the show closed.
The 120 participants made an unprecedented financial effort themselves, spending almost FFr50 million on a Biennale marked by a surprisingly elegant, italianate style set by Italian theatre designer Pier Luigi Pizzi.
Dealers such as Jean Gismondi of Paris were unstinting in their praise of the chic it lent to the event.
Roughly speaking, objects and furniture under a value of around FFr 300,000 sold easily, and dealers who aimed at modest margins fared well.
In paintings, particularly well represented this year, the FFr1 million mark remained a barrier beyond which clients chose to go home and think.
Dealers found collectors haggling harder than ever before and far more confidential in their buying.
‘The flashiness has gone out of collecting, the show-off period of the late 1980s is over, and we're back to discretion, thank God’, said Adam Williams of the New York Old Master dealers Newhouse.
Big, rich art lovers did come Waring Hopkins of the Paris modern painting gallery Hopkins-Thomas, said the fair had allowed him to meet all of his regular clients.
Hopkins-Thomas sold five paintings and every major European collector of drawings stopped at least to think about their magnificent FFr10 million 1859 Ingres drawing of comtesse d'Agoult and her daughter Claire.
With turnover having been so sluggish for two years some works at the Biennale had been déjà vu at other fairs.
But overall quality, everyone agreed, had never been so high.
The six Antiquaires à Paris dealers, returning to the Biennale after six year's absence, brought some great eighteenth-century French furniture with them.
Old Master dealers Colnaghi, present for the first time, contributed to the outstanding quality of the paintings on display while specialist fields such as Art Deco, Chinese art, old books and porcelain were all represented by leading dealers and top goods.
At the Orangerie Italiana 1992
‘Florence prevailing over Pisa’ after Giambologna.
Maiolica, San Quirico, Siena, first quarter of the eighteenth century.
To be shown on the stand of Antiquus, London, at the Orangerie Italiana 1992 which takes place at the Accademia Italiana from 9 to 18 December.
Around 150 Italian works of art will be shown by around forty dealers and galleries, ranging from antiquities to nineteenth-century paintings, about with prices from £500 to over £1 million.
Accompanying events will include four lectures on aspects of Italian art and the Leonardo d'Oro prize awarded to the dealer who has made the most important new find or reattribution in the field of Italian art
Art Cologne contracts into a predominantly German fair
COLOGNE.
The twenty-sixth Art Cologne (12–18 November) will show 270 galleries, representing around twenty countries.
The depression in the art market, and a growing diffidence among gallery owners where fairs are concerned, evident in the run up to the FIAC fair in Paris, looks set to turn the Cologne fair into a predominantly home-grown event.
Of the galleries taking part 180 are German, while many star galleries in the States, England and France declined to attend.
Dénise René, who is well known for her support of constructivist art during her forty years as a gallery owner in Paris, will be present however as winner of the Preis Art Cologne of DM20,000 (see Around the Galleries, Cologne, p. 33).
The contingent from London includes Laure Genillard, Gimpel Fils, Annely Juda, Victoria Miro and Reynolds and Todd.
Very few galleries are bothering to make the trip from the States and the three or four that are coming are outnumbered by galleries from former East Germany.
The current  difficulties in the market have one advantage they act in favour of younger artists whose work sells at more affordable prices.
As in other years there will be an exhibition of young German artists, in this instance born between 1953 and 1968.
…and Cologne's breakaway ‘Unfair’ is for new galleries
COLOGNE.
Last November the consensus among Cologne's younger art dealers was that the annual Art Fair had become too much of an good thing.
So, concurrent with this year's Art Cologne (see above) Galerie Tanja Grünert and Galerie Christian Nagel have launched an alternative, known colloquially as the ‘The Unfair’.
Says Michael Janson, a director at Grünert, ‘The first Cologne Art Fair in 1967 was held in Gurzenich, with about eighteen to twenty galleries participating.
We think it's time to try to create a new showcase for young galleries.’
The site of the Unfair is an old industrial building close to the main train station in Ehrenfeld, a section of Cologne slightly outside the centre, but still close to the main gallery district, the Belgischen Viertel.
The building is illuminated by natural light from vast roof-lights, to be supplemented by large industrial lights.
Participants will not be limited to Cologne dealers, but will include gallerists from Europe and the United States.
The provisional list includes Anne de Villepoix and Jennifer Flay from Paris, Bleich Rossi and Artelier from Graz, Metropol and Galerie Jänner from Vienna, Fons Welters from Amsterdam, and Bruno Brunnet and Barbara Weiss from Berlin.
From New York are expected Matthew Marks, Andrea Rosen, American Fine Arts, Pat Hearn, Feature, Lisa Spellman of 303 and Nordenstadt-Skarsted of New York and Stockholm.
Brian Butler and Tom Solomon are coming from Los Angeles, and Jack Hanley from San Francisco.
Cologne stalwarts include Aurel Scheibler, Daniel Buchholz (who will also have a booth at the main fair), Esther Schipper, and of course, Nagel and Grünert.
Enquiries about attending the alternative fair should be addressed to Heike Kempken, Richard Wagnerstr. 4, 5000 Cologne 1, Tel. 221– 25 21 93.
Faxes may be sent to 221–25 71 311.
The fair itself will take place at Ehrenfeldgürtel 88–94, 5000 Cologne 30.
Christopher Wood shows in New York
NEW YORK.
Christopher Wood, the London based dealer in Victorian and pre-Raphaelite art, is hosting an exhibition of eighteenth-and nineteenth-century British watercolours with particular reference to architectural designs at the Shepherd Gallery, New York (until 28 November).
Wood, whose company is now owned by the Mallett group, has shown at the Shepherd Gallery housed in an entirely appropriate  nineteenth-century building with period interiors on numerous occasions.
Mr Wood noted that the taste for English watercolours had developed considerably in the US over the last ten years through the support of the Paul Mellon Foundation as well as the efforts of dealers like himself.
Included in the present show are views by Ruskin, Thomas Shotter Boys and William Turner of Oxford, garden pieces by Helen Allingham and Lilian Stannard and an interesting group of interiors and architectural designs including a group of designs by J. D. Crace, together with work by Joseph Nash, Birket Foster and George Pyne.
Christopher Wood's last New York exhibition on this theme was held at the Shepherd in 1985 and he felt the present time to be right for another one, particularly given the slackness of the London market at present.
American collectors, he noted, are ‘wonderfully eclectic’ in comparison to their British counterparts, willing to purchase a work outside their normal field of interest.
Art LA/92: this year's news
LOS ANGELES.
Now in its seventh year, the Los Angeles contemporary art fair will take place from 3 to 6 December.
Around eighty galleries have confirmed so far that they will be attending more than this time last year and the organisers are presenting a positive front in the light of the art market recession.
Around one hundred galleries are expected to have signed up by the closing date and attendance figures are expected to be around the usual 100,000.
Galleries participating this year will include Galerie Furstenberg, Paris, Gemini GEL Los Angeles; Walter Bischoff Galerie, Stuttgart; and Contemporary Art Forum, London.
In general the number of European galleries participating is fairly low and the majority are from Los Angeles or Maine.
Accompanying this year's fair will be an exhibition of the work of young Austrian artists entitled ‘Radical Surface: Individual Positions’, organised by Dr Lorand Hegyi of Vienna's Museum Moderner Kunst in conjunction with the Modern Art Dealers Assocation of Austria.
Fifteen artists' work will be included.
Meanwhile the Los Angeles Municipal Art Gallery is presenting a city-wide exhibition sponsored by BMW called ‘LAX: The Los Angeles Exhibiton’ at eight different venues on the work of contemporary Los Angeles artists.
This is the first of a series of biennial exhibitions which will include painting, sculpture, photography, installation and video.
Participating will be the Fisher Gallery, University of Southern California; the Japanese American Cultural and Community Center; Los Angeles Contemporary Exhibitions; the City's Municipal Art Gallery; Plaza de la Raza; Otis/Parsons School of Art and Design; Santa Monica Museum of Art and Wight Gallery, University of California, Los Angeles.
Around the galleries
A selection of the commercial shows on this November
New York
Feigen shows surrealist Pierre Roy
Art Spiegelman returns at St Etienne
Among the Surrealists one of the first and one of the least known was Pierre Roy.
He showed in the first official Surrealist exhibition in Paris in 1925 and the following year he had his first solo show.
That event had the imprimatur of no less a figure than Louis Aragon, one of the founders of the movement, who wrote an uncompromisingly surrealist preface for it in which he spoke of the rock candy sticks which ‘emerge from the earth at every seismic shock’ and toasted Félix Faure, the President of the French Republic who died, in 1899, in the arms of a courtesan.
Roy's paintings, influenced by Giorgio de Chirico, typically align ambiguously associated common objects, sometimes in a landscape, sometimes in an interior, against what he referred to (in an autobiographical statement prepared for the Museum of Modern Art) as ‘the light blue sky with feather-like clouds between Angers and the sea’ a sky beloved to him from childhood days.
Richard Feigen the high profile dealer who used to show the quick among artists back in the 1960s but who now specializes in the dead (so much easier to cope with!) has had the bright idea of mounting, this month, the first Pierre Roy exhibition in the United States in over fifty years.
And that cirrus-strewn sky is much in evidence in the show.
An especially striking example of it appears in ‘The Metric System’(1930), a largish canvas on loan for the occasion from the Arensberg Collection at the Philadelphia Museum of Art.
Other paintings come from the Indiana University Museum of Art in Bloomington, the Museum of Modern Art and private collections on both sides of the Atlantic.
A fully illustrated catalogue contains the text of the Museum of Modern Art's autobiographical essay composed in English by the artist shortly before his death in 1950 and never before published as well as an interview by Mr Feigen with the film director Billy Wilder, who visited the artist in the 1940s.
The show opens on 2 November and continues until 22 January 1993.
Surrealism's often alarming tentacles reached far and deep in the history of modern painting, but nowhere was its influence more multiculturated than in the art of Wifredo Lam.
Born of parents who mixed three heritages between them African, Hispanic and Chinese he grew up in Cuba and subsequently went on to live in Spain, Italy, Mexico and the United States, stopping long enough in France in the late Thirties to be bouleversé by Surrealism, and by Picasso's ‘Les Demoiselles d'Avignon’ in particular.
At the moment New Yorkers can survey the length and breadth of his achievement at the galleries of the Americas Society on Park Avenue and coming up in January they can have a second look in a big retrospective of the artist's work at the Studio Museum in Harlem.
Meanwhile appetites for Lam can be supplemented by a small show of drawings (the artist's primary medium) at the Galerie Lelong (10 November to 23 December).
They've also got up a selection of works by contemporary Latin American artists.
A kind of Hispanicism Triumphant proclaims itself in the high-key paintings Rafael Ferrer makes of the landscapes and locals of his native Puerto Rico.
He also does painted constructions, some of which have been known to hang from the ceiling and others to rise up from the floor like tents.
To see what he has been up to lately, visit Nancy Hoffman before 2 December.
‘Primitive’ is a vexed term these days in relation to both tribal art and the work of the early modern masters in the West.
‘Primitivism’ the big show that addressed the relationship between the two a few years ago at the Museum of Modern Art got the debate off to a controversial and often acrimonious start.
Kent this month and until 3 December does a reprise of the issues in their current ‘Primitive and Modern Masterworks’ show.
Works by Senufo, Urhobo, Bangwa, Kuba and Baule, among other examples from Africa, are juxtaposed with appropriate works by Picabia, Picasso, Schmidt-Rottluff, Laurens, Archipenko and others.
(Wilfredo Lam, who would have filled the bill, is not included.)
A recent phenomenon in art is the husband and wife team: think of Helen and Newton Harrison or Hilla and Bernd Becher.
Then there is Claes Oldenberg.
For years he was just plain Claes Oldenberg.
Then he got married and became, on occasion, Claes Oldenberg and Coosje van Bruggen.
Think how different art history would be if we had had Peter Paul and Helena Rubens, Pablo and Jacqueline Picasso or Barnett and Annalee Newman.
A pioneer in this department is Ed Kienholz, who some years ago became Ed and Nancy Kienholz and not just on the marriage certificate.
Their latest collaborative effort a huge construction extravaganza called ‘The Merry-Go-World or Begat by Chance and the Wonder Horse Trigger’ takes up most of the available space at Louver starting on the 24th and going around until Christmas.
It is the result of a six-year trek around the world by the Kienholzes which took them from an Indian reservation in South Dakota to China and got them thinking about how the chance of one's birth is all important in one's life.
Visitors to the gallery may spin a wheel of fortune and wait for it to stop and illuminate one or another of eight room tableaux.
East, West, rich, poor it's the famous fickle finger all over again.
At the Galerie St Etienne the risen star of ‘comix’(which combines art with the comic strip), Art Spiegelman, has a one-man show from 17 November until 9 January 1993.
Subtitled ‘The Road to Maus’ it follows on from the exhibition held by MoMA last spring of Spiegelman's drawings for his two published volumes on the Holocaust, told in comic strip form with mice, cats and pigs as the protagonists (see The Art Newspaper No. 16, March 1992, p.15).
Meanwhile Marion Goodman continues to show the British sculptor Richard Deacon with new work that continues until 14 November.
This is the fourth  exhibition with the gallery for Deacon who was also seen this year at Kassel's Documenta IX and at the Carnegie International.
The André Emmerich Gallery is celebrating the recent addition of Karel Appel to its list of artists with an exhibition of recent pictures in all the mediums that he explores.
Oils on canvas, paintings on paper, paintings on carved wood panels and large-scale drawings can be seen in the fifth and sixth floor galleries from 14 November until 31 December.
‘Ocean Park’ is the title given to dozens of paintings done over as many years by Richard Diebenkorn.
The works, of course, are abstract but the recurring allure of the title for the artist, with its two words suggestive of expansiveness, geometry and large areas of modulated colour, seems clear.
At Gagosian, from 5 November to 9 January, a selection of ‘Ocean Parks’ from the years between 1965 and 1985 are on view, some of them on loan from museums (Yale, the Metropolitan, MoMA) and some from private collections.
Jack Flam has written the accompanying catalogue.
The term abstraction, of course, covers a multitude of if not sins at least variations of severity, from the wholly recognizable to the utterly ‘pure’(one stroller to another recently on the Battery Park City esplanade in lower Manhattan, noticing R.M. Fisher's fanciful gateway sculpture: ‘Oh look!
An abstract arch’!).
Matthew Weinstein, at Sonnabend from 14 November to 19 December, makes abstractions aggressive, colourful, even violent in spirit, using enamels and glazes and flirting with notions of vulgarity in which the imagery of the tattoo parlour hearts, skulls, etc. sometimes peep through.
Tattoos also appear, of all places, in the new work of Christian Eckart, which may cause some of his devotees to do double-takes worthy of Edward Everett Horton.
Previously his work seemed to be strictly about the inter-relationship of material, colour and shape, but in his new ‘Shadow Paintings’ at Rubin Spangle until 18 November tattoos, car explosions and other scenic bits coalesce behind veils of white paint.
Known, but somehow often overlooked, is the fact that Ellsworth Kelly he of the precise abstract geometries and the monochromatic fields has always kept a pencil within easy reach, taking it up regularly over the years to make line drawings, uninflected by modelling, chiefly of plants and flowers.
In them clarity and fluency combine in the spirit of Matisse.
He began doing them in the earliest days of his career down on Coenties Slip in the late Fifties (where the drawing classes held in Fred Mitchell's loft became legendary) and has kept steadily at them ever since.
Until the end of the month a selection of them spanning a forty-year period may be seen at Matthew Marks.
Kelly also has two shows of brand new work on the boards these days: one, of paintings at Blum Helman from 11 November to 2 January, and another at Castelli from 21 November to 19 December in which he abandons the wall in favour of a large piece meant to be looked down upon and circumambulated.
Previous floor paintings, done in Europe, were in black and white but the one for New York is in colour.
Painting the figure, of course, continues apace, practiced by those who have devoted lifetimes to it and by those who are only beginning.
Philip Pearlstein can be seen in the new Hirschl & Adler space in SoHo from 7 November to 5 December, Eric Fischl at the newly-configured Mary Boone gallery from 7 November to 19 December and Volker Stelzmann, who matured as an artist in East Germany, shows ‘Berlin Today’ a series of twenty-five paintings in the spacious new quarters of the Forum Gallery.
Nancy Chunn shows paintings from her ongoing ‘History of China’ series at Ronald Feldman (until the 28th) and David Saunders, who makes small paintings of faces or still life objects on surfaces which have been routed in low relief, shows new work at Borgenicht (11 November -5 December).
George Tooker has been portraying brooding figures caught in foreboding psychological situations for many years.
Since, in fact, Paul Cadmus introduced him to egg tempera in 1943, a medium he was to make very much his own.
Marisa del Re has selected, from a lifetime's production, a group of works some lent from museums and private collections under the rubric ‘George Tooker's Women’.
The exhibition (until 5 December) also marks the publication of a catalogue raisonné by Thomas Garver.
Bruce Connor, the West Coast assemblagist and film maker and old friend of Ed Kienholz before he became Ed and Nancy shows new ink-blot drawings and three-dimensional pieces at Curt Marcus beginning 5 November; Saint Clair Cemin, who seems to be everywhere these days, shows new pieces of his allusionary, often highly coloured sculptures at Kasmin starting 3 November; and Pace, uptown, shows Louise Nevelson in ‘Black, White and Gold’ while downtown installs new John Chamberlains in black, white and chrome.
All these shows continue until 28 November.
Jason McCoy, all this month, has a show of Jackson Pollock drawings among which are two large gouaches which surfaced too late for inclusion in the artist's catalogue raisonné in 1976.
Moon Vessel, a painting from 1945, is shown along with the works on paper.
‘Pollock in the Mid-Forties: A Close-Up’ is accompanied by an illustrated catalogue with an introduction by Elizabeth Frank.
To celebrate the November Presidential election two galleries have come up with national election year shows.
Sally Hawkins has got ‘Ballots or Bullets’, curated by G. Roger Denson with works by Marilyn Minter, Maura Sheehan, Bill Schiffer, Lois Nesbit and that darling of Senator Helms, Andreas Serrano.
Dintenfass, uptown, has invited artists from the P.P.O.W. gallery to join it in a show called simply ‘VOTE!’
Philip King, Philip Evergood and Will Barnett join a downtown crew made up of Carrie Mae Weems, Martin Wong, Christie Rupp, Paul Marcus and others.
Both shows run through the end of the month.
LONDON
Jacklin at Marlborough and Oxford's MoMA
Scully is centrepiece of Cork Street's Open Weekend
After a dull launch to the new season, London's commercial art galleries pick up speed with a really exciting list of new exhibitions.
Commanding particular attention is the series of new paintings which Sean Scully is showing at Waddington (4 November-23 December).
It is his first gallery exhibition in this country for more than five years and follows the exhilarating survey which took place at the Whitechapel Art Gallery in 1989.
Underlining the importance of the occasion, Leslie Waddington has made available both his corner space and his main gallery, usually reserved for a changing display of the dealer's stock of modern masterpieces.
For the present exhibition, Scully, who has important museum surveys at the Fort Worth Museum of Modern Art, where he will be uniting the ‘Catherine’ paintings, in May 1993, and at the Hôtel des Arts in Paris in September 1993, has created five large new compositions in his studio in Deptford, as well as several seductive smaller canvases and a suite of pastels and watercolours.
The large canvases include two new chequerboard compositions, with inserted panels resembling prayer mats laid out on a tiled floor, reminders of his visit to Morocco in 1991, when he was making a film of Matisse's work in Tangiers for Channel 4.
In other galleries in Cork Street, Victoria Miro is showing the work of Karin Knefel, Michel van Ofen and Andreas Shon (3 November-18 December), three students of Gerhard Richter.
There are six new graphic works based on Monet's waterlily compositions and printed in small editions on stainless steel in hand-painted wooden frames by Roy Lichtenstein at Mayor (16 November-23 December).
William Darby has curated a loan exhibition of works by Sickert, placing particular emphasis upon his theatre and music hall subjects and including drawings and etchings, for Browse and Darby (26 November-23 December).
RAAB is showing a new series of canvases created in New York by Rainer Fetting (to 25 November) and depicting views of the city from his rooftop studio with further developments of the taxi themes explored in his last exhibition, and other dealers are mounting mixed exhibitions of works by their artists to coincide with Cork Street's Open Weekend on 28–29 November, when galleries will remain open for business on both days.
To coincide with a survey of his New York Urban Portraits which has opened at Oxford's Museum of Modern Art (see p. 15), Marlborough is exhibiting twenty-five oil paintings completed by Bill Jacklin on Coney Island during the last eighteen months (to 29 November).
Subjects include a bar, the boardwalk and bathers in the sea, a theme which has prompted Jacklin's most abstract meditations since the drawings which he showed with Nigel Greenwood twenty years ago.
Marlborough's graphic department is publishing a new series of etchings and monoprints proofed at Patricia Branstead's studio in New York.
Marlborough's list of British artists has been strengthened by the recent addition of Christopher Lebrun, formerly contracted to Nigel Greenwood.
Near Cork Street, there are two exhibitions of the work of Stanley Spencer taking place to coincide with the publication of Keith Bell's catalogue of the artist's oil paintings.
Bernard Jacobson, the leading dealer involved in the recent revival of interest in Spencer's art, is showing sixteen canvases (to 5 December) including two important triptychs ‘Souvenir of Switzerland’(1934) and ‘The Resurrection: Waking Up’(1945)‘The Sabbath Breakers’(1952) and a late self-portrait (1951).
Richard Nagy is mounting a related exhibition of forty of Spencer's drawings at the Dover Street Gallery (to 5 December).
His selection contains compositional studies for the Burghclere Chapel and ‘The Marriage at Cana’ as well as a fine pencil self-portrait (1931).
In Dering Street, Anthony d'Offay shows the four large abstract pictures which Elsworth Kelly exhibited at this year's Documenta (to 20 November), with an exhibition of an important new group of works by Gilbert & George opening at the end of the month (26 November-29 January 1993).
Titled ‘The New Democratic Pictures’, a selection of which were previewed at the Aarhus Kunstmuseum in Denmark in September, they feature the first nude portraits of the artists.
The second part of ‘And What Do You Represent?’ at Anthony Reynolds includes Gerard Hemsworth, Olivier Mossett and Michael Scott (to 14 November).
Christian Boltanski's new installation at Lisson (to 21 November) is a set of portraits of the autumn's new enrolment of students at Westminster Community School.
The gallery looks across its playground.
Boltanski photographed each of 143 pupils when he visited London in September and he is testing the way in which art is created by its context by also sending the portraits to the pupils' parents in return for the fee which would have been charged by the school photographer.
With this ambitious new project, the exhibition includes three historical works, ‘Images Modèles’(1975), ‘Compositions Fleuris’ and ‘Compositions Decoratifs’(1976–77).
Grenville Davey, a Lisson artist and finalist for this year's Turner Prize, is showing six recent or new sculptures at Chisenhale (10 November-13 December).
They have been created from materials not previously associated with his production and include wood and mirror.
Karsten Schubert is mounting a retrospective exhibition of paintings and works on paper by Victor Willing (19 November-19 December), which will also be seen at Richard Salmon's studio in South Edwardes Square.
Deryck Healey's ‘Meditation Works’, a series of twenty-five dark and luminous works on paper pinned to the wall like Japanese banners, are showing at Long and Ryle (4–28 November).
Created during the five months which the artist spent in Santa Fe at the end of last year and the beginning of this year, they are executed in oil inks applied by brush or rollers and smudged by Healey's hand, their veils of rich colour capturing the mood of, rather than representing, the broad landscape of New Mexico and its dawn and dusk effects.
Adam Lowe's fourth exhibition at Pomeroy Purdy (to 21 November), shortly to be retitled Purdy Hicks in recognition of the promotion of Rebecca Hicks to director, is a strong series of thirteen new abstract canvases known as ‘The Verso Paintings’.
They were created in oil and acrylic paints and in resin, their boldly scarred surfaces resulting from the careful removal of upper layers in a technique which Lowe compares to the detachment of frescoes from their supports.
The exhibition includes ‘Registration Marks’, six new etchings made by Print Centre Publications.
The following exhibitions were discussed in last month's issue and should be noted: sculpture and drawings by Eduardo Chillida at Annely Juda (to 14 November), works on paper by Bridget Riley at Karsten Schubert (to 14 November), seven sculptures and a strong selection of graphic works by Elizabeth Frink at Lumley Cazalet (to 13 November), ‘Three Score and Ten’, the seventieth birthday exhibition of Albert Irvin at Gimpel (to 21 November), the second part of Adrian Wiczniewski's new paintings, drawings and neon sculpture at William Jackson (to 21 November), Andy Goldsworthy's clay floor at Turske-Hue-Williams (to 27 November), the large sculptures of Jeff Lowe at Maak (to 20 November), Fantastic Works on Paper at RAAB's Millbank branch and the paintings of Jean-Michel Basquiat and Robert Combas at Crane (to 3 December).
Cologne
Spiegel hosts René
Veteran gallerists link up
As the 26th annual Cologne Art Fair approaches, it seems only appropriate to pay tribute to those veteran galleries founded before the Fair's inception in 1967 which have continued to thrive.
Of premier importance is the legendary Galerie der Spiegel, founded in 1945 by Hein and Eva Stünke, as artists began to return to Cologne after the war.
Dr Stünke inventor of Art Cologne, doctor of philosophy and German literature, several times chief functionary of Documenta, and producer since 1945 of books, print folios, catalogues and Editions Mat has over nearly five decades assembled an extraordinarily eclectic roster of artists.
Too encyclopaedic to enumerate fully here, the selection has always been based upon Stünke's personal feeling for quality.
In the early Fifties, Stünke combined shows of Klee and Kirschner with exhibitions of artists of the Ecole de Paris: Soulages, Schneider, Hartung and Poliakoff, along with their German counterparts, Horst Antes and Dieter Krieg.
In the Sixties Galerie der Spiegel was one of the first in Cologne to show Americans such as Rauschenberg, Motherwell, Lichtenstein, the émigré Josef Albers, and Christo, as well as the European New Realists, Spoerri, Armand and Yves Klein.
In the Seventies Stünke inaugurated relationships with English artists David Hockney, Allen Jones and Ben Nicholson, at the same time showing Germans such as Lüpertz and Girke.
From 10 November until 6 January Galerie der Spiegel will launch a homage to this year's winner of the best gallery award made by the Federal Association of German art dealers each year during Art Cologne (from 12 to 18 November).
This year's winner is the French gallerist Denise René, established in Paris since 1945 and a close contact of Dr Stünke's since the Fifties.
The works selected by René span the years 1925–90, and include Albers, Arp, Cahn, the Delaunays, Kupka, Mortensen, Picabia, Seuphor, Tauber-Arp, Tinguely, Vasarely and Cruz-Diez.
Another notable, if rather more junior long-term presence in Cologne is Galerie Jöllenbeck, founded in Essen in 1965 (as Galerie Thelen), and moved to Cologne in 1969.
Although its founder, Karl-Ernst Jöllenbeck died in 1991, the gallery remains a vital force under the directorship of Michael Nickel.
Jöllenbeck's programme in the Seventies was varied in nature and nationality, showing Armand, American Photo-realists, the English artist John Newling and the Dutch artist Paul Thek, among others.
Since the early Eighties the gallery's emphasis has narrowed to younger German artists, particularly sculptors including Ingrid Roscheck, Manfred Müller (who makes geometric wall-reliefs of cardboard and paper), Josef Wolf (a Cologne sculptor who creates configurations of standing stones from stones found in the Eifel), Rune Mields (whose black-and-white acrylic paintings incorporate hieroglyphics, Islamic decoration, and invented systems of numbers, handwriting, and typography), and Frank Dornseif,(whose three-dimensional ‘drawings’, made of the thick iron wire used in building construction, were exhibited this October).
Until 5 December, wax sculptures by Rainer Barzen will be on display, to be followed, from 11 December until 30 January 1993 by Michael Witlatschil's steel obelisks and crescents.
Since 1988, Polish art dealer Rafael Jablonka (Venloer Straße 21) has composed a fluid, provocative programme of artists whose correspondence to one another‘makes sense in your head, but has no visual connections: it is not a package deal’.
Jablonka's elective affinities include Thomas Bernstein, Hans Brändi, Thorsten Ebeling, Stefan Ettlinger, Katharina Fritsch, Peter Halley, Roni Horn, Mike Kelley, Richard Prince, Meyer Vaisman, Lawrence Weiner and Rombouts-Droste.
Until 21 November Jablonka will show new works by New York artist Carroll Dunham, which include two series of three large paintings in psychedelic forms and colours, with the second group featuring appliqués of styrofoam bubbles.
In Jablonka's upstairs space are two suites of Dunham's drawings, totalling fourteen.
Next door at Venloer Straße 19, Tanja Grünert has mounted a vast accrochage of gallery artists, including sculptures and objects by Michael Landy, Raimund Luckwald, Tobias Hauser, Harald Braun, Rolf Walz, Meg Cranston, Sarah Lucas, Abigail Lane, Dan Petermans, Thomas Locher, Iskender Yediler and Nayland Blake, and paintings by Kevin Wolff, Beate Günther, Peter Zimmermann, Julio Rondo, Joe Scanlan and Rudolf Stingel (from 6 to 29 November).
Also worth noting in the Belgischen Viertel is Galerie Tanit's exhibition, from 13 November until the end of the year, of black and white paintings of idealised, archaic landscapes, and terracotta ‘Holy Mountain’ sculptures under glass vitrines by the Italian artist Arcangelo.
At Hansaring 77, Désiré Feuerle is featuring the first one-woman show in Germany of Italian artist Ilaria Bona.
Bona's gifts are Protean: startling, outsized necklaces and molecule-like objects in white wax contrast with careful, Dürer-like renderings of plants and vegetables, in pencil on white-painted wood.
One wall of the gallery is papered with her collages, made from watercolours and photographs, on view until 10 November.
At the same address, gallerist Karin Bolz has filled her salon-like suite of carefully restored nineteenth-century rooms with another first one-woman show: five large graphite drawings and three sculptures by Andrea Zaumseil.
Zaumseil's drawings are characterised by massive, brooding organic forms with a velvety, sensuous surface.
Her sculptures are hybrids of organic and machine forms: cylinders punctuated with round apertures and protuberances.
Bolz, who has been in Cologne since 1986, specialises in drawing and painting by young artists, among them Ernst Caramelle, V.A.
Wölfl, Winfried Virnich, Silke Leverkuhne, and Alfio Giuffrida, and also shows works by Nicola de Maria and the late Joseph Beuys.
Since 1988, Ulrich Mueller has possessed the only art gallery in Klettenberg, one of the few sections of Cologne with Art Nouveau buildings undamaged during the war.
Mueller opted for splendid isolation at Breibergstr. 1, largely because of the unusual character of the space: a sweeping, semi-circular wall of windows at street-level and a downstairs workshop for art restoration, which is Mueller's first career.
Recent exhibitions, often accompanied by catalogues, have included the young Cologne sculptor, Tina Haase, who makes snail-like objects from sponge rubber and old fabric, and Tatlin-like towers of spindly, found pieces of wood.
From 12 November until 31 December, Mueller will present the first of three annual exhibitions of paintings by Edgar Hofschen, born in 1941 and whose restrained abstractions are allied in style to those of Raimund Girke.
The ‘92 show deals with Hofschen's work from 1968 to 1970: this and the subsequent shows will be recorded in three unified catalogues.
Finally, at Aurel Scheibler from 12 November until 31 December will be a one-man show of American artist Curtis Anderson.
Living in Cologne since 1984 he also show at Galerie Jule Kewenig.
Anderson has evolved a system of private insignia derived from sources as diverse as late nineteenth-century Prussian maps and ancient Japanese and Chinese emblems, which he fuses into collages printed, variously, on cloth, silver or lead.
The collages at Scheibler are composed of black and white ink drawings; onto these Anderson has applied anatomical elements from early twentieth-century medical plates, reprinted on coloured paper by a copper heliogravure process.
PARIS
Connecticut artists hit town
Photos by Mercadier and Warhol
What is it that links the baseball players, boxers and other athletes, drawn with hyper-realist attention to detail, that people the canvases of Jessica Gandolf; a combination of sexual imagery and social tension that characterises the work of John Carey; strident colours and hand-written captions that tell of love and men in the paintings of Irène Hardwicke; the domestic interiors and nature studies for which Katherine Spitzhoff uses egg-based tempera to give a high-gloss finish; the pictures of John Spinks, a professor of linguistics, that incorporate printed paper, old book bindings and letters from his father?
The only thing these artists have in common is their gallery of origin the Bachelier-Cardonsky of Kent, Connecticut, USA which has sent their work for the first time ever to Paris where it can be seen at Gianna Sistu for a month.
Corinne Mercardier, photographer, draughtswoman and sculptress, who in recent years has concentrated on landscape, continues her explorations in scenes from her everyday life.
The shots on show at the Isabelle Bongard in celebration of the ‘Mois de la Photo’ are remarkable for their elusive light effects a testimony to Mercardier's patience.
As always, her photos are virtually devoid of human presence, though the odd hint remains.
Liliane & Michel Durand-Dessert are also venturing into photography, showing ‘preparatory studies’ by Andy Warhol for portraits and self-portraits.
These snapshots, never previously exhibited, cover the period from Big Shot in 1971 until the final months of his life.
The Warhol exhibition will continue until 9 January of next year, following on from recent geometrical compositions by Helmut Federle (on show until 14 November).
‘Art spoken here’ is the title of a collective show being mounted, until 28 November, by Hélène de Roquefeuil.
The exhibitors include Daniel Bonnal, de Velay & Partners, Charles Dreyfus and Joël Ducorroy.
November 28 also sees the close of Michael Biberstein's exhibition of recent landscape paintings at the Montenay.
Until 5 December, the Louis Carré gallery is showing a series of works in watercolour and gouache by Jean Bazaine.
Meanwhile, and until 14 December, Gilles Peyroulet is hosting the first solo exhibition in France of the American Ronald Jones, a neo-conceptual sculptor who manifests a special dislike of politically-committed art.
Jones is to be followed by Udo Koch.
Until 14 November, the Sous-sol, a new gallery inaugurated this autumn, is featuring large-scale canvases by Hervé Assuied, characterised by biomorphs and complex, restless patterns of bright colour, and video-sculptures by Dominik Barbier.
These demand active participation on the part of the viewer, and an ‘initiation course’ is provided by the Australian artist Cathy Vogan.
Elisabeth Valley is presenting a first solo exhibition by Sébastien De Ganay, whose paintings incorporate jetsam of various kinds.
Painting is also the order of the day at the Vidal-Saint Phalle, where William Mackendree is featured until Christmas Eve.
Masayoshi Yamada, a Japanese artist now based in Paris, is as skilled in the medium of torn-up newspaper as in his use of brush and paints.
An exhibition of his work, entitled ‘De l'Est à l'Ouest’(from East to West), is being shown by Claude Samuel.
Until 27 November, Camille Saint-Jacques is exhibiting at the Innocenzi-Delsol.
With the Apostles in mind, he has produced twelve wooden blocks, akin to children's bricks, and lined them up on shelves.
Eleven of these cubes, on which the knots and grain of the wood show through, bear silk-screen portraits far removed from traditional iconography, while the twelfth, representing Judas, is faceless.
The Barbier-Beltz gallery, is home to Jean-Loup Trassard, who photographs the natural world, and Patrick Dubrao, who creates three-dimensional forms from a variety of ‘poor’ materials and paints them in uniform white.
Both exhibitions run from 14 November to 14 December.
Thom Mayne's ‘Morphosis on Los Angeles’ continues its showing at Saddock & Uzzan, while at the Beaubourg Daniel Spoerri has brought together ten panel paintings fresh from the Universal Exhibition in Seville.
Photographic self-portraits and collages by Claude Cahun, an anti-establishment figure of the early part of the century, are on show at the Zabriskie until 7 November, to be followed on the 12th by photographs by Paul Strand.
Finally, Jutta Koether and Laurent Joubert are featured at the Laage-Salomon until 28 November; Nils-Udo is showing at the Claire Burrus; while the Jennifer Flay gallery accommodates a series of three-dimensional forms by Marylène Negro, with sound-track.