

INFORMATION BULLETIN
In this issue:
Smoking linked to premature facial wrinkling 1, i
New voluntary agreement shortly to be signed? 2, i
Canadian government to appeal against judge's decision on ad ban law 10, i
1.
SMOKING AND DISEASE
i In order to determine whether cigarette smoking was a risk factor for the development of premature facial wrinkling, a study based at the University of Utah, USA, looked at a sample of 132 adult smokers and nonsmokers.
All the subjects volunteered for the study.
Smokers were recruited at a smoking cessation clinic while the nonsmokers were recruited at a church meeting.
All the subjects were white and aged between 35 and 59.
They were asked to complete a questionnaire in order to quantify their smoking habit and to obtain information about possibly confounding factors such as skin pigmentation, sun exposure, age and sex.
Wrinkling was assessed using photographs of the subjects' temples, and a severity score based on predetermined criteria was assigned.
A system of ‘pack years’, which quantified the smoking volunteer's total level of smoking, was also developed.
This involved defining a ‘pack year’ as smoking one pack per day for one year, half a pack per day for two years, etc.
A logistic regression model, which controlled for non-confounding variables, was developed to assess the risk for premature wrinkling in response to pack-years of smoking.
The researchers found that the prevalence of premature wrinkling was independently associated with both sun exposure and pack-years of smoking.
After controlling for age, sex and sun exposure, premature wrinkling increased with increased pack-years of smoking.
Heavy cigarette smokers (up to 50 pack-years) were 4.7 times more likely to be wrinkled than nonsmokers.
Sun exposure of more than 50,000 lifetime hours also increased the risk of being excessively wrinkled by 3.1 times.
When excessive sun exposure and cigarette smoking occurred together, excessive wrinkling was multiplicative (prevalence ratio of 12.0).
The researchers therefore concluded that cigarette smoking was an independent risk factor for the development of premature wrinkling.
ii As part of a larger study to assess the effectiveness of a passive smoking reduction programme for newborn babies, a group of 152 healthy infants in North Carolina, USA, was followed from birth to the age of one year in order to provide a description of passive smoking during that time.
Data collectors visited the homes of the infants when they were approximately three weeks old and collected urine samples, which were then independently analysed for the presence of cotinine.
Cotinine in the urine is a reliable indicator that the subject has been exposed to passive smoking.
At the same time, the parents were asked about family smoking habits and any other way in which the baby might be exposed to passive smoking.
The same procedure was repeated when the infants were approximately one year old.
The researchers found that at three weeks of age, 39% of the infants had been exposed to passive smoking from any source.
This had risen to 63% of the sample at the age of one year.
The proportion of infants exposed to smoking by their mothers, from other family members, from non-household sources and from more than one of these sources, increased significantly during the first year of life.
The results of the cotinine tests, which were carried out only on those 114 infants who provided a sample on both visits, were very similar.
Most infants (92%) excreting cotinine at three weeks were excreting it also at one year; moreover, 61% of infants not excreting cotinine at three months were excreting it at one year.
The researchers concluded that the prevention of the onset of passive smoking should begin very early.
iii Oxford University Press has produced a book on coronary heart disease which explains the cause and effects of the disease in a readable and accessible way for the general public.
The book, which was co-written by Professor Desmond Julian of the British Heart Foundation, explains the role of the heart and circulatory system in the body, what coronary disease is, how diet, exercise and other lifestyle changes can protect against it, and the most common treatments prescribed.
It will be useful for anyone interested in health matters, and particularly valuable for CHD patients and their families.
The paperback edition costs £5.95.
ADVERTISING AND PROMOTION
i It is believed that the government and the tobacco industry are on the verge of signing a new voluntary agreement, according to a report in Marketing.
Having recently announced a new health warnings to be placed on packets in fulfilment of the EC Labelling Directive, the Secretary of State for Health, William Waldegrave, has now reportedly agreed with the tobacco industry that the same warnings will also be used on advertising.
The warnings (like those on the packets) will no longer be attributed to the Chief Medical Officers, except the strongest warning, ‘Smoking Kills’, to which the industry took special exception.
According to Marketing, the Tobacco Advisory Council initially objected to the new warnings, but William Waldegrave ‘insisted that continuation of the voluntary agreement system is his main weapon against a total EC ban.’
i The Camel Benetton Formula One racing car formed part of a promotion for the cigarette brand at Euston at the end of July.
The car was parked in front of an advertising hoarding, obscuring the health warning, while young women were handing out free Camel cigarettes.
Smokers aged 18 or over were invited to enter a free competition to win ‘one of five exclusive Camel Benetton Formula One team jackets.’
4 TOBACCO INDUSTRY
i BAT Industries is planning to expand the annual production capacity of its Southampton factory from 18 billion cigarettes to 30 billion.
The cigarettes, which include the brands Benson and Hedges, Player's Gold Leaf, John Player Special and State Express 555, are all destined for export.
A spokesperson for BAT said: ‘We are expanding to meet the demand from around the world.
Due to political changes, particularly in eastern Europe and the Far East, new markets are opening.’
She said that the company adhered to health legislation in every country where it had a market.
Mark Flannagan, assistant Director of ASH, commented: ‘They are exporting death.
Effectively Britain will be exporting an epidemic of tobacco-related diseases, which will be seen in some 20–30 years.
The irony is that this is at a time when such diseases are slowly being reduced in Britain.’
ii Hanson plc, which owns Imperial Tobacco, reported three- quarter year pre-tax profits of £976 million.
Although this is an increase of £28 million over the figure for the previous year, Lord Hanson commented: ‘We believe the recession has reached its nadir, but its effects will be felt longer than most anticipated, probably for another 12 months.’
7 SMOKING CESSATION
i A Norwegian study of the efficacy of transdermal nicotine patches as a method of giving up smoking has shown that while it is a safe and effective cessation method, the absolute rate of abstinence after one year was only 17%, which is lower than the success rate using nicotine gum in conjunction with behavioural therapy.
A total of 289 smokers were enrolled in the study.
145 were treated with the nicotine patches and 144 with placebo patches for 16 weeks.
The rates of sustained abstinence were significantly better with active treatment than with the placebo: 53, 41, 24 and 17 per cent of those in the nicotine patch group were abstinent after 6, 12, 26 and 52 weeks respectively: the equivalent abstinent rates for the control group were 17, 10, 5 and 4 per cent.
Only two subjects in the nicotine patch and one in the placebo group had withdrawn because of side effects.
ii An issue of the Adverse Drug Reaction Bulletin on the subject of the effects of nicotine has suggested that nicotine gum could cause many of the health problems associated with cigarettes.
Medical opinion has so far been divided on the precise relationship of nicotine to such conditions as cardiovascular disease and oral cancer, with many experts considering tar and carbon monoxide to be the most toxic substances in tobacco.
A contributor to the Bulletin, Dr Heather Ashton, said: ‘It is clear that nicotine, far from being an innocent passenger on the tobacco leaf, is an important contributor to many tobacco-related health risks…about seven per cent of ex-smokers become dependent on the gum.
The public should be aware that nicotine itself is harmful.’
However, experts in the smoking cessation field pointed out that compared to smoking, nicotine replacements such as gum were much safer.
Dr Michael Russell of the Addiction Research Unit, commented: ‘Nicotine replacement has less than 5 per cent of the risk of smoking’, while Dr Chris Steele, who runs a smoking cessation clinic in Manchester and is the author of books on giving up smoking, added: ‘A  smoker with any smoking-related disease would be far, far safer to change over to nicotine gum than to continue smoking.
Cigarettes also contain tar, carbon monoxide, cyanide and over 3,000 other chemicals.’
8 PUBLIC PLACES AND WORKPLACE
i A strict policy on smoking in sixth form colleges and colleges of further education is the best way to deter young people from taking up smoking, according to the British Medical Association.
A study of nearly 2,500 sixth formers, conducted by Dr Anne Charlton of the Cancer Research Campaign, found that one in five smoked at colleges where smoking was not permitted, compared with one in three where smoking was allowed.
Students at no-smoking colleges also used fewer cigarettes, 23 a week as opposed to 45.
The prevalence of smoking among the students was 25% for the boys and 28% of the girls.
Dr Charlton also reported that 86% of the colleges and 19% of the schools allowed students over the age of 16 to smoke, and more than six out of ten local education authorities had no formal policy on smoking issues.
At a press conference to publicise the study, Dr Natalie-Jane Macdonald, assistant head of the BMA's professional division, announced that the BMA would be writing to all councils and to Education Secretary Kenneth Clark to encourage a no-smoking policy.
ii The new headquarters of Pearl Assurance, currently under construction in Peterborough, will be entirely smoke-free.
The new policy will come into effect in June 1992, and is a revision of previous policy which assigned a number of areas within the building to smokers.
A spokesman for Pearl said that the policy had been changed because of the increasing awareness of the dangers of smoking and passive smoking.
Company managers have been asked to provide support for smoking employees who may find the new policy difficult to follow, and if required, staff will be offered counselling to help them give up.
iii The TUC has issued a policy paper, Greening the Workplace, which provides employers with guidance on a number of environmental issues.
The paper includes recommendations on recycling, noise levels, aerosol use and smoking at work.
It can be obtained from: TUC Publications, Congress House, London WC1B 3LS, price £4.00.
iv A family has received £400 in compensation after a coach holiday firm failed to provide the smoke-free transport specified in the brochure.
Although they had checked twice before booking that there would be no smokers on their coach, the firm, Land Travel, had received too few bookings for the special trip and had consolidated the bookings with another coach party where most of the passengers were heavy smokers.
The firm was fined £800 in addition to compensation and costs.
INTERNATIONAL
i Canada : Following the news (IB 14/91) that a superior court judgment in Quebec could mean that the ban on advertising will be withdrawn, some tobacco companies are already planning to resume advertising.
Michel Descoteaux, Director of Public Affairs for Imperial Tobacco, stated: ‘We have the right to advertise, and we will advertise’.
He added that he had received thirty phone calls from the media enquiring about ad placement in the first three days after the ruling.
The Canadian government had until 26th August to appeal against the ruling and has already lodged an appeal.
ii Italy : The Italian Post and Telecommunications Minister Carlo Vizzini will shortly introduce restrictions on the scope of tobacco and drinks advertising.
Scenes  linking tobacco or spirits consumption with improved athletic performance or business success will in future be illegal.
It is thought that this move will be followed by stronger legislation which will in time ban all cigarette companies' brand names and logos appearing in any form on Italian TV.
Vizzini's principal concern is the influence of ads on young people.
iii Netherlands : The joint tobacco manufacturers of the Netherlands have unconditionally dropped their lawsuit against Stivoro, the Dutch Foundation on Smoking and Health, and agreed to pay all of Stivoro's legal costs.
Stivoro is claiming a ‘complete victory’ in the case.
The lawsuit, originally filed in November 1987, was a response to Stivoro's information campaign on the negative effects of passive smoking in the Autumn of 1987.
The tobacco industry requested that Stivoro be stopped from propagating its position on passive smoking.
On October 30, 1990, the Hague court ruled on one issue in the case, finding that Stivoro acted diligently in stating that passive smoking negatively affects health.
In that judgment, Stivoro was asked to produce additional evidence in connection with certain aspects of the campaign.
The court was then given the results of research that had been conducted since the suit was filed in 1987.
The quality of the additional research was such that the tobacco manufacturers informed Stivoro that they wanted to drop the lawsuit.
However, they wanted no publicity for the out-of-court settlement and expected Stivoro to share the legal costs, so Stivoro allowed the case to continue until the in-court settlement.
iv New Zealand : The New Zealand government is to raise the excise tax on cigarettes by 50 cents per pack to help contain the public health costs of smoking.
The actual price increase per pack could be as much as 70 cents because an extra goods and service tax of 6 cents will be added and the tobacco industry has increased the price per pack by 14 cents.
When old supplies of cigarettes are exhausted, a pack of 20 cigarettes could cost NZ$5.00 compared to less than NZ$2.00 five years ago and less than NZ$3.00 three years ago.
v South Africa : A programme of smoking cessation support for young people based on self-confidence enhancement has recently been carried out in two black townships near Cape Town.
In each case, the programme was tested in schools after consultation with the staff and translation of course materials into Xhosa.
The programme represented a departure from previous campaigns in that it concentrated on building belief in the ability to make decisions for oneself, and it used social cognitive theory techniques to ‘inoculate’ children against chronic self-doubt or learned helplessness.
Thirty-one children with an average age of ten years were enrolled on  the course and the control group consisted of 40 children at two other schools.
Evaluation of the course consisted of self-administered questionnaires for the children, parental and teacher reaction to the programme and peer review of the video and programme development.
Overall, when the children on the course were compared to those in the control groups, it was found that none of them had taken up smoking and some who had been using snuff before the start of the programme had now given up.
Teachers and parents were very enthusiastic about the course.
ASH gratefully acknowledges the generous financial support of the British Heart Foundation with the cost of maintaining the ASH Information Service and of producing the Information Bulletin.