

8
THE BRETTON WOODS SYSTEM
8.1 Exchange rate systems
In the previous chapter we identified the major variables which influence the current account of the balance of payments and examined how automatic and discretionary adjustments operate to rectify payments imbalances.
Although we identified the exchange rate as one of these important variables, we did not examine how different exchange rate systems affect the adjustment process.
This section is designed to explain briefly the operation of various exchange rate arrangements, before we analyse in more depth in this and the next chapter how the type of exchange rate system influences the adjustment mechanism.
International trade is complicated by the existence of sepa-rate currencies, each used as mediums of exchange within their own national boundaries.
Consequently an effective system of international trade requires the adoption of exchange rate arrangements which enable the currency of one country to be exchanged for currencies of other countries.
But how is a rate of exchange between two currencies established?
Since a rate of exchange measures the price of one currency in terms of another, its determination can be compared with the price of any other item.
When market forces are allowed to operate, rates of exchange are determined by the demand and supply of currencies.
The demand for the domestic currency in foreign exchange markets derives from exports of goods and services plus capital inflows, irrespective of whether payment is made in domestic or foreign currency.
For example, if UK exports or capital inflows into the UK are paid for in sterling, then foreigners have to purchase pounds in foreign currency markets with their own currencies, thus giving rise to a demand for pounds.
If UK exports or capital inflows into the UK are paid  for in foreign currencies, then UK residents will sell these currencies in foreign exchange markets to purchase pounds, since only the latter can be spent in the domestic economy, and so the demand for pounds will rise.
Conversely the supply of the domestic currency in foreign exchange markets derives from imports and capital outflows, irrespective of whether actual payment is made in domestic or foreign currency.
For example, if UK imports and capital outflows from the UK are paid for in sterling, then foreigners receiving these sterling payments will exchange them for their own currencies in the foreign exchange markets, and so the supply of pounds in these markets will rise.
If UK imports and capital outflows from the UK are paid for in foreign currency, then domestic residents have to obtain foreign currency with pounds, and so the supply of pounds will increase in foreign exchange markets.
When market forces alone are allowed to determine the exchange value of currencies, a free-floating exchange rate system is said to exist.
But will a free-floating exchange rate system operate smoothly?
If a country faces a current account deficit due to a sudden rise in the value of its imports, there will be an increased supply of the domestic currency in foreign exchange markets which should depreciate the exchange rate.
But actual movements in the exchange rate will also depend upon capital transactions.
Indeed, capital movements may offset the current account deficit if speculators think that the exchange rate will recover to its former level in the near future, as could be the case if the current account deficit is thought to be temporary.
In this situation capital inflows should increase and capital outflows decrease because buying the domestic currency now would provide capital account transactors with a potential capital gain.
Alternatively speculators might think that the exchange value of the domestic currency will fall even further in the future, perhaps because they expect the current account deficit to become permanent, and so capital inflows will decrease and capital outflows decrease accordingly.
In the latter case the exchange rate will depreciate even further due to net capital outflows at the existing rate of exchange.
Therefore an exchange rate will be established at which capital account transactions offset the current account balance, but the demand and supply of currency may be equated (i.e. there should  be no need for official financing) only at the expense of large fluctuations in exchange rates.
In practice, governments have usually been reluctant to leave exchange rate determination completely to private market forces because of the danger that large fluctuations in exchange rates might ensue.
If large fluctuations in exchange rates are to be expected under free-floating, such a system may be undesirable for international trade and payments since the uncertainty caused by price fluctuations could inhibit world trade, output, and employment.
It is also possible to have a rigidly fixed exchange rate system in which the exchange values of currencies are fixed in terms of some common unit such as gold.
In fact a gold standard operated in the international economy prior to 1914 and for a period after the First World War.
The essential feature of the gold standard was that each country's currency had a fixed value in terms of gold (i.e. gold was the numeraire ), and therefore exchange rates were effectively fixed.
Under a gold standard it is possible for gold to circulate domestically as the  legal tender along with banknotes which can be exchanged on demand for gold.
An alternative, which operated in the UK from 1925 — 31, is that the central bank is not prepared to convert banknotes into gold for domestic residents but is willing to convert such paper into gold for foreigners.
In the latter case the Bank of England would have to hold a gold reserve to meet the demand of foreigners who wanted to convert sterling into gold.
One notable feature of the gold standard was that it allowed automatic adjustment to take place via changes in expenditure and output.
A country facing a payments imbalance would suffer an outflow of gold which would necessitate a reduction in the domestic money supply since gold was required to back the note issue.
Interest rates would then rise as the central bank increased its discount rate to discourage borrowing and the demands for legal tender.
The higher cost of borrowing would discourage spending on investment and other goods, and  therefore domestic output and employment would eventually fall.
Accordingly adjustment to payments imbalances would come about since deficit countries would experience deflationary pressures which would constrain their demand for imports and make their exports more competitive due to lower wages and prices.
Surplus countries would experience inflationary pressures from an inflow of gold which would increase their demand for imports and make their exports less competitive.
However, the gold standard did not always work as smoothly or effectively as this description indicates since many countries were unwilling to follow the simple rules of the game.
In particular, surplus countries often neutralized an inflow of gold by preventing it from adding to the domestic money supply.
The adjustment mechanism did not work very effectively in such circumstances, as the history of the operation of the gold standard in the period after the First World War indicates.
So far we have briefly explained how a free-floating and a rigidly fixed exchange rate system are supposed to operate.
Between these two extremes there are various alternatives, two of which have operated since the ending of the gold standard in 1931.
A system of managed floating enables exchange rates to be determined essentially by private market forces, but governments intervene in the foreign exchange markets to try and moderate any short-term fluctuations which may arise due to  destabilizing capital flows or other factors.
Such official intervention may in theory reduce the degree of exchange rate volatility, and so partially reduce the uncertainty in world trade that might result from a free float.
A system of managed floating has existed in the international monetary system since 1973, and its operation will be  discussed in Chapter 9.
However, managed floating also was adopted in the 1930s when the gold standard was abandoned in the severe economic conditions of the time.
The experience then was that floating did not appear to be very successful since individual countries depreciated their currencies so as to gain a competitive advantage over their trading rivals.
Consequently a lack of cooperation in the international monetary system only served to intensify the economic problem of the 1930s.
Another alternative is an adjustable peg arrangement under which exchange rates are fixed at agreed values, but  revaluations and devaluations of currencies can be undertaken under certain conditions.
Such a system may provide fairly stable exchange rates for the development of world trade and yet still permit some degree of adjustment via the exchange rate.
The remainder of this chapter will investigate this type of system as it operated in the international economy from the Second World War until 1973.
8.2 The adjustable peg system
At the Bretton Woods Conference in 1944 the Allies came together in an attempt to design an international monetary system that would operate in the post-war period.
One of the main objectives of the negotiators was to devise a new system which would avoid a return to the economic conditions of the 1930s.
Accordingly the Bretton Woods Conference resulted in the formation of the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and its associated articles of agreement, which put into effect the agreed views of the negotiators.
In the following discussion we will summarize the features of the Bretton Woods (or adjustable peg) system under the headings of adjustment, liquidity, and cooperation.
We then examine the operation of the system.
8.2. 1 ADJUSTMENT
One characteristic of the Bretton Woods system was the arrangement for fixed but adjustable exchange rates.
This was an attempt to retain some of the advantages of the gold standard, since stable rates of exchange were thought to be beneficial to the conduct of trade and other international transactions, and yet adjustments in the exchange rate were deemed desirable for a country facing a permanent payments imbalance.
The articles of agreement stipulated that gold was the official numeraire in terms of which each currency's exchange value was to be pegged, but it became common practice for countries to adopt a par value for their currencies expressed in terms of the dollar.
Individual monetary authorities were then responsible for maintaining the exchange value of their currencies within a band 1 per cent either side of this agreed par value.
From 1949 until 1967, for example, the UK agreed to maintain the exchange value of the pound within a band 1 per cent either side of the agreed central value of £1 = $2.8.
If  exchange rate pressure arose to force the market rate outside this limit, then the central bank concerned (the Bank of England) was obliged to intervene in the exchange markets.
When the pound was approaching the rate £1 = $2.82, the Bank of England would sell pounds and buy dollars; if the rate approached £1 = S2.78, the Bank of England would sell dollars and buy pounds.
Additionally, the exchange value of the dollar was pegged in terms of gold at the rate of $35 an ounce.
The US authorities were willing to buy and sell gold to other central banks at this price, and therefore currencies were convertible into gold via the dollar.
The dollar was therefore the key currency under the adjustable peg system.
Domestic monetary authorities had to hold dollar reserves to support their exchange rates in foreign exchange markets and at the same time currencies were officially convertible into gold via the dollar.
Adjustment to a payments imbalance is restricted under a rigidly fixed exchange rate system since the authorities lose one of their policy tools, that is the ability to vary the exchange rate of their currency.
However, the Bretton Woods arrangements allowed countries to change their par values if they experienced a ‘fundamental dis-equilibrium’ in their balance of payments.
The criteria were never carefully defined, but the necessary IMF approval was granted if the country concerned was judged to have a persistent need for accommodating (i.e. official) financing.
If the proposed change in parvalues was less than 10 per cent, then prior approval of the IMF was not required.
It was envisaged, therefore, that long-term changes in the competitive position of a particular country could be rectified by a change in the par value of its currency.
8.2.2 LIQUIDITY
International liquidity can be defined as those assets which are internationally acceptable in the payment of debts.
The supply of international liquidity is of concern since sufficient finance must be available to assist the development of trade, and yet excess liquidity should be avoided since it may stimulate  inflation.
Now the need for liquidity derives both from the demands of individuals and private bodies to finance trade and investment flows, and from the operations of central banks.
The finance of trade and capital flows can be carried out in various currencies when the latter are freely convertible into each other, although payment may be preferred in currencies which have a more stable exchange value.
Central banks require reserves of international liquidity for two reasons: to support the domestic exchange rate in foreign exchange markets; and to meet the possibility that in any given time-period payment to foreigners will exceed receipts.
Governments had the obligation to maintain the par values of their currencies under the adjustable peg system, and the arrangements described in Section 8.2.1 indicate that the dollar was used primarily in this capacity.
The dollar also became a principal source of liquidity for private transactions (e.g. oil payments) because of the dollar's crucial position in the international monetary system, which made it a safe and acceptable medium of exchange.
Further arrangements were made by the IMF under its general account to organize an additional source of liquidity to meet the temporary needs of deficit countries.
The facilities have survived the adjustable peg system and are still in operation today.
Each member country has a quota which reflects its economic size and importance as a trading nation.
The size of the quota determines the extent to which a country can draw currencies from the pool held by the IMF as well as each country's contribution to the pool.
Each member originally contributed 75 per cent of its quota in domestic currency and the remaining 25 per cent in gold, although the latter proportion must now be contributed in other reserve assets such as foreign currencies or SDRs (see Section 8.2.5).
If a country requires foreign exchange (e.g. dollars) to a support the par value of the domestic currency, then it purchases foreign exchange with its own currency.
Such a drawing results in an increase in the Fund's holdings of the member's currency and a decrease in the IMF holdings of the currencies that are  borrowed.
If the UK for example, purchases foreign currencies when the Fund's holdings of sterling are 75 per cent of the UK quota, then drawings equivalent to 25 per cent of UK quota are available without restriction.
This drawing is known as the gold tranche (now called the ‘reserve tranche’) because it is equivalent to the contribution of gold from the member country under previous quota arrangements.
After this tranche has been drawn, the Fund's holdings of sterling will be 100 per cent of the UK's quota.
Under the Fund's ordinary facilities members may purchase additional foreign currencies, but only if they accept increasing restrictions upon their domestic policies.
A country can draw by additional tranches, each equivalent to 25 per cent of its quota, until the Fund's holdings of that member's currency are 200 per cent of its quota.
Thus four tranches are available after the reserve tranche has been utilized, each known as credit tranches.
However, the IMF requires increasingly detailed programmes of how the member concerned will rectify its payments imbalance before access to the higher credit tranches is granted.
Often these programmes are expressed in terms of agreed monetary and financial targets to which the member country is expected to adhere.
As a result, drawings are phased over a number of years and are granted in accordance with the successful attainment of the agreed programme.
A country is required within 3 — 5 years to repurchase its drawings through buying back its own currency with foreign currencies.
But countries now have the option of making drawings under a standby arrangement whereby they negotiate access to the credit tranches but only use the facility if and when it is required.
In recent years, especially since 1982, a number of countries have developed very serious international debt problems.
The IMF identifies fifteen heavily indebted countries including Brazil, Argentina, Chile, and Yugoslavia — most of them are in South and Central America — and their indebtedness is largely to private sector banks through the Euro-currency markets.
Rescheduling of such debts has become a necessity for the private banks, and a practice which has emerged is that new  agreements have been made conditional on such countries accepting the stringent programmes of the IMF which are intended to promote effective adjustment of a country's balance of payments and ensure that the use of Fund resources is temporary.
The extension of the IMF's role is discussed further in Chapter 9.
With the increasing value of world trade, it became necessary to periodically adjust the quotas of member countries.
Even so, the IMF facility was often insufficient to meet the needs of countries requiring foreign currencies to support their rates of exchange.
During the early 1960s a group of ten of the larger and richer members of the IMF agreed to make available to the Fund additional resources which could then be used by any member of this group of ten.
These arrangements, known as the general arrangements to borrow (GAB), have been utilized extensively by the UK over the years.
The IMF also introduced supplementary facilities during the 1960s in addition to the ordinary facilities outlined above.
The compensatory financing was designed to give temporary support to countries facing short-term fluctuations in export earnings, predominantly primary producing nations.
The buffer stock financing facility was designed with the intention of making finance available for schemes to allow the holding of buffer stocks to prevent undue price fluctuation in certain products.
In the 1970s a temporary oil facility was established through which oil exporters made finance available, via the Fund, to assist the balance of payments problems caused by the sudden rise in the price of oil.
All the above arrangements were made in order that members of the IMF could finance any short-term balance of payments deficit without variations in their exchange rates.
If there was a ‘fundamental disequilibrium’, then the appropriate action was a devaluation of the currency since temporary finance would delay rather than solve the basic problem.
8.2.3 COOPERATION
The economic recession of the inter-war period had been intensified by the adoption of ‘beggar my neighbour’ policies, since many countries abandoned the rules of the gold standard and attempted to gain a competitive advantage over their  trading partners by introducing tariffs and depreciating the value of their currencies.
These sorts of policies were bound to be self-defeating, as we indicated in Section 7.2.4, since the volume of world trade contracted and therefore output and employment stagnated on an international scale.
It was against this background that the negotiators at Bretton Woods accepted that more cooperation would be required after the end of the war.
A strong element of participation and cooperation is embodied in the institutional arrangements for the operation of the IMF.
Each member of the Fund appoints a governor to the board of Governors, and this body is ultimately responsible for policy decisions.
The large number of members involved means that a full meeting of this board would be too cumbersome for the day-to-day administration of the IMF and so it meets only once a year, mainly to ratify any new proposals.
Most of the business is carried out under the control of an executive board of twenty-two directors.
The five largest members (France, Germany, japan, the UK and the USA) appoint their own directors, and the remaining directors are elected by groups of other members.
Although all members participate in the decision-making process, votes are allotted in proportion to the size of their quotas.
Therefore a governor or an executive director exerts influence in accordance with the economic importance of the area he or she represents.
Over the years, the IMF has provided a forum for many important discussions affecting the international monetary system, and the process of debate and collective decision-making has encouraged cooperation in this area.
The Bretton Woods arrangements tried to ensure cooperation in the international monetary system, not only through the institutional arrangements for the operation of the IMF but also through the widespread acceptance of certain rules of conduct.
International trade was to be encouraged by member countries maintaining par values for their currencies so that stable rates of exchange would prevail.
General agreement to minimize trade and currency restrictions, although not possible at first, was also considered to be another essential step in this direction.
Of course long-term adjustment must be carried out as countries' competitive positions change, but expenditure-reducing  policies seem to be the only option for the authorities under a fixed exchange rate system.
The danger, then, is that such a system may suffer from a deflationary bias as a result of the attempts of deficit countries to resolve their payments imbalances by reducing domestic demand.
The Bretton Woods arrangements recognized these problems by encouraging long-term adjustment to be carried out through deficit countries devaluing when their balance of payments was in ‘fundamental disequilibrium’.
Indeed it was hoped that overall adjustment would take place successfully through the cooperation of member countries in accepting such rules of conduct.
8.2.4 OPERATION OF THE SYSTEM IN THE 1940s AND 1950s
Although the IMF began operations almost immediately after the Second World War, the Bretton Woods system did not become fully operational until after 1959.
The war caused such widespread damage and disruption to national economies and trading patterns that the system of pegged exchange rates could not be operated without recourse to exchange controls.
The effective working of the adjustable peg system required deficit countries to have official reserves at their disposal for supporting their currency at the par value.
Since many countries had depleted reserves and weak trading positions, they adopted extensive exchange controls in an attempt to regenerate their economies without being subjected to the full rigours of the adjustable peg system.
The late 1940s witnessed the general operation of a system of bilateral arrangements for trade and payments.
In effect, country A fixed its exchange rate against that of country B by closely controlling the amount of country B's foreign exchange available to its residents for trade and other purposes.
However, these bilateral arrangements were not universal in that the dollar and sterling areas were each characterized by a system of multilateral trade and payments based on the dollar and sterling respectively.
In the sterling area, for example, all inter-country trade was conducted in sterling so that the receipts from any one country in the area could be used to make payments to any other.
The Bretton Woods arrangements were designated to foster a network of multilateral trade and payments in the world as a whole, since this was deemed desirable for the development of world trade.
A general system of multilateral trade and payments became more tenable in the 1950s when the European Payments Union was formed to take over payment settlements between European countries (including their colonies and dependencies).
The EPU recorded surpluses and deficits of any one of its members with each of the others, and settlement was made via the EPU on the net deficit or surplus of one country with the rest.
Accordingly a system of multilateral payments came into operation in the area covered by the EPU; one country's deficit with another member of the EPU was now identical to a deficit with any other in the area.
So the non-communist world came to be dominated by two payments systems, the dollar area and the EPU, each involving multilateral payments arrangements.
The moves towards a common system of multilateral payments were concluded with the general acceptance of current account convertibility in December 1958.
Individuals from any one country were now able to obtain any other currency for trade purposes simply by purchasing it via the foreign exchange markets.
However, most countries still retained some degree of control over capital account transactions, mainly because the volatile nature of capital flows was thought to present potential problems for the stability of their exchange rates.
8.2.5 THE STRAINS OF THE 1960s
Our previous discussion has explained that the Bretton Woods system did not become fully operational until after the general acceptance of current account convertibility in 1958.
However, most of the next decade was a testimony to the wisdom of the Bretton Woods arrangements since international trade grew at an unprecedented rate.
As a consequence, almost every economy benefited from rapid growth and high employment.
There can be little doubt that the new order in the international monetary system, characterized by its arrangements for adjustment, liquidity, and cooperation, was a major factor in these developments.
As the 1960s progressed, however, it  became evident that certain strains were developing in the Bretton Woods arrangements.
A major problem arose from the way in which the adjustable peg system was operated.
Section 8.2. i has already indicated that the intention of Bretton Woods was to erect a system of fixed but adjustable exchange rates within which countries experiencing a ‘fundamental disequilibrium’ in their balance of payments could devalue.
However, a devaluation of the domestic currency came to be regarded almost as a sign of failure by countries facing permanent imbalance, and so was avoided for as long as possible.
Consequently exchange rate adjustment to long-run changes in a country's competitive position was not carried out in the manner visualized by the founding fathers of the system.
The UK's position in the mid 1960s provides a good example since she tried to avoid a change in her par value for as long as possible but in the end was forced to devalue because of increasing capital outflows.
Adjustment also came to be regarded as a problem relevant to deficit and not to surplus countries.
Thus the whole burden of adjustment was thrown onto the economies of certain weaker countries who were themselves reluctant to devalue and preferred to adopt expenditure-reducing policies.
These developments gave rise to the claim that the system suffered from a deflationary bias since expenditure-reducing was the major policy weapon used.
Nations such as Germany and japan, increasingly recognized as chronic surplus countries, were reluctant to revalue their currencies upwards to assist the overall process.
The Bretton Woods conference had accepted that adjustment should be borne by surplus as well as deficit countries through including a ‘scarce-currency clause’ in the articles of agreement.
If IMF holdings of a particular currency were depleted to an extent that threatened its ability to provide that currency to other countries, then that currency could be declared ‘scarce’.
The IMF was then authorized to ration that currency among its member countries, and the latter were allowed to discriminate against the exports of the country in question.
Such a clause, if invoked, would obviously encourage a country to reduce its surplus, but it was never called into effect.
Towards the end of the 1960s, however, the adjustable peg system came under increasing pressure from the growth in short-term capital movements.
Increased capital mobility was a result of a number of factors.
The growth in world trade led to the development of multinational corporations and banks whose increased scope of operation made them more concerned with the placement of funds in a wide range of currencies.
Indeed, the development of the Euro-currency market meant that most large organizations became increasingly aware of the possibility of switching funds between currencies in order to make capital gains (or avoid capital losses) and to benefit from interest rate differentials.
If a country was facing a payments deficit, then short-term capital outflows would tend to increase because of the potential capital gains accruing to holders if that country devalued its currency.
A rate of exchange of £1 = $ 2.8, for example, would give $2,800 for every £1,000.
If the pound was expected to devalue to £1 = $2.4 then the holder of sterling balances could sell his £1,000 now (at £1 = $2.8), buy back pounds at a future date (at £1 = $2.4), and hence make a sterling capital gain of £167.
Such speculation was of a ‘one-way’ nature in terms of risk; the holder of these (sterling) balances would make a capital gain if the currency was devalued but would suffer no losses if the exchange rate remained unchanged.
Thus there was every incentive for speculation against the weaker currencies, as the UK found to its cost prior to the 1967 devaluation.
These increased capital flows led to mounting pressure on the adjustable peg since an increasing stock of reserve currencies was required to maintain par values in the face of larger capital movements.
Another major problem for the adjustable peg system was the liquidity arrangements discussed in Section 8.2.2.
The system was a form of gold exchange standard since all currencies were expressed in terms of the dollar and the latter was officially convertible into gold at the fixed price of $35 an ounce.
Nevertheless the dollar was the principal reserve asset, and was likely to remain so for as long as the rest of the world accepted dollars and the monetary authorities of individual countries did not exert their option of exchanging dollars for gold.
Indeed, during the 1950s there had been fears that there might be a liquidity shortage unless the USA took steps to increase the supply of dollars.
But by the early 1960s opinions had changed markedly, partly as a result of the arguments put forward by Robert Triffin.
He argued that the international monetary system, based largely on the dollar, contained certain inherent contradictions.
The demand for reserve currencies was growing more quickly than the supply of gold, so a liquidity shortage could only be avoided if the supply of dollars was increased.
But an increase in the supply of dollars implied a persistent US balance of payments deficit (e.g. exporters to the USA accept payments in dollars, or payments overseas by US residents are made in dollars), and this would undermine confidence in the dollar as a reserve currency because dollar claims were growing in relation to US gold reserves.
The effect of a loss in confidence would be a desire to convert dollars into gold at the official price, and accordingly the system would collapse since the most widely held reserve asset would cease to be accepted as such.
The world would face either a liquidity shortage which constrained the development of trade, or a collapse of the system as confidence in the dollar waned.
Triffin's theoretical analysis gained more credence when the US balance of payments appeared to move into overall deficit.
Although America's current account was always in surplus during the 1960s, her net capital outflows, particularly private investments overseas, more than offset the current account surplus in most years.
As a result, the USA suffered a net outflow of gold in every year but one during the 1960s as pressure of the kind described by Triffin built up.
A potential solution to the liquidity dilemma was the introduction of some other form of reserve asset.
The IMF set about the problem by devising the special drawing right (SDR) as a means of settlement among its members.
This new form of liquidity, unlike gold, was essentially a book-keeping transaction which created additional reserve assets for member countries.
It was introduced in 1970 following an amendment to the  articles of agreement of the IMF and the formation of a special drawing account.
The nature and purpose of the SDR can be described as follows:
(a)
Participating countries were allocated SDRs in proportion to their quotas, these allocations being known as their ‘net cumulative allocations’.
The SDRs were issued initially over the three-year period 1970; 72, when SDR9 billion were issued; a further SDR 12 billion were issued between 1979 and 1981 (valued in pound sterling at roughly £15 billion).
(b)
Any participating country is able to use its SDRs as of right.
There are two ways in which this can be done.
There may be a transaction by agreement , which means that a country which wishes to use its SDRs makes a voluntary agreement with a prescribed holder such as a central bank which then exchan-ges the SDRs for foreign currencies.
Funds obtained by this method are not limited in their use to balance of payments difficulties.
Alternatively a holder of SDRs having a balance of payments or reserve problem activates its SDRs through the special drawing account, and the Fund designates other participants to whom the SDRs may be transferred in exchange for foreign currency.
This use of SDRs is known as a transaction with designation .
(c)
A participant is not obliged to provide currency for SDRs beyond the point at which its holdings of SDRs in excess of its net cumulative allocation are equal to twice its net cumulative allocation.
A participant, if it wishes, may provide currency in excess of the obligatory limit.
Transactions by agreement amount to almost twice transactions with designation.
(d)
An incentive to creditors to hold the SDR is provided by interest charges on users of SDRs transferred to creditors.
The SDR interest rate is determined by reference to a combined market interest rate based on an average of rates on short-term instruments; the rate is set weekly.
The interest charge for users of SDRs provides an incentive for correction of balance of payments problems and subsequent repurchase of the SDRs used.
Once the repurchase has been made, the payment of interest would cease.
(e)
The SDR was originally defined in terms of gold at a value of 1/35 of an ounce (equivalent to $ 1 at the prevailing official price); hence its former title of ‘paper gold’.
In 1974 the value  of the SDR was linked to a basket of sixteen national currencies, so the link with gold was severed.
A subsequent revaluation in 1981 established the SDR in terms of five national currencies — dollar, yen, mark, pound and French franc.
In theory, the SDR possesses several major advantages over gold as a reserve asset.
The supply of SDRs can be controlled in line with the demand for reserve assets, and the costs of provision are very low since it is merely a book-keeping transaction.
However, the increased payments deficits of the USA during the early 1970s provided the international monetary system with extra liquidity in the form of dollars, and further issues of SDRs were not made until 1979–81.
Since 1981 there have been no further issues of SDRs because the executive board of the IMF cannot provide a consensus as to the need for a further issue of SDRs.
The difference of view seems to be that a deficiency of official reserves and lack of access to funds by some countries is a reflection of their creditworthiness rather than a global lack of reserves.
At the present time SDRs constitute only 2 per cent of countries' official reserves — some measure perhaps of the limited contribution of SDRs.
8.2.6.
BREAKDOWN IN THE 1970s
The eventual collapse of the adjustable peg system came about as a result of intensification of the pressures that had developed during the 1960s.
Exchange rates had only been adjusted as a last resort by deficit and surplus countries, and so were not used speedily enough to prevent prolonged payments imbalances and exchange rate crises.
However, the weakness of the adjustment mechanism became critical when the United States, the linchpin of the system, suffered continual balance of payments problems.
It appeared difficult for the dollar to be devalued since the exchange values of all other currencies were tied to it and the dollar itself was tied to gold.
Furthermore, confidence in the exchange value of the dollar was essential since it provided the bulk of the reserve assets in the system: any devaluation of the dollar would give rise to fears that it might be devalued again, and hence there would be a reluctance to hold dollars as a reserve currency.
It was feared that a severe  liquidity crisis might ensue and that the world economy would then be plunged into economic recession.
Confidence in the dollar as a safe reserve asset declined markedly from around 1970 onwards when the USA encoun-tered larger balance of payments deficits.
The USA wanted surplus countries like Germany and japan to revalue since it was difficult for payments imbalances to be resolved through a devaluation of the dollar.
In contrast, surplus countries argued that the USA should solve her balance of payments problems by introducing expenditure-reducing policies at home, as had other countries.
The USA had never needed to undertake such policies previously, since acceptance of the dollar's role as a key reserve asset had meant that she could meet any payments deficit simply by increasing the supply of dollars.
Thus there was fundamental disagreement on what steps should be taken to resolve the problem, and cooperation between members of the international monetary system reached a low ebb.
The American administration adopted a policy of ‘benign neglect’ in the early 1970s in accordance with its view that surplus countries should revalue.
This policy meant that the USA did not take any special steps to control her deficit but instead allowed the balance of payments to deteriorate.
But the increased mobility of international capital flows was bound to bring added pressure on the system of fixed exchange rates under such conditions.
Other countries, especially those in surplus, were facing an inflow of dollars in exchange for their currencies because of the potential capital gains that would accrue to speculators if the dollar was devalued.
These speculative pressures encouraged countries to utilize the option of converting their official holdings of dollars into gold at the fixed price of $ 35 an ounce.
The US Treasury began to experience a depletion of its gold stock, so in August 1971 it announced that official convertibility of dollars into gold was temporarily suspended.
An essential link in the Bretton Woods arrangements, that of official convertibility into gold via the dollar, had thus been broken.
In response to these events, the monetary authorities of countries other than the USA decided that they would  no longer intervene to stabilize their exchange rates against the dollar, since this would have meant their accumulating large quantities of dollars for which (a) the exchange value was uncertain, and (b) the option of convertibility into gold at a fixed price had been terminated.
Accordingly individual currencies were allowed to float since there was no other option, although the governments concerned ensured that it was a ‘managed’ rather than a free float.
Then in December 1971 the Smithsonian Conference was convened in Washington in an attempt to reach agreement, on a multilateral basis, for some new arrangement to perpetuate the adjustable peg system.
Several steps were taken in this respect:.
(a)
There was a revaluation of most major currencies against the dollar, notably a 13.5 per cent increase in the value of the Deutschmark and a 17 per cent increase in the value of the yen.
(b)
The band of fluctuation either side of the new parities was widened from 1 per cent to 2.25 per cent, thus allowing for a larger margin of exchange rate fluctuation before official intervention was required.
(c)
The official price of gold was increased to $ 38 an ounce, but this move had little significance since the dollar was no longer officially convertible into gold.
Although the conference brought about the first international agreement on a multilateral adjustment in exchange rates, it did not prevent the collapse of the adjustable peg system.
Indeed, once the dollar effectively had been devalued it became more likely that the same might happen again in the near future.
Consequently lack of confidence in the dollar, combined with the high mobility of capital flows, led to severe pressure on the new parity structure.
The UK floated sterling in June 1972, largely because of her own balance of payments difficulties, and most other major economies had followed suit by March 1973.
The emergence of new exchange rate arrangements is contained in Table 8.1 , which shows the exchange rate arrangements now in operation.
just over one-third of IMF countries have exchange rate policies which permit their currency to change in value against others according to market forces.
Within the independently floating group are the UK and the USA.
Within the   European Community, member countries (other than the UK) are part of the European Monetary System, which is an arrangement whereby these countries fix their exchange rates against each other but have flexible rates against non-member countries.
The countries which have chosen to fix their exchange rates against the US dollar and the French franc are those which continue to have close commercial (and political) links with these two countries.
Although the classification of countries in Table 8.1 suggests that a large majority of countries have opted for stable exchange rates, in fact this is not so; those countries which are pegged to the US dollar will find their exchange rate moving against other currencies, because the US dollar itself is an independently floating currency.
However, it is likely that these various arrangements help to reduce the volatility of exchange rates and thus reduce uncertainty.
8.3 The World Bank (the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development)
Origin and purpose The World Bank, like the IMF, was designed at Bretton Woods and began operations in 1946.
The two institutions have adjoining offices in Washington.
One of the initial purposes of the World Bank was to aid post-war reconstruction through the provision of finance, since private capital markets were not expected to be able to cope with the scale of the problem.
In practice, the US Marshall Aid programme provided most of the necessary finance and the World Bank came to be responsible for assisting economic development in mainly the poorer countries.
Source of funds Member countries have to make capital subscriptions which reflect their IMF quotas.
However, only 10 per cent(originally 20 per cent ) of this subscription is paid to the Bank, the remaining 90 per cent acting as a guarantee for the Bank's lending.
As at June 1987 the Bank's subscribed capital was over $77 billion.
The major source of funds is from its borrowings in world capital markets, but the Bank obtains a substantial flow from its retained earnings and the repayment of loans.
The Bank issues bonds in capital markets such as the New York market.
Since its inception it has made loans totalling over $ 140 billion to 110 countries.
Nature of operations The Bank lends on a commercial basis (although loans usually have a grace period of five years before repayments) since the intention is to supplement private finance, not compete with it.
Consequently the Bank satisfies itself that the borrower can meet the interest and capital repayments before making the loan.
Also the Bank makes a general appraisal of the merits and priority of each proposal in order to allocate its funds effectively.
In view of this, the Bank's loans are usually directed towards developing countries which are in a more advanced stage of economic development.
The Bank lends to governments and governmental agencies, although private organizations can borrow if the national government guarantees the loan.
The length of the loan is dependent upon the character of the project and the debt position of the borrower, but twenty years is a typical period.
Lending is normally limited to the financing of the foreign  exchange costs of the imported goods and services to be used in the project.
The Bank also provides its members with technical assistance and advice on projects, since the less developed countries often lack the required technical expertise.
Recipients of loans Loans go mainly to the Asian, African, South American and Central American countries with low levels of GNP per head.
The Bank's outstanding lending has increased from $ 250 million in 1947 on one project to a total of $29.7 billion by June 1980.
Loans made during the 1950s were mainly for the development of infrastructure, such as transport and electric power schemes.
Loans have more recently been extended to finance education and other socially oriented projects.
Many of the less developed countries have found it difficult to meet the service charges on their loans to the World Bank.
To  accommodate this, the World Bank was expanded into the World Bank Group which now includes the International Development Association (1960) and the International Finance Corporation (1956).
The purpose of the International Development Association is to provide capital funds for poorer developing member countries on more flexible terms.
The countries which qualify for assistance are those with a per capita GNP of less than US $ 791 (valued at 1983 dollars).
Term of loans from the IDA are more favourable than those demanded by the IBRD and can be up to fifty years with repayments deferred for the first ten years, with no interest charges.
For the period 1984–87 the usable resources of the IDA had been expanded to over $39 billion, with funds provided by subscriptions and contributions from the more advanced and prosperous members.
The objective of the International Finance Corporation is, on the other hand, intended to encourage the growth of productive private enterprise in less developed countries, particularly where sufficient private capital is not available on reasonable terms.
The IFC borrows most of its funds from the World Bank but it also raises money from private capital markets.
By 1987 the IFC had approved investment projects over $9 billion.
Most of the projects are in Asia and about 40 per cent of the funds went to projects in very poor countries; investment in fertilizers, chemicals and petrochemicals was the largest single group.
8.4 Summary
(a)
Various exchange rate arrangements can be adopted, ranging from free-floating at one extreme to a rigidly fixed system at the other.
The extent to which the exchange rate can contribute to the adjustment mechanism, in either an automatic or a discretionary manner, is influenced by the type of exchange rate system in operation.
(b)
The adjustable peg system was characterized by its arrangements for adjustment, liquidity, and cooperation.
With adjustment, the essential feature was the fixed but adjustable exchange rate structure in which the dollar held a central position.
All currencies came to be expressed in terms of the dollar, and the dollar was officially convertible into gold at a fixed price.
Consequently world trade was encouraged since all currencies were exchangeable for each other and for gold at stable rates of exchange.
(c)
The liquidity arrangements came to be based on both the IMF quota schemes and the supply of dollars.
However, there was an intrinsic weakness in such a system, as was pointed out by Triffin.
He argued that the system was bound to collapse, either because a liquidity shortage would ensue if the supply of dollars failed to keep pace with the growing world demand, or because the persistent balance of payments deficits of the USA (which provided dollars to the world) would reduce confidence in the dollar and so lead to the conversion of official dollar balances into gold.
(d)
Cooperation in the international monetary system was enhanced by the institutional arrangements made at Bretton Woods.
Through the creation of institutions such as the IMF and the World Bank, a forum was provided for discussion and decision-making on an international scale.
At the same time rules of conduct were established for the behaviour of member nations.
(e)
The causes of the breakdown of the adjustable peg system are related to its three major features described above.
The adjustment mechanism in the 1960s was characterized by the reluctance of all countries to adjust their exchange rates, especially those countries in surplus.
Accordingly, adjustment via the exchange rate was not able to compensate adequately for long-term changes in competitive conditions.
The deterioration in the US balance of payments in the early 1970s caused particular concern since the dollar was the linchpin of the international monetary system.
When the U S authorities failed to undertake domestic policies to remedy the external situation, some countries started to exercise their option of converting their dollar balances into gold.
These moves brought about the suspension of the official convertibility of the dollar into gold and the eventual adoption of floating exchange rates.
9
MANAGED FLOATING
9.1 The general operation of the system, 1973 to date
9. 1.
1 HISTORICAL BACKGROUND
Chapter 8 has already examined the reasons why the adjustable peg system collapsed.
In summary, an exchange rate system needs to be sufficiently flexible to cope with long-run changes in countries' competitive positions.
But the adjustable peg system did not adequately specify if and when countries in surplus or deficit were to undertake exchange rate adjustment.
Such a shortcoming is illustrated by the imprecise meaning of the term ‘fundamental disequilibrium’, the required condition for a devaluation by a deficit country.
This deficiency proved fatal when the dollar faced a prolonged confidence crisis in the early 1970s.
It was extremely difficult for the USA to devalue since all currencies were expressed in terms of the dollar, and yet surplus countries were not very keen to revalue their currencies.
However, speculative pressure, stimulated by the increasing size and mobility of capital flows, eventually brought about the suspension of official dollar convertibility into gold and the subsequent abandonment by individual monetary authorities of their obligation to maintain fixed exchange rates.
The adoption of floating exchange rates was thus a consequence of the collapse of the adjustable peg rather than the result of a collectively planned decision.
Once the system of fixed exchange rates had been abandoned there was no alternative but for currencies to float.
However, the system of floating exchange rates was thought at the time to be a temporary feature of the international monetary system: it was hoped that a new framework would be found for a return to some kind of adjustable peg in which the burden of adjustment was clearly defined, both for deficit and surplus countries, and in which reserve assets were not based primarily on one currency.
Accordingly, many negotiations took place within the IMF (especially through the so-called committee of twenty) in an attempt to find some generally acceptable basis for a return to such a system.
But these extensive discussions failed to provide a common area of agreement, mainly because of divergent national interests and unfavourable economic developments such as inflation, recession, and the oil crisis.
Table 8.1 revealed the extent to which flexible exchange rates have been adopted.
The first few years of floating proved to be fairly successful, especially in the light of the prevailing economic conditions.
Consequently floating came to be accepted as a permanent feature of the international monetary system, even though the Bretton Woods Conference had disapproved of such arrangements.
Therefore at the Jamaica Conference of the IMF in January 1976 a second amendment to the articles of agreement (the first amendment being the introduction of SDRs) was made by which the system of floating exchange rates was legalized.
In fact the rules were changed so that now an 85 per cent affirmative vote was required before the IMF could sanction a return to an adjustable peg arrangement.
A floating exchange rate should, in theory, ‘solve’ the balance of payments problem automatically.
In practice, however, the elasticity of demand for imports and exports may not be of an appropriate value or else it may take considerable time before such automatic forces become effective.
Under such circumstances speculative capital movements cannot be relied upon to offset any temporary deficit on the current account because capital flows may prove to be volatile in an uncertain world.
Accordingly managed floating was generally adopted when the adjustable peg was abandoned.
Under managed floating, the domestic monetary authorities intervene in the foreign exchange markets to smooth out excessive short-term fluctuations in the exchange rate.
But it can be difficult to ascertain whether exchange rate pressure is temporary or permanent in nature; consequently the decision when and to what degree the central monetary authority should intervene is largely a matter of judgement.
If a country's exchange rate is generally thought to be overvalued, however, then the central bank concerned would face heavy losses of foreign currency if it  attempted to maintain the exchange rate at its current value.
Large reserves of foreign currencies would then be required to buy the domestic currency in support operations, but the growth and mobility of capital flows has made most countries accept that such a defence is impractical.
With floating, a potential complication arises because of the difficulty in establishing whether the domestic currency's exchange value is increasing or decreasing.
The home currency may appreciate in terms of one currency and yet depreciate in terms of another.
To take an example, sterling appreciated against the dollar in late 1987 but depreciated against most of the EC currencies.
If we want an overall measure of the value of the domestic currency then some weighted average of changes in its exchange value against all other currencies is required.
The weights should indicate the relative importance of each of these currencies, perhaps in terms of the volume of trade which the respective countries conduct with the domestic economy.
For sterling and the other major currencies the ‘effective exchange rate’ is a general measure of the exchange value of the domestic currency, and it is calculated on such a basis.
However, it is still common to see exchange rates expressed in terms of the dollar, partly because this had long been the accepted practice under the adjustable peg, and also because of the USA's continuing dominance in the world economy and financial system.
To facilitate comparison with the adjustable peg, the major features of managed floating can be described under the headings of adjustment, liquidity, and cooperation.
9. 1.2 ADJUSTMENT
Under floating, the exchange rate can operate as a form of automatic adjustment to payments imbalances, although such adjustment may not be full or immediate.
Floating exchange rates have the added advantage that responsibility for the burden of adjustment does not have to be assigned to particular countries: with floating, the exchange rate mechanism itself  should lead to an appreciation of strong currencies and a depreciation of weak currencies.
In contrast, the operation of the adjustable peg was characterized by disputes as to whether the burden of adjustment should be borne by deficit or surplus countries.
Discretionary adjustment via the exchange rate is not easy under managed floating.
The existence of large and mobile capital flows makes it extremely difficult for national governments to overcome market pressure and maintain an exchange rate which is not compatible with general market sentiment.
Nevertheless some form of discretionary adjustment may still be required, especially for deficit countries, since there is no guarantee that the exchange rate will adjust smoothly in such a manner as to ensure an equilibrium in the balance of payments.
Countries with balance of payments problems — in the sense of having requirements for official financing which put a strain on official reserves or on the capacity to borrow abroad on reasonable terms — have had to resort to traditional defensive measures in such circumstances.
Thus expenditure-reducing policies are most appropriate when the problem is identified as a deteriorating current account balance, whereas tighter monetary policies may be preferable if capital outflows are the source of undesirable pressure on the exchange rate.
An additional consideration is that the adjustment process prior to floating was influenced by the one-way nature of speculative flows.
Since countries were obliged to maintain par values, it was possible for speculation to be carried out against the stronger and weaker currencies in the knowledge that the currencies concerned might be revalued or devalued respectively, but there was no danger of the strong currencies being devalued or the weak currency being revalued.
With managed floating there is a risk that speculators will suffer capital losses since the monetary authority is no longer attempting to defend a rigid par value, and so the exchange rate can move in either direction in response to market pressures.
This reasoning suggests that capital flows are potentially more stabilizing under floating.
However, both the weaker and stronger currencies have experienced bouts of speculative pressure, thus indicat-ing that capital flows have not been a particularly stabilizing force under managed floating.
The competence of the adjustment mechanism under managed floating was given a thorough testing by the oil shocks of 1973 — 74 and 1979 — 80.
In both instances a massive disruption to trade and capital flows took place.
For example the combined current account surplus of the OPEC countries expanded from $8 billion in 1973 to $60 billion the next year before subsiding back to only $5 billion by 1978, and in the aftermath of the second oil shock the surplus rose to $65 billion in 1979, $ 110 billion in 1980, but was then eliminated by 1983 as oil prices came under some downwards pressure.
At first glance the size of the surpluses, their volatility, and the corresponding deficits in oil importing countries would appear to pose an overwhelm-ing problem for any type of exchange rate system.
Indeed it is difficult to envisage how the adjustable peg system could have coped with the scale of this problem, whereas the system of floating exchange rates did.
The impact of the oil shocks on financial flows and the foreign exchange markets has been affected by the means of payment for oil and the asset preferences of OPEC countries.
Practically all payments to OPEC countries are made in dollars, because this is the traditional means of payment.
So in the first instance a sharp rise in oil prices necessitates an increased demand for dollars, but whether this is maintained depends very much on the decisions of OPEC countries.
After accepting payment in dollars, oil-exporting countries can decide to keep their enlarged surpluses in this form, either in deposits or in longer-term investments, or they can switch into other currency assets.
If they choose the former, the dollar can be expected to strengthen relative to other currencies.
After the second oil shock, for example, there was a tendency for reserves to be kept in dollars, primarily because of the relatively high interest rates being offered on dollar deposits at the time, and so during the early 1980s the dollar was a strong currency.
In the aftermath of the first oil shock, however, there was a greater tendency for OPEC countries to diversify their assets into traditionally strong currencies such as the Deutschmark and Swiss franc, a move which effectively boosted the international value of these currencies.
Another dimension to the trading imbalances caused by the two oil shocks is not so much the currency consequences but the  recycling problem.
This relates to the need for the international financial system to reconcile the financing needs created by deficits in some countries with the extra resources available to others.
The first oil crisis created particular concern in this respect, but the development of the Euro-currency market greatly facilitated the process.
A large proportion of the oil surpluses was kept in a fairly liquid form and redeposited in the Euro-currency market, where it was on-lent to the monetary authorities of deficit countries, thus enabling them to finance their deficits.
The smoothness with which the financial system dealt with the first oil shock surprised most people and suggested that the new floating exchange rate regime might cope better with large shocks of this type than the adjustable peg system would have.
9.1.3 LIQUIDITY
The abandonment of a fixed exchange rate in favour of floating means that there is potentially less need for government intervention in foreign exchange markets, and therefore a reduced need for international liquidity to meet this purpose.
Governments, however, have on occasions intervened in foreign exchange markets to influence their respective rates of exchange, although a greater variety of currencies has been used now that exchange rates are no longer pegged exclusively to the dollar.
On the other hand, the growth in the Euro-currency market has provided an enlarged source of borrowing for monetary authorities who wish either to support their exchange rates or to meet the needs of official financing.
This was particularly the case after the first oil crisis when the Euro-currency market may have responded too easily to the financing needs of some countries, effectively building up problems for the future.
It has been suggested that lending to finance trade imbalances may have been too lax, and as such contributed to the inflationary resurgence in the late 1970s.
By the early 1980s problems for some Central and South American countries in meeting interest and principal repayments on outstanding loans gave rise to fears of an international debt crisis.
This led to a reappraisal by the Euro-currency markets and banks-of their exposure to borrowers in the non-industrialized world, carrying With it the danger that attitudes could swing too far in the opposite  direction and that too restrictive a stance might jeopardize international trade and economic growth.
Some nations have continued to use the IMF facilities, despite the success of the Euro-currency market in providing large-scale finance.
Indeed in December 1976 the UK negotiated a standby facility of SDR 3,360 million ($3,900 million), the maximum amount available under the British credit tranches.
Other IMF facilities have also been utilized extensively, especially by the less developed countries.
All these countries have been willing to borrow from IMF — even though there are conditional policy restrictions — because the Euro-currency markets have become more concerned with the creditworthiness of their customers.
In fact there have been various instances where the banks in the Euro-currency market have been willing to extend credit only if the country in question has already obtained IMF credit and its associated conditionality.
What, then, has happened to the dollar and gold, the two key reserve assets under the adjustable peg?
The prolonged speculative pressure against the dollar in the final stages of the adjustable peg system indicated there was an oversupply of this currency.
The first oil crisis gave rise to renewed demand for dollars, since payments to oil exporting countries are made in this form, but in the late 1970s this was followed by another dollar crisis which undermined its integrity as the key international reserve asset.
Reforms in US monetary policy from 1979 — which led to much tighter monetary conditions and higher interest rates — paved the way for a resurgence in the dollar in the early 1980s, supported by the increased demands arising from the second oil crisis.
Thus to date the era since Bretton Woods has seen several major changes in the fortunes of the dollar, which is still by far the most important reserve currency in the international monetary system.
Not only has this led to a high degree of volatility in the foreign exchange markets, but at the same time trade and capital flows have been undertaken against a greater background of uncertainty than was customary in the 1960s.
The role of gold has always been a controversial issue in the international monetary system, but with the advent of floating its importance as a source of international liquidity has been  reduced in several ways.
When currencies were allowed to float, gold was no longer the ultimate numéraire in which exchange values were expressed; indeed, discussions at the time accepted that the SDR (based on the value of national currencies from 1974) would be the numéraire in any future return to an adjustable peg system.
Moves towards the demonetization of gold went further when, under the second amendment to the articles of agreement in Jamaica in 1976, it was agreed that the IMF should dispose of one-third of its gold holdings.
One-half of this was to be sold by auction, and the profits above the official price of $ 42.2 an ounce were then to be used to promote aid to the less developed countries, whereas the other half was to be sold back to members at the prevailing official price.
The notion of an official gold price at which inter-central-bank transactions were to be conducted was also abandoned.
Finally, countries were no longer required to pay a quarter of their IMF quotas (or quota increases) in gold; in future they were allowed to use foreign currencies or SDRs, assuming further allocations of the latter were to be made.
Advocates of a return to gold still remain, and at times there have been proposals to consider reinstating it as the key reserve asset in the international monetary system.
Such views have not received widespread acceptance, however, and as time goes by the chances of a reinstatement of some form of gold standard look more and more remote.
9. 1.4 COOPERATION
The replacement of the adjustable peg by floating implies that fewer rules of conduct are necessary for coordinating the system of exchange rates.
Countries no longer have to decide the rate of exchange at which currencies should be pegged, or the responsibility for ensuring that par values are maintained at agreed values.
Indeed, advocates of floating have frequently argued that the need for fewer rules, and reduced formal cooperation, confers an important advantage on the present system over its predecessor.
It must be remembered, however, that the Bretton Woods arrangements and the associated rules of conduct were designed with the intention of avoiding the conflicts of national interest  which had been associated with the previous period of floating.
At that time, the adoption of floating exchange rates was also thought to be advantageous since the constraints of the gold standard could be abandoned.
Nevertheless the pursuit of policies based on national self-interest led to competitive depreciation and the introduction of tariffs and other trade restrictions.
Trade, output, and employment suffered as a consequence on an international scale.
The present system of managed floating does contain the possibility of direct conflict if official intervention is carried out at cross-purposes.
Thus the central bank of country A might buy currency B in order to keep the domestic exchange rate at a competitive level, whereas country B might simultaneously try to keep the value of its currency down by buying currency A. In this manner a lack of cooperation, fostered by a system of floating exchange rates, can lead to conflict and mutually frustrating policies.
In summary, cooperation is still necessary if trade, output, and employment are to develop to their full potential.
This need for cooperation is especially pressing during a period of economic recession, since nations are then more concerned with gaining a competitive advantage over their rivals so that domestic employment levels can be maintained.
Accordingly, the danger with floating exchange rates is that the less formal arrangements for cooperation may foster insufficient inter national cooperation of policies for the alleviation of sustained economic recessions or containment of inflationary pressures.
9.2 Exchange rate determination
In Section 8.1 it was explained that the determination of a currency's exchange rate value is in principle broadly the same as the establishment of the price for any other financial instrument, commodity, or good.
Essentially it is a matter of identifying the sources of supply and demand.
Our discussion in the last two chapters and this one reveals three broad types of transaction which give rise to the demand and supply of currencies:
Current account flows in the form of exports and imports of goods and services.
Capital account transactions, either private or official, long-term or short-term.
Government intervention , usually involving the direct buying or selling of domestic and foreign currencies by central banks.
The relative balance of these factors has changed over time and is influenced by the type of exchange rate system in operation.
Under the Bretton Woods arrangements government intervention at predetermined levels, or parities, was the characteristic feature of the system.
Central banks agreed to buy or sell unlimited amounts of currency at points 1 per cent either side of their established par values, although the mere fact that they were prepared and willing to do this was often sufficient to limit the extent to which they had to intervene in practice.
In this period capital account transactions were at a much lower level than they are nowadays, partly because many countries still had restrictions or limitations on this type of flow.
Accordingly, the regular demand and supply of currencies in the foreign exchange markets tended to be dominated by current account transactions, which were expanding quite rapidly as international trade grew faster than domestic growth rates.
If persistently large current account imbalances arose, the antici-pation of devaluation or revaluation would give rise to speculative short-term capital flows in the same direction, putting added pressure on the exchange rate in question.
Typically the central bank of the country facing downwards pressure on its currency would intervene for a time by running down its official reserves, but eventually might decide to devalue if there was no sign that domestic policies were likely to contain the situation.
With current account performance playing the dominant role in determining the demand for and supply of currencies, attention became focused on the relative competitiveness of each country's goods and services in international markets.
Section 7.2.1 examined some of the mechanics involved, in particular the relevance of elasticities in influencing the extent to which price changes impact on the value of exports and imports.
Before floating exchange rates were adopted, such price changes were constrained to differences in domestic inflation rates.
But because inflation differentials were relatively small during the 1950s and 1960s, it often took some time for marked divergences in competitiveness to emerge.
When  they did, a change in parity values was often the end result.
Fur example the devaluation of sterling in 1967 was mainly the consequence of higher inflation in the UK over a number of years than that experienced by her major trading partners.
By the early 1970s not only had the general inflationary climate changed for the worse, but at the same time the Bretton Woods arrangements were breaking down.
In this new environment it was widely believed that exchange rates, freed from restrictive intervention, would adjust reasonably smoothly to divergences in competitiveness, as predicted by the purchasing power parity theorem .
Simply stated, this asserted that the actual exchange rate between any pair of currencies would fluctuate to offset differences in inflation between the two countries in question.
Or expressed another way, real exchange rates — that is nominal exchange rates adjusted for inflation differences — should remain more or less constant over time.
A temporary deviation might occur because export and import volumes could react slowly to exchange rate movements, but these lags were thought unlikely to be excessively long, especially if capital account transactions anticipated the process.
Thus ‘speculators’ would buy undervalued currencies and sell overvalued ones, and in so doing would speed up the adjustment process.
Figure 9.1 shows the movements in real exchange rates of the major currencies over the period 1974 — 88.
Measurements are made relative to the US dollar, with 1975 as the base year.
Wholesale prices are used as an indicator of movement of domestic costs up to 1983 and retail prices subsequently.
Our attention should be focussed on the direction of movement and the relative change.
What seems clear from the chart is that the real exchange rates have deviated by much larger amounts over the period 1978–88 than in the early years of floating.
For example, sterling's real exchange rate relative to the dollar rose by over 40 per cent between late 1977 and late 1980, only to fall by about 35 per cent in the following two years.
In other words, according to the principle of purchasing power parity, sterling was overvalued against the dollar and subsequently undervalued against the dollar if one simply compares relative prices of goods in the two countries.
If the explanation offered by purchasing power parity for exchange rate levels is correct then these deviations are due to buying and selling of dollars and sterling which are motivated by factors other than the relative prices of goods involved in trade.
It is interesting to note that the movements of the real exchange rates do seem to move around the level appropriate to a purchasing power parity explanation.
Although the evidence presented does not refute the claim that in the long run exchange rates compensate for domestic inflation differentials, it does show that over periods of several years real exchange rate anomalies can and do occur.
Moreover this short-term instability can be very substantial.
One of the reasons why the purchasing power parity theorem has not worked so well over short periods is that the influence on currencies of current account flows has diminished, while capital account transactions have assumed a greater role.
Moreover, these capital transactions have not always been stabilizing in the manner assumed by some proponents of floating exchange rates.
The tendency for international capital flows to increase has been evident for some time, and was causing problems for central bank intervention in the final years of the Bretton Woods system.
But over the last decade there has been a rapid acceleration in this type of transaction.
A relaxation in restrictions and controls on capital flows was a  key factor, but generally it is the increasing internationalization of business operations and their financing which lies behind the development.
Investment institutions, companies, and banks have become much more sophisticated in the operation of their affairs across national boundaries, as witnessed by the spectacu-lar growth in the Euro-currency markets.
Furthermore the OPEC countries have accumulated massive portfolios of international financial assets as a consequence of the two oil shocks, and the management of these assets can have a marked impact on the foreign exchange markets.
Pension funds, insurance companies, and other investment institutions in the industrial economies have also become large accumulators of financial assets in recent years, with a greater tendency to consider international diversification of their portfolios.
Asset portfolio adjustments by these various groups can nowadays have a dominant effect on foreign exchange markets even if this appears to run contrary to what might be suggested by purchasing power parity relationships.
Table 9.1 gives some indication of the size and importance for the UK of these changes in recent years, notwithstanding the particular consequences of North Sea oil investment.
It is clear from the table that exports of goods and services have grown from £53 billion in 1977 to £159 billion in 1987 (with a similar growth in imports), i.e. 11 per cent growth each year on average.
Transactions in liabilities (capital inflows) have also grown but in a much more irregular fashion.
The ratio of the capital inflows to the trade and commerce position has averaged 0.31, although clearly it has also been quite volatile.
In other words, capital inflows have averaged 31 per cent of the trade and commerce flows of the UK; in 1979 and 1986 however, they were over 50 per cent.
A similar picture emerges when we examine the net flows arising from transactions in assets and liabilities.
In each of the ten years the UK accumulated net assets (net flows abroad) and the data again show considerable variation during the period, ranging from net outflows of £0.7 billion to £14.3 billion.
A natural consequence of the growth and sophistication in international capital flows is that decision-makers have become more aware of potential short-term gains.
This suggests that the foreign exchange markets are now more sensitive to actual and  prospective interest rate developments, especially as they impact on the key reserve currencies.
Also official intervention has become much less effective in this environment, making it difficult for governments to oppose trends established by private sector transactions.
One reason for this limited ability of central banks to intervene in foreign exchange markets is that, generally, official reserves of gold and foreign currencies have not increased in line with the size of the flows which can disturb exchange rates.
Although in the case of the UK there have been substantial additions to the official reserves in recent years (a consequence of foreign exchange market intervention, even though the UK has, technically, a floating or market-determined exchange rate) this growth in the reserves has not matched the increase in capital flows.
In 1986, for example, the UK's reserves (valued in US dollars) were lower than in 1979.
The official reserve itself is also vulnerable to changes in exchange rate, which compounds the problem of ensuring adequate reserves.
As the value of the US dollar fell in the mid 1980s, so did the value of the UK reserves.
Since the mid 1970s the monetary authorities of the UK and other countries have felt a greater concern for the domestic monetary consequences of intervention in the foreign exchange market.
As we saw in Chapter 5, the buying and selling of foreign currencies by the Bank of England, using sterling, can have an effect on the domestic money stock.
At times adherence to money targets might prove incompatible with heavy intervention in the currency markets.
The floating exchange rate regime has thus become less managed from about 1980 than was the practice in its early days, with the US authorities in particular more reluctant to engage in foreign currency transactions.
The one exception is the European Monetary System, where member countries have continued to operate some form of managed exchange rates, although parity adjustments here have been much more frequent than in the Bretton Woods era.
9.3 Monetary union, the snake, and the European Monetary System
Despite the adoption of floating exchange rates, within many European countries there has been a persistent desire to  maintain some degree of exchange rate stability.
Since 1979 this desire has been manifested in the European Monetary System, whereby most of the member countries of the European Community have agreed to limit the fluctuations of their respective currencies.
But this scheme should be seen in the context of the longer-term aspirations of some countries for greater economic and monetary union in Europe, and the steps that have been taken to achieve this.
Monetary union has long been seen as a way of bringing about greater economic and political unity within the Community.
The Werner Report of October 1970 mapped out a stage-by-stage plan to achieve economic and monetary union (EMU) by 1980, although it concentrated more on monetary union and assumed that economic union would automatically follow.
The stage outlined in the Werner Plan were as follows:
(a)
A progressive narrowing of the margins within which the exchange rates of member currencies would be permitted to fluctuate vis-a-vis each other, with some arrangement for financing of countries in deficit by the countries in surplus.
(b)
A pooling of foreign exchange reserves.
(c)
Eventually the elimination of exchange rate margins, with the establishment of a common currency recognized as being perhaps the best way of embodying this.
(d)
The establishment of a single central bank.
The Report's recommendations were approved in principle by the European Community (EC) in 1971 and, as a prelude to the first stage, central banks were invited to restrict fluctuations in their currencies around the existing par values.
Under the then prevailing adjustable peg arrangements, any one currency could fluctuate within a band (or ‘tunnel’) 1 per cent either side of the dollar par value, so if one EC currency moved from its floor to its ceiling and another moved from its ceiling to its floor there would be a 4 per cent relative fluctuation in the values of the two currencies.
The avoidance of such fluctuations was considered desirable not only as a first stage in monetary union but also for the smooth operation of the Common Agricultural Policy, since food prices are calculated according to the exchange value of member currencies.
However, the widening of the margin of fluctuation either side of par to 2¼ per cent at the Smithsonian Conference in December 1971 posed a threat to EC plans for limited exchange rate fluctuations amongst member currencies.
If one EC currency rose from its floor to its ceiling against the dollar, whilst another fell from its ceiling to its floor, there would be a 9 per cent change in the relative values of the two currencies.
Accordingly the ‘snake in the tunnel’ scheme was devised as a way of restricting EC exchange rate fluctuations.
The basic idea (see Figure 9.2 ) was that members agreed to maintain no more than a 2¼ per cent band around all their respective currencies so as to set a limit to the degree to which exchange values could fluctuate (the ‘snake’).
At the same time, all EC currencies would move together as a bloc within the 4½ per cent Smithsonian band of fluctuation against the dollar (the ‘tunnel’).
Obviously the snake arrangements required intervention by domestic monetary authorities when currencies looked likely to break out of the 2¼ per cent band.
Therefore the EC central banks made arrangements to sell the stronger currencies when they threatened to break through the snake ceiling and to buy the weaker currencies when they seemed likely to fall through the snake floor.
Furthermore, a settlement arrangement was made whereby the creditor countries could exchange on a monthly basis their accumulations of the weaker currencies (which they had been buying in the EC exchange markets) for some other form of reserve asset.
The six original members of the EC commenced operating the ‘snake in the tunnel’ scheme in 1972, and the UK along with Eire and Denmark also participated in May 1972 while negotiating entry to the  Community.
But sterling was soon withdrawn from the scheme when the pound was floated in June 1972.
The advent of generalized floating in early 1973 meant that there was no longer any requirement to keep the snake in the tunnel.
The snake was now allowed to float against the other major currencies, but a maximum spread of 2¼ per cent was still retained for the currencies in the snake.
Also in 1973, the European Monetary Cooperation Fund (EMCF) was established as a body to operate the snake arrangements, its major responsibilities being to record the currency transactions between the central banks of the participating countries and to administer the short-term financing settlements.
However, the successful operation of the snake was hindered by the adverse circumstances of the time: exchange rates were no longer pegged against the dollar; there had been a massive increase in oil price which resulted in larger payments imbalances and severe exchange rate pressures; domestic rates of inflation were showing a tendency to diverge markedly; and the world economy was moving into recession.
Under such pressures it proved very difficult for monetary authorities to intervene in foreign exchange markets to ensure stable rates of exchange between all EC currencies.
Indeed, Italy left the snake in February 1973; France left in January 1974, rejoined, and then left again in March 1976; and the UK and Eire remained outside the scheme after 1972.
The EC seemed to have moved further away from the aims of the first stage of the Werner recommendations now that most exchange rates in the Community were floating against each other.
Although the Werner plan failed, the concept of EMU was not abandoned.
Indeed it was still argued that determined efforts should be made towards monetary union so that eventually a common currency could be issued by a European central bank.
Such a development would aid economic and political union and, like the existence of a common currency between regions of the same country (see Section 7.2.2), would facilitate capital account adjustment between member countries.
However, it is now recognized that progress in this direction requires a great deal more cooperation in other fields, such as monetary and budgetary policy, than was originally acknowledged.
The Marjolin Report (1975) identified such weaknesses in the  previous conception of EMU and suggested that cooperation on a much wider basis was required before EMU would become tenable.
The Tindemans Report (1976) recommended a gradual approach towards EMU, and suggested that the countries able to proceed in the direction of monetary union should do so, and others should follow suit later when conditions became more favourable.
Neither of these reports, however, has made the previous mistake of trying to set targets or deadlines for the eventual achievement of EMU.
At the Bremen summit conference in July 1978 a new impetus was given towards monetary union by the agreement of heads of the nine Common Market governments to press ahead with a detailed study for a new European Monetary System (EMS).
The main points of the plan, intended to promote closer economic and monetary integration in the EC, are as follows:
(a)
The scheme aims to limit fluctuations of member EC currencies against each other.
Exchange rate intervention is to be carried out by central banks according two sets of criteria.
One is a parity grid arrangement, whereby upper and lower intervention rates are established for each currency against every other currency.
No member's currency can move by more than 2¼ per cent against any other member currency, although initially the Italian lira was allowed to move by up to 6 per cent.
The second is the ECU divergence indicator .
The European currency unit (ECU) is used as a basis for calculating a central rate for each member s currency.
The ECU is based on a basket of EC currencies, including sterling, weighted according to their relative importance in EC output.
Each currency is allocated a maximum percentage deviation against its ECU central rate, and when it has reached this limit there is the presumption (but not an obligation) that the domestic government concerned will undertake remedial action.
(b)
An exchange rate stabilization fund has been created by the pooling of 20 per cent of the gold and dollar reserves of central banks with the European Monetary Cooperation Fund  in return for issues of ECUs.
The ECUs are then available for use by central banks, to finance foreign exchange intervention and to settle claims between the Community's central banks.
At first the EMCF was to be used merely as a way of recording transactions and as a temporary depository for the pooled reserve funds.
At a later stage — initially set for March 1981 — it was to be developed into a full European Monetary Fund.
This has not, however, happened and the EMCF continues.
The funds deposited with the EMCF can be used for supporting the currency grid of exchange rates between member countries as well as the provision of medium-term credit facilities.
The credit facilities are available ‘very short term’, up to ten weeks; ‘short-term’, up to nine months; and ‘medium term’, between two and five years.
However, funds provided in the third category would be available only if a country's domestic policies were adjusted to that prescribed by the Community's Council of Ministers.
The new EMS first began operations in March 1979, but without the participation of the UK in the exchange rate mechanism.
However, the Bank of England has been party to the arrangements for placing gold and dollar reserves with the EMCF on a three-month temporary basis in exchange for ECUs.
The UK continues to remain outside full membership.
The parity grid arrangement is similar in its operation to the snake in that absolute intervention points are set for each member currency against every other at which central banks are obliged to buy or sell their own currencies.
But in practice it is the divergence indicator which often triggers intervention because it is designed to serve as an early warning device for when strong or weak currencies look likely to test their parity limits.
This is a distinctive feature of the arrangements, both because it identifies pressure at an early stage and also in that it establishes the source of disturbance and whether it is a weak or strong currency.
Apart from intervention, the other usual response to currency pressure has been a rise or reduction in interest rates.
However, interest rate rises on weaker currencies have been more frequent and larger than the reductions which have been effected by countries with strong currencies.
But despite intervention and interest rate adjustments, it has been  necessary for realignments of exchange rates to take place on a frequent basis.
Since the EMS became operational there have been ten realignments of parities.
This has involved the revaluation (upwards) of some currencies whilst others were devalued.
The realignment of January 1987, for example, required a 3 per cent revaluation of the Deutschmark and the Netherlands guilder and a 2 per cent revaluation of the Belgian/Luxembou-rg franc.
One of the reasons for the exchange rate adjustments is that inflation rates and trade performances of member countries have failed to converge sufficiently, making exchange rate adjustments necessary in order to maintain a reasonable degree of competitiveness and prevent excessive balance of payments imbalances.
In September 1987 the committee of European Community central bank governors decided to change a number of rules relating to interventions and financing within the EMS and strengthen cooperation among the various central banks.
These changes followed the exchange rate realignments of January 1987, and the basis for concern was that individual EC countries' currencies continued to move differently in response to the depreciation of the US dollar.
If this situation persisted then it would clearly undermine the cohesion of the EMS.
The September changes were intended to make the EMS less vulnerable to external influences, and to this end further agreement on foreign exchange intervention policies and interest rate policies was made with the particular objective of reducing incentives for short-term capital movements.
Three measures were agreed:
(a)
The duration of the very short-term financing which central banks could draw through the EMCF was increased to three and a half months (an increase of one month).
This change applied to the obligatory foreign exchange intervention, i.e. when exchange rates moved to their limit.
Also, the financial ceiling applied to the renewal of short-term central bank indebtedness, automatically available for exchange rate intervention, was doubled.
(b)
Finance from the EMCF for intra-marginal intervention in foreign exchange markets (i.e. interventions within the permitted margins of fluctuation, but not obligatory on a member  country) was made easier.
Some EC countries had argued that if intra-marginal interventions could be financed through the EMCF then this might prevent the obligatory interventions when a currency had reached the limits of its permitted flexibility.
(c)
The use of ECUs for repayment of intervention borrowings by a member country was also made easier as long as the creditor country (i.e. the country providing the currency which was needed for foreign exchange support operations) did not develop an unbalanced composition of reserves.
This aspect of the agreement would be subject to review in the light of experience.
These changes were seen as part of a comprehensive strategy to foster exchange rate cohesion.
Such cohesion was dependent also on all member countries achieving through their economic and monetary policies further convergence towards internal stability.
There was agreement to strengthen the procedure for joint monitoring of economic and monetary policies within each member country.
9.3. 1 AN ASSESSMENT OF THE EMS
The more immediate objective of the EMS was to ensure greater stability of exchange rates between member countries.
The realignment of exchange rates discussed above might suggest that it has not been very successful in promoting greater exchange rate stability.
But such matters are relative: the major currencies outside the EMS have been characterized by a high degree of exchange rate volatility, and the proper comparison is to consider the effect on intra-community exchange rates without the operation of the EMS.
The mere fact that the original members of the EMS have remained within the scheme suggests some degree of success.
More recently the relative stability of the EMS currencies (including the more vulnerable Italian lira) has been a result of not only exchange rate intervention by Community central banks but also coordinated interest rate adjustments under the September 1987 agreement, intended to strengthen the operational mechanisms of the system.
This latter change is clearly important since foreign exchange intervention by one central bank within the EMS  could be undermined by an ‘inappropriate’ interest rate policy (thus causing changes in capital flows) by another central bank.
Nevertheless, it is widely recognized that exchange rate adjustments within the EMS will only become less frequent if the economic performance and the economic policies of member countries are converging and consistent.
This too was recognized in the 1987 agreement.
To some extent the commitment to fixed parities by member countries is of itself a discipline and an inducement to pursue policies which will assist in the convergence of economic performance.
For example, relatively high rates of inflation in one country will tend to produce balance of payments ‘deficits’ and a downward pressure on the exchange rate; such a country thus faces the necessity of imposing anti-inflationary policies in order to maintain the exchange rate.
The longer-term aspects of the EMS, however, have not been a success.
The European Monetary Fund has not come into existence and the moves towards a common currency and a Community central bank are little nearer reality.
Without the full membership of the UK within the EMS and a commitment to the longer-term aims, such developments within the Community seem difficult or unlikely.
The reluctance of the UK and other member countries to go further stems from the inherent feature of monetary union: the relinquishing of a high degree of sovereignty in economic policy-making to a supra-national body.
One might add, however, that if member countries achieved and sustained fixed parities then this would be the virtual equivalent of a single European currency.
9.4 The European Investment Bank
In this chapter we have examined the impact of floating exchange rates on the hopes for economic and monetary union within the EC.
At the same time we explained the role of one EC institution, the European Monetary Cooperation Fund, in administering the snake and then the EMS arrangements.
Here  we intend to explain the operation of another EC institution, the European Investment Bank, which will probably have an important part to play in future progress towards economic and monetary union within the EC.
Origin and purpose The European Investment Bank (EIB) is a European Community institution set up under the Treaty of Rome in 1958 as a source of long-term finance for investment projects.
The board of governors consists of the finance minister from each member state.
The routine management of the EIB is carried out by a board of directors, of which there are nineteen nominated by member countries, with France, West Germany, and the UK appointing nine directors.
The terms under which the EIB was formed prescribe that the purpose of finance provided shall be to support: projects aiding development of less advanced regions of the Community; modernization and conversion projects in essentially declining areas; and projects, usually large, which are of interest to several member countries or the Community as a whole.
Source of funds Its main source of funds is bonds and loans raised on a commercial basis on the capital markets in the EC and on other international markets also.
In addition, it has capital subscribed by member states of the EC.
The Bank's statute stipulates that its lending cannot exceed 250 per cent of its subscribed capital.
Paid-in capital by member countries amounts to about 10 per cent of subscribed capital and represents only a small part of the total funds obtained by the EIB.
Nature of operations The Bank operates on a non-profit-making basis, and so its interest charges are close to the average rates it has to pay in the EC and international capital markets.
These relatively low interest rates make it an attractive source of finance to borrowers, and the fact that it is a non-profit-making organization means that it can involve itself in socially oriented projects which may have long pay-off periods.
Loans are intended to supplement finance obtained from other sources, and so the EIB only lends up to 40 per cent of the cost of fixed investments of a project with a minimum size of around £1 million.
The term of the loan is approximately 7 — 12 years for industrial projects but can go up to 20 years for  infrastructure investments (these are investments in areas such as energy, transport, and communications which are beneficial to economic expansion in general).
It is also intended to help finance small ventures, and the EIB grants ‘global loans’ to intermediary financial institutions, such as Finance for Industry in the UK, which on-lend the funds for suitable projects after prior approval from the EIB.
Finance for major projects is provided by loans negotiated directly with the Bank.
Adequate security for loans is required since the EIB itself borrows at commercial rates.
Thus the Bank prefers a guarantee from industrial or financial groups associated with the project, a public authority, or from the government in whose territory the project is being undertaken.
EIB loans are usually made in the form of a ‘cocktail’ of several currencies, depending upon the currencies which the Bank has available at the time of the loan.
Loan repayments are due in the currencies in which they are made.
Repayments can be delayed for up to four years until the project yields a return, but thereafter they are normally due in six-monthly instalments.
Recipients of loans Between 1981 and 1985 the EIB undertook loans of ECU28.5 billion, and of this over 90 per cent was within the European Community.
Almost half of these funds allocated within the Community were used in Italy, with France and the UK obtaining 15 per cent and 13 per cent respectively.
Much of the bank's lending in the UK has gone to major public sector developments such as the Sullom Voe oil terminal in the Shetland Isles, British Rail's advanced passen-ger train, and various National Water Council projects.
The EIB made available ECU1.8 billion to countries outside the Community, mainly Mediterranean and African countries.
9.5 Fixed versus floating exchange rates
The previous chapter and the present one have examined in detail the operation of both a fixed and a floating exchange rate system.
This section attempts to identify the major strengths and weaknesses of these two systems.
It should be recognized that floating exchange rates have usually been adopted (e.g. in  the 1930s and since 1973) when adverse conditions have caused a breakdown in the prevailing system of fixed exchange rates.
Therefore the comparison of the two systems in practice should take account of the unfavourable circumstances in which floating has been introduced.
9.5.1 CASE FOR FLOATING (AGAINST FIXED) EXCHANGE RATES
Simplicity There is no need for countries to decide what constitutes the appropriate exchange rate or for their general agreement on whether deficit or surplus countries are responsible for the adjustment burden.
It is simply demand and supply pressures which determine the appropriate exchange rate for each currency.
Continuous adjustment If a country is suffering balance of payments difficulties because of a long-run decline in its competitive position, then a floating exchange rate allows a gradual depreciation of the home currency to come about, thus providing a continuous stimulus to exports and a continuous discourage-ment to imports.
In contrast, the adjustable peg system was characterized by long periods of crisis in deficit countries such as the UK with exchange rate adjustment occurring infrequently and belatedly, e.g. the devaluations of 1949 and 1967.
The operation of the adjustable peg required deficit countries to carry out expenditure-reducing policies between exchange rate adjustments, whereas floating permits automatic adjustment to take place via the exchange rate.
Independence of domestic policies Under the adjustable peg system, deficit countries had to direct fiscal and monetary policies at the external situation since expenditure-reducing was the only way in which the balance of payments could be improved without devaluation.
In the UK, for example, economic expans-ions often had to be cut short by restrictive domestic policies as an increased demand for imports led to a deterioration in the balance of payments.
Consequently internal policies were often dictated by the external situation.
But if exchange rate variations are successful in bringing about automatic adjustment, then governments may have greater independence in the use of  domestic policies.
In the UK at the present time (1988) the balance of trade deficit has increased from £10.2 billion in 1987 to almost £20 billion in 1988.
This is the largest trade deficit (relative to national income) in recent history and has been caused largely because of the sustained growth of domestic incomes and spending since 1981.
The growth of imports has been over 11 per cent p.a. whereas export growth has only been 7.7 per cent p.a., and if one considers exports and imports of goods other than oil products then the figures are 13 per cent p.a. import growth and 9 per cent p.a. export growth.
Ultimately there would be a depreciation of the exchange rate under a free-floating regime, but the policy response of the government has been to prevent this occurring by sustaining a high level of domestic interest rates.
This has reduced independence in the use of domestic policies.
Insulation from external inflation With fixed exchange rates, inflation abroad is transmitted directly into higher import prices.
Of course the effect on the domestic price level will be influenced by the importance of imports in the home economy and by the ability of domestic industry to provide substitutes for the higher-priced imports.
Floating, on the other hand, insu-lates a country with stable prices from world inflation since its currency would be continually appreciating, thereby offsetting the rise in import prices.
Reduced need for official reserves With floating, there should in theory be no need for official intervention in foreign exchange markets, and therefore no need to accumulate large stocks of official reserves.
But in practice, government intervention may be considered desirable to neutralize short-term disturbances in the exchange markets.
Nevertheless, as long as floating exchange rates are not too volatile, there should be a reduced need for official reserves.
9.5.2 CASE FOR FIXED (AGAINST FLOATING) EXCHANGE RATES
Effectiveness of current account adjustment under floating A floating exchange rate may not be very effective in eliminating a country's current account deficit (or reducing a current  account surplus) if the  elasticities of demand for imports and exports are of an inappropriate value.
Therefore continuous current account adjustment via a floating exchange rate may not always be successful.
Uncertainty Capital flows can be unstable.
A country which experienced volatile movements in capital flows, operating under a floating regime, would find that balance of payments equilibrium might be attained only by tolerating very wide swings in the foreign exchange value of its currency.
Such experience would prove highly disturbing and create considerable uncertainty for business, especially importers and exporters, in that country.
The attainment of fixed exchange rates would prove highly attractive.
This uncertainty argument in favour of fixed exchange rates is based upon the apparent instability of capital flows.
This is illustrated in Table 9.1 , which shows the net transactions in assets and liabilities between 1977 and 1987.
The final column reveals that there has been a continued accumulation of assets by the UK, but the variability of these net transactions is clearly considerable, ranging from £0.7 billion to £14.3 billion.
One writer has expressed the problem very succinctly:
By its very nature, the foreign exchange market is a nervous, high-risk, ultra-sensitive mechanism, primarily geared to short-term developments.
Of the tens of billions of dollars in daily transactions cleared through the market, only a fraction derive from such fundamental factors as foreign trade and long-term investment.
On a day-to-day basis, the market is instead dominated by short-term capital movements in search of quick profits or a hedge against exchange risks.
If there are considerable fluctuations in exchange rates under floating, world trade may be inhibited since traders will become reluctant to enter into commitments because the price paid on delivery may vary to such an extent that the transaction is no longer profitable to one of the parties.
In contrast, exchange rate fluctuations cannot by definition be a source of  uncertainty in world trade under a fixed exchange rate system.
Effects on domestic inflation If exchange rate fluctuations are fairly large under floating, then economies with depreciating currencies should encounter rising import prices.
These rising import prices will tend to feed back into domestic prices, especially if imports are a large proportion of GDP and the elasticity of demand for imports is low.
The present policy of the UK government towards the exchange rate, to which we alluded in Section 9.5.1 , is to prevent depreciation, and one of the reasons for this policy is an anxiety that a depreciating pound would raise costs of imports and thus cause a further deterioration in the inflationary situation.
With fixed exchange rates, an inflationary impulse from the exchange rate can only arise when there is a devaluation of the domestic currency.
Furthermore, supporters of fixed exchange rates argue that under their system countries have to take action to control domestic inflation or else they will lose reserves under their commitment to support the exchange rate at the prevailing parity.
But with floating, it is argued, no such discipline exists.
The domestic authorities can simply allow internal inflation to push down the rate of exchange.
Independence of domestic policies The extent to which floating exchange rates enable governments to have greater independence in their domestic policies may be exaggerated.
Although the domestic authorities do not have the immediate problem of defending a fixed exchange rate under the present system, the external situation has still had an overriding influence on most countries' domestic policies, as was indicated by UK experience during most of the 1970s and the late 1980s.
Need for official reserves Because governments have frequently intervened in foreign exchange markets, the operation of floating exchange rates has, like the adjustable peg system before it, required the availability of official reserves.
The major reason for this is that exchange markets appear to be  fairly volatile, and therefore governments have required large reserves of foreign currencies to moderate unwanted fluctuations in the exchange value of their currencies.
Therefore, managed floating does not have the advantage of making redundant the holding of official reserves.
Any judgment on the preferability of fixed or floating exchange rates must take into account these considerations and recognize that it is a matter of balancing advantages against disadvantages.
However, it must be acknowledged also that the conditions of the time have an important part to play in determining the feasibility of any particular type of exchange rate system.
Under stable conditions some form of fixed exchange rate system may work effectively, but floating may be the only option when the world economy is in a state of instability.
Thus floating has often been adopted as a last resort when a system of fixed exchange rates has collapsed, as was the case in 1973.
9.6 Some recent developments in the international monetary system
9.6.1 THE INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
The widespread acceptance of floating exchange rates has been associated with a period of less favourable economic developments, such as massive payments imbalances arising from large but often irregular oil prices increases, declining commodity prices (which seriously affect less developed economies), high interest rates during the 1980s (which worsened the debt position of many countries), and lower average economic growth compared with the Bretton Woods era.
Together these factors have put new pressures on the international monetary system and on institutions such as the IMF which were designed to operate in a different economic environment.
Table 9.2 shows the changes in the balance of payments (current account) of industrial and non-industrial countries.
Although by 1987 the imbalances had declined significantly, one can see the difficulties which faced the developing countries, especially non-fuel exporters.
Amongst the industrial countries the emerging deficit problems for the USA and the UK are very clear.
It would seem, however, that from 1986 the overall deficit  position improved; there was a decline from US$54 billion in 1986 to US$ 37–3 billion in 1987.
The size of these deficits has meant, nevertheless, that the normal financial facilities available from the IMF have proved inadequate even though the total quotas have been increased substantially: between 1964 and 1988 quotas were raised from SDR14 billion to SDR89.9 billion.
It has to be remembered also that the IMF is not a bank — or a development agency; its functions are primarily to do with sustaining an orderly system of international financial relationships, especially exchange rate arrangements, and the provision of relatively short-term finance to countries which have balance of payments problems.
Some of the main changes that have taken place are examined below.
9.6.1.1 Changes in the structure of the IMF
Since the second amendment to the articles of agreement the structure of the Fund has been defined as consisting not only of a board of governors, an executive board, and a managing director and staff, but also a council if it is called into being by a decision of the board of governors with an 85 per cent majority of total voting power.
To date, no such call has been made.
The roles of the board of governors and the executive board are broadly as described in Section 8.2.3.
The interim committee, which was established by a resolution of the board of governors in 1974, has been given more of the responsibilities of the full board since its smaller number of members allows it to work more effectively.
This group, comprising twenty-two governors, normally meets twice a year to review world economic conditions and the activities of the IMF.
The highest authority of the Fund is still exercised by the board of governors, but the constitution of the interim committee is such that decisions taken there are usually ratified by the full board when it meets annually in the autumn.
9.6.1.2 New IMF facilities
Over the past decade it has been necessary for the Fund to play a more expanded role, principally because of the large current account imbalances identified in Table 9.2 .
The Fund's normal  facilities were insufficient to meet the new demands, and so additional resources have been made available.
Figure 9.3 and Table 9.3 display the main facilities currently available and show clearly the decline in relative importance of the credit  tranches, especially after 1980.
The regular facilities provide only 20 per cent of the credit available from the Fund.
The oil facility, set up in 1974 to assist countries which had current account difficulties because of higher oil prices, ceased to be available after 1983.
Having reached a price of $ 36 a barrel at the beginning of 1981, oil prices began to fall in early 1982 and in April 1986 reached a low point of $ 10 a barrel.
The decline in the price of oil in nominal as well as real terms made this clearly less of a problem.
In addition to special borrowing facilities the Fund has renewed until 1993 the additional funding through the general arrangements to borrow (see Section 8.2.2) and which now amounts to SDR 17 billion.
The other facilities are as follows:
Compensating financing facility Set up in 1963, this line of credit was made available to countries which had exceptional balance of payments problems caused by special factors, such as a major crop failure, and beyond the control of a particular government.
Although less significant it still provides about 15 per cent of funds.
Extended Fund facility This facility provides 20 per cent of credit and was established in 1974 to assist countries on a longer-term basis for supporting adjustment efforts through structural reform and appropriate macroeconomic policies.
Borrowers are able to use the facility up to 140 per cent of their quota over a four-year period and with much more relaxed repayment conditions than the normal facilities.
The availability of funds under this facility is conditional on appropriate policies being followed by the borrower.
Supplementary financing Providing about 8 per cent of funds, this facility, established in 1977, is intended to assist countries with longer-term problems in their balance of payments, and for which the normal facilities of the Fund are not adequate.
As with the extended facility the Fund lays down conditions for borrowing.
Enlarged access resources By far the most important supplement to the Funds resources has been the enlarged access facility, available since March 1981.
Both the enlarged access facility and the supplementary financing facility are available to members of the IMF only in conjunction with the use of resources in the upper credit tranches (i.e. they are special arrangements when normal credit lines are insufficient) and are for countries which are facing serious payments imbalances that are large in relation to their quotas.
The enlarged access provision accounts for 35 per cent of credit available.
The policy of the Fund is that access limits are to be regarded as limits and not entitlements, and provision of funds is conditional on the determination shown by a borrower to remedy its balance of payments problem.
The IMF decided, in 1988, that the limit to enlarged access would be 440 per cent of a country's quota over a three-year period.
Structural adjustment facility This was established in March 1986 to provide balance of payments assistance to low-income developing countries.
Loans are available for a three-year period in support of a three-year macroeconomic and structural adjustment programme.
Repayments are in ten instalments beginning six years after the date of borrowing and completed at the end of the tenth year after borrowing.
Interest is charged at 0.5 per cent p.a.
The funds made available under these supplementary schemes are obtained by the IMF through various borrowing arrangements with member countries such as West Germany, japan and Saudi Arabia, as well as the Bank for International Settlements (BIS).
Conditions for repayment of resources to the Fund vary according to the facility which has been used, with repayment in the form of SDRs or designated foreign currencies.
For example, borrowings under the compensatory finance facility have to be repaid in quarterly instalments beginning three years and ending not later than five years after the date of the borrowings, whereas the enlarged access repayments are required twice a year beginning three and a half years and ending not later than seven years after the date of the borrowings.
The extended Fund facility provides for a maximum of a ten-year repayment period after borrowing.
The Fund is obliged to pay market-related rates of interest on its borrowings, and therefore members of the Fund which use borrowed resources pay an appropriate rate.
For example, under the policy on enlarged access, the rate of interest charged to borrowers is the net cost to the Fund plus a margin of 0.20 per cent .
In 1987–88 the rate of charge on enlarged access was 7.39 per cent.
It should be emphasized that private markets have remained the main source of financing for countries with balance of payments problems.
However, to such countries the fact that the Fund has agreed domestic programmes as a condition for loans has often been the key factor in encouraging lending by banks and other private sector organizations.
In this respect the importance of agreement with the IMF on access to its facilities is much greater for many borrowers than the actual size of the funds provided by the Fund would appear to indicate.
Despite the greater emphasis on additional facilities, it has been necessary for the ordinary financing arrangements to be enlarged by regular increases in quotas.
The most recent review of quotas set up in March 1987 failed to conclude its review, and as a result the IMF board of governors requested fresh proposals for new quotas by April 1989; until that review the level of Fund quotas remained unchanged at SDR89.99 billion.
9.6.1.3 Developments relating to SDR
When the SDR was first introduced in 1970 its main purpose was to serve as an additional reserve asset because of a perceived shortage of gold and dollars.
From 1974 onwards it evolved as a unit of account, first when its value was linked to a basket of currencies and then as the IMF denominated its growing balance of payments financing in terms of the SDR.
After the second amendment was ratified in April 1978, this process was speeded up because the concept of an official gold price was abandoned (the final step in eliminating gold from its central role in the Fund as a standard of value), the Fund's own unit of account became the SDR and members agreed that the SDR should become the principal reserve asset of the international monetary system.
Further practical steps were taken following the second amendment to make the SDR ‘the principal reserve asset’:
(a)
A new allocation of SDRs was made between 1979 and 1981 which increased the total to SDR 21 billion.
No further issues have been made and at April 1988 this represents the cumulative total issued since the introduction of SDRs.
(b)
SDRs could now be used more freely among participating countries: it became possible to use them to settle obligations without changing them first into currencies; they could be loaned to other countries; and they could be used as a security for a loan by another central bank or government.
However, it is essential for private sector as well as official transactions to be denominated in SDRs if they are to become the principal reserve asset.
Although the earlier calculation of the value of the SDR in terms of a basket of sixteen currencies had the advantage of making it more stable in value than individual currencies, it had nevertheless certain shortcomings.
One was that it might not be as attractive as some of the stronger currencies and so its general acceptability might suffer.
Another is that its method of valuation was too complex and this would detract from its widespread adoption.
In response to these problems the IMF decided from January 1981 to reduce the size of the basket of currencies determining the value of the SDR from sixteen to five and to simplify the calculation of the interest rate on the SDR.
The five currencies chosen were the  dollar, mark, French franc, yen, and sterling, weighted to broadly reflect their relative importance in international trade and finance.
It was hoped that this simplification would enhance further the attractiveness of the SDR in both official and private transactions.
There were indications after 1979 that commercial banks and financial markets might use the SDR to denominate financial instruments created in the private sector capital markets.
Some issues of securities denominated in SDRs were made in 1980 — 81 but none since.
Nevertheless it is used as the unit of account not only by the IMF but also by a number of international organizations of modest importance, e.g. Arab Monetary Fund, Economic Community of West African States, Nordic Investment Bank.
The International Air Transport Association uses movements of currencies against the SDR as a basis for reviewing cargo tariffs, and as we have already noted seven member countries peg their exchange rate to the SDR.
It is plain, however, that the innovation of SDRs has failed to develop as originally conceived.
The allocations of SDRs by the IMF have been very limited,(no new issues since 1981) and consequently SDRs are only a small part of countries' reserves.
The US dollar and the euro-currency markets were the main providers of additional liquidity, and therefore liquidity provided by the IMF was regarded as unnecessary or even potentially inflationary.
Private sector use of the SDR as a unit of account or the basis for international transactions has been very limited because of the absence of SDR-denominated assets which could be purchased with SDR-denominated deposits.
If the IMF had been a major borrower and issuer of SDR-denominated assets then the SDR might have been used more extensively.
9.6.2 THE US DOLLAR
We referred in Section 9.6.1 to the growing current account deficit of the USA, and Table 9.2 shows this clearly: it moved from a current account surplus of $6.9 billion in 1981 to a deficit of $ 154 billion in 1987.
This huge deficit can be explained by reference to the growth of demand within the USA which has drawn an increasing volume of imports.
In the  early part of 1988, for example, the volume of imports was 83 per cent higher than in 1980 compared with an average import growth for the rest of the world in the same period of 28 per cent .
Alternatively one might note that, relative to the growth of domestic demand in the USA, imports were 41 per cent greater in early 1988 than in 1980 — compared with, say, 7 per cent higher for France and 17 per cent higher in West Germany.
One of the factors sustaining the growth of domestic demand in the USA has been the very considerable federal government budget deficit.
Export growth over the same period has shown an increase of only 36 per cent which, although better than the world average growth of 28 per cent, is clearly not sufficient to cover the large increase in import demand.
The demand for imported goods by the USA has been sustained not only by the growth of incomes during the economic expansion since 1982 but also by the considerable appreciation of the US dollar in foreign exchange markets between 1979 and 1985 (the depreciation of the dollar beginning in March 1985).
During this period the dollar appreciated by 55 per cent as an average against major currencies.
In particular, the exchange rate of the dollar against the Deutschmark and yen were such that US demand for goods from these two countries must have been greatly stimulated.
These rates were as follows: It is clear from these data that the dollar appreciated against the Deutschmark by 85 per cent and against the yen by 20 per cent between 1979 and 1985.
The position was reversed towards the end of 1988, with a depreciation of 45 per cent and 49 per cent respectively.
Our discussion of the balance of payments in Section 7. i.1 showed that payments imbalances on the current account would need to be offset by transactions in assets and liabilities (the capital account); a deficit on the current account, as in the case of the USA (and also the UK), is offset by inflows of funds in the form of short-term and long-term capital.
This has indeed been happening to the USA, and much of the capital  funds moving to the USA have come from Japan.
Our earlier analysis of balance of payments adjustment under floating exchange rates suggests that correction must come about through foreign exchange depreciation of the deficit country's currency relative to other countries.
This could mean either a uniform, across-the-board depreciation of a greater depreciation against some currencies than others, i.e. some currencies in effect appreciate against the deficit country.
In respect of the US dollar this might well require a general depreciation as well as much greater depreciation against the Deutschmark and the yen.
This would make US exports generally cheaper in world markets but especially so in West Germany and Japan, and at the same time cause US imports to become generally more expensive in the USA but especially goods from West Germany and Japan.
Without exchange rate depreciation the only alternative method of remedying the US trade deficit is for the US federal government to adopt contractionary economic policies aimed at reducing the rate of growth of domestic demand.
Such policies might include raising federal taxes, cutting government expenditure, and raising interest rates in the USA.
In view of the above assessment one might ask why, therefore, the US situation is regarded as a problem.
To summarize:
(a)
The USA is the largest single economy in the world, accounting for about 40 per cent of the output of all the OECD countries.
It is larger than the whole of the European Community combined.
Changes in economic activity within the USA therefore have a significant effect on the level of exports of other countries and therefore affect the level of economic activity in most ofthe non-communist economies.
If the USA were to solve its balance of trade problem by internal deflationary policies aimed at reducing USA demand for imports, then the effect on the exports of the rest of the world would be noticeable and serious.
It could conceivably trigger recession in other countries.
(b)
The chronic trade deficits have resulted in the USA becoming the major debtor country in the sense that other countries' savings have flowed to the USA, attracted by relatively high rates of interest and the apparent security of investment in the world's most powerful economy.
As we noted  earlier, these capital inflows have financed the current account deficits.
It is usually assumed that although the ever-increasing indebtedness of the USA cannot continue indefinitely, the elimination of the imbalance should not be brought about by sudden and severe adjustment.
One view is that the rising indebtedness might suddenly trigger a loss of confidence, with the consequential withdrawal of funds from the USA and massive sale of US dollars; the exchange rate for the dollar would collapse, and with it would collapse the value of dollar-denominated assets held by non-US residents.
Such a fall in the value of wealth held outside the USA could itself trigger economic contraction on a wide scale.
(c)
The need by the USA to finance the deficit by — in effect — foreign borrowing is regarded as a major factor sustaining high interest rates in the USA as well as other countries.
Such high rates, it is held, are a disincentive to investment which is needed to sustain world economic growth.
(d)
The growing indebtedness of the USA is regarded as unacceptable because it is draining savings away from other, less prosperous economies.
One assertion is that the world's richest country is maintaining its high and raising standard of living by borrowing and thus depriving other countries — with very much lower living standards — of investible funds.
(e)
A widely held view is that the USA current account deficit must be corrected but that the correction should produce ‘a soft landing’.
Essentially the recommendations consist of a combination of demand restraint within the USA, and a key component of this is a reduction in the federal government deficit, together with a moderated fall in the foreign exchange value of the US dollar in order to restrain import growth and boost exports (the depreciation of the dollar would cheapen US exports and raise the price of imports).
The essentials of the problem have been thoroughly analysed in the past few years; the difficulty has been to obtain international agreement on solutions.
There have been several significant steps, as follows.
Plaza Agreement 1985 This agreement by the governments of five major economies (Japan, West Germany, France, UK, and the USA), known as the ‘group of five’, was that the dollar was  overvalued (see Table 9.6 ) and that the central banks of the group of five should regulate the decline in the dollar's foreign exchange value by a policy of managed floating, i.e. foreign exchange market intervention by the central banks.
It is clear from the data that the dollar began to depreciate steadily after March 1985.
Louvre Accord 1987 The finance ministers and central bank governors of Canada, France, West Germany, Japan, the UK, and the USA met in February 1987 (at the Louvre) and agreed to intensify efforts at economic policy coordination to promote more balanced economic growth and reduce existing imbalances.
Since the Plaza Agreement the US current account deficit had continued to increase and the current account surpluses of West Germany and Japan also continued to rise substantially.
The communique issued by the participants stated that ‘surplus countries committed themselves to following policies designed to strengthen domestic demand and to reducing external surpluses’ and ‘deficit countries committed themselves to encourage steady, low-inflation growth while reducing their domestic imbalances and external deficits.’
The accord also included agreement to ‘foster stability of exchange rates around current levels’.
Venice Economic Declaration 1987 At an economic summit of the group of seven (Canada, France, West Germany, Italy, Japan, the UK, and the USA) in June 1987 in Venice, it was agreed to strengthen arrangements for multilateral surveillance and economic coordination.
Of considerable importance, it was agreed that governments should develop medium-term economic objectives and projections for their economies which were mutually consistent, as well as using ‘performance indicators’ to determine whether there were significant deviations from an intended course that required remedial action.
The Louvre Accord and the Venice summit represent quite significant economic agreement because:
(a)
There was the recognition that elimination of trade deficits can be accomplished by policy measures in both deficit and surplus economies, i.e. demand moderation in the deficit countries and demand stimulation in the surplus countries as well as regulated exchange rate adjustments.
(b)
The setting of economic objectives and projections by individual countries would imply that the ‘success’ of economic policy could be tested and judged by other countries, and by implication that appropriate economic policies would need to be introduced if objectives were not being achieved.
Since the group of seven meeting in Venice there have been several statements by the group referring to the world economy and the need for intensified policy coordination.
In 1987 there were three further statements after the Venice summit, maintaining the impetus towards greater policy coordination.
Toronto Economic Declaration 1988 In June 1988 another summit meeting of the group of seven extended the area of concern to include the overriding need to resist protectionism and strengthen the multilateral trading system; to develop a strategy for economic development and the debt problem of the less developed economies; and to deal with the world agricultural problem.
The declaration recognized the special needs of the poorest developing countries and the proposals included con-cessional interest rates on debt as well as the adjustment of repayment periods.
The shift of emphasis of the Toronto declaration probably derives from:
(a)
A recognition that by 1987 the fiscal position of the USA had shown improvement since the federal deficit had been reduced by the equivalent of 2 per cent of GNP; and West Germany, for example, had maintained an expansionary fiscal position since 1985.
(b)
A diminishing of the current account imbalances by 1987 (see Table 9.2 ).
The growth of the current account deficit of the USA was showing signs of moderating throughout 1 987 and into 1988; the increase in the current account surpluses of Japan and West Germany was slowing markedly in 1987 and 1988.
(c)
An awareness that the debt problem of the developing countries — particularly the group of fifteen heavily indebted nations (see Section 8.2.2) required monitoring.
Although the current balances of most developing countries had begun to improve after 1981, for many countries their ability to service  their heavy debts was less in 1987 than in 1982.
Total debt too continued to increase from $633 billion in 1980 to $ 1,217 billion in 1987, of which about 40 per cent was owed by the fifteen heavily indebted countries.
9.7 Summary
(a)
Under managed floating, exchange rates are free to move according to market forces but governments may intervene in an attempt to stabilize any short-term fluctuations.
The characteristic features of an international monetary system based on floating are as follows:.
Adjustment can now come about automatically via the exchange rate, although the success of this mechanism depends upon the elasticity of demand for imports and exports as far as the current account is concerned, and on the stability of capital flows for an overall balance of payments.
Liquidity is based less on the dollar or other key reserve assets and more on variety of currencies, since there is no obligation to peg individual currencies to any particular standard.
Cooperation seems to be less of an immediate necessity with market-determined exchange rates, but coordination of national policies still seems desirable if conflict and economic stagnation are to be avoided in the long run.
(b)
In theory floating exchange rates should adjust to compensate for differences in domestic inflation rates.
But the purchasing power parity theorem has not been a very successful explanation over short periods because in practice large discre-pancies in real exchange rates have emerged.
One reason is that current account flows no longer dominate the supply of and demand for currencies, and that capital transactions have assumed a greater relative importance.
In this environment official intervention in the foreign exchange markets has less chance of achieving even short-term success, with the result that floating has become less managed in recent years.
(c)
The general adoption of floating has also posed problems for the objective of economic and monetary union within the EC.
It had been hoped that the removal of exchange rate fluctuations between EC currencies would constitute the first stage toward monetary union, but the widespread acceptance of floating has made this aim more difficult to achieve, although  the European Monetary System has had some success in this respect.
(d)
Both fixed and floating exchange rates have advantages and disadvantages, although the history of managed floating to date does cast doubt on some of the stronger claims originally made in favour of floating.
However, floating has occurred previously, as in 1973, because of a breakdown in fixed exchange rates rather than as a result of a collective decision based on an assessment of its relative advantages.
The success of floating should be judged in the light of the fact that it has usually operated under unfavourable circumstances, and thus the concerted adoption of floating exchange rates in more stable circumstances might well yield different results and evaluation.
(e)
In recent years the stability of the international monetary system has been threatened by the debt problem of ‘middle-income’ countries such as Brazil and Argentina.
Much of the indebtedness of these middle-income countries arose through borrowings in private sector capital markets, mainly the euro-currency markets, and although it was feared that the banks involved were seriously at risk it is becoming clear that rescheduling of debt by the banks with the debtor countries has been possible.
Nevertheless the debtor countries continue to have a problem because the flow of private finance fell considerably between 1982 and 1984 after the emergence of the debt problem, and this fall in private flows of capital has not recovered.
It is fortunate, however, that total debt has ceased to grow as fast, and since 1986 the total debt relative to country exports has fallen slightly.
But it is still the case that such countries have considerable difficulty in servicing their debts and the debt problem continues to be serious.
This was recognized in the Toronto Declaration.
(f)
The USA trade deficit constitutes the other source of instability within the international monetary system.
It is recognized that the current account deficit and associated capital inflows to the USA must eventually be corrected.
The difficulty is to ensure that adjustment does not result in either world recession or financial collapse associated with a precipi-tate fall in the foreign exchange value of the dollar.
There are indications that the US trade deficit is increasing at a lower  rate, and that inter-governmental cooperation has contributed to an orderly decline in the dollar's foreign exchange value.
It continues to be a difficult problem in view of the role of the dollar in international trade and finance, and the size of the U S economy.
Appendix 1 Exchange rate indexing
CALCULATION OF WEIGHTED EXCHANGE RATE INDEX
A simplified illustration allows us to demonstrate the importance of a weighted exchange rate in order to capture the effect of changes in different exchange rates on the overall position.
We will assume that exchange rates with the rest of the world do not change.
The starting position for trade is as follows:.
By using a weighted average for the exchange rate we are able to capture the much more important depreciation against the Deutschmark, which swamps the appreciation against the  dollar.
The overall position is therefore a sterling depreciation .
If only the sterling — dollar rate were quoted, it would indicate an appreciation of the exchange rate.
REVISIONS TO THE CALCULATION OF THE EFFECTIVE EXCHANGE RATE
The ‘old’ exchange rate index (ERI) used weights derived from an IMF model, and these weights were becoming increasingly out of date.
The IMF began publishing in July 1988 a new monthly series of nominal effective exchange rate indices for sixteen industrialized countries.
The Bank of England has decided to make the IMF's new index the UK's ‘official’ exchange rate index.
The main difference between the ‘new’ and the ‘old’series is that the weights of the new are derived from trade flows in manufactured goods rather than trade in all goods based on 1977 trade flows, which was used for the old index.
The base date for the new sterling ERI will be 1985 = 100 and the index came into operation on 3 January 1989.
It is clear from Figure 9.4 and Table 9.4 that the new index provides a similar picture to the old index but with some divergence.
Appendix 2 Operation of a floating exchange rate in Table 9.5
Suppose at the beginning of year in Table 9.5 the exchange rate between the UK and West Germany (WGS is £1 = DM 3.00.
During that year, however, the rate of inflation in the UK relative to that in WG is 10 per cent(e.g. inflation in the UK is 10 per cent p.a and in WG is zero; or is 15 per cent p.a in the UK and 5 per cent p.a. in WG).
This would mean that at the end of year 1 a UK car would have a showroom price of £13,200 not £12,000.
A West German car exported to the UK   which sold for DM 36,000 in WG would still sell for £12,000 at the exchange rate £1 = DM3.00.
Thus similar cars from WG would be £1,200 cheaper than the UK-made car, and UK cars would be selling for DM39,600 in WG, i.e. DM3,600 dearer than the equivalent car made in WG (year 2a).
Demand for cars from WG would increase (UK imports) and demand for UK cars would decline (UK exports), but this would also result in an increase in UK residents' demand for Deutschmarks and a decrease in West German residents' demand for the pound.
If the exchange rate for the two currencies is determined by market forces then the price of Deutschmarks would rise and the price of pounds would fall.
The exchange rate (the price of currencies in terms of each other) would move initially to, say, £1 = DM 2.9, i.e. the Deutschmarks are becoming dearer, for there are fewer per pound.
This change in the exchange rate would cause cars from WG to become dearer in the UK and UK cars sold in WG would become cheaper.
The change in the exchange rate would continue automatically until the price difference for cars had been eliminated.
Such a situation would apply when the exchange rate had moved to £1 = DM2.727 (year 2b), when the UK car in WG would no longer be uncompetitive and the WG car sold in the UK would no longer have a price-competitive advantage.
The levels of exports and imports between the two countries would return to their original positions, as would the balance of payments position between the two countries.
Appendix 3 Exchange Rate Comparisons
Table 9.6 shows data for the sterling effective exchange rate as well as for other currencies.
The comparison of the effective exchange rate and actual rates clearly demonstrates the value and necessity for a weighted exchange rate.
We can see from the annual average figures that sterling's effective exchange rate has fallen since 1975 (1975 = 100) and in 1987 it averaged 72.6 — depreciation of 27 per cent.
But in recent years sterling has appreciated against the US dollar but depreciated against the major European currencies and also the Japanese yen.
The effective exchange rates for the Deutschmark, yen, Netherlands guilder, and Swiss franc appreciated, whereas the French franc and Italian lira (as well as the pound) have depreciated.
One  should not be surprised at the offsetting movements of currencies, since if some currencies are appreciating then as a matter of arithmetic other currencies must be depreciating.
It should be noted that the Bank of England has, from January 1989, adopted a new effective exchange rate (see Appendix 1 to this chapter).
This new index will continue to provide information on the relative movement in the average value of sterling, but it needs to be noted that the absolute value of the index is higher than the old index.
In 1988 the old effective exchange rate had absolute values in the 70s but the new index is in the 90s.
This change in these values does not mean that there has been an appreciation of sterling.
10
A SIMPLE MACROECONOMIC MODEL
10.1 Introduction
In the remainder of the book we intend to examine macroeconomic theory and policy in order that the reader can appreciate how government decisions in the area of fiscal and monetary policy affect the economy in general and the banking and financial system in particular.
But before we can understand the operation of macroeconomic management it is first necessary to examine a simple model within which some of the more fundamental macroeconomic relationships can be identified and explained.
The purpose of any model is to  identify and summarize the more important features of the problem under investigation.
Economic models are particularly useful since millions of daily transactions are carried out in the real world and so some means must be found of expressing the essential characteristics of the problem at hand.
A macroeconomic model by its very nature must be highly simplified since its purpose is to simulate what is happening in the economy as a whole.
It is only on the basis of such a model that the government, which considers one of its basic functions to be the management of the economy, can predict what the effect will be of a change in one of its policies.
However, the danger with relying upon such a model is that the necessity to summarize and simplify the more relevant economic relationships can lead to the omission or misrepresentation of some important features.
This potential weakness has to be borne in mind when macroeconomic models are used as a basis for policy prescription.
The rest of this chapter will be concerned with developing  one particular model, known as the income — expenditure model, which has frequently been used as a basis for explaining the operation of fiscal policy.
Our basic model is developed from the circular flow relationship that was established in Chapter 1, and so the reader is recommended to refer to that chapter as a background for the present discussion.
Readers who find the discussion too brief may wish to consult one of the many basic economics textbooks which cover this area.
10.2 The basic model
Our basic model is developed from the circular flow approach which we adopted in Chapter 1.
In Figure 1.1 we divided the economy into two sectors, households and firms, and we assumed that all the households' income earned in the current week was used to purchase the output of firms.
Accordingly total expenditure E in the period under consideration was composed entirely of consumers' expenditure C , and total income Y in the community was identical to this expenditure.
The assumptions can be expressed as follows: However, we did point out in Chapter 1 that the above summary is an over simplified representation of the real world, not least because it ignores the existence of the government and external sectors.
We have explained elsewhere in this book that the government sector gives rise to taxation and expenditure flows (see Chapter 6) and that the external sector gives rise to export and import flows (see Chapter 7 and Appendix 2 to this chapter).
At the same time we have to take account of the fact that some of the households' income will be channelled into saving, and that additional spending on the output of firms will arise from investment.
How, then, can the circular flow be extended to include all these other flows?
If we analyse all the uses to which income is put, then it is immediately obvious that for the economy as a whole consumers' expenditure on goods produced in the domestic circular flow is  only one element.
Some income will be taken in direct taxation, such as income tax and so will not be available for other uses.
The amount of income left over after deduction of this taxation is known as disposable income.
This disposable income is not all directed into consumption on goods and services produced by firms in the domestic economy because some portion will be saved and some part will be used to purchase goods and services produced by firms in other countries (i.e. imports).
Therefore we can classify the various uses of income as in Figure 10.1 .
We can refer to taxation, saving, and imports as leakages from the  domestic circular flow since such flows are not immediately used to purchase goods and services produced in the domestic economy.
However, these flows may be ultimately recycled into the domestic circular flow because governments invariably spend what they raise in taxation, because expenditure on investment goods is frequently financed out of current saving, and because other countries often spend on domestically produced goods and services at the same time as we purchase their products.
But the point is that there is no automatic mechanism to ensure that taxation, saving, and import flows are immediately returned to the domestic circular flow.
If we examine all the categories of total expenditure in the economy, then consumption of domestic products is only one component.
Aggregate expenditure also consists of government spending, exports, and investment, all of which contribute to the demand for domestically produced goods and services.
Therefore we may classify the various types of expenditure as in Figure 10.2 .
We can refer to government expenditure, investment, and exports as injections into the circular flow because  they add to consumers' expenditure on domestic products.
This total expenditure is often referred to as aggregate demand , i.e. the total demand for goods and services in the economy which arises from consumption on domestic products, government expenditure, investment, and exports.
Now that we have identified the types of leakages and injections associated with the circular flow, we can begin to explain the assumptions that the basic model makes about the determinants of these various flows.
Consumers' domestic expenditure C is assumed to be related to income levels Y .
This consumption relationship in its simplest form is often expressed as: where a is some constant consumption irrespective of income levels, and b is some fraction of additional income (known as the marginal propensity to consume) which would be less than 1 but greater than zero for the community as a whole.
Many detailed studies have been carried out on the nature of the consumption relationship and all seem to agree that, for the community as a whole, consumption is related in some way to income.
Taxation Tin the circular flow has been interpreted as income taxation and is the difference between gross and disposable income.
Other forms of taxation may be introduced as well, but for the sake of simplicity we will confine our discussion to income taxation.
It is taken for granted that such taxation is  related to income levels because the amount taken in income tax varies directly with incomes.
Saving S in the economy is assumed to be related to income levels also, in a similar manner to consumption.
The proportion of any additional income that is saved (the marginal propensity to save) will tend to vary according to the tastes and preferences of the individual, and one might expect the proportion that is saved to increase as income increases.
For the community as a whole, total saving will tend to vary directly with the level of income.
Imports M will absorb a certain fraction of any additional income received by the community, the relevant proportion being known as the marginal propensity to import.
The actual proportion will depend upon many factors, but whatever the fraction the basic model assumes that import spending is directly related to income.
Again, this seems a justifiable assumption to make because the experience of the UK and other countries confirms that imports rise when incomes rise.
Government expenditure G is determined by political decisions, as we noted in Chapter 6.
Accordingly, the model assumes that government spending is determined mainly by factors outside the circular flow.
In other words, the level of government expenditure is assumed to be exogenous, i.e. given from outside the model.
This is clearly an over simplification because, as was pointed out in Chapter 6, a considerable proportion of public expenditure in the modern economy is demand-determined, at least in the short term.
Investment expenditure I is also assumed to be exogenous in our model, with factors such as business confidence and the expectations of entrepreneurs being considered more important determinants of the level of investment than the current level of income.
However, this may be an oversimplified assumption because the current level of economic activity will certainly influence business expectations and confidence.
It is recognized, also, that investment may be influenced by interest rates, with fluctuations in the latter having a direct effect on the cost of borrowed funds and therefore on the profitability of potential investments.
This relationship should be borne in mind when we examine monetary policy in the next two chapters.
Exports X from the domestic economy are related to income  levels in the rest of the world, along with other factors such as the exchange rate (see Section 7.2.1).
The value of exports is assumed to be determined by factors outside the domestic circular flow and so is assumed to be exogenous in our model.
In summary, our basic model assumes that leakages from the circular flow (T, S, M ) are determined within the model by income levels, and so can be described as endogenous.
Injections of expenditure (G, I, X ) are exogenous, however, because they are given from outside the model.
Now that we have classified the various sources of income and types of expenditure, as well as identifying the assumptions that the model makes about the nature of these flows, the next matter to discuss is the relationship between total income Y and aggregate expenditure E .
In Figure 1.1 the reader will notice that income equals expenditure in the period under consideration.
In fact income and expenditure also will be identical when we take into account all the various leakages and injections connected with the circular flow, because income and expenditure are simply two different ways of measuring the value of the same set of economic transactions.
Expenditure by one party will be equivalent to income for another, and so total income must be equal to aggregate expenditure in the domestic circular flow.
Indeed the national income accounts measure the value of goods and services produced in the economy (gross domestic product) by both an income and an expenditure method.
The use of these two methods of estimating gross domestic product (GDP) provides a cross-check on the accuracy of the recorded information.
Income must equal expenditure when all the sources of income and types of expenditure are classified and measured.
We are now in a position to express our discussion in terms of a set of definitions: Appendix 2 to this chapter explains how the last expression can be used as a basis for illustrating the flow-of-funds accounts, with each of the bracketed expressions representing the various sectors in the economy.
But here the reader should notice that total injections (G + I + X ) must equal total leakages (T + S + M ).
How, then, are these flows brought into balance in the model which we are investigating?
It is at this point that the assumptions made about the nature of injections and leakages are relevant.
For instance, imagine that there are increased injections into the circular flow in the form of investment, or government expenditure, or exports.
Income will start to rise as a result of this additional spending, but leakages will rise also because taxation, saving, and imports are all related to the level of national income.
In other words, extra spending automatically generates additional leakages from the circular flow.
Accordingly, income and expenditure will increase as a result of additional injections of spending until once again total injections equal total leakages, but at a higher level of income and expenditure.
On the other hand reduced injections will have a contractionary effect on income levels in the domestic circular flow.
Leakages of saving, taxation, and imports will fall as income declines until once again total leakages equal total injections.
In this case, however, the economy will operate at a lower level of income and expenditure.
So, it is variations in income levels which equate total injections and leakages, even though these flows are the results of the decisions of millions of different economic agents.
This equality comes about in our basic model through leakages being directly related to income levels.
The important question, however, is at what level of national income (and therefore national prosperity) will injections equal leakages and income equal expenditure?
The answer to this question is of concern to government because it has responsibility for managing the economy in the interests of the community.
10.3 The multiplier
In the previous section we indicated the direction of changes in national income and aggregate demand when there were increased or reduced injections into the circular flow.
The other  crucial feature of the process is the magnitude of change in national income: if injections increased by £100 million, for example, would national income rise by the same amount?
We will investigate the magnitude of change in national income by first of all considering changes in government expenditure, one of the three categories of injections.
Suppose the government spends an additional £100 million on the construction of a new motorway.
This £100 million will be received by workers, contractors, suppliers, etc. who are enga-ged on building the motorway, and so the first-round effect will be an equivalent increase in national income of £100 million (remember, income must equal expenditure).
Let us suppose that the proportion of any additional income absorbed as leakages is 0.6.
Therefore £60 million of the additional income will be channelled into taxation, saving, and imports, with the remaining £40 million being spent on consumer goods and services produced in the domestic economy.
This extra consumers' expenditure will give rise to additional income of £40 million in those domestic industries producing the required goods and services.
The second-round effect of the increased government expenditure will be a further increase in national income of £40 million.
Again some proportion (60 per cent) of this additional income will leak from the circular flow while the remainder is passed on as extra consumers' expenditure on domestic goods and services.
This time £24 million (£40 million × 0.6) will be absorbed in leakages and £16 million will be received as additional income in the circular flow.
The third-round effect of the increase in government expenditure will be a further increase of £16 million in national income.
The process will continue, and with each stage the amount of income passed on to others in the circular flow will be reduced by leakages of taxation, saving, and imports.
The following increases in national income will take place after the initial increase in government expenditure of £100 million: £100 million, £40 million, £16 million, £6.4 million, £2.56 million, and so on.
A simple formula exists for calculating the sum of such a series: This amount represents the total increase in national income following from the initial injection of government expenditure.
Indeed the total increase in national income (£167 million) divided by the initial injection of expenditure (£100 million) is known as the multiplier .
When leakages absorb 60 per cent of any additional income, therefore, the value of the multiplier is 1.67.
This value is simply the reciprocal of the proportion of income taken in leakages, i.e. .
We are now in a position to see the significance of government expenditure and taxation flows in the determination of national income levels.
An increase or decrease in government spending will stimulate or contract national income by an amount given by the value of the multiplier.
A similar effect takes place when the government changes the rate at which taxation is levied because such changes alter the proportion of additional income which is absorbed by leakages.
For instance, a cut in the basic rate of income tax would reduce the proportion of income taken in leakages and so would increase the value of the multiplier.
Government spending and taxation will therefore have a magnified effect on total income and expenditure flows, thereby providing the fiscal authorities with a potential means for managing the economy.
We could examine the workings of the multiplier by considering changes in other injections into the circular flow.
An increase in exports would be particularly beneficial in that the  balance of payments would improve and at the same time national income will rise by an amount greater than the initial increase in exports.
If we retain the assumption that leakages constitute 60 per cent of additional income, then a multiplier of 1.67 would apply to the increase in exports.
The multiplier process would apply to additional investment expenditures also, but with both exports and investment expenditures the government has little direct control over the size of these flows.
Certainly the government may exert an indirect influence on these injections (e.g. investment may be encouraged by lower interest rates), but the degree of control is not as powerful or certain as that which it exercises over government expenditure.
Of course changes in national income can also be brought about by variations in the proportion of national income that is taken in imports and saving.
Again, however, the authorities cannot control these leakages directly whereas they can vary tax rates through their own budgetary powers.
Accordingly, variations in government spending and taxation might provide the best avenue for policies aimed at controlling the level of national income.
This is not to say that other injections and leakages are less significant, only that they are less easy for governments to control.
10.4 Fiscal policy
Since the government has responsibility — either directly or indirectly — for the management of the economy, it is especially interested in the level of expenditure generated by the circular flow process.
More precisely, the government has certain economic objectives that it would wish to achieve, and all are affected in some way by national income levels.
The reader is referred to Chapter 12 for a more thorough discussion of the compatibility of these economic objectives.
At this point, however, it is useful if we explain briefly what the principal economic objectives are and now their attainment is influenced by the level of national income.
Full employment Gross domestic product is a measure of the money value of the goods and services produced in the economy during a certain period of time.
The money value of goods and  service is derived from two components, quantity and price.
If an increase in national income is the result of an increase in the quantity of goods and services produced, then we would expect the level of employment to rise as more people are employed in the production of additional output.
The employment objective may be attained, therefore, by increasing the quantity of goods and services produced.
One obvious policy for the achievement of this objective is for government to stimulate aggregate demand by some means or other.
One method may be through variations in government expenditure and taxation since these flows are under the direct control of the authorities.
Since the election of the Conservative government in 1979 the official attitude towards the achievement of full employment has shifted from the consensus which applied to previous Conservative and Labour governments.
Although the present Conservative government would claim to be concerned about unemployment, it has argued that falling unemployment can only be achieved by (a) reducing the rate of inflation, since this would raise the real value of a given level of money spending in the economy, and (b) stimulating the operation of markets, especially the labour market, so that changes in the relative price of labour can come about more easily and thus ‘price people into jobs’.
Although the government would admit that in the short term a rise in aggregate demand stimulated by government fiscal policy would raise employment and output (quantity), in the longer term such fiscal relaxation would raise the rate of inflation (price) and not quantity; money GDP (price × quantity) would be rising but not output.
These issues are still the basis for debate and controversy.
Stable prices Rapid inflation is regarded as undesirable for many reasons, not least because of the danger it poses for the stability of the economic and political system (see Chapter 12  for further discussion).
Accordingly one of the objectives of government may be to achieve stable prices, or more realistica-lly to reduce the rate at which prices are rising.
But when governments expand aggregate demand in an attempt to secure the employment objective, there is a danger that the extra spending will increase prices rather than output.
In theory it is conceivable for any increase in aggregate demand to raise output and employment levels as long as full employment of the labour force has not been reached.
After full employment is reached, extra spending will only serve to add to the rate of inflation.
In practice, however, bottlenecks in production are likely to develop well before this physical limit is reached, perhaps because of equipment and labour shortages in specific industries.
In such circumstances the achievement of the prices objective may necessitate a reduction in aggregate demand through cuts in government expenditure and increased taxes.
Balance of payments equilibrium For most countries the achievement of a balance of payments equilibrium is desirable because the authorities can then apply their economic policies solely for domestic purposes.
We have argued earlier that the value of imports is related to the level of national income in the domestic economy and that the value of exports is related to aggregate demand abroad.
Therefore an expansion of aggregate demand in the domestic economy which is not matched by comparable increases in other economies will result in a deterioration in the balance of payments.
Conversely, a contraction in domestic national income relative to that in other countries may improve the balance of payments.
High rate of growth The rate of growth is a measure of the increase in output over a period of time.
But booms and slumps in economic activity occur periodically so that the relevant time period over which to measure economic growth is a number of years, e.g. the average rate of growth over ten years.
Over such periods high growth rates, and rapid improvements in living standards, are dependent upon an increase in productive capacity rather than on temporary changes in the level of demand.
However, investment is required to augment productive capacity, and policies to eliminate excessive fluctuations in aggregate demand may provide the best environment for high investment expenditures.
Our brief discussion of economic objectives and their relationship to the level of national income suggests that control over aggregate money demand is necessary if the government is to achieve all or some of these objectives.
UK governments, until recently, have relied traditionally upon fiscal policy, i.e. variations in government expenditure and taxation, as the primary weapon to achieve its objectives.
The income — expenditure model has been used as a framework for justifying this role for fiscal policy because government expenditure and taxation directly, and fairly reliably, influence national income levels.
Up to the Second World War it was normal for governments to run a balanced budget.
The only exception was in war periods when it became customary to meet part of the additional spending through borrowing.
In the Victorian era, however, the burden of interest payments resulting from earlier wartime borrowing caused such concern that for some time budget surpluses were run in order to reduce the national debt.
But the prolonged depression of the interwar period caused a reappraisal of the attitude of governments to their own budgetary position, with Keynes the most influential figure in advocating that budget deficits should be adopted in such circumstances.
His argument was that aggregate demand could best be stimulated through fiscal expansion, and that in the prevailing conditions most of the increase in national income would feed through into output and therefore employment rather than inflation.
After 1945 this philosophy became the conventional wisdom and governments accepted that they had a responsibility for macroeconomic management, predominantly through their own fiscal position.
Budget deficits were regarded as a normal feature of economic management based on Keynesian principles.
It is only relatively recently, as we have suggested earlier, that with the election of a Conservative government in 1979 this orthodoxy was challenged and reversed.
Budget surpluses are now the norm and the emphasis is on repaying government debt rather than borrowing.
Although at the political level it would seem that the Keynesian position has been relegated, at the theoretical (and practical) level it is maintained that fiscal policy can influence the achievement of the objectives of government policy.
It has been argued that the Conservative government has in its policy changes (if not  publicly voiced) moved towards a more Keynesian stance.
The preceding discussion suggests that the operation of Keynesian fiscal policy should pose few problems.
But the typical situation facing a government has been what to do when the economy suffers from more than one problem simultaneously, e.g. unemployment and inflation.
The coexistence of these two problems means that a choice must be made between an expansionary or contractionary budget depending on the government's preference: higher employment or stable prices.
The response of most governments has been to manipulate the economy in order to secure some trade-off between the conflicting economic objectives.
This question of trade-offs, and the ‘fine-tuning’ of the economy in order to achieve these objectives, will be examined further in Chapter 12.
Two other considerations relevant to the conduct of fiscal policy also should be mentioned.
First, when governments want to make relatively large adjustments in their budgetary positions they may rely more upon changes in taxation than changes in public expenditures.
Part of the explanation for this is that government spending tends to be planned over a number of years (e.g. hospitals, schools, and other capital expenditures take several years to complete, and governments are reluctant to dismiss teachers, policemen, and other employees for short-term economic reasons); consequently such expenditure tends to be fairly inflexible, especially downwards, in the short run.
In contrast, tax rates are relatively easy to alter and so may be the more appropriate means to adjust fiscal policy when changing economic conditions require action.
Secondly, when governments spend in excess of taxation receipts the budget deficit incurred will be reduced as income levels rise and taxation receipts subsequently increase.
Thus part of the expense of an increase in government expenditure will be met by additional taxation receipts as national income and expenditure rise to higher levels than previously.
Now that we have outlined the basic operations of fiscal policy, it is desirable to conclude by pointing out some of the limitations of this approach to economic management:
(a)
The achievement of a predetermined budgetary target may prove difficult because of the  uncertainties involved in  economic forecasting.
It is the normal practice for the Treasury first to make an estimation of economic growth, inflation, public expenditure, and revenue receipts on the basis of unchanged fiscal policies.
Then, if the general economic conclusions are considered unsatisfactory, a fiscal adjustment can be considered.
But economic growth is subject to many influences, most of which are beyond the direct control of government, and relatively small errors in the Treasury's forecast can have quite large effects on actual revenue receipts and public expenditures.
Between 1976 and 1986 the average error in the Treasury's forecasting of the PSBR (whether negative or positive) was £2.3 billion, and in the 1983 edition of  the Treasury's Financial Statement and Budget Report it was estimated that the average error in forecasting the public sector borrowing requirement for the year ahead was ofthe order of 1.5 per cent of GDP.
Recently the size of the error has increased and the Treasury has greatly underestimated the negative PSBR (i.e. budget surplus).
Table 12.7 presents PSBR data since 1983.
(b)
The supporters of fiscal policy as the principal macroeconomic policy defend their position by arguing that changes in government expenditure have a direct effect on economic activity.
The argument is that government spending and taxation unambiguously influence total income and expenditure.
But this approach tends to neglect the monetary effects of budgetary decisions.
Earlier chapters (see Chapter 6 especially) have indicated how the financing of budget deficits (or surpluses) has implications for the size of the money supply and the level of interest rates, and it is to the relationship between these monetary variables and economic activity that we will turn in Chapter 11.
However,our basic model may be criticized in advance of this discussion in so far as it ignores the monetary effects of fiscal decisions and so may overstate the case in favour of macroeconomic management through this route.
(c)
The achievement of multiple economic objectives is especially difficult if the government relies exclusively upon one type of policy which operates essentially through the channel of aggregate demand.
Additional policies may be required to complement fiscal policy if the government is to have a better chance of achieving its various objectives.
10.5 Summary
(a)
In our basic model we established that total expenditure (or aggregate demand) derives from consumers' expenditure on domestically produced goods and services C , government expenditure G , investment I , and exports X ; that national income Y consists of consumers' expenditure on domestically produced goods and services C , taxation T , saving S , and imports M ; and that aggregate demand is equivalent to national income.
From these relationships it was established that total leakages (T + S + M) must equal total injections (G + I + X ).
(b)
Since leakages are assumed to be related to income, and injections are assumed exogenous, then variations in income equate total income and expenditure flows in the circular flow model.
The important question, however, is at what level of national income does income equal expenditure?
(c)
Governments have a direct influence over the process of national income determination through their control over the flows of public expenditure G and taxation T .
The management of the economy through fiscal policy is assisted by the multiplier which magnifies any injection of expenditures or leakages of income into or out of the circular flow.
(d)
Fiscal policy may provide government with a potentially powerful method of managing the economy in order to achieve its macroeconomic objectives.
However, government expenditure and taxation flows also exert an influence on monetary variables — and therefore affect economic activity — since the size and financing of the public sector borrowing requirement (negative or positive) are crucial elements in the determination of the money supply and interest rates.
Appendix 1 Calculation of GDP by expenditure method
The expenditure method of calculating the GDP is the most commonly presented.
Extensive data for the UK are contained in Table 10.1 .
We may use the figures for 1987 to relate to the discussion in this chapter: These categories of expenditure do not correspond exactly with the simplifications in the text.
For example,G above refers only to government consumption expenditure rather than all government expenditure, which would also include spending on fixed assets; this item is in fact included under gross domestic fixed capital formation.
In assessing how much is spent on domestic output we add the first four items.
Spending on imports is then deducted because this represents spending on output produced by other countries.
So 
Because taxes on expenditure (i.e. VAT, customs and excise duties) artificially inflate the value of what is sold, we need to deduct T .
On the other hand, subsidies (largely payments to farmers) reduce artificially the value of what is sold, and therefore this element Sb needs to be added back in.
Thus the final calculation of the value of what was actually produced within the UK economy in 1987 is £351,413 million and is given by the relation.
Appendix 2 Circular flow model
For those readers who are familiar with the circular flow model outlined in Chapter 1, this appendix is intended to provide a slightly more rigorous approach to that which has already been developed in Sections 1.2 — 1.5.
Beginning with Figure 1.3 , we can see that this system has all the major flows of expenditure and income incorporated within it.
Looking first at expenditure flows, we can identify total expenditures within the economy as the sum of consumption spending by the personal sector;investment spending by the industrial and commercial sector;investment and current spending by the government, local authorities, and the public corporations, i.e.  the public sector; and the net position with respect to imports and exports (‘net’ since imports represent expenditure on output of another economy), i.e. the overseas sector.
Having identified the main sectors we can now include them in the circular flow approach adopted in Figure 1.2 .
All the sectors transact with another sector in some way, in the form of either production and sale of goods and services, or borrowing and lending (the production of financial assets and liabilities), or indeed both types of transaction.
Figure 10.3 and Tables 10.2 and 10.3 illustrate these relationships.
Beginning with the industrial and commercial sector (in Figure 1.2 we simply call this sector ‘firms’), these firms are paying out in each period (a year) £13,500 million which is largely wages and salaries to employees.
A further £4,000 million is spent by this sector on the importation of necessary inputs from abroad (raw materials, etc.), as well as the £2,500 million spent on investment; and finally the firms pay £1,500 million corporation tax.
In terms of market prices the industrial and commercial sector produces   £10,000 million of consumer goods and services, and £5,000 million capital goods of which half is used by the sector itself and the other is purchased by the public sector.
We have assumed for simplicity that the public sector's current spending of £5,000 million flows entirely into the industrial and commercial sector in return for goods and services.
The personal sector earns in return for contributing to current production (no pensions are received by individuals in our model) a gross income of £13,500 million, and of this sum, £3,000 million is paid in income tax to the public sector.
The personal sector's disposable income of £10,500 million is distributed between £10,000 million consumer purchases and £500 million saving.
The public sector, as we have already seen, spends £7,500 million on current expenditure and capital goods.
The receipts of this sector amount only £6,000 million, comprising £3, o00 million income tax, £1,500 million corporation tax, and £1,500 million in VAT.
It is evident that the public sector is running a deficit of £1,500 million.
We have assumed that exports amount to £3,000 million and that imports are £4,000 million; the external sector has a surplus of £1,000 million (this does of course represent an unfavourable balance of payments for the country represented in the model).
Table 10.2 provides a summary of total expenditure as outlined at the beginning of the appendix.
Since spending also generates income for members of the community, we can also consider the income of the community as being disposed of in three ways: consumption, saving, and the payment of taxes.
Table 10.3 provides the alternative presentation.
Table 10.4 examines each of the sectors we identified at the beginning of the appendix.
It will be noticed that the personal sector has a surplus of receipts over expenditure of £500 million, the public sector has a deficit of £1,500 million, the external sector has a surplus amounting to £1,000 million, and the industrial and commercial sector is in balance.
However, the sums of the deficits and surpluses exactly offset one another so that all sectors together have neither a surplus nor a deficit.
Nevertheless for an individual sector, as we have already seen in Section 1.3, this need not be the case since income can exceed expenditure and vice versa.
Using the information and  identities of Tables 10.2 and 10.3 , we can express some of these ideas symbolically: We can rearrange this to  Since Y = E then Y-E must be equal to zero, and the propositions above follow from that identity.
In the last equation you will notice that the bracketed expressions approximate to our sectors, the industrial and commercial as well as the personal (I-S ), the public sector (G-T ), and the external sector (X-M ), and that although they must all sum to zero it does not follow that each expression must be equal to zero.
Thus investment spending by firms may be greater or less than the volume of saving, government spending may be greater or less than tax receipts, and exports may be greater or less than imports, but it must be the case that a deficit or surplus in one sector is exactly offset in one or more of the other sectors.
For example, using the figures in Table 10.2 and 10.3 (£million): If we return to Table 10.4 we are able to examine how the various sectors ‘solved’ the problem of their surpluses and deficits, in the sense used earlier (Section 1.5).
If a sector is not in balance (i.e. Y=E ) it has either to accumulate assets (the surplus sector) or attempt to sell additional liabilities (the deficit sector).
In this illustration the personal sector channelled its surplus of £500 million to the financial sector (banks, insurance companies, building societies, etc.) and the remaining funds originated from the foreign sector which lent its £1,000 million surplus derived from the excess of its exports  over imports.
The total funds were then used to purchase £1,500 million of government securities, thus allowing the public sector to cover its deficit.
11
MONEY AND ECONOMIC ACTIVITY
The last two chapters of the book are primarily concerned with the problems and policies of macroeconomic management, with special emphasis being given to the role of monetary policy.
Before we can look at the appropriate policies for macroeconomic management, we must first investigate the theoretical relationship between money and economic activity.
Such a discussion is essential since it enables us to judge the degree to which the successful conduct of monetary policy can influence economic activity and thereby achieve economic objectives.
For quite a long time the prevailing view among economists had been that money does not affect the relative prices of commodities, but that it does determine the overall price level.
These ideas, embodied in the so-called quantity theory of money, dominated economic thinking until the 1930s.
Since then we have witnessed the development first of all of the Keynesian view of the importance of money, followed by the monetarist view which is at odds with the former and is closely associated with the original quantity theory.
It is the aim of this chapter to examine these theoretical issues, especially the Keynesian versus monetarist debate, since theoretical controversy has had a profound influence on the attitude of most governments towards monetary policy as an approach to macroeconomic management.
11.1 The quantity theory
The quantity theory reflected the view of economists prior to the 1930s that changes in the quantity of money in existence do not have a permanent effect on the real sector of the economy (that is on, output and employment levels), but do determine the general price level.
The quantity theory is based on the  following relationship, which is known as the equation of exchange: As expressed here, the relationship between MV and PT constitutes a truism, or identity, as can be illustrated by an example.
Consider a simple economy consisting of one fisherman and one farmer.
During a particular week the fisherman sells the farmer two fish at £4 per fish, and during the same week the farmer sells the fisherman eight loaves at £1 per loaf.
So the total number of transactions will be ten, and the average price of each transaction is £16 /10 = £1.60.
Suppose the money stock consists of only eight £1 notes, then what will be the velocity of circulation of the money stock during the week under consideration?
Of course some pound notes may be used more frequently than others, and some may not be used at all, but the velocity of circulation measures the average number of times a unit of currency is used.
Since the value of transactions is £16 and the quantity of money is £8, the velocity of circulation is 2.
We can express the above information as  In fact MV must equal PT since both measure the same set of economic transactions in two different ways: indeed we can only observe P, T , and M, so V cannot be calculated independently of the rest of the variables in the equation, as can be seen in our example.
Now if V and T are fixed, or are uninfluenced by M (i.e. V and T are independent of M), then the equation of exchange can be expressed as the quantity theory, which states that an increase/decrease in M will lead directly to an increase/ decrease in P .
But why should T and V be fixed, or independent of M?
Before the sustained economic recession of the inter-war years it  was thought that the economy automatically moved towards full employment, even though periodic booms and slumps were experienced at the time.
Thus the total number of transactions T in the economy can be taken to be fixed if full employment is the norm, or alternatively the assumption that the quantity of money has no permanent effect on the real sector of the economy implies that T is independent of M. Consequently there should be a definite relationship between the quantity of money and the price level if the velocity of circulation can also be shown to be independent of M.
Supporters of the quantity theory argued that V will be influenced by the customs and payments practices prevailing at the time, and that such arrangements change only slowly.
If, for example, workers are paid weekly, then a smaller amount of money will be required compared with a monthly system of payment; a worker will require to hold money balances to meet his purchases only for a maximum of one week at any particular point in time.
But with monthly payment, money balances will be held to meet expenditures up to one month in the future.
So although the quantity of money required will be larger in the case of monthly payment, the velocity of circulation will be lower than for weekly payment (assuming total spending is the same).
Therefore it was supposed that payments practices, and other institutional arrangements which change only slowly over time, have more influence on the velocity of circulation than any temporary changes in M. Before the First World War there may have been a good deal of truth in this assumption because the financial system was relatively unsophisticated and financial innovation was taking place very slowly by today's standards.
Indeed the statistical evidence that is available does suggest that the relationship between the money stock M and money national income PT was quite stable, in both the short and the long term.
But the prolonged depression of the inter-war period upset this relationship, causing the quantity theory to fall into disrepute.
Money incomes actually fell quite sharply during the early 1930s owing to a combination of falling prices and declining real incomes, but money growth proved much more resilient.
Therefore money supply measures proved to be unreliable as an indicator of both money incomes and prices.
11.2 Keynesian and monetarist views on money
The undermining of the credibility of the quantity theory during the depression years, together with the general failure of conventional economic doctrine to explain the events of the time, left a vacuum which was filled by the new theories of J. M. Keynes.
Elements of the macroeconomic framework which he proposed were examined in Chapter 10.
An important part of his contribution to theory was the analysis of the demand for money and its differences with the quantity theory view.
It is to these ideas that we turn first.
The monetarist attack on Keynes's ideas is considered next, and then some brief comments are made on the empirical issues which divide these schools of thought.
11.2.1 KEYNESIAN THEORY
The traditional Keynesian approach divides the demand for money into three elements: the transactions, precautionary, and speculative demands.
Before discussing these elements in detail it might be useful to emphasize that the notion of ‘the demand for money’— which may seem a curious concept — can be thought of as a demand to hold money.
The transactions demand is related to the function money performs as a medium of exchange in that a certain quantity of money balances is required by economic transactors simply to purchase the goods and services they expect to buy during the period in question.
For example, a man may earn £100 per week and out of this he may plan to spend £70, and thus his transactions demand would be £70 in this particular week.
What factors influence the size of the transactions demand?
In most cases a man earning £300 per week would be expected to spend more than the man earning £100 per week, and so the transactions demand should be larger for the former.
Furthermore, during periods of inflation money incomes will normally rise together with prices and so more money will be required simply to purchase the same collection of goods and services.
For both these reasons, therefore, one would expect the transactions demand to be a function of money incomes.
In our example the man earning £100 per week plans to spend only £70; therefore he can save the remainder and  purchase a range of financial assets which earn a rate of return.
In this case, building society deposits or National Savings certificates are the most likely option, but for higher-income earners equities and government securities will be considered as well.
However, such savings cannot immediately be turned into cash since there is inconvenience, cost, and even uncertainty of value with some financial assets.
Accordingly the man in our example may prefer to keep an additional fraction of his income as money balances in excess of his transactions demand, just in case something unexpected happens which necessitates immediate expenditure.
For example, the man may travel to work each day by car and so carry an extra £20 with him just in case his vehicle breaks down and needs to be repaired at once .
This precautionary demand for money will also be related to money incomes since:(a) the higher your regular income then normally the more expensive are the items you own, e.g. the Rolls-Royce is usually more expensive to repair than the Mini;(b) if money incomes rise due to inflation then the same items cost more to replace or repair.
If the level of money incomes in the economy is known, it might be possible to estimate the transactions and precautionary demand for money.
The extent to which the money supply exceeds this combined transactions and precautionary demand determines the amount of money left over to satisfy the speculative demand .
If the transactions and precautionary demands are estimated at £80 million during a certain time period, and the money supply is fixed at £100 million, then the speculative demand is £20 million.
In Keynes's time it was mainly wealthy or high-income earning individuals who operated speculative balances, but in the modern economy this role has been assumed more by institutions which manage contractual savings held in pension funds, life assurance contracts, and the like.
These speculative balances are available for the purchase of types of wealth such as financial assets, since wealth held as money, although it has the advantage of being perfectly liquid, earns no rate of return.
Thus speculative balances will be held  in anticipation of the purchase of non-monetary assets at some future date.
A crucial Keynesian assumption is that if holders of speculative money balances decide to hold their wealth in some other form, they are likely to purchase financial assets since these are taken to be closer substitutes for money than other types of assets.
The idea of substitution has been examined in Section 2.4.2, but the reader is reminded by an example.
Butter and margarine are close substitutes, and so any increase in the price of butter would be expected to lead to an increased demand for margarine as consumers substitute the latter for the relatively more expensive butter.
In a similar way, the Keynesians argue that changes in rates of interest (price) bring about substitution between various financial assets, including money.
Thus speculative balances are likely first of all to be spent on financial assets which are close substitutes for money, rather than on real assets such as land, buildings, and the like.
But why might potential buyers of financial assets delay their transactions and instead hold their wealth in a perfectly liquid form with a zero or low yield, e.g. cash or current account deposits?
To answer this question it is necessary to refer back to Section 6.11.1, in which the relationship between the price of a financial asset, such as an undated bond, and its yield were explained.
We concluded that there will be an inverse relationship between the market price of the bond and its true yield.
In the case of dated bonds and other financial assets there will still be an inverse relationship between the market price and yield, but it will not be proportional.
Now the holder of speculative balances not only has to consider the yield on close substitutes such as bonds, but he also has to take into account any prospective capital gains or losses which may accrue when buying the bond.
If holders of speculative balances are of the general opinion that the price of bonds will fall in the near future (i.e. their yield will rise), then they will not purchase these assets now because they will suffer a capital loss if their expectations are borne out by experience.
Instead they will prefer to remain liquid, and this will give rise to a speculative demand for money in preference to other forms of financial wealth.
Thus the speculative demand for money will be strongly influenced by the expectations of the market as to the future course of financial asset prices.
What, then, are the implications of an increase in the money supply according to the Keynesian view of the demand for money?
Since the ‘Keynesian’ sees no reason to expect money incomes to be directly affected by the increase in the money supply, we can assume that the transactions and precautionary demands remain unchanged at first.
The extra money balances are therefore available as a direct form of wealth holding, or else they can be used to purchase those financial assets which are a close substitute.
An increased demand for financial assets will lead to a rise in their price, and thus a fall in their yields.
Consequently the first effect of an increase in the money supply is expected to be a decrease in interest rates.
Of course market expectations may constrain the movements in interest rates since any increase in the money supply could simply be absorbed into speculative balances if the general opinion is that the price of financial assets will fall in the near future.
Under these circumstances the rate of interest will not fall any further.
But, apart from this possibility, an increase in the money supply should lead to a fall in interest rates, other things being equal.
11.2.2 MONETARIST THEORY
An alternative view is closely associated with the work of Milton Friedman from the middle 1950s onwards.
Over this period an influential school of thought called monetarism has developed around his ideas and has come to  challenge the Keynesian orthodoxy as the dominant academic influence over monetary policy.
Friedman's views are based essentially on the quantity theory relationship and depend crucially on statistical evidence which purports to show that velocity is relatively stable and predictable especially over long time periods.
However, he has elaborated on the simple quantity theory to provide a more sophisticated framework for the explanation of a link between monetary growth and inflation.
The velocity concept is developed as a demand for money relationship.
Friedman argues that money is just one form in which wealth can be held, other forms including bonds, equities,and physical  goods such as houses, property, and even consumer durables.
The actual proportion in which each individual holds his wealth depends upon the relative yields he receives on the whole range of assets, and upon his individual tastes and preferences.
The yields concerned may be of the direct money kind, as is the case with equities and bonds, but may be implicit in the form of services or benefits received, as with owner-occupied houses.
The individual receives an implicit yield on money because of its convenience value as a means of payment.
Thus the demand for money is seen to depend upon the relative yield or attraction of money and a wide range of other assets, and so ‘money’ is taken to be an equal substitute for all these other types of assets.
Since the demand for money is related to several variables, according to Friedman and the monetarists, then it may be difficult to measure the precise effect of a change in one of these variables on the demand for money.
However, the basic argument of the monetarist is that money is a unique asset which is not a close substitute for any particular range of assets, but instead is a substitute for all assets both real and financial.
Thus the substitutability of money for other assets is one crucial area of difference between the Keynesians and monetarists: whereas the former argue that money is a close substitute for financial assets, the latter claim that money is a substitute for all assets.
How does this demand for money specification affect the relationship between money and prices?
A key assumption is that the money supply is exogenous — uninfluenced by economic activity — but is controllable by the monetary authorities.
Any increase or decrease in the money stock is thus directly attributable to the activities of the central bank.
The transmiss-ion process through to money incomes and prices is then determined by the interaction between money supply and demand.
An increased supply of money will encourage economic transactors to substitute other forms of wealth for money as the convenience yield on these extra money balances will be exceeded by the potential yields on the wide range of alternative assets.
Because the demand for money is fairly stable there should be a reasonably predictable effect in terms of increased demand for other assets, which may be real or financial.
Although the supply of these assets — and therefore economic activity — may respond at first, eventually the increase in the money stock feeds through to prices.
The final result is just as the simple quantity theory states, except that the monetarist view explains the process by reference to a stable demand for money function and an exogenously determined money stock which is under the control of the monetary authorities.
11.2.3 EMPIRICAL CONTROVERSY
The Keynesian and monetarist views seem to lead to very different conclusions as far as monetary policy is concerned.
But it is first necessary to consult the available empirical evidence on the relevant theoretical issues before we turn to their recommendations for the conduct of monetary policy.
Investiga-tions here have focused on two aspects of the debate.
One difference between the two views is that Keynesians believe money is a close substitute for financial assets, whereas the monetarists argue that money is not a particularly close substitute for any specific range of assets.
The Keynesians would therefore expect a close relationship between the demand for money and the yield (rate of interest) on near-money substitutes, but the monetarist would not expect a significant relationship because of the belief that money is a substitute for all assets alike.
The empirical evidence does suggest that there is a definite relationship between the demand for money and the interest rate on near-money substitutes,but it is not as strong as the Keynesian theory suggests.
Therefore the extreme versions of both theories do not seem to be supported by the empirical evidence on the demand for money, although measurement is complicated by various definitional and conceptual problems.
For example, what definition of money is taken and which financial asset(s) is it best to use in the investigations?
For these and other reasons, the empirical evidence on the demand for money does not provide conclusive evidence in support of the extreme versions of either of the two theories.
Secondly, the claim that there is a strong correlation between changes in the money stock on the one hand and changes in money incomes and prices on the other is central to the monetarist case.
Statistical evidence does show support for a link, although it may not be as precise as some of the stronger  monetarist claims have suggested.
The graph in Figure 11.1 is useful because it illustrates the relationship between the real  money stock and real national income over the long term,(more than 100 years), which is equivalent to comparing the actual money stock with nominal national income.
Monetarist theory argues that the two lines on the graph should more or less coincide over long periods, showing that any increase in the money stock in excess of that needed to finance real output growth will be dissipated in price rises.
Up to about 1920 this appeared to be the case, but thereafter the link was more tenuous.
For example in the inter-war period the real/nominal money stock grew much more quickly than real/nominal national income, only for this trend to be reversed after the war.
Using more recent data which provide a similar comparison,Figure 11.2 plots real money stock and real GDP for the period 1979 — 87.
This is, of course, a much shorter period than that represented in Figure 11.1 , but it does show that the growth of the real money stock has been consistently faster than the growth of real GDP.
Whatever the factors underlying the different growth rates, it is consistent with the uneven relationship emerging in the inter-war years.
The high growth of the real money stock after 1979 compared with the growth of real GDP is partly reflected in the high rate of inflation during the   1980s — an annual average of 9.3 per cent, compared with 2 per cent growth of real GDP.
But even if all participants accepted that there is a close link between the money stock, money incomes, and prices, this would not prove that changes in the money stock caused changes in money income and prices.
Indeed the causality might run the other way.
This is where the monetarist assumption of an exogenous money supply plays such a vital role.
If an exogenously determined money stock can be taken for granted, then movements in money incomes and prices would not influence the money stock and so the causality must run in the direction presumed by monetarists.
In practice there are strong grounds for believing that the money stock is not entirely exogenous.
Therefore monetarists have resorted to the claim that governments can exert control over the money stock if they are determined enough, and in so doing will bring about the desired effect on money incomes and prices.
11.3 The role of monetary policy
Our preceding discussion has concentrated upon the two major views of the importance of money, and this section intends to clarify their implication for the direction and significance of monetary policy.
Indeed we will see that the outcome of the Keynesian view is that monetary policy should be directed at interest rates, rather than the money supply, but that in any case monetary policy should be subsidiary to fiscal policy.
On the other hand, the monetarist recommends that control of the money supply should be the major concern of the monetary authorities and that such a policy is of paramount importance for the conduct of macroeconomic policy.
11.3.1 KEYNESIAN VIEW
We have already established the Keynesian view that an increase in the money supply will lead to the purchase of financial assets.
Further, these purchases are  expected to lead to an increase in the price of financial assets and a fall in their yields (i.e. interest rates).
However, this process now needs to be spelled out a little more clearly if we are to gain insight into the effectiveness of the increase in money supply on the level of interest rates.
It is first necessary to recognize that some financial assets are closer substitutes for money than other financial assets, and so are the more likely to be immediately affected by a change in the money supply.
Therefore any adjustment which comes about as a result of an increase in the money supply will probably take place first of all through purchases of short-term, highly liquid financial assets such as Treasury bills and bank bills.
As a consequence the prices of these assets will begin to rise, i.e. their yields fall.
Other economic transactors are now assumed to compare the declining yield on bills with the (now relatively higher) yield on close substitutes such as short-dated bonds.
Rational behaviour would dictate that substitution of short-dated bonds for the relatively less attractive bills will now take place, and so the price of these bonds will begin to rise as investors increase their demand for them and the yield on these assets will begin to decline.
The Keynesian view would emphasize that the original increase in the quantity of money will have a ripple effect  spreading through the whole financial market until eventually even the less liquid financial assets such as equities are affected.
At each stage, yields will fall as economic transactors adjust to the ‘disturbance’ through the purchase of close substitutes.
The overall effect of the above process should be a fall in interest rates throughout the whole spectrum of financial assets.
But precisely because the effect is dispersed through the whole market the Keynesian argues that, unless there is a massive increase in the money supply, the impact on interest rates in general may be relatively small.
Furthermore, the process may be unpredictable as far as individual yields are concerned because the movement in the prices of financial assets is subject to the variable and uncertain expectations of the market.
How will the change in interest rates affect economic activi-ty?
The Keynesian answers this question in terms of the income — expenditure model of Chapter 10.
To summarize: the level of economic activity is determined by the level of injections and withdrawals into the circular flow of income.
Keynesians assume that investment expenditures are the more likely to be influenced by changes in interest rates, since raising money to purchase capital goods — perhaps through the issue of equities or through borrowing from the banks — is more attractive when interest rates are lower.
It thus becomes a matter of the sensitivity of investment to changes in interest rates, i.e. what is the interest-elasticity of investment?
In the early post-war years it was believed that investment expenditures were not very responsive to changes in interest rates, and most of the empirical evidence at the time, seemed to support this view.
The Keynesian concludes, therefore, that an increase in the money supply would not have a marked effect on economic activity since:(a) the money supply only influences economic activity indirectly via interest rates, and the latter may not be significantly affected anyway because all parts of the financial market bear the burden of adjustment; and (b) investment expenditures may not be very sensitive to changes in interest rates.
So, the Keynesian argues that monetary policy will be more effective if the authorities aim to control interest rates directly, rather than indirectly through the money supply.
Furthermore, monetary policy is not as crucial as fiscal policy because the latter has a direct impact on economic  activity via government expenditure and taxation, whereas monetary policy only affects economic activity indirectly via the tenuous link between interest rates and investment.
Indeed, some Keynesians went so far as to say that money is unimport-ant since it only exerts an influence on economic activity via interest rates, and then without much success.
11.3.2 MONETARIST VIEW
The assumption that money is a substitute for all assets, both real and financial, leads the monetarists to conclude that an increase in the money supply brings about directly an increase in prices as a consequence of increased purchases of all types of assets.
Also Friedman and others have undertaken many detailed empirical studies to investigate whether changes in the money supply are a cause of fluctuations in national incomes and prices.
Their results purport to show that, in different time periods and in different countries, changes in the money stock precede changes in money incomes and prices.
Based on this theoretical and empirical approach the consensus view would be that not only do increases in the money supply cause changes in the price level but fluctuations in the money supply are a major source of economic instability; both can have an impact nationally and internationally.
Unfortunately, empirical evidence rarely leads to the resolution of economic debates, primarily because the economist cannot control his experiments in such a way as to isolate the effect of one variable (e.g. the money supply) on others (e.g. money incomes).
Apart from some of the empirical problems mentioned earlier, a fundamental point is whether correlation, no matter how good it might be, proves causality.
For example there is very good correlation between the arrival of swallows and summer, but no one suggests that the presence of swallows causes summer.
Similarly, the fact that the increases in the money supply precede increases in money incomes does not prove causality.
Professor Kaldor has pointed out that an increase in the note issue precedes the Christmas spending spree, to facilitate the extra demand for transactions balances, but the absence of such an increase would not prevent the spending boom.
Instead the given money stock might be used more intensively (i.e. a rise in V as notes, coin, and bank deposits are exchanged more frequently.
So, despite the detailed and extensive studies of the monetarists, there is still disagreement as to whether the money supply is the prime cause of fluctuations in money incomes and prices.
Although the monetarists claim that there is a direct link between the money supply and money incomes, they do point out that variable and unpredictable lags exist.
Indeed, US studies indicate that the lag may vary between six months and two years.
Perhaps paradoxically, it is argued that the money supply should not be manipulated by the monetary authorities on a short-term basis because the existence of such lags would make the effect of monetary policy uncertain, although powerful.
The best policy, according to the monetarists, is for the authorities to aim for a steady growth in the money supply in order that economic growth can be accommodated without undesirable fluctuations in money incomes and prices.
The Keynesian versus monetarist debate, at the practical level, gives conflicting advice to governments on the role and importance of monetary policy.
The ambiguity of the empirical work and research does little to resolve matters.
Keynesians argue that the interest rate is the most important variable for the monetary authorities to control, but that monetary policy should be subsidiary to fiscal policy.
In contrast the monetarists argue that a steady growth in the money supply is the best policy to follow, and that monetary policy directed to this purpose is of paramount importance.
Certainly the Keynesian view provided the academic basis for the conduct of monetary policy in the period from the Second World War up to the late 1960s, with the influential Radcliffe Report (1959) supporting this general approach in the UK.
However the 1970s and early 1980s witnessed a change in opinion towards the monetarist view, especially in respect of government policy in the UK.
UK governments since 1976 adopted explicit monetary targets, and with the Conservative election victory in 1979 came a strong commitment to controlling the money supply.
Although a succession of Conservative governments since 1979 has expressed a firm belief in monetary  methods of managing the economy, with the emphasis on controlling inflation, it is fair to say that the empirical justifica-tion for much of this policy has been thin.
In particular, establishing a close and sustained relationship between money and nominal income or prices has been especially elusive.
It may well be the case — as some commentators have observed, perhaps unduly cynically — that the economic and political situation in 1979 was such that it mattered little what the government tried to control as long as they showed determination and resolve to control something; the money supply happened to be both a convenient and a relevant variable at that time.
11.4 Summary
(a)
An appreciation of why governments follow certain types of economic policies requires an understanding of the theories which influence the decisions of the policy-maker.
Thus the relationship between money and economic activity is of crucial importance to the direction and emphasis of monetary policy.
(b)
The original quantity theory suggested that the major impact of the money supply is on the general price level, but this crude theory fell into disrepute during the inter-war years with the absence of any well-defined link between money and prices.
Nevertheless the relationship between the money supply and price has received continued attention, with the monetarists trying to provide theoretical and empirical support for the argument that changes in the money supply cause fluctuations in money incomes and prices.
(c)
The Keynesian and monetarist views provide opposing theories of the importance of money upon which the authorities can base their policies.
The Keynesians argue that money is a close substitute for financial assets, so they see an increase in the money supply resulting in an increase in the price of financial assets and a fall in the yield received.
In contrast, the monetarists argue that money is a substitute for all assets, so they see an increase in the money supply resulting in an increase in prices in general, not just in the price of financial assets.
(d)
These divergent views on the demand for money lead to very different policy conclusions.
The Keynesian view implies that the money supply has its major effect on economic activity  via the impact of interest rates on investment expenditures.
The Keynesian then considers the implications in terms of the income — expenditure model of Chapter 10, with any increase in investment bringing about a magnified increase in national income through the workings of the multiplier.
However, the Keynesian sees the effect on economic activity as being unpredictable and indirect, and instead attaches more significance to fiscal policy.
The monetarist position is that control of the money supply is essential for the successful conduct of macroeconomic policy since they see a direct link between the money supply and prices.
But they argue that the money supply should not be manipulated on a short-term basis because of the variable and unpredictable lag which exists before prices and money incomes are affected.
It is therefore a background of academic controversy which provides the theoretical framework for the conduct of macroeconomic policy in general, and for monetary policy in particular .
12
MACROECONOMIC MANAGEMENT AND THE CONDUCT OF MONETARY POLICY
12.1 Macroeconomic objectives
The major macroeconomic objectives are usually summarized as:
(a)
High employment of the labour force
(b)
Stable prices
(c)
Balance of payments equilibrium
(d)
A satisfactory rate of growth.
However, this list may be far from complete since most governments have objectives in other areas, notably the distribu-tion of income and wealth.
Nevertheless it is very difficult to achieve even the major objectives listed above, either because some of them conflict in practice or because the policy tools are insufficient in number or effectiveness to complete the task adequately.
Thus the policy-maker is invariably in the position where he has certain aspirations in terms of macroeconomic objectives, but he has to decide which are to be given priority.
Obviously such choices are political decisions, which will involve social as well as economic considerations, but it is first necessary to establish the nature of the trade-offs between macroeconomic objectives so that the policy-maker is well aware of the sacrifices involved.
The economist would seem to have two crucial roles:
(a)
To identify and measure the trade-offs that exist between economic objectives so that the policy-maker is made aware of how much of one must be given up to get more of another, e.g. 2 per cent more inflation or 0.5 per cent less unemployment.
(b)
To search for the most appropriate policy-tools which will enable the government to achieve its economic objectives more satisfactorily.
There would be no need for a choice between economic objectives if they were all uniformly related to one controllable variable.
Chapter 10 explained that although the four macroeconomic objectives listed earlier are each related in some manner to the level of demand, the relationship is by no means uniform or in the same direction.
Output and employment may be improved at least temporarily through using fiscal policy to expand aggregate demand, but at the same time there is an increased likelihood that inflation will be exacerbated by such an injection of spending.
Furthermore, a higher level of demand will probably result in an increase in the value of imports, implying that the balance of payments objective may also conflict with the employment objective.
So fiscal policy on its own cannot be relied upon to achieve all the macroeconomic objectives simultaneously since it operates essentially through the channel of aggregate demand.
In fact it is generally the case that the achievement of more than one independent policy objective requires the adoption of a combination of policy tools.
We will investigate the nature of the trade-offs between macroeconomic objectives in the UK economy from the 1950s onwards.
In this period not only did the nature of the trade-offs change but at the same time the policy-makers came to attach more or less importance to particular objectives.
During most of the 1950s and 1960s UK governments as a whole concentrated predominantly upon the employment objective, with the balance of payments frequently exerting a cons-traint on the achievement of this goal.
Indeed the problem was that fiscal and monetary policies designed to stimulate employment often resulted in a deterioration in the balance of payments under the then existing fixed exchange rate system.
Specifically, an expansion of demand would result in a reduction in unemployment but would also lead to a balance of payments deficit as imports increased.
This was largely a reflection of Britain's uncompetitiveness in world trade.
One possible solution was that fiscal policy could be used exclusively for the management of the level of employment, and monetary  policy could be directed at raising interest rates to attract capital inflows and thereby offset the increase in imports in the balance of payments accounts.
Unfortunately such capital inflows tend to be very volatile in nature, as we have seen in earlier chapters, and this is one reason why this option did not provide a permanent or reliable solution.
Instead more reliance was attached to expenditure-reducing policies (see Section 7.2.3) as a solution to the balance of payments problems, and this involved the use of both fiscal and monetary policies to bring the expansion of demand to a sudden end.
Consequently the policy of expanding and then contracting demand, which came to be known as ‘stop — go’, was a result of the direct conflict between the employment and balance of payments objectives since control over the level of aggregate demand was relied upon in order to achieve both goals.
The use of fiscal and monetary policies to influence the level of demand also has implications for the prices and growth objectives.
An expansion of demand can give rise to inflationary pressures, and the frequent expansion and contraction of demand (stop — go) provide an inappropriate environment for investment spending by business and therefore economic growth.
In fact the more immediate objectives for most of the 1950s and 1960s were employment and the balance of payments.
Our earlier discussion suggests that:(a) a trade-off might need to be established between these two objectives, and (b) additional policy tools might need to be used to achieve a more desirable combination of objectives.
In case(a), it could be concluded that equilibrium in the balance of payments might only have been accomplished with the existing policies by accepting higher levels of unemployment.
In case(b), the availability of additional policy tools for the achievement of balance of payments equilibrium was limited.
Indeed the adjustable peg system was operated in such a way that the exchange rate was rarely used as a means of adjustment, and import restrictions were not allowed under the Bretton Woods agreement.
During the same period it was also alleged that there was a trade-off between unemployment and inflation, which came to be known as the Phillips curve.
This trade-off was based on the original observations by Professor A. W. Phillips of the relationship between the rate of change of money wage rates and  unemployment levels over long periods of time going back as far as 1861.
Figure 12.1 gives an example of a Phillips curve, with the horizontal axis measuring the level of unemployment.
On the vertical axis is plotted the recorded rate of increase of money wage rates, and it may be assumed that the rate of  inflation can be closely associated with these rates of wage change because wages are usually the largest component of costs.
To the extent that a growth in productivity allows a certain increase in money wages to take place without price increases, then this productivity growth can be deducted from actual wage rises to calculate price increases.
For example, with 2 per cent productivity growth, a 4 per cent rate of wage increase can be associated with an inflation rate of 2 per cent .
When such adjustments are made, the Phillips curve apparently gives the policy-maker a choice between employment and stable prices; more of one can only be gained at the expense of the other.
For example, our hypothetical Phillips curve shows that a 4 per cent per annum wage increase (equivalent to 2 per cent inflation with a 2 per cent productivity growth) is associated with a 3 per cent unemployment rate, and that a 9 per cent annum wage increase (equivalent to 7 per cent inflation) is associated with a 2 per cent unemployment rate.
In other words, a reduction in unemployment is associated with a certain increase in the rate of inflation.
By the early 1960s, therefore, it had become accepted that fiscal and monetary policies could only be used to reduce unemployment at the expense of a deterioration in the balance of payments and a higher rate of inflation.
Figure 12.2 illustrates a Phillips relationship using data for the UK between 1953 and 1967.
The data do appear to confirm the view that there was a relationship between the level of unemployment and the rate of change of prices.
However, unemployment and inflation data after 1967 shows an almost total absence of the typical Phillips relationship.
Table 12.1 provides inflation and unemployment data from 1953 to 1988 and is divided into three sub-periods; 1953 — 67; 1968–75; and 1976 — 88.
In the first period, as we have seen in Figure 12.2 , there does appear to be some degree of relationship between unemployment and the rate of price inflation.
Unemployment is relatively very low and so is the rate of inflation.
In the second period, however, the relationship — if such there be — seems to be one of relatively    stable unemployment but sharply accelerating inflation, with average unemployment higher than in the previous period.
In the third period, average unemployment is higher still but the rate of inflation is declining.
In the first and third periods there does seem to be a Phillips relationship, but whether the relationship is causal, and in which direction, are very  debatable .
It is equally convincing that although the level of unemployment may have an effect on price inflation, there may well be other factors of greater short-term impact, for example, the incorporation of previous price increases into current wage bargaining, regardless of the level of unemployment.
Nevertheless , if one plots unemployment against data showing the acceleration or deceleration of price inflation then a trade-off does re-emerge, which is consistent with a monetarist view of the economy; lower levels of unemployment which are below the natural, market-determined, rate can only be achieved with the consequence of an acceleration of the rate of inflation.
So far we have discussed the existence of trade-offs between the employment and balance of payments objectives, and between employment and changes in prices.
Furthermore, we have noted that in the UK during most of the 1950s and 1960s employment and the balance of payments were considered to be the most important macroeconomic objectives by both Labour and Conservative governments.
But by the late 1960s world inflation had gathered pace to such an extent that most governments came to regard this as the major problem confront-ing them.
Moreover, high inflation rates were and are of particular concern because of the danger that the monetary and financial systems might collapse as conventional money no longer becomes accepted as the medium of exchange.
Past experience in Germany and other countries in the inter-war years suggests that hyper-inflation can ultimately lead to the collapse of the economic and political system as well.
Accordingly, the prices objective became more important in most economies, and by the middle of the 1970s it had replaced full employment as the principal objective of the UK government.
The traditional Keynesian approach has tended to regard unemployment and inflation as being inversely related, as is depicted by the shape of the Phillips curve.
Indeed the implication of the Phillips curve relationship was taken to be that control of demand via fiscal and monetary policies allowed the government to operate the economy at full capacity, yielding high employment but rising prices; or at lower levels of demand, producing more stable prices but higher unemployment.
But the coexistence after 1967 of high unemployment and inflation cast doubt on both the usefulness of the Phillips curve as a representation of a trade-off, and on the excess demand explanation of inflation.
It was against this background of ‘stagflation’ that monetarism increasingly became more influential, providing as it did an alternative explanation of the economic problems of the time as well as a potential remedy.
The coincidence of rising inflation and unemployment, in spite of Keynesian-type policies to maintain aggregate demand, cast doubt on the continued effectiveness of conventional economic policies during the 1970s.
Monetarists argued that excessive growth in the money stock was the root cause of the inflationary problem, and that any tradeoff between inflation and unemployment was at best temporary.
It was claimed that a ‘natural’ rate of unemployment existed in an economy at any particular time, determined by such things as the state of technology and any impediments to the free movement of labour such as restrictive work practices.
Any attempt to reduce unemployment below this rate was sure to fail, according to monetarists, and would bring about higher inflation.
This particular view has become one of the central tenets of the present Conservative government's economic policy.
Our commentary suggests that the nature of the trade-offs between economic objectives may change over time, and that the policy-maker needs to be advised of such changes when deciding upon the preferred combination of objectives.
Another issue which needs to be considered is whether or not new policy tools can be found to enable the authorities to achieve their objectives more effectively, and to this we will turn next.
Incomes policies were first adopted in the UK in the late 1940s but became a regular feature during the 1960s.
The argument was that fiscal and monetary policies could be used to achieve the government's objectives as regards full employment and the balance of payments (although such policies were not very successful in that they gave rise to stop — go), and that incomes policies could be used to contain the inflationary consequences.
Indeed, increasing concern over inflation led to the operation of more or less continuous incomes policies during the 1970s.
Moreover, succeeding governments tried to operate the economy at lower levels of demand and therefore at higher levels of unemployment in order to reduce inflationary pressures.
The search for new policies led additionally to the widespread adoption of monetary targets in most economies, including the UK, apparently giving some acceptance of the monetarist claim that inflation is a consequence of a rapid growth in the money supply.
The conduct of monetary policy, and its changing emphasis over time, will be discussed further in Section 12.4.4.
Since 1972 in the UK there has been available an additional means for the achievement of the balance of payments objective: the adoption of floating exchange rates.
This enables easier adjustment to take place, although in practice the balance of payments has at times continued to pose problems for the UK economy.
The urgency of such problems, however, is not usually as acute under floating, since the government is no longer obliged to defend a fixed exchange rate and to direct domestic policies to this purpose.
(see Section 9.5).
The discussion so far is intended to highlight the point that macroeconomic objectives often conflict, and that the policy-maker has to choose the most desirable combination.
Also the nature of the trade-offs may change over time, as may the choices of the policy-maker.
The economist's role in all this is essentially to make the policy-maker aware of these trade-offs and to advise him of the suitability of alternative policy tools for the achievement of objectives.
12.2 the framework of macroeconomic management
Our discussion in Section 12.1 broadly indicated how fiscal, monetary, and incomes policies might be used to achieve some combination of macroeconomic objectives.
In this section we intend to explain how such policies involve the relationship between objectives, targets, and instruments.
Objectives have been defined already in Section 12.1, where it was stated that priorities are decided by the policy-maker in line with political, social, and other considerations.
In the subsequent discussions we intend to concentrate upon employment, prices, and the balance of payments as the most relevant objectives.
This approach seems to be consistent with UK post-war experience since policy-makers have tended to concentrate their attention upon the more short-term objectives rather than on strategies aimed specifically at longer-term growth.
Targets (or intermediate variables) are the variables through which government actions have an influence on macroeconomic objectives.
The relevant fiscal targets are the levels of government expenditure G and taxation T , each of which the government tries to control via instruments.
But both these  target variables are also influenced by variables outside the direct control of the authorities.
For example, government expenditure on unemployment benefits is related to the number of people out of work; state pensions are related to the number of people over retirement age; and taxation receipts are influenced by the incomes of the community (via direct taxes) and by prices (via indirect taxes).
With monetary policy the target variables may consist of some measures of the money supply or interest rates.
But again the monetary authorities do not control these variables directly; instead they are able to exert influence over their chosen targets via their control of instruments.
Instruments (or techniques) enable the authorities to influence target variables.
In the case of fiscal policy the major instruments are changes in tax rates and allowances, and variations in expenditure plans.
Chapter 6 has already explained the role of the Budget and the Public Expenditure White Paper in this context.
It is through changes in instruments that the fiscal authorities influence the levels of taxation and government expenditure, the two target variables.
A variety of instruments are available for the conduct of monetary policy, such as reserve requirements, special deposits, open market operations, and the central bank discount rate.
These instruments can be directed at the two monetary targets, the money supply and interest rates.
Table 12.2 uses fiscal and monetary policies as illustrations of the difference between objectives, targets, and instruments.
But it should be remembered that these two policies are not to be   treated as mutually exclusive: the fiscal position often has important ramifications for the conduct of monetary policy.
Our discussion of macroeconomic management emphasizes that the link between instruments and objectives is by no means direct or precise.
Accordingly we can identify two necessary conditions which must be fulfilled before macroeconomic policies are likely to be successful:
(a)
Macroeconomic objectives must be sensitive to changes in target variables.
(b)
The authorities must be able to control target variables via instruments.
For any type of policy to be successful both of these conditions need to be satisfied or else the policy instruments under consideration will fail to give an adequate degree of control over macroeconomic objectives.
For example, it may be of little value that the authorities are able to control interest rates via monetary instruments if the relevant objectives are not very sensitive to changes in interest rates.
Another consideration is that the process of economic management, involving the use of instruments to achieve objectives via some set of intermediate target variables, is subject to delay and uncertainty because of the existence of various lags.
In the following discussion we will identify the major lags, with special reference to fiscal and monetary policy.
The recognition lag Effective economic management would require the authorities to take action as soon as a disturbance occurs which is judged to have an adverse impact on the desired combination of macroeconomic objectives.
But in practice a certain period of time may elapse before the authorities are able to recognize that a problem exists.
One reason for this is that suitable up-to-date information on employment, prices, etc. may not be immediately available, partly because it takes time for such data to be collated.
Furthermore, the authorities will require sets of consistent data before they accept that action is required.
Bank base rates were raised in the UK during 1988 from 8.5 per cent at the beginning of the year to 13. o per cent by the end.
The Chancellor of the Exchequer's intention was to cut back consumer spending.
During 1988 there was considerable uncertainty as to whether a slowing down of spending was taking place.
For these and other reasons, there may be a  recognition lag before the fiscal and monetary authorities consider activating their policy instruments to cope with what is perceived as a change in circumstances.
The administration lag Even when the authorities recognize that action is required, there may be a further lag before the available instruments are brought into action.
In the conduct of fiscal policy the government has to receive Parliamentary approval before proposed changes in taxation or public expenditure can be made effective, and obviously the planning of a Budget and its acceptance by Parliament is a time-consuming process.
The administration lag should not be as long for monetary policy since formal Parliamentary approval is not required.
However, delays may occur if the authorities have failed to make contingency plans to meet the change in circumstances, and consequently prolonged discussion may be necessary before a decision is made to use particular instruments in a certain way.
But the monetary authorities in most advanced countries normally do make such contingency plans, and therefore the administration lag is unlikely to be excessive.
The operation lag More time may elapse before the activated policy instruments exert their full impact on targets and then employment, prices, and the other macroeconomic objectives.
A lag exists between the change in instruments and their effect on intermediate target variables.
With monetary policy, for example, the money supply may not decrease immediately following a decision to make open market sales of public sector debt to the non-bank sector.
Instead, the money supply might contract over a period of time as the banking sector adjusts stage by stage to successive sales of gilt-edged securities.
In the conduct of fiscal policy, several months may pass — due to the delay in adjusting individuals' tax codes — before a change in personal taxation influences the tax paid by the community.
Another lag, for example, is that between changes in instruments and the achievement of the employment and prices objectives.
For instance, employment and prices may react slowly to variations in the money supply or interest rates.
Indeed, the monetarists argue that frequent manipulation of the money supply is a mistaken policy because of the long and  variable lag before prices are affected.
Thus the monetarists recommend a steady growth in the money supply.
To refer again to the rise in interest rates in 1988, the cost of personal and business borrowing is approaching levels which in real terms (after taking away the effects of inflation) are high.
In view of the uncertain lagged response of spending to changes in interest rates (real or nominal), there is an element of speculation in considering the size and timing of this change in interest rates and the effect on borrowing, spending, inflation, and the balance of trade.
The overall conclusion to be drawn from this discussion is that the various lags can complicate the business of macroeconomic management, and may even make it counter-productive.
One common criticism of the UK government during the 1950s and 1960s was that fiscal and monetary policy were conducted in such a way that these policies ultimately exerted their full influence at the wrong time.
It was suggested that the authorities tried to manipulate aggregate demand — primarily through fiscal policy — in order to achieve their desired combination of economic objectives but, because of the lags mentioned earlier, such policies exerted their full effect much later when economic conditions had changed as a result of the fluctuations in the business cycle.
To give an extreme example, fiscal policies designed to increase employment might take effect after a year, when, say, the economy had begun to move out of the recession.
The stimulus to demand would be felt during a period of expansion and so would exacerbate any inflationary pressures which might be building up.
Moreover, it was argued that contractionary policies introduced during boom periods to reduce the growth in imports and inflationary pressures had their full effect when the economy had begun to move into recession.
Therefore the contraction in demand engineered by the government only succeeded in adding to the unemployment problem.
The manipulation of aggregate demand by the government, and in particular the fairly frequent changes in policy instruments, became known as fine-tuning .
By the end of the 1960s many economists were critical of this policy of fine-tuning on the grounds that it added to rather than reduced the instability of the economy.
12.3 Monetary instruments and control: UK experience to 1979
In the remainder of this chapter our attention is focused on the means by which control has been exercised by the monetary authorities, and the problems connected with such control.
The emphasis in Chapters 4 and 5 was on the theoretical aspects of monetary control, whereas here we attempt to place the problem in the context of UK experience since 1945.
Between 1945 and 1951, the immediate post-war period, it would be no exaggeration to suggest that the authorities viewed monetary policy instruments as rather limited in their effectiveness.
The problems of physical shortages and the volume of highly liquid financial assets accumulated during the war (high incomes during the war period, with few goods and services to be bought, led to high savings) probably meant that attempts to regulate the economy by monetary means would have failed.
The Labour government lost office in 1951, however, to be replaced by a Conservative one, and with this change came a different approach to economic policy which included the revival of monetary methods of control — in particular the manipulation of bank rate and associated interest rates.
Suffice to say that it became evident fairly soon that the existing monetary techniques of regulation were not sufficiently effective, and in 1957 a committee was set up by the Chancellor of the Exchequer to inquire into the working of the monetary and credit system in the UK.
This committee — commonly known as the Radcliffe Committee after its chairman — produced a report in August 1959.
This report, together with the minutes and memoranda of evidence, provided a considerable volume of information about the workings of the financial system in the UK as well as some of the views of monetary authorities (the Bank of England and the Treasury) as to how the system might be regulated.
Of special interest was the Radcliffe Committee's view that control of the banking system was exercisable via the liquidity ratio and the supply of Treasury bills, and not through regulating the supply of cash (see Section 5.6).
Another view expressed was that the stock of money per se was not of prime importance and should not be the prime target of the authorities; rather the authorities should concentrate on the liquidity of the whole system.
The reader is referred to  Appendix 1 to this chapter for further discussion of this emphasis on liquidity.
Although the general tenor of the Radcliffe Report cast some doubt on the strength of monetary methods of control — at least in the way they were being used at the time — monetary and fiscal instruments of control continued to be used to regulate the economy.
During the 1960s, however, the use of market methods of monetary regulation (e.g. open market operations, shifts in interest rates) to influence the major part of the banking system (the primary banks) became of even more questionable value.
There were a number of reasons for this, some of which have been uncovered earlier in the book:
(a)
The support operations in the gilt-edged market were proving to be an awkward commitment for the authorities.
The gilt-edged market and the foreign exchange market were, and are, influenced by each other, so that a deterioration in the balance of payments tended to produce a weakness in the gilt-edged market.
If the authorities intervened in the gilt-edged market to support prices, they would be tending to add to the liquidity of the banking system.
But a deterioration in the balance of payments position was usually followed by economic policies designed to curtail credit and spending, and therefore support operations in the gilt-edged market would be somewhat counter-productive and inconsistent with overall economic policy.
Such support operations would involve the Bank of England buying gilt-edged and thus tending to expand the liquidity and lending potential of the banking system.
Furthermore, the authorities did not control the supply of all the eligible liquid assets which could count towards the banks' liquidity ratio.
We have seen earlier that the banks were able to substitute other liquid assets (money at call, commercial bills) as the supply of Treasury bills contracted.
(b)
The rapid growth of the secondary banking sector meant that unsatisfied demand for credit from the primary banks could be met by the secondary banks; this sector not being subject to the liquidity ratio requirements.
Squeezing the primary banks simply pushed some customers into the secondary sector.
Indeed, the setting up of secondary banking subsidi-aries by the primary banks is indicative ofthe slippage that was occurring.
The response of the authorities to the inadequacy of market methods of control was to introduce, and increasingly rely upon, non-market methods of regulation.
The call for special deposits was used on fifteen occasions between June 1960 and the end of 1966.
Other methods of regulation used by the authorities were ‘moral suasion’ and direct controls.
Moral suasion by the Bank of England was frequently directed at the nature of banking business (qualitative directives) rather than the overall level of business (quantitative directives) to which, say, the call for special deposits would be aimed.
The Governor of the Bank of England on a number of occasions requested the banks to refrain from certain types of lending in favour of others.
A direct control introduced in the 1960s was the use of the lending ceiling, i.e. a direct control on credit rather than, say, bank deposits.
The banks were asked to prevent lending rising above the level prevailing at the time.
This lending ceiling was reinforced by a further statement by the Bank in November 1968 which gave the banks four months' notice to reduce their lending to 98 per cent of the mid November 1967 level.
At the end of May 1969 the Bank curtly announced that the banks had not complied with the earlier request for the attainment of the lower lending ceiling and that therefore the Bank intended to halve the rate of interest payable on special deposits for as long as the banks exceeded the lending ceiling.
This penal arrangement came into effect from 2 June and would have cost the clearing banks about £150,000 per week as a result of the lost interest.
It is hardly surprising that the clearing banks found the use of both moral suasion and direct controls particularly irksome.
Moral suasion caused the banks to discriminate between customers in a manner unrelated to their ordinary business relations: a customer who happened to be an exporter was eligible for funds, but an equally good customer who, say, imported manufactured consumer goods was deprived of necessary funds.
The firm application of market methods of control would have yielded a rise in interest rates which would have provided, albeit more slowly, the allocative mechanism rather than the banks having to discriminate against one customer in favour of another.
In addition, the banks claimed that the authorities'  monetary measures — particularly prior to 1964 — tended to restrict mainly the clearing banks, whereas other financial intermediaries (secondary banks, building societies, insurance companies, etc.) were relatively untouched.
Thus it was argued that the non-market methods of control were discriminatory, limited in their application, and somewhat clumsy as instruments, producing distortions and inequities within the financial system.
It is probable that both the authorities and the banking system felt the need for an alternative approach to monetary management, and after wide-ranging discussions between the Bank and financial intermediaries, the arrangements embodied in the document Competition and Credit Control became operative on 16 September 1971.
These changes are of considerable interest because they represented a major step towards the deregulation of the UK financial system — a process which is still continuing.
The proposals and subsequent amendments also provide us with a case study of central bank policy-making in respect of both monetary control (macroeconomic policy) and prudential regulation.
As we shall see, the private sector financial system proved highly adaptable to the new system and that in itself provides us with insight into the problems of banking regulation.
12.3.1 COMPETITION AND CREDIT CONTROL
Our approach to these changes may be divided conveniently into the two parts: the competition and the credit control aspects of the new arrangements.
Competition The proposals included a number of reforms which were intended to stimulate competition in the financial system and also to remove some of the discriminatory aspects of the previous methods of regulation:
(a)
The new reserve ratio arrangements were to apply across the whole ofthe banking system and not merely to the London clearing banks.
(b)
The special deposits (and after 1973 the supplementary special deposits) scheme would be applied to all banks and the larger finance houses.
(c)
The collective agreement between the London and Scottish clearing banks on interest rates would be abandoned.
The banks would be expected to compete with each other in both the attraction of deposits and the making of loans.
(d)
The discount houses agreed to abandon their collectively agreed price for the weekly Treasury bill issue, but they would continue to apply for a quantity of bills sufficient to cover the tender.
(e)
The larger finance houses were expected to adhere to a slightly lower reserve ratio than the banks (10 per cent rather than 1 2.5 per cent) but the reserve asset requirements would be the same as for the banks.
Some of the finance houses chose to apply for bank status (under the Protection of Depositors Act) and these finance houses would observe therefore the same reserve requirements as the other banks.
(f)
The Bank ceased to support the gilt-edged market but would sell gilt-edged when the market could absorb stock satisfactorily.
If the market were weak, the authorities intended simply to withdraw rather than give support until it strengthened again, when gilt-edged sales would be resumed.
Such a change of tactics in the gilt-edged market did not preclude intervention, but such intervention would be in accordance with the authorities' own requirements rather than in response to particular market changes.
It should be realized that this change of tactics in the gilt-edged market is consistent with the objective of greater competitiveness since it allowed greater freedom for market forces to determine prices, and therefore yields, on government stock and close substitutes.
For the authorities to have maintained their 1960s approach to the gilt-edge market would have been inconsistent with the other aspect of policy: flexibility of interest rates through greater competitiveness amongst banking and other financial intermediaries.
Credit control The arrangements in this area were as follows:
(a)
The quantitative lending controls were abolished and the liquidity and cash ratio requirements as devices for regulating  credit were to be replaced by the reserve asset ratio (this will be considered further).
(b)
The authorities declared their intention of relying more on interest rate changes as a means of regulating both the direction (allocation) and volume of credit available.
This represents quite a significant change because it signals that the authorities were inclined to let market forces have a greater influence on the volume of credit (and therefore the stock of money; see Chapter 5) as well as the recipients of credit.
(c)
Special deposits would continue to be used as a means of regulation, but the Bank indicated that in the future it would consider using special deposits in a more flexible way.
The Bank stated that a call for special deposits might be related either to domestic or overseas sterling deposits and that the percentage-rate of call might be different for domestic and overseas sterling deposits.
One reason for such differentiation was that some banks, e.g. the secondary banks, were and are much more dependent on foreign business, and such business is based on finer margins.
A uniform call for special deposits, it was argued, could upset their foreign business very substantially.
A further reason was that the Bank might wish to influence the net inflow of funds to the UK by means of either a different application in respect of the type of deposits, or a different rate of call.
In practice, the Bank of England ceased using special deposits after 1980.
The introduction of competition and credit control triggered off a considerable amount of comment and criticism from the City as well as from within academic circles.
Furthermore, events since the new scheme was introduced cast some doubt on the underlying approach as a basis for monetary management.
We shall look now at some of the comments which have been made and attempt an evaluation of the scheme before going on to discuss subsequent developments.