

SHOWCASE
A second collection of new an innovative performance work created in Britain.
Sixteen diverse shows packed into one weekend .
Presented in association with the British Council & the Arts Council of Great Britain.
Dance
DIVAS present Liz Aggiss in EL PUNAL ENTRA EN EL CORAZON
Inspired by the writings of Lorca, this solo dance piece features Billy Cowie (piano) and Daphne Scott-Sawyer (soprano) plus VIER TANZEN by Hilda Holder Liz Aggis performs revivals of the Viennese dancer, Hilda Holger's choreography from the 1930's, accompanied by Billy Cowie on piano.
MICHAEL CLARK & COMPANY
Double bill:Cosmic Over E featuring the music of Sondheim, T Rex & Sex Pistols plus Rite Now , commissioned by Nottingham Playhouse in association with Nottinghamshire New Arts Works and Dance 4.
This collaboration with Stephen Petronio, interprets the striking violence of Stravinsky's original Rite of Spring score without inhibition.
Using rhythm as the central driving force, Clark and his dangers of ‘raging talent’ take ballet to its physical extremes.
shinkansen tracks
Choreographers, composers and live practitioners present extracts of their current work.
Each show features different invited artists with innovative and risk-taking performance styles.
shinkansen tracks provides a platform for artists with new ways of making work.
NO RESPITE
by Yolande Snaith
An ‘impeccably controlled and executed piece’ from the winner of the Digital Award in 1988 & 1989, and of the Time/Out /Dance Umbrella Award in 1991.
Full of striking painterly images inspired by visual art and sculpture of 12th and 13th century France.
An original fusion of music, film, movement, text and design accessible to a wide audience.
PHOENIX DANCE COMPANY.
Formed in 1981, Leeds based Phoenix Dance Company has established itself as one of Britain's leading contemporary dance companies.
Presenting four pieces to music by k d lang, Penguin Cafe Orchestra and Arvo Part, they display electrifying energy, brilliant technique and extraordinary dynamism. ‘…they're glorious’Pittsburg Press 
Performance
FROM HONEY TO ASHES
By Centre For Performance Research
From Honey to Ashes is about bees, greed, nuclear power, memory, work and play.
It is a cautionary tale told with sad humour on the border between innocence and togetherness.
YES/NO PEOPLE present
STOMP
It started with a beat and took Edinburgh and the Financial Times by storm…‘basic, profound, thrilling musical instinct.’
The Yes/No People, creators of Night of 100 Drums and Beat The Cycle, will be stomping, banging, abseiling and cavorting all over the Dome in this newly commissioned largescale version of Stomp.
‘A jiving cacophony…imaginative, humorous.
Amazing percussion on the move.’
MEDEA: SexWar
by Volcano Theatre Co
Based on Medea: A Sex-War Opera by Tony Harrison, author of the 91 festival smash hit Trackers of Oxyrynchus , and choreographed by Nigel Charnock.
An irreverent interweaving of the Harrison text with Valerie Solanis' (She shot at Warhol) SCUM (Society for Cutting Up Men) manifesto.
An exhilarating fusion of physical dance theatre, intellectual punch and black comedy.
‘Soft porn meets Spare Rib’The Guardian 
SNUFFHOUSE — DUSTLOUSE
by Faulty Optic Theatre of Animation
A surreal drama of eccentricity and fear using scrap creations, clanking Heath Robinsonesque sets, sound machines and an extraordinary array of animated figures.
Haunting, surreal & truly original.
‘Faulty Optic do for the stripey booth what Archaos did to the Big Top’City Limits 
DROWNING
by Black Mime Theatre: The Women's Troop
Punchy and powerful theatre by the country's foremost mime company, incorporating rich comedy, music and expressive energetic performances in a show that takes a sharp critical look at society's attitude to women and alcohol ‘Shrewd detailed observation…disarmingly truthful’The Guardian ‘Honest, humorous and compulsive’.
Spare Rib 
NAME
written and devised by Gary Stevens
Name is a game for two or more players.
It is both funny and disturbing, a complex memory game that is distinctive in it simplicity and yet with a playfulness and sense of fun that complements both the rigour of the structure and seriousness of its themes.
A delightfully simple, wonderfully complex, utterly absorbing and thoroughly entertaining gem of a piece.
‘Quite brilliant…unique and thoroughly enjoyable’The Guardian 
OSCAR MCLENNON AND ANNE SEAGRAVE
An evening of black humour, surrealist monologues and mixed media performance including Notes on Noise by Oscar McLennon and Or Ever What Leaving Was by Anne Seagrave.
What the critics say about Oscar ‘As black and satisfying as a pint of Guinness’The Independent ‘brilliant and disturbing’Sunday Times , about Anne ‘Sharp and idiosyncratic’The Guardian .
A rare visit.
Forkbeard Fantasy present
THE BRITTONIONI BROTHERS in AN EXPERIMENT IN CONTRAPROJECTION
A comic interaction between film and theatre.
Cleverly conceived and splendidly executed Chinese puzzle about films within films, films within cameras, film makers within films, film makers without films…
‘Imaginative nonsense of a very high order’The Guardian 
FULL TILT by IOU
Using as its basic theme the medieval joust, IOU's new show Full Tilt is pure spectacle, using an array of imaginative eccentric contraptions and costumes made from the most unlikely of materials!
With live music from a mobile mechanical orchestra this is a unique, bizarre, exhilarating, magically theatrical and ultimately indescribable event.
See it!
MOOSE
The Right Size Theatre Co. present devised physical comedy.
A collision of dance, acrobats, slapstick and vaudeville: a world of inspired lunacy which relishes the naive optimism of the clown.
‘…natural clowns with a keen eye for the incongruous and the absurd…a wealth of shrewd and satirical observation…= tumbling, magic, mime and illusion…
’The Guardian 
The Guardian Talks
PANEL DISCUSSION ON NEW PERFORMANCE
Chairman Kenneth Rea, drama teacher at Guildhall School of Music and Drama and theatre critic for The Guardian .
Panel to include Gavin Henderson, Artistic Director, Brighton Festival; Lois Keidon, Performing Arts Officer of the Arts Council: Carolyn Graham, Manager of Event Planning, South Bank Centre; Richard Gough, Artistic Director, Centre for Performance Research: Denise Wong, Director, Black Mime Theatre: Anne Seagrave, performance artist.
Faulty Optic Theatre of Animation
No Respite by Yolande Snaith
Yes/No People present Stomp
The Right Size Theatre Co in Moose
Full Tilt by IOU Theatre
THEATRE
Book now by using form on p33, or from 23 march, on Expressline
THEATRE ROYAL
National Youth Theatre of Great Britain
THE RIVALS
By Richard Brindsley Sheridan
A gorgeous mix of farce and high comedy with glittering dialogue.
Mrs Malaprop is one of the most delicious characters ever to gratify the stage.
THE HEIRESS
By Ruth & Augustus Goetz
Based on the novel Washington Square by Henry James
Starring Frank Finlay, Nichola McAuliffe, Anthony Head and Barbara Murray
Daughter of a brilliant and beautiful mother, who died giving birth, the gauche and unconfident Catherine Sloper lives in the shadow of her rich father's thinly veiled contempt…when the young handsome and charming Morris Townsend falls in love with her, the father thinks he is nothing but a fortune seeking bounder.
With her bags, and eager to fulfil her life's dreams through elopement, Catherine waits…in Washington Square of 1850's New York at the height of fashion and sophistication.
Frank Finlay
Nichola McAuliffe
Anthony Head
Barbara Murray
GARDNER CENTRE
DR FAUSTUS By Christopher Marlowe, adapted by Max Hafler.
Commonwheal Theatre Co
Directed by Tony Hegarty For one night only, prior to opening in London, Commonwheal ‘Exciting and revelatory…a true ensemble’Daily Mail , bring their new version of Marlowe's classic tale of a man who sells his soul to the devil for knowledge and power.
METAMORPHOSIS
by Frank Kafka, adapted by Steven Berkoff
Julia Smith directs this Birmingham Rep ‘astonishing production = grab this full star production while you can’The Guardian The eerie menace and absurd comedy of Kafka's surreal saga of Gregor Samsa whose body unexpectedly turns into a large beetle — brilliantly played by Gary Selfton, with original music by Nigel Piper and suitably claustrophobic design by Helen Skillicorn.
‘A compelling piece of theatre’Birmingham Evening Post 
THE HOUSE OF THE SPIRITS
By Isabel Allende
Yorick Theatre company
Premiere of a magnificent family saga by one of the Latin America's foremost writers.
Set in Chile, men and women, spirits, the forces of nature and history come together in an unforgettable, wholly absorbing and brilliantly realised epic drawn from Allende's best selling novel.
‘Fine, stirring, generous…casts its powerful spell.’
Hermione Lee,Observer The work is produced in 2 self-contained parts.
PAVILION THEATRE
COCK ROBIN
By Nick Burbridge
Tommy McDermott's Theatre
A potent black comedy on the hell of alcoholism, and sequel to last festival's major success Vermin , ‘Burbridge is to social realism what Harry Houdini was to Chubb locks’Evening Argus .
Runner up for the ‘91 Verity Bargate Award.
MEDEA: SexWar
by Volcano Theatre Co
An exhilarating fusion of physical dance theatre, intellectual punch and black comedy.
See showcase page.
MY CHALLENGE IS RELEASE
By James Berry
Good Company, Director Sue Pomeroy
with the Tunde Jegede Ensemble
This challenging new verse drama about Nelson Mandela shows that you cannot imprison the mind in the past.
The desire for freedom is irrepressible.
James Berry liberates this prison of the mind with poetry, humour plus  Caribbean & classical music.
Workshops available.
AUTOGEDDON
By Heathcote Williams
Directed by Dominic Cooke & Charlotte Keatley, lighting by Jon Linstrum.
+ MY FIRST CAR by Roy Hutchins
Following his award winning performances of Whale Nation and Falling For a Dolphin , Roy Hutchins returns with Heathcote Williams’ angry diatribe against the automobile…and also gives the world premiere of his own gentle, moving account of motor-madness.
‘Blisteringly declaimed.
You would not buy a used car from this man’The Observer .
THE YEAR THEY CHANGED THE WIRES
Written and performed by Steve Shill and Graeme Miller
‘a perceptive, wicked and ridiculously funny examination of art in big business.
Shill and Miller are a pleasure to watch…
This Third Eye Centre commission enjoys a beautiful filmic set, superb sound effects and the professionalism of two men who have obviously paid their dues.
Writers may never forgive them.’
Glasgow Herald 
THE SCHOOL OF NIGHT
By Stephen Plaice
Alarmist Theatre presents a new thriller which unravels the complex intrigues that led to the murder of Elizabethan playwright Christopher Marlowe in a pub brawl in 1593.
Directed by Helena Uren, designed by Matthew Miller, lighting by Alan Nesbitt.
SALLIS BENNEY
THERESE RAQUIN
By Emile Zola, a new adaptation by Chris Stagg
Brighton Theatre Events
Zola's poetic and riveting domestic thriller.
Adultery, murder, betrayal and revenge in a stifling and haunted Paris.
MYSTERO BUFFO
By Dario Fo
Stephen North of London's Burning in this brilliant distillation of the comic truth and popular punch of Medieval mystery plays.
‘What shines out of this show is Dario Fo's love of humanity and truth’ Michael Billington,The Guardian 
DIEU EST ABSENT DES CHAMPS DE BATAILLE
The Godforsaken Battlefield
Adapted from Blaise Cendrars' Book The Severed Hand and from the poems of Guillaume Apollinaire.
A triumph of the 1991 Avignon Festival the company, Ches Panses Vertes from Picardy, create vivid with sombre imagery of the battlefield with a structure of sand and barbed wire…a mystical garden in which two men re-enact with tiny wire figures some of the experiences of Cendrars and his experiences of Cendrars and his companions during the first year of the 1914–18 war.
Barely one hour in length — it is an extremely powerful and beautiful show…a British premiere, a performance which could become a festival legend.
MARLBOROUGH
Aids Positive Underground Theatre Co
THE CRYING CELIBATE TEARS TRIOLOGY
By John Roman Baker, comprising Crying Celibate Tears ,The Ice Pick and Freedom to Party , these award-winning plays explore man's relation to man in a time of crisis, where the war against the HIV virus is at is fiercest.
In the final play Freedom to Party the holocaust is over, but the battles remain.
The Edinburgh Festival Times said ‘This is committed theatre at its most vital.’
Directed by Bryce Pedersen and Federico Hewson.
Set design by Peter Davies.
Music by Kristian Steffes.
Warning: These plays are sexually explicit and contain nudity and violence which may offend.
LAUGHING GAS
This is the programme for 1992.
But, if you can believe it, there's more in the pipeline.
Will it be Robin Williams?
Will it be the Pope on a unicycle?
Watch out for the full Laughing Gas brochure in March.
In the meantime, feast your diaries on the first  instalment .
ENNIO MARCHETTE + support
The paper sensation with his latest creations: Louis Armstrong, Ella Fitzgerald, Marlene Dietrich, Morticia Addams…a visual celebration of fame in human origami.
THE CODE OF THE WOOSTERS
Robert Coodale as Jeeves, Bertie, Gussie Fink Nottle, Aunt Dahlia, Stiffy Byng…
‘Better than all those television johnnies put together’The Scotsman 
JEREMY HARDY
ITV Comedy Awards — Live Comedian of the Year 1991.
‘A stand-up comedian in complete control’The Independent 
BODGER AND BADGER'S SUNDAY MASH
TV's Bodger & Badger children's treat with Jane Bassett, Tim Bat & Pierre Hollins.
KEVIN DAY
What a funny man.
Looks innocent but hits hard.
And he's even worked in India.
‘A very funny young man’The Bombay Daily Express 
LOUISE RENNISON BOB MARLEY'S GARDENER SOLD MY FRIEND
Last year's double award winner continues her erratic journey from the 60's into the 70's.
‘A hugely successful piece’Kaleidoscope World Premiere 
THE SHOW'S NOT OVER TILL THE FAT LADY SINGS
By Jennie Reznek & Mark Fleishman from South Africa.
‘Sends you out of the theatre brimming with joy’South African Sunday Times .
British Premiere 
KILLER and GET UP AND BE SOMEBODY.
Double bill from Ollie Parker, the newest and most original comedy writer in Britain.
‘Glittering with wise humour’The Independent .
‘Get Up…’ is a World Premiere  All events at the Assembly Rooms, Old Ship Hotel, Ship Street unless otherwise stated.
Tickets £5 (concs £4)
SEAN HUGHES with Mark Lammar
He had just one line in The Commitments but he'll do a thousand more tonight.
‘The Tommy Cooper of the coming generation’The Melbourne Age 
MARK THOMAS
A Tory Councillor once resigned from office over one of his shows.
‘The iconoclastic boot boy…a topical comic at the top of his tree’The Guardian 
LARRY MILLER USA
Remember Pretty Woman ?
Remember the bit in the clothes shop?
Well, this is the man who stole the scene — the store manager.
The Jimmy Stewart of American comedy, with his four piece suit and his gentlemanly ways, he's a 40's guy in a 90's world.
UK premiere.
JOHN HEGLEY and NIGEL
The man from The Guardian , with the glasses and the dog.
Poet, comic & friend of Nigel.
‘Sheer specs appeal’Time Out 
TONY HAASE
THE BLACK ROOM
The opera horror that will never hit Glyndebourne from the man who was Gerty Naylor.
World Premiere 
JO BRAND
This year's model…new stuff with a couple of old faves thrown in.
‘One of the best comedians in Britain’Daily Mirror ‘A hideous old pot boiler’The Sun 
EDDIE IZZARD
Ever upwards, Eddie rambles his way to the peak of success.
He only did telly once —Hysteria!on Channel Four.
He was a sensation.
As he will be tonight…and we can guarantee that.
MARK STEEL
YELTSIN TROTSKY AND THE BETTING SHOP
At last— the true story of the Russian revolution.
‘Astounding’The Observer 
PAUL MOROCCO AND THE EC BIG BAND
What do Flamenco, fire and fruit have in common?
This will be your most surreal comedy-music and juggling experience ever.
ALAN DAVIES
Time Out 's Best Young Comic of the Year 1991.
‘See Davies and you might be watching the beginning of a new wave in comedy’Time Out 
STRUCK OFF AND DIE
How to Become a Doctor in Only 59 Minutes…
Two real doctors, hundreds of real stories and not a colostomy pun in sight.
‘It is devastatingly funny, but at the same time poignant’Evening News 
SLIGHTLY FOXED
Radio Four panel game for the slightly well-read 
I'M SORRY I HAVEN'T A CLUE
St George's Rd…
Tilbury Place…
Bute Street…
Mornington Crescent.
Cryer, Rushton, Garden, Brook-Taylor and Lyttleton play very silly games for radio.
TWO OLD FARTS IN THE NIGHT
Barry Cryer and Willie Rushton disgrace themselves with the kind of behaviour that gets other people put into homes.
MOTHER TERESA OF CALCUTTA
The Grand Farewell Tour
The first date of her world tour, which will end in a gala evening at The Cathedral of St Margaret the Possessed in Sao Paulo.
‘A minor triumph’
TERRY GAROGHAN SHOWS OFF
Escapist lunacy of the highest order.
All singing…all dancing.
‘This man is impossible to describe in a family newspaper’The Leader 
HOLSTEN IMPRO
Jeremy Hardy, Kit Hollerback & Steve Frost with the rest of South of the River Impro team — who knows what will happen?
CHARLES FLEISCHER
USA
In the film he was the voice of Roger Rabbit.
On stage he is the fastest improvising comedian in the States.
He plays the piano, sings like a flea and electrifies the audience.
‘A dazzling comedian with frenetic, word-tumbling intelligence’Scotland on Sunday 
LAUGHING GAS A THE MOVIES?
Pop corn and carrot cake with a comedy film bonanza.
Fun movies and personal appearances by comedy guests from filmland.
Directors, stars, ushers…
Duke of Yorks Cinema.
(Details to follow)
DR JONATHAN MILLER
If we said the doctor, opera director, humourist, writer, broadcaster and ex-Sussex University tutor was giving a lecture about jokes in a church you'd just have to go, wouldn't you?
Well he is!
JIM TAVARE
The Masterclass with Al Murray
Jim Tavare and ‘Bassie’, the double bass, in their proper home.
‘The comic timing of Eric Morcambe’The Times All events at the Assembly Rooms, Old Ship Hotel, Ship Street unless otherwise stated.
Tickets £5 (concs £4)
AND THERE'S STILL MORE TO COME!
Look out for the Laughing Gas comedy brochure, available mid-March.
Shame Promotions/Laughing Gas present
ALTERNATIVE MISS BRIGHTON
‘The most theatrical event of the year…
’Gay Times Julian Clary hosts this glittering contest to find Brighton's most alternative individual  
DANCE
BALLET DU NORD
Since making their British debut at Brighton Festival in ‘88, Ballet Du Nord has emerged as one of the most polished and exuberant classical companies in Europe.
Under their new artistic director, Jean-Paul Comelin, their repertoire has been strengthened with classics such as Firebird , and great guest choreographers such as Paul Taylor — both to be seen in this powerful Festival season.
VERTEX
Ali Pourfarrokh/Philip Glass
Iranian Pourfarrokh created Vertex in response to TV news reports on the Gulf War…the bursting forth of everything we feel in a world of unfulfilled dreams…dreams which are as varied as the people who dream them…a poem told through the bodies of the poets: the dancers.
Ballet du Nord — Roses
ROSES
Paul Taylor/Henri Baermann/Wagner
In Roses — we find man, with his aspirations, his joys, his suffering and bitterness, his hopes and encounters, but everything appears fixed, fatal, everything seems to belong to the man's destiny.
FIREBIRD
Jean-Paul Comelin/Igor Stravinsky
One of the greatest classics of the 20th century ballet and a cornerstone in the evolution of Diaghilev's Ballets Russes .
In Firebird Comelin has created a beautifully evocative interpretation of this passionate work…here receiving its UK premiere.
Ballet du Nord — Firebird
Dance Incorporated present
CAFE DU CIRCLE
Directed by Linda Rickett, music by Ray Price.
A show to bring warmth to your heart, a large measure of live music with traditional dance circle steps.
MICHAEL CLARK AND COMPANY
Fresh from his recent starring role in Peter Greenaway's Prospero's Books , Michael Clark makes a long overdue return to the British dance circuit.
COSMIC OVER E
Michael Clark/music T Rex, Sondheim and The Sex Pistols
Michael Clark Dance Co — Rite Now
RITE NOW
Michael Clark/music Stravinsky
Stravinsky's Rite of Spring scandalised the audiences at its first performance…ten years later it was an established classic.
Michael Clark develops further the radical primitivism…taking it to its extreme in his new work Rite Now , a collaboration with Stephen Petronio.
Commissioned by Nottingham Playhouse in association with Nottingham New Arts Works & Dance 4 ‘…a wonderful dancer who attracts our gaze like a magnet’Le Monde ‘No other London dance group does so much simply through its mere existence to expand the boundaries of dance’Time Out ‘Catalyst, agent-provocateur, sex-symbol and idol…the Wunderkind of British New-Wave’The Times 
CAROSEL & LAURIE BOOTH
A new collaboration using Laurie Booth's innovative improvisational form and sound collage composed by Philip Jeck.
The Company works with images and themes of events, scenes, dances of travel and life on the road.
DIDIER THERON DANCE CO
A sensational of the ‘91 Montpellier International Dance Festival, Didier Theron comes from the gutsy background of a steelworking family…to create a company of raw and stylish impact.
IRONWORKS by Didier Theron
Didier Theron Dance Co — Ironworks
CUMBRE FLAMENCA
Present EL BAILE
Unknown in 1986, they made their UK debut at Brighton Festival — now they are a worldwide sensation.
‘A compelling and spellbinding combination of icy precision and wild emotion.’
‘A breathtaking night of passionate virtuosity…
Flamenco at its most heart stoppingly authentic’The Guardian Dancers and musicians with all the romance, power, heat and rhythm of Spain.
SHOWCASE SEASON
From 8–10 May, the Festival's Showcase weekend presents new and innovative performance work created in Britain.
The following companies are featured in a short season that packs sixteen events into three days.
See page 4 for full Showcase programme.
DIVAS Liz Aggiss
El Punal Entra en el Corazon
Inspired by the writings of Lorca, this solo dance piece features Billy Cowie (piano) and Daphne Scott-Sawyer (soprano) plus VIER TANZEN by Hilda Holger Liz Aggiss performs revivals of the Viennese dancer, Hilda Holger's, choreography from the 1930's, accompanied by Billy Cowie on piano.
shinkansen tracks
YOLANDE SNAITH
No Respite
An ‘impeccably controlled and executed piece’ from the winner of the Digital Award in 1988 & 1989, and of the Time Out /Dance Umbrella Award in 1991.
Full of striking painterly images inspired by visual art and sculpture of 12th and 13th century France.
An original fusion of music, film, movement, text and design accessible to a wide audience.
PHOENIX DANCE CO
OPERA & MUSIC THEATRE
Highwaymen, ugly sisters, a barber and multiple suicide — it can only mean one thing — OPERA!
GARDNER CENTRE
THE RAKES PROGRESS
Igor Stravinsky with W H Auden and Chester Kallman
Drawn from Hogarth's pictures on the sinful decline of Tom Rakewell, Stravinsky's operatic masterpiece makes an appropriate opening to the ‘92 Brighton Festival.
Its wit, neoclassic charm and sparkling score make for a work that appeals to all, young or old…and a dreadful warning too!
New Sussex Opera return to the Gardner Centre where they won the Alliance & Leicester Award last festival for their outstanding production of Weill's Lost in The Stars .
Cast includes Mark Curtis, Adrian Clarke, Mary Negarty, Stephen Richardson, Mary King and Philip Slane.
Director and Designer John Lloyd-Davies Conductor Lionel Friend 
A SONG OF SATYRS — ANTIGONE
Luc Brewaeys and Dirk Opstaele
British Premiere
A vivid combination of physical theatre and opera co-produced with the Holland Festival, La Monnaie (Brussels), Limelight (Belgium), l'Hippodrome (France) and Brighton Festival, by Walpurgis for the multi-national music theatre Ensemble Leporello.
Composer Luc Brewaeys uses spoken and lyric voices, percussion and tape in a score that emphasises the raw emotion and power of Ensemble Leporello's production.
Presented in association with Visiting Arts  
A scene from Hogarth's Rakes Progress
MICHAELHAM PRIORY
THE BEGGARS OPERA
John Gay, music by Pepusch
The work that took 18th century London by storm with its rich mixture of ballads and brigands, true love and treachery.
Heber Opera have won praise for championing English music theatre, notably in works of Vaughan Williams; they make their festival debut in the highwayman's haven of the Great Barn and tavern at Michelham Priory!
Heber Opera with Michael Forrest as Macheath Producer Roger Clow Musical Director Michael Withers 
THEATRE ROYAL
ROSSINI AT THE ROYAL
To celebrate the birth of Rossini 200 years ago on Leap Years Day and in recognition of his sojourn in Brighton as guest of the Prince Regent, his two most cherished comic operas.
THE BARBER OF SEVILLE
Figaro, the scheming barber, helps the pure & lovely Rosina to outwit her wicked guardian and kiss the hand of the saintly student Lindoro…who is of course a most honourable Count in disguise.
‘It ought to be called ‘The Barber of Fawlty Towers’ since Peter Knapp's hilarious version of Rossini's classic deserves the same sort of popularity enjoyed by that series’The Guardian Sun in English by Travelling Opera Directed by Peter Knapp 
A Music Theatre London/Vienna Festival production
CINDERELLA (La Cenerentola)
In the wake of the huge success of their up-dated versions of Don Giovanni and The Marriage of Figaro , Music Theatre London's new production of Rossini's Cinderella comes hot foot from its premiere at the Vienna Festival.
Drawing on the English obsession with class and some of the more bizarre conventions of English pantomime, MLT guarantees an unusual and highly entertaining interpretation of this witty masterpiece.
Sung in English Adapted and translated by Tony Britten and Nick Broadhurst Directed by Nick Broadhurst Conductor Tony Britten   
CONCERTS
JOAN OF ARC AT THE STAKE
An exceptionally rare occasion — the intensely moving concert-drama by Arthur Honegger, to the poem of Paul Claudel, calls for massive forces…4 actors, 5 solo singers, children's choir, double chorus and large symphony orchestra featuring an ondes martenot under the brilliant young American conductor David Robinson.
Many of you will recall the ovation given to Honegger's King David at the ‘87 festival — from which time we have been planning this epic performance to feature, once again, Brighton Festival Chorus.
To celebrate the chorus's 25 year association with the Festival and to acknowledge their standing as one of the country's most successful choirs, they perform three of the most ambitious works in the repertoire including Delius’A Mass of Life and the Berlioz Grande Messe des Morts .
THUS SPAKE ZARATHUSTRA…
THE BRABANT ORCHESTRA
Nietzsche's great book and theory of the superman, has inspired much music — notably the tone poem of Richard Strauss, the enormous 3rd symphony of Mahler and Delius' Mass of Life , all brought together in this residency of the Netherlands' Brabant Orchestra, who created such a major impact with their series at the ‘89 Brighton Festival.
Josephine Barstow Strauss Concert 10 May
STRAUSS CONCERT
R Strauss
Macbeth Symphonic Poem op.23 Four Last Songs Symphonic Tone Poem op.30 ‘Also Sprach Zarathustra’
Note literature programme's The Dream of Intelligence, launch of Sebastian Barker's epic poem on Nietzsche, Royal Albion Hotel, May 10 at 3pm — see page 15
MAHLER THIRD SYMPHONY
Continuing Brighton Festival's cycle of all the Mahler symphonies…in many ways, the most demanding and compelling of them all — the ‘epic’ Third.
THE HANOVER BAND
Based in Brighton and Hove, but known worldwide through their tours and recordings, The Hanover Band is one of the UK's finest orchestras specialising in period instrument performances of ‘classical’ and baroque works 
World Premiere
John Williams' ATTACCA
Original, stimulating and entertaining — classical guitarist John Williams' new seven piece band perform their world premiere at Brighton Festival.
Since the 1960's Williams has been exploring the dynamics of contemporary and classical music, achieving enormous success with ‘Sky’ and ‘J W and Friends’.
Attacca has an Anglo/Australian line-up, mainly acoustic with gentle amplification of the guitars.
John Williams premiers his new band, Attacca
Grand Closing Concert — Requiem
GRAND MESSE DES MORTS
The sheer scale of Berlioz' Requiem defies description…the massive symphony orchestra, four brass bands placed around the auditorium.
A fitting finale — and summons to the Last Judgement, be ye Saint or Sinner.
Leonard Slatkin and the Philharmonia return after their truly sensational closing concert of the ‘91 Festival…‘beat that!’ went the cry, the Berlioz Requiem surely will!
Plus…
TUESDAY AT THE DOME
An evening of nostalgic memories.
First performed in 1946 this series of concerts ran for 37 years, earning an entry in the Guinness Book of Records.
Douglas Reeve celebrates the 50th anniversary of his appointment as Dome organist.
Flying Music presents
THE MAGIC OF THE MUSICALS starring MARTI WEBB & MARK RATTRAY
Marti Webb and Mark Rattray
With the Magic of the Musicals Orchestra & Singers they perform hits from Phantom of the Opera ,Aspects of Love ,Chess ,Return to the Forbidden Planet ,Evita ,Buddy ,Cats and more…
CHORAL SAINTS AND SINNERS…
DIEPPE SCHOOL OF MUSIC
JUNIOR WIND BAND
A programme of popular music including Powers, Wagner and Elgar's Pomp and Circumstance .
Director: Daniel Lefebvre.
RECITALS
LUNCHTIMES
Considered ‘best value of the festival’, this series gives the opportunity to hear brilliant young artists perform in the fine acoustic and welcoming ambience of the Friends Centre.
Refreshment room and garden to relax in before and after.
EARLY EVENINGS
SIX AT SIX or ‘LES SIX A SIX ’
Last year the Festival launched a new series of early evening concerts — Six at Six.
Developed this year, it features the Parisian group of composers which evolved under the influence of Eric Satie…known as Les Six , promoted and fostered by Jean Cocteau comprising Honegger, Milhaud, Germaine Tailleferre, Poulenc as well as Auric and Durey.
Concerts last approximately one hour and can be enjoyed after work or before a main evening festival event.
Concerts start promptly at 6pm, tickets £2.50
NEW MUSIC DAY
MARATHON OF NEW MUSIC
Saturday 23 May
For five years, the ensemble IXION has presented a day of pioneering music within the festival and this year they celebrate with anniversary greetings to Xenakis (70) and John Cage (80).
They are joined in Brighton for the first time by LONDON NEW MUSIC.
A day of discovery which includes six premiers…the wit of Berners, Ives and Satie, as well as a dash of Chopin.
ROYAL PAVILION
All Royal Pavilion Music Room recitals include an interval drink in the Banqueting Room.
All concerts £11 (concs £2 off)
QUARTETS IN CHURCHES
BRODSKY STRING QUARTET
The American composer George Crumb has achieved an almost cult following for his mystical work.
In the vivid atmosphere of Brighton's oldest building and its legendary  cemetery the Brodsky Quartet offers a nocturnal experience.
George Crumb Black Angels 
St Nicholas Church, Duke Road Thurs 21 May 1 p.m. (approx 35 mins) £2.50
LITERATURE
Miroslav Holub
Readings
MIROSLAV HOLUB AND JAMES BERRY
To open the literature programme we are delighted to welcome back the internationally acclaimed poets James Berry and Miroslav Holub to read from work past and present.
MALCOLM BRADBURY
British Council/Minerva collection of new writing by Britain's top authors introduced by Malcolm Bradbury.
Guests include Rose Tremain & Adam Zameenzad.
ALISON FELL and MICHELE ROBERTS
SAINTS AND SINNERS
Alison Fell, novelist, poet and editor of the anthologies The Seven Deadly Sins and The Seven Cardinal Virtues is joined by Michele Roberts for an evening of fiction.
MARGARET ATWOOD
Canada's leading novelist makes a special visit to Brighton to read from work past and present.
Not to be missed.
GRAEME GIBSON
Novelist Graeme Gibson is published the world over — but not in Britain.
Meet him and find out more about his fiction, journalism and writing for TV, radio & film.
FIONA PITT-KETHLEY
Saint or Sinner, poet Fiona Pitt-Kethley has always been famous for her ability to startle.
In a solo presentation she offers some of her latest observations.
SYLVIA KANTARIS and D M THOMAS
An exploration of the Saints and Sinners theme by two of our most daring authors.
Not suitable for children.
KENNETH WHITE
Considered by such critics as Lawrence Durrell and Seamus Heaney to be an extraordinary and major writer, Kenneth White, who also holds the Chair of 20th Century Poetry at the Sorbonne, visits the Festival from his Brittany home to celebrate publication of a new work —Pilgrim of the Void 
BILL BRYSON
NEITHER HERE NOR THERE
Bill Bryson has recently toured Europe armed with a back-pack and knowledge of only one language (English).
This is his account.
The book does for harmonisation in Europe 1992 what John Wayne did for the ballet.
MICHAEL TUCKER AND KENNETH WHITE
Poetry and Shamanism
Michael Tucker introduces his new book Dreaming with Open Eyes — The Shamanic Spirit in 20th Century Art .
After the interval he is joined by Kenneth White (featured in the book) to discuss the new language of the Arts as a reflection of the archetypal spirit of the visionaries of old.
DARING HEARTS
OURSTORY present material from a new book on lesbian and gay Brighton lives in the 50's and 60's to be published by QueenSpark Books.
BEN OKRI
The 1991 booker Prize winner was the novelist and poet Ben Okri.
We are delighted that he has agreed to present some of his work as the climax to this year's Literature Programme.
Workshops
BRIGHTON ROCK
Location Writing Workshop
Two Saturday workshops, led by Tony Masters exploring locations featured in Graham Greene's masterpiece.
You are invited to react to the locations and then submit a story, poem or essay (3000 words max, 4 copies please) inspired by your experience, to the Festival Office — see page 3 for address.
A distinguished panel will award 2 cash prizes (£50, £25) and a £10 book token to the winners.
Entries to be received by June 1st.
NOTE — On display throughout the Festival at the Royal Albion Hotel is a free British Council Exhibition in tribute to Graham Greene.
LANGUAGE AND TEXT — SPEAKING OUT
Singer and theatre director, Joan Mills conducts a workshop designed to extend the student's power and range in expressing the meaning and value of both spoken and sung text.
MICHELE ROBERTS
Poetry Workshop
Poet, novelist and broadcaster Michele Roberts conducts a poetry workshop for beginners as well as more experienced writers.
Places limited, book early.
ALISON FELL
Fiction Workshop
Writers of all levels of experience are welcome to attend a fiction workshop with this prolific poet and novelist.
EROTIC WRITING
Workshop with D M Thomas and Sylvia Kantaris investigating ways of producing erotic writing.
SYLVIA KANTARIS
Poetry Consultations
Meet the poet Sylvia Kantaris on an individual basis to discuss your poetry.
A BOOK AT BEDTIME
QueenSpark Books present two simultaneous writing workshops: ‘Love 'em to Death’ writing about romance, ‘Steamy Stories’writing about sexuality and desire.
Readings 4.30pm 
NICKI JACKOWSKA
Poet and novelist Nicki Jackowska, a past writer in residence and author of the forthcoming book Write For Life conducts a language workship.
Experienced and inexperienced writers welcome.
Talks
BRIGHTON/DIEPPE
A Fraternity of Artists
Charles Conder, Aubrey Beardsley, Jacques Emil Blanche and Marcel Proust are just some of the names recalled by Miron Grindea, founder editor of ADAM, as he celebrates the Dieppe exhibition at Brighton Museum.
MICHAEL IGNATIEFF
THE EUROPE OF THE MIND
Following the celebration at this year's Festival of ‘New Writing ‘92’, to which he contributed an essay, Michael Ignatieff the distinguished columnist and broadcaster considers the concept of Europe in these post-Maastrict times.
Father IAN KER
CARDINAL NEWMAN
Fr.
Ian Ker discusses the life and work of the Venerable John Henry Cardinal Newman.
Author of The dream of Gerontius and the famous Apologia , Newman was one of the greatest champions of Catholicism and there are many campaigning for his  canonization .
PAUL FOOT
RED SHELLEY
Paul Foot marks the bicentenary of Percy Bysshe Shelley — a firebrand of his time and certainly no admirer of the Prince Regent!
Brighton Lines
Brighton Poets
In the last 18 months Brighton Poets have invigorated the poetry scene by bringing well known guests to read with locally-based poets.
Tonight features leading poets Eva Salzman, Don Paterson and Allen Stevens.
The Bridge Poets
The Bridge Poets are published, prizewinning and local.
Their achievements go far beyond the locality and tonight they invite you to meet and hear Sally Meyer, Ellen Zaks, Celia Robertson, Antonia Lister-Kaye, Pam Wilkie, John Tomkins and Martin Ward.
Maude Casey, Stephen Plaice and Sue Roe
Three diverse and distinguished writers all resident in Brighton, present their latest work.
Fiction, poetry and other work promise a happy mix.
Nicky Rice and Peter Abbs
Nicky Rice, 1990 National Poetry Competition winner and Brighton resident, is joined by Peter Abbs, Director of the Language, Arts and Education course at Sussex University and author of three volumes of poetry.
Tours
Throughout the Festival there are many guided walks and tours in Brighton and around Sussex.
These include Myths, Martyrs and Murderers, Winnie The Pooh, The Rich & Famous, The West Pier, Inns and Taverns and a variety of haunted haunts.
See page 35
BOOK FAIR
Antiquarian and second hand books and prints from the Provincial Booksellers Fairs Association.
SLIGHTLY FOXED
The Radio Four literary panel game chaired by Gill Pyrah comes to Brighton.
Timothy West
Performance
THE WILD GIRL
Michele Roberts and Joan Mills in performance.
A unique collaboration of poetry, music and theatre inspired by Michele Robert's novel The Wild Girl .
THE DREAM OF INTELLIGENCE
8 years in composition, we launch this giant poetic work by Sebastian Barker tracing the personal and intellectual development of Nietzsche from the early days to final decline.
Introduced by Keith Ansell-Pearson of London University with readings by Prunella Scales and Timothy West.
John the author afterwards for conversation and a glass of wine.
MICHAEL SAINT-DENIS
A Theatrical Portrait of this great French Director created in an imaginary conversation between Marius Goring, the eminent actor and Edward Thompson who became St Denis' publisher.
A renaissance in the English theatre began with St Denis' arrival in England in 1931 with his legendary productions of classical plays, starring many great actors, including John Gielgud, Peggy Ashcroft, Laurence Olivier and Michael Redgrave.
SOUVENIR OF NORMANDY
Poet and painter Adrian Henri has spent much time in Dieppe and its environs.
Complementing the Dieppe exhibition at the Museum he joins folk/rock guitarist and composer Andy Roberts for a modern celebration of Normandy.
The evening includes a Festival commission.
THE PRINCE & HIS PAVILION
A celebration of H.R.H.
the Prince Regent Awakening the Spirit of Brighton.
A programme devised by Edward Thompson with due acknowledgement to J.B. Priestley's The Prince of Pleasure .
Told by Richard Lindfield of Radio Sussex and Brighton Little Theatre with Vera Shelley of The Sussex Playwrights Club.
Discussion
THE TREE OF KNOWLEDGE
P D James & Penelope Lively
Author and publisher Anthony Rudolf chairs in a discussion on the nature of good and evil with two foremost authors whose work is intimately concerned with these concepts.
PASSIONATE ATTITUDES
At the end of their weekend residencies, Sylvia Kantaris, D M Thomas and Fiona Pitt-Kethley come together to discuss images of and attitudes to erotic writing.
Chairman Peter Pegnall.
TALKING BUSINESS
Sir James Craig, Diplomat and Director General of the Middle East Association joins Sir Peter Parker or Rockware plc, Michael Dobbs novelist and former chief of staff at Conservative Central Office, and poet and translator Herbert Lomas for a discussion on the uses of language in the international fields of markets, diplomacy and power.
Chairman, Christian Tyler of the Financial Times.
MADE IN BRITAIN
Explorations into the Ethos of a People
Are the British different from other Nations?
If so, how and why?
A day long seminar chaired by the Rt.
Hon.
Julian Amery MP.
Speakers include a member of the Bruges Group, a foreign diplomat, a member of the faculty of the University of Sussex and Jeremy Seabrook the sociologist and writer.
Presented by the Montpelier Society with the support of the University of Sussex Centre for Continuing Education 
LINGOISM
Author Bill Bryson joins Philip Howard of The Times and Katharine Whitehorn of The Observer to explore the eccentricities of English.
Pet hates and favourite amusements will feature strongly.
If you have a bee in your bonnet, do join us.
THE CHAIR OF BABEL
The Chair of Babel is the title of Peter Porter's latest collection.
Tonight he joins distinguished lexicographers Prof John Sinclair (Birmingham University) John Simpson (Oxford English Dictionary) and Sara Tulloch (Oxford Dictionary of New words) to take a wry look at the way the English language is constantly in flux.
P D James
ADDRESSING THE FORBIDDEN
The exhibition in the Polytechnic gallery will have raised many questions.
Today you have a chance to air your views.
The programme, jointly devised by Brighton Polytechnic and the Festival, consists of a morning forum, afternoon workshops and a general discussion.
Speakers include Peter Webb, art historian; Prathibha Parmar, critic and author and staff from the Polytechnic.
In the chair is Linda Clarke, barrister and lecturer in law at Sussex University.
Presented in association with the Centre for Continuing Education at the University of Sussex.
Children
BOOK BANG ONE!
A Childrens Book Event
Author Judy Corbalis and illustrator Celia Berridge draw, chat, juggle, show their newest books, tell stories and attempt to ad-lib a book together live!
With guest appearances from Titus and Bigsby, the naughty dogs.
For children aged 4–11 yrs.
Friends Centre, Ship Street Saturday 9 May 11am
THE VALLEY OF DOOM
If you are between 8 and 14 and want to participate in a dark journey of the imagination come to the VALLEY OF DOOM.
Enter the Sci-Fi Fantasy Story Writing Contest and win a brilliant prize.
Have you courage to face the blind hunter?
Can you play Russian Roulette?
Will you spring the time trap?
Enter and find out!
FOR THE YOUNG
A lively programme of events designed to appeal to Festival-goers of all ages
EVENTS FOR ADULTS & CHILDREN
OPENING PARADE
1000's of school children (and a score of dragons) pursue a giant St George through the town centre in a spectacular opening procession.
Join in the fun and celebrate the opening of the 1992's Festival.
BODGER & BADGER'S SUNDAY MASH
TV's Bodger and Badger cook up a Sunday lunchtime treat, with barmy Jane Bassett, juggling genius Tim Bat and Prince of Pottiness Pierre Hollins, and masses of mashed potato.
BOOK BANG!
Author Judy Corbalis and illustrator Celia Berridge draw, chat, juggle, show their newest books, tell stories and attempt to ad-lib a book together live!
With guest appearances from Titus and Bigsby, the naughty dogs.
For children aged 4–11 yrs.
AFTERNOONS IN THE PARK
Bring the children and a picnic to two lazy Sunday afternoons of live music and theatre, with story trails and treasure hunt.
All outdoors and all free of charge.
ENSEMBLE BASH
Children's percussion concert.
Featuring Carnival of the Animals, War Drumming, and a Junkyard Samba played on a canteen of instruments from Africa, Asia, and the local hardware store.
For 5–11 year olds and accompanying adults.
THE VALLEY OF DOOM
If you are between 8 and 14 and want to participate in a dark journey of the imagination come to the VALLEY OF DOOM.
Enter the Sci-Fi Fantasy Story Writing Contest and win a brilliant prize.
MR FIZZBANG'S CIRCUS SPECTACULAR
A special, Mr Fizzbang family circus show with amazing juggling, fabulous unicyclists, incredible clowns and wonderful club swinging — fun for all ages.
WALK THE PLANK
Europe's first touring theatre ship comes to Brighton Festival for the launch of her maiden tour…berthing at Newhaven Harbour and Brighton Marina with a daytime family show, costumed carnival band and night-time fire spectacular.
THE BLUE daytime show
An ecological fairy tale written by poet and playwright Adrian Mitchell.
Told through pantomime, puppetry, live music, song and spectacular images.
Book now, only 100 places on board for each show.
THE BLUE ON FIRE night show
Amphibious machines descend, inflatable beings come to life, huge lanterns illuminate the waterscape — a large, promenade performance concluding with firework display.
FULL TILT by IOU
Free outdoor spectacle in Preston Park.
Using as its basic theme the medieval joust, IOU's new show features an array of imaginative contraptions and costumes made from the most unlikely materials!
With live music from a mobile mechanical orchestra this is a unique, bizarre, exhilarating, magically theatrical and ultimately indescribable event.
See it!
ILLUSIONS OF GRANDEUR
Part 3 — This new family magic show, presented by Lynn Thomas, features a guest artiste and one of the worlds most famous illusions The Zig Zag!
Horse and Bamboo on tour throughout East Sussex
HORSE & BAMBOO
Each year Horse and Bamboo, pioneers of true rural theatre, travel through a new area of the British Isles…on foot and with horse with a new show.
Horse and Bamboo at last come to Sussex, with their latest show based on the extraordinary story of the legendary and influential Mexican artist, Posada.
Combining a vast array of puppetry techniques, strange masked characters and live music, they tour to the following Sussex villages:
BALMORAL CRUISES
The historic Balmoral sails from Brighton Marina in this third season of Festival Cruises.
Book early to be sure of your tickets by either completing the booking form or contacting the Dome Box Office direct on Brighton (0273) 674357.
See page 29 for further details.
ISLE OF WIGHT & STEAM RAILWAY
All day excursion, returning to Brighton about 9.30pm.
FRENCH COAST CRUISE
Grand day trip via Folkestone.
Returning by special coaches from Folkestone, arriving Brighton 8pm.
YOUNG RADIO
YOUNG RADIO PLAYWRIGHTS FESTIVAL
Festival Radio presents the most spectacular programme of radio drama initiatives for young people in southern England.
The first workship is designed to stimulate ideas and to discuss the craft of radio writing.
It will be led by award winning writing/directing team and the UK's leading independent radio drama producers Tim Crook and Richard Shannon.
Participants will be invited to submit a five minute script for the second session.
On the second date, the short plays will be recorded in a studio with professional actors.
It is hoped that the writers will develop their pieces into a full length play for the Woolwich Young Radio Playwrights Competition.
The best work will be broadcast in May on Festival Radio 100.4 FM in Brighton and LBC in London.
Budding dramatists should not miss the chance to talk to some of this country's finest writers at a special seminar on Saturday 9 May at 2pm.
Admission is free to all events but the numbers of places limited
FESTIVAL RADIO
Festival Radio broadcasting on 100.4 FM from 27 April throughout the Festival, 24 hours a day.
Hourly listings from 8am til 5pm and live coverage of Festival events every weekday evening at 6pm, in association with The Guardian .
Full programme schedule available in The Punter and Festival Times .
Cumbre Flamenca at The Dome 21 & 22 May DON'T MISS…the colourful Cumbre Flamenca — flamboyant, energetic flamenco dance company in vivid, traditional costume.
Accompanied by the thrilling music of flamenco guitars.
VENUE GUIDE
umbrella
Music
MUSIC OF THE TWELVE: THE ORIEL TRIO
A musical celebration for European Year 1992 with Betty Mills, flute; Helen Powell, oboe and Philip Gammon, piano.
Music from Belgium, Britain, Denmark, France, Germany, Greece, Holland, Italy, Luxembourg, Portugal and Spain.
GUITAR RECITAL
Richard Durrant is a local classical guitar player, he will be using a variety of instruments to play a varied programme of contemporary and other music.
FESTIVAL MUSICAL TEA
An afternoon of nostalgia, cream tea and the piano music of Patrick Redmond.
MOVE ON UP A LITTLE HIGHER
Move On Up A Little Higher, by Kate Ayling and Mark Edwards, is an exploration of the rich heritage of gospel music, from the blues-orientated spiritual, to the energetic uptempo sounds of praise, to the contemporary sounds of some of the very best modern gospel.
Accompanying the choir are such musicians as the brilliant trumpeter Raul d'Olivera (ex Duke Ellington) and local, wellknown and well-loved jazz pianist Mark Edwards, who co-wrote the work, and talented saxophonist Julian Nicholas.
BROADWAY COMES TO KEMPTOWN
A programme of songs from well-known shows performed cabaret style.
The ever exciting and rare appearance of Hazel Ross with pianist Joseph Daniel Marshall.
CHAPEL ROYAL LUNCHTIME SERIES
Thursday 7 May Robert Randall and Nicholas Houghton piano duo.
Works by Bizet and Debussy
Thursday 14 May Kim Retallick violin & Peter Sulski violin.
Works by Bach, Handel and Mozart
Thursday 21 May Jennifer Caws oboe, David Evans flute and Nicholas Houghton piano.
Works by Quantz, Mozart and Poulenc 
WESTBROOK-FRIEND GUITAR DUO
James Westbrook and Annette Friend play an evening of music written and arranged for classical guitar duet.
MASTERS OF THE KINGS MUSICK
The Gentlemen of the Chapels royal from 1135 to the present day.
Presented by Brighton Consort, dir.
Michael Donkin.
FROM EURIPIDES TO DOSTOEVSKY
A concert of music on literary themes by the Pastores Ensemble with Darren Jameson (piano), actors and dancers.
Works by Robert Carrington.
In assoc. with Portslade Community College.
ROEDEAN MUSIC SCHOLARS' CONCERT
Solo and ensemble items, including works by Mozart, Beethoven and Moffat.
AN DIE MUSIK
Martina Becker soprano, Peter Lay guitar.
Lieder by Franz Schubert with guitar accompaniments from the period.
HANDEL'S MESSIAH
East Sussex Bach Choir & East Sussex Bach Orchestra.
Roger Durston conducts a performance with audience participation in well-known choruses — bring your own copy and join in.
SAINTS ALIVE
St Michael's presents a selection of music and movement featuring Brighton Chamber Choir, Printer's Measure, Brighton Steiner School Children's Choir, Brighton Steiner School Students Eurythmists plus a variety of instrumentalists and singers.
THE REHEARSAL ORCHESTRA
FESTIVAL ORCHESTRAL COURSE
The course begins with a contemporary music workshop where the Mexican composer, Gabriela Ortiz's piece Patios will be rehearsed, studied and presented.
Players will have the opportunity to discuss interpretation and points of technique with composer and workshop director Martin Butler.
The rest of the two days will be devoted to rehearsing Malcolm Arnold's Symphony No 9 , Saint-Saens Organ Symphony (No 3)and Rossini's overture La Cenerentola .
Applications invited from good orchestral players.
A free, informal concert to be end the weekend course will be held in St Mark's Chapel on Sunday 17 May 6 pm.
Pink Parasol
BRIGHTON LESBIAN & GAY PRIDE ‘92
An eleven day festival from 15–25 May.
Events so far include — Fri 15 Coming Out Day, Sat 15 Lesbian Strength Day, Sun 17 Day or Remembrance, Mon 18 Launch of ‘Outrights’— a manifesto for lesbian and gay liberation, Tue 19 AIDS/Safer Sex Day, Fri 22 All night film showing at the Duke of York's, Sat 23 Pride Procession and outdoor carnival, Sun 24 Metropolitan Community Church Service and blessing of relationships, Lesbian and Gay Sports Day, Mon 25 ‘Queer on the Pier’ Day of Action plus exhibitions and other cultural, social and political events.
Theatre
FISH-HEADS
This highly acclaimed improvisation team kick off the festival with 3 nights of honed chaos.
Improved cabaret at its best.
SINGLE SPIES by Alan Bennett
Burgess or Blunt?
Saints or sinners?
Was Burgess more sinned against than sinning?
Did the highest in the land know all the time about the other side of Anthony Blunt — knight of the realm, art historian and Keeper of the Royal Pictures?
A savagely funny double header providing some of the answers!
CHARLES DICKENS — SAINT AND SINNER by Constance Cox
His writing was filled with compassion, but he showed another face to his wife and children.
A reading with full cast by the Sussex Playwrights Club.
BLOODY POETRY by Howard Brenton
Shelley, Mary Shelley and Claire Clairemont, fleeing England after the scandal caused by their triangular relationship, meet Byron on the shores of Lake Geneva.
A challenging play full of atmosphere and (naturally) poetry, portraying lives both saintly and sinful.
Kent-based Pegasus Theatre Company is directed by Philip Wilson.
BURROUGHS!
By Graham Duff
Part dramatised biography, part stand-up comedy based on the life of William S Burroughs.
CABARET
Book by Joe Masteroff, music by John Kander, based on the play by John Van Durten and stories by Christopher Isherwood.
Join the heady decadence of Berlin's Kit Kat Club, singing and dancing while Hitler's profile rises on the city's skyline, and a society heads inexorably towards extinction.
UMBRELLA EVENTS 1993 — Interested in putting an event on during next year's Festival?
If you wish to be included in this section of the brochure please contact the Festival office in October/November for an appropriate form (address on page 35)
PZO92
PZ092 will be presenting work throughout May in the metropolis of Brighton.
The project will involve artists working in a multiplicity of media and spaces, creating a matrix of spiritual intensity and Diabolic rapture including…
PZ092 PART V — BLANK AND THE ART OF THE PARTY.
Transparent propaganda from the archives of the Pow Wow on exhibition for two days only.
This is a rare and unique chance to see Archaeology, Andy Walker, Film, Video, Hardcore, Opera and Philosophy in Euphoric discord.
IT'S A SIN — The Musical
A swift moving written, directed and produced by two local sixth formers.
It's A Sin deals with a modern day trauma of two best friends; their longing for girls and their love for each other.
Profits to the Terence Higgins Trust.
CALL ME, CANDY!
This black comedy by Peter Bullock, his third production for the festival (nominated in 1991) for the Best Theatre Award), encompasses the lives of evening shift workers on a telephone chatline.
Life is a slow, but easy, on the phones until a newcomer breezes in and threatens their jobs, homelife and sanity.
Presented by Club Theatre.
THE WEDDING
A contemporary performance piece exploring the full variety of the wedding experience.
Utilising the media of dance, drama, photographic and video technology the audience will be treated to a montage of illusion.
Traditional bridal wear combines with theatrical costume and effects to create an entertaining and thought-provoking visual statement.
DR FAUSTUS
By Christopher Hampton
The learned doctor abandons academia and seeks rewards of magic.
He makes a pact with the devil whereby the devil will be his servant and do his bidding for 24 years, after which time he will render up his immortal soul.
Umbrella Theatre presents
KABARETT VALENTIN
An extraordinary show which recreates the droll downbeat world of Karl Valetin, Germany's greatest clown.
With his long-time partner Liesl Karlstadt, Valentin performed his comic-surreal sketches and songs in Munich beer halls of the 20's and 30's.
‘The music hall clown who discovered the deep meaning of nonsense’ with Michael Mann and Christine Furness.
THE HAPPENING
A multi-arts event including music, dance, theatre and fashion.
Artists include The Innocent Theatre Company, The Smith Quartet and Wildflower.
Reaction Theatre present
THE TEMPEST
Directed by Robin Manuell.
The Tempest , Shakespeare's last play, is a tale of power and slavery, spirits and demons, revenge and forgiveness, magic and love.
It's also hilariously funny.
Reaction's high energy approach and commitment to producing a visual and musical spectacle has helped to make the Shakespeare in the Park a festival favourite.
The Evening Argus described the 1991 production, ‘Three hours of pure magic…a show not to be missed.’
Bring blankets, a picnic — eat, drink & be merry.
THE PASSION by tony Harrison
From Tony Harrison trilogy The Mysteries ,The Passion is based on York's famous medieval plays.
Produced by local group Mysterium, directed by Bob Hinton, this powerful combination of music and drama in the folk style has been appreciated by audiences in Sussex churches since Easter 1991.
THE SECRET RAPTURE by David Hare
Prospect Drama explores how notions of morality & personal relationships changed during the 80's in ‘one of the best English plays since the war’Sunday Times .
Mr Fizzbang presents
MR FIZZBANGS CIRCUS SPECTACULAR
Family circus show with amazing juggling, fabulous unicyclists, incredible clowns and wonderful club swinging — but mainly fun, fun, fun.
For children of all ages.
FEAR AND MISERY IN THE THIRD REICH by Berthold Brecht
Translated by John Willett.
Brecht wrote this searing and bitter denunciation of Hitler's ‘Thousand Year Reich’ from exile in 1936.
It is one of his most heartfelt works combining all the pungency, political commitment and black humour of his best plays.
The music, by Brecht's contemporaries Weill and Eisler, adds atmosphere and reinforces the strong protest against tyranny and persecution.
WILDE ABOUT OSCAR!
or The Importance of Being ‘Algy’
Michael Jayston and Rosalind Shanks in an evening of wit and humour from the writings of Oscar Wilde.
Devised by Peter Thorogood, who reveals an interesting link between St Mary's House at Bramber and The Importance of Being Earnest .
Boundstone Community College present
MESSAGE OF DESTINY
By Tom Brown.
An original play which examines the strengths and failings of some of the characters who led the Chartist movement, one of the most important political events of the C19th.
Open Air Shakespeare in the Park
MACBETH
Following previous successes with A Midsummer Night's Dream and last year's As You Like It —‘Left us mesmerised’Evening Argus .
The Festival Shakespeare Company present Shakespeare's archetypal tragedy,Macbeth .
It's all there, witchcraft, murder, ambition, madness and comedy.
So bring your blankets, picnics and arrive early for the pre-show entertainment.
VOICES AT HER ELBOW
A new play concerning schizophrenia and Joan of Arc, based on medieval and true present-day events.
A thought-provoking look at the ever-growing affliction of mental disturbance.
Produced and performed by Britannia, a locally-based company of professional actors.
Christian Arts Festival
TURNING POINT
Springs Dance Company bring alive their Christian faith in a humorous but thought-provoking presentation.
A delightful repertoire of contemporary & classical dance & music.
CONCERT OF FRENCH CHORAL AND ORCHESTRAL MUSIC
Combined orchestra & choirs of Brighton College, Brighton College Junior School and Roedean School perform Faure's Requiem plus orchestral music by Tchaikovsky and Mussorgksy.
Conducted by Stephen Hicks & Conrad Sandercock.
THE DEATH MASQUE OF BISHOP HENRY KING.
1992 is the 400th anniversary of the birth of Henry King, Bishop of Chichester (1642– 1669).
King was a minor poet and staunch Royalist; this led to his flight from Chichester at the time of the Cromwellian bombardment of the city.
The Death Masque is a dramatisation of his often macabre writings by Michael Butler and Stephen Cornford.
PAINTINGS AND DRAWINGS BY CAFE ARTISTS
An exhibition by Christians working in the arts, media and entertainment 
SEEING AND BELIEVING
Drawings, paintings and craft on the christian theme by the regional group of the Society of Catholic Artists.
Artists' ecumenical service Sat 23 May, 12.30pm  
ANGELS AND DIRT
Ceremony of readings and carols for Easter with the Meeting House Choir 
MEDITATION INTRODUCTION
1.
TRANSFORMATION OF MIND
A short talk about what meditation really is and how it relates to the transformation of self, concentrating on meditation on awareness of breath and body.
BEYOND GOOD AND EVIL A GUIDE TO BUDDHIST ETHICS
A talk by Dh Vessantara, a senior member of the Western Buddhist Order.
SUSSEX SUMMIT ON SAVING THE EARTH
Half day assembly with speakers and discussion as a run-up to United Nations Earth Summit in Brazil in June 1992.
PREACHERS PAST AND PRESENT
A mobile street drama presentation depicting preachers of the past who visited and spoke in Brighton and Hove.
The drama will involve a cast of over ten people and include sections of talks actually preached by eminent men such as Whitefield, Wesley and others.
READINGS
SAINTS AND SINNERS
Members of the Brunswick Poetry Group giving a reading of their own poetry in very varying styles.
WISE AND WICKED TALES
An evening of stories with Brighton storytellers and the Upstairs Theatre Company.
Profits to Local Housing Charities.
And…
Dwelling on twenty five years of festivity in Brighton — the nature of the town itself and various themes that the festival has adopted, such as Death, Heaven and the Victorians, The Seven Deadly Sins, Phantasmagoria, Myths and Magic…a suitable retrospective theme would be Saints and Sinners.
Thus we welcome you to the 1992 Festival programme!
Brighton Borough Council with the Arts Council and South East Arts brought us into being — and their support continues as strongly as ever.
More recently we have been joined by East Sussex County Council, The Borough of Hove, The British Council and now we welcome also Lewes District Council.
The Festival Trust represents many corporate sponsors, whose commitment has been crucial in developing this international celebration of the arts.
In 1990 we heralded the dawning of a New Europe — in 1992 we can advance as true Europeans, looking forward especially to a closer partnership with our friends in Dieppe, Rouen and Lille.
As usual we are celebrating Europe Day with a special concert but, for the first time, we incorporate the official Europe Week within the programme of the Festival in association with East Sussex County Council.
It has not been easy to pull this programme together in the prevailing economic climate, but we hope you will find much to enjoy and help blow away those recessionary blues…
Gavin Henderson, Artistic Director
Exhibitions
All Festival exhibitions have free admissions but opening times vary — please check.
FESTIVAL EXHIBITION CENTRE
THE CORN EXCHANGE
Transformed every festival into a huge art gallery, the Corn Exchange this year houses three major exhibitions.
Artists from Sussex and Normandy come together in the ‘Spirit of ‘92’.
BODIES OF WORK
With the scope to show large scale work — a group of Sussex based artists with national and international reputations focus on the human figure.
PETER STRAUSFELD
Remarkable posters designed from his Brighton Studio for the Academy Cinema in Oxford Street over a period of forty years — each in effect a ‘portrait’ of the film.
Terry Gravett — Performing in Ancient Surroundings
CONTEMPORARY PRINTS FORM ROUEN
Making their British debut — these printmakers have become recognised as one of the liveliest groups of artists working in France today.
RENDEZ-VOUS A DIEPPE
THE TOWN AND ITS ARTISTS FROM TURNER TO BRAQUE
This long awaited exhibition is the first ever to explore Dieppe as a meeting place for French and British artists and writers.
Almost  wid.way between London and Paris, a mixture of working port and fashionable resort, Dieppe, with its cafes, casino, beach and racecourse was, in the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, the chief summer visiting place for sophisticated French and British artists.
Monet — L'Eglise de Varengeville a Contre Jair 1882
Works by Blanche, Braque, Daubigny, Delacroix, Gauguin, Gilman, Gore, Gosse, Monet, William & Ben Nicholson, Pisarro, Renoir, Sickert, Turner, Whistler and Christopher Wood, as well as drawings by Aubrey Beardsley and Max Beerbohm will be shown, shedding new light on English Impressionism and on the Aesthetic Movement.
The special atmosphere of the town and region, its architecture and landscape, cultural life and the busy port is reflected in this major exhibition which brings together paintings from public and private collections in Britain, France and America.
POSTCARD PIONEER
As a ‘side show’ to the Dieppe artists exhibition, an exhibition of the postcard pioneer and prominent early 20th century Dieppe photographer Georges Marchand.
ADAM BIRTWISTLE
Now living and working near Dieppe, Birtwistle's paintings conjure images of saintly reverence and sinful resonance.
ADDRESSING THE FORBIDDEN
‘How could they do it?!!’
Why are images of lust considered sinful, when those of avarice, gluttony, envy and wrath raise not an eyebrow?
And why are they so popular?
This exhibition seeks to explore the question of mass-produced, sexual imagery, not through the written word, but through the visual language of the artist.
Images exploring other images; art interrogating commerce.
The sublime addressing the forbidden.
Bringing together paintings, photographs and sculptures by artists from Europe, America and as far afield as Anguilla, who, through their work examine the role and nature of commercial sexual representation.
The question is not ‘How could they?’, but ‘why do we?’.
It is not the intention of this exhibition to shock, but to illuminate.
However, it should be understood that it contains images of sexually explicit nature and is not recommended for those offended by such material.
Adults only.
% For Art: KISS WALL.
A public sculpture for Brighton by Bruce Williams — winner of the national competition to provide a public art piece for Brighton.
The KISS WALL will evolve on the sea front during the festival.
Preparatory work of maquettes, photographs and drawings form the basis of this exhibition.
BURNING THE LIBRARY OF BABEL
A book can contain a world between its bindings.
It can ben authority or a friend, entertainment or education, escape or involvement, the past or the future.
This will not be an exhibition of bookbinding — there will be books of stone or steel, electric books, books to enter, microscopic books, inside-out books, burning books.
ADRIAN BERG: GARDENS
Marking his recent move to Sussex, including large oil paintings and watercolours of many grand local gardens…a departure from his celebrated work based on Regents Park, his former habitat.
Adrian Berg — Stourhead 16th August
FROM PRIMITIVES TO PRE-RAPHAELITES
The collection of Constantine Ionides (1833–1901), Hove's greatest patron.
In a house in Second Avenue, banker and statesman Constantine Ionides amassed his great collection of 19th century French art including prints and drawings by Rosetti, Delacroix, Whistler, Canaletto and Montegna.
DROGUERIE CONCEPT —‘DISCOUNT STORE’
In the darkest years of Soviet repression in Czechoslovakia, a group of dissident artists kept their work in the public eye behind the camouflage of a little shop…
Galerie Droguerie or literally ‘Discount Store’ in the industrial town of BRNO.
Led by Peter Osozly, now President Havel's personal adviser, these artists symbolise the rise of the ‘velvet revolution’.
Inge Clayton at Cobb's Mill Gallery
AT CHARLESTON
DAVID GARLAND Tableware with a bold and original approach to decoration in the spirit of pottery painted by Bell and Grant at Charleston.
DENNIS CREFFIELD A notable student of David Bomberg, his work features in many public collections including the Tate.
This show focuses on his ten year association with Charleston.
VIEWS OF PORTUGAL, SPAIN AND FRANCE
By DAVID PONSONBY
A chronicle of his life during the war years in France and subsequent travels.
The first showing since his death in 1985 of works by this friend and fellow student of Les Six , the composers featured in the Six at Six concerts (see page 12).
FESTIVAL ART TRAIL
Presented by CIRCUS, the independent arts project, the trail's core is formed by a series of informal exhibitions.
From Brighton Station to the Palace Pier it is designed to be enjoyed both by casual visitors and dedicated enthusiasts.
Entrance free to all exhibitions.
SAINTS AND SINNERS
Etchings, paintings and collages by Austrian born Inge Clayton.
Paper sculptures by Martin Hall.
A ‘maplet’, giving full exhibition details and opening times together with an independent ‘fringe’ guide will be available at Art Trail venues and the Tourist Information Centre.
FIVEWAYS ARTISTS
Russian sculpture at 8 Hollingbury Road
RUSSIAN SCULPTURE
8 HOLLINGBURY ROAD
Selection of work by 14 contemporary Russian sculptors from studios in and around Moscow and Tallin, Estonia.
Thanks to Jonathan Poole for his support in lending the Russian Sculpture.
182 SPRINGFIELD ROAD.
Original paintings by Colin Ruffell and Fran Slade
70 SOUThd3OWN AVENUE
Harvey Daniels, woodcuts and other works
49 EDBURTON AVENUE
Elizabeth Bell, drawings; Marion Charles, drawings; Jennie Fontana, poems; Jonathan Gilhooly, paintings; Marilyne Green, prints; Julius Tabacek, paintings: Julie Jennings, ceramics
69 LOWTHER ROAD
Jane Abbott, ceramics; Rachel Eaves, ceramics/paintings; Matthew Lewis, paintings/prints; Mark Sands, paintings/drawings; Anna Thorell, ceramics; Martin Ward, paintings
102 SANDGATE ROAD
 Amanda Armstrong, tapestries; Philip Dun, paintings & prints; Brenda Hartill, etchings & paintings; Louis Johnson, ceramics, Trixie Lauterwasser, ceramics
146 BALFOUR ROAD
Nicola Jackson, paperworks; Sarianne Durie, stained glass; Moira Faulkner, ceramics; Liz Jalla, ceramic sculpture; Zul Mukhida, photographs; Sue Nunn, woodcarvings; Caroline Pickering, paintings    
Umbrella visual arts featuring local artists work on display in houses, open studios & galleries
BACK TO BRIGHTON
Window Gallery celebrates its 10th anniversary with an exhibition of recent and new works by Philip Dunn 
PEOPLE IN PLACE
Paper sculpture by Philip Cox 
JONATHAN HOWLETT
Recent and retrospective work 
PAINTINGS AND TAPESTRIES
Doreen Osborn, watercolours; Maire Cunningham, tapestry cushions, wall-hangings and pictures 
BRIGHTON BOUND
Fine bookbinding by Jan Ascoli, Rebecca Cornish, Sue Doggett, Helen Gibbs, Jenni Grey and Peter Jones 
TRAVEL ALBUMS
Works by award winning students (sponsored by South East Arts and East Sussex County Council) from 3 art colleges in East Sussex 
THE FIGURE DISCLOSED
Keith Clements, paintings/drawings; Graham Loder, photographs, collages, articulated images/drawings; Marilyn Panto, sculptures/drawings 
THE QUANTUM ART GROUP
Una Beavan, Denise Collins, Jenny Duncan, Clare Ford, Christine Holmes, Wendy Quantrill, Valerie Shepherd, Sally Verrall.
Abstract and traditional works 
PIGMENTS OF THE IMAGINATION
The 6th Annual Exhibition of the Compton Avenue Art Club.
Julia Buxton, Annelies Clarke, Sarah Chrisp, Clare Evans, Nick & Sohani Gonzalez, Annie Moss, Fiona Rankin, Linda Strange, Jackie Thomas, Barry & Pam Wilkinson and Gail Young 
OPEN HOUSE
Shirley Trevena, watercolours; Lucy Goffin, textiles; Lynne Moore, prints; Rosalie Dodds, ceramics; Pamela Sobels, monoprints; Meg Campbell, etchings 
DUPONT ARTS
50 artists from beginners to professionals   
Sarah Colgate — Beach Cafe
REVELATIONS
Work by post-graduate students from the Polytechnic's Certificate in Art course 
HAND-MADE HAND-PAINTED TILES AND PORCELAIN
By Diana Hall and Peggy Strausfeld  
NEWHAVEN WORKS
Work by Newhaven based professional artists plus selection of photographs by guest artist Charlotte Macpherson, whose work will be featured in 1993 to mark the opening of a new gallery in Newhaven 
THE MUSGRAVE COLLECTION
Housed in recently restored Grade II listed building, 1000 years of British coins plus ancient documents, pottery &  artefacts linked to the journeys of St Paul 
SAINTS AND SINNERS
Sculpture, photography, textiles, jewellery, ceramics 
OPEN STUDIO
Barry Hinchliff, French landscapes-oils & watercolours and Brian Lumsden, landscapes-pastels 
THE CLIFF
Veronica Travers, low relief works; Barrie Huntbach, paintings/drawings; John Robinson, collage/drawings; Stephan Watson, computer imagery 
SUSSEX COUNTRY ARTS CLUB ANNUAL EXHIBITION
Life drawings and paintings 
THE GUILD OF SUSSEX CRAFTSMEN
The work of the Guild in a home environment to celebrate its 21st birthday 
OPEN HOUSE
Jane Arkwright, mixed media; Audrey Hay, paintings; Tricia Rafferty, rugs and jewellery; Moria Wills, prints and jewellery; Susan Zuppinger, paintings 
PAUL & VIVIEN MARTIN
Recent watercolours, oils and etchings 
LOCAL BUDDHIST ARTISTS
Including work of the late Martin Shann 
PETER STRAUSFELD
Paintings, linocuts, woodcuts and prints 
BLUE HADDOCK ARTISTS CO-OP
Mixed media modern paintings.
Some material may be considered ‘controversial’
PHOTOWORKS
Terry Howe, cibachrome prints of events involving household objects.
Paul Rafferty, photographic installation  
Terry Howe — Up The Hill
ODDBALLS AND OGRES
Mark Eason, oil paintings, portraits from life, landscapes and creatures of fancy 
FRANCE, SAINTS AND SINNERS
Groupe Primitif Moderne — Naifs Andalie, Marie-Joe, Luce Formeau, Jeannie Thomas, Many Kriegel, Frances Trott, Charlotte Lachapelle, Jeanne-Marie Vidal 
BRIGHTON ILLUSTRATORS GROUP — THE BIG SHOW
Largest exhibition of professional illustration ever held in Brighton representing over 50 illustrators' work 
CONTEMPORARY CRAFTS
Furniture by David Booker, wood engravings by Graham Evans and jewellery by Cynthia Cousens 
JULES CLORAN
Drawings, acrylic and oil paintings — post surrealist images.
Some material may be considered ‘controversial’
PRIVATE COLLECTION OF THE ARCHANGEL GABRIEL
Drawings and paintings by Sian Bouvier 
NO SHADES OF GREY
Work by members of Clarendon Church 
OAP's ART EXHIBITION
Carolyn Fearman, paintings/photographs 
COLIN DAY
Recent paintings 
JOHN TOMPLINS
Sculptural and figurative ceramics with a mythical and medieval accent  
ON THE DANGEROUS EDGE OF THINGS
First mounted to celebrate the 85th birthday of Graham Greene, this British Council exhibition pays tribute to the writer who had such close connections with the town 
VIRTUE AND ICE
Artists express in their own way what they feel is saintly, what is sinful 
BRIGHTON PEOPLE — A PHOTOGRAPHIC STUDY
Kin Ho, Graham Loder & Yiorgos Nikiteas, black & white photographs        
COMMUNITY
DRAGONS & ST GEORGE
THE CAT'S WHISPER
A 35 minute theatre show for Infant Schools.
A look at Words and Sounds; how they're put together and what they make us do.
Well-hidden in a lively and unusual music performance for the under 8's.
Available to schools from 4 May.
DRAGON'S EGGS
5 Story Tellers from Same Sky offer a 45 minute show for all ages.
An omelette of rumour, speculation and downright lies, with many a sting in the tail.
Available to Junior Schools from 4 May.
AINT MISBEHAVIN'
Afternoon Tea Dance with Festival Extras for Senior Citizen's groups and lunch clubs.
A 3 piece dance band, some gentle surprises and maybe even a potted palm or two, spill out of a van and into church halls and community venues all over town.
TWO STEPS FORWARD
Back by popular demand, Same Sky's Dance Band offers a Big Night Out to community groups who want to hold their very own Festival Party.
BRIGHTON VISITORS
A programme of workshops across the town from around the world.
Dance from Cumbre Flamenca, Ballet Du Nord and Michael Clark.
Hand-crafted shadow puppetry performances and workshops, plus a surprise or two from Indonesia.
HERE BE DRAGONS…
Opening Childrens Parade
1000's of school children (and a score of dragons) pursue a giant St George through the town centre in a spectacular opening procession.
Join in the fun and celebrate the opening of 1992's Festival.
ENSEMBLE BASH
Children's percussion concert.
Featuring Carnival of the Animals, War Drumming, and a Junkyard Samba played on a canteen of instruments from Africa, Asia, and the local hardware store.
For 5–11 year olds and accompanying adults.
Ensemble Bash also see p12 lunchtime concert
HOVE HAPPENIN'
At St Barnabas Hall, Sackville Road a taste of the entertainment promised at this exciting new arts venue in Hove.
A day of assorted delights, for every age.
AFTERNOONS IN THE PARK WITH ST GEORGE
Bring the children and a picnic to two lazy Sunday afternoons of live music and theatre, with story trails and treasure hunt.
All outdoors and free of charge.
MOULESCOOMB FAMILY FUN DAY
The longest established community extravaganza in town featuring over 100 stalls, clowns, gymnastics, dog displays, childrens corner, fun fair, pony rides, Its A Knock Out and bands.
PRESTON BLOOMS
A week-long festival of flowers arts, exhibitions and musical performances, at St John the Evangelist (Preston Parish Church)
THE GOOD, THE BAD AND THE UGLY
A two week Youths Arts Festival featuring a play devised and performed by Brighton Youth Theatre, an exhibition of young people's artwork and workshops.
Exhibition open during the day and on evenings when there are performances in the Youth Theatre.
Details of workshops from Brighton Youth Centre.
DIEPPE MARKET DAY
No need to cross the Channel to buy Monsieur Olivier's cheeses and Monsieur Letellier's baguettes.
They will be on sale with many other tasty offerings in Bartholomew Square, when the Dieppe Street Market makes a much awaited return to the festival.
Be there early!
Sunday 3 May 8am
CELEBRATORY OPENING SERVICE
Liturgical performance, with orchestra, Haydn's Nelson Mass.
Closing voluntary by Festival Director, Gavin Henderson, Trumpet.
BLESSING OF THE NETS
The Blessing of the Nets Festival begins Sunday 3 May at 11.30am outside the Admiral Codrington Bar on the Beach Deck and ends with a grand finale on Sunday 17 May in The Lanes.
FESTIVAL OF FAMILY FUN
All day event of stalls, sideshows, bands and sports displays.
Don't miss the celebrity fun-run, world's longest bric-a-brac stall and, new for ‘92, parachute display by the Royal Marines .
CHARLESTON FESTIVAL 1992
Between The Acts
In transition between two eras of government and in the year of European Integration, who are the heroes and villains in the arts?
Charleston Farmhouse, former home of the Bloomsbury artists and writers, saw the emergence of new forms of art from the wreckage of Edwardian society, and through Maynard Keynes laid the foundation for arts subsidy today.
The programme explores the contemporary situation with notes of celebration and warning from leading critics, artists and writers.
THE VISUAL ARTS UNDER ATTACK
Patrick Heron — painter — deplores the destruction of art schools..
WAYS OF BEHAVING
Readings by Fleur Adcock, one of Britain's most distinguished poets, whose latest collection is Time Zones (OUP, 1991) and Eva Saltzman, whose first book,The English Earthquake (Bloodaxe), published this Spring, is a Poetry Book Society recommendation..
ARTS AID
The role of subsidy in the arts today with Richard Eyre, Director of the Royal National Theatre and Philip French, doyen of English film criticism and producer of Critics Forum ..
FRENCH CONNECTIONS
Angelica Garnett, artist, sculptor and writer, daughter of Vanessa Bell and Duncan Grant, looks at Bloomsbury's relationship with France..
SONG OF LOVE
A reading of the letters of Rupert Brooke and Noel Olivier by Pippa Harris, editor of Letters and Ian Kelly, who recently appeared in the film version of Howard's End ..
VITA AND VIRGINIA
Premiere of a new dramatisation of the captivating correspondence between Vita Sackville-West and Virginia Woolf with Eileen-Atkins, who recently toured the USA in A Room of One's Own .
Directed by Patrick Garland, director of Chichester Festival Theatre..
CRUISES.
The historic Balmoral sails from Brighton Marina in this third season of Festival Cruises.
Book early to be sure of your tickets by either completing the booking form or contacting the Dome Box Office direct on Brighton.
TRADITIONAL JAZZ BAND CRUISES
Sunset cruises to Seven Sisters and Beachy Head returning about 10pm..
COASTAL CRUISES
Cruising round Beachy Head & Lighthouse to visit Eastbourne £9 (concs & under 16's £4.50 off) or stay on for afternoon cruise ‘round Royal Sovereign’ £13.95 (cons & and under 16's £6.95 off)..
ISLE OF WIGHT & STEAM RAILWAY
All day excursion, the classic Brighton holiday outing with the afternoon on the Island £15.95 (under 16's £8 off) or stay aboard for the afternoon cruise round Portsmouth Harbour £19.95 (under 16's £10 off).
Book on board for IOW Steam Railway trip £5.50 (under 16's £1.50 off).
Returning to Brighton about 9.30pm..
FRENCH COAST CRUISE
Grand day trip — visit Folkestone £15.95 (concs £6 off) or cruise to the French coast £19.95 (concs £4 off).
Returning by special coaches from Folkestone, arriving Brighton 8pm..
All cruises depart from West Quay, Brighton Marina (car parking provided).
Please be ready to board at least £15 mins before sailing time.
Note — access to ship is down a sloping gang plank.
Bar and catering on board(at additional cost)
Bring warm clothes.
FILM & TV
4 CHANNEL FOUR TELEVISION TVS TRUST The Film & TV programme is sponsored by Channel 4, TVS Trust and AVCOM Services
Full details of dates, screenings, directors talks and other special events will appear in the film and media festival programme — available the second week in April.
Updated information will also appear in the Festival Times ,The Punter , other local press and on Festival Radio .
Meanwhile an outline of the main French Cinema season at the Duke of York's together with some special events appears below.
FRENCH CINEMA FROM THE NEW WAVE TO THE NEW GENERATION
DUKE OF YORK'S CINEMA 2–23 MAY
France boasts a rich and varied tradition of film-making where going to the cinema is an accepted part of people's cultural and intellectual lives.
What lies within this tradition?
How is it sustained?
And in what directions will it develop over the next decade?
To consider such questions, we present a major season spanning thirty years of French cinema from the nouvelle vague to the present day.
The work of internationally known directors such as Malle, Godard, and Tavernier through Besson, Annaud and Akeman will be set alongside that of a new generation like Eric Rochant, Leon Carax and Diane Kurys.
On show will be new prints of Resnais' classic Hiroshima ,Mon Amour and Truffaut's Tirez sur la Pianiste , together with the latest releases like Rivette's La Belle Noiseuse and Pialat's Van Gogh and previews of the films not yet in distribution in the UK.
Throughout the season, film-makers and critics will discuss their work and ideas with audiences to explore the prevailing themes of French cinema; recent state support for new directors, particularly through television; and the possibilities of developing Anglo-French co-productions as our two nations stand on the threshold of the new Europe.
British premiere screening
MON PERE, CE HERO
Starring Gerard Depardieu in ‘…the best movie — the most enjoyable, and by far the audience's favourite…
Gerard Lauzier's Mon Pere, ce Hero (My Father, the Hero).
In this blithe seaside comedy, Depardieu reminds us that a great star is more than a great actor; he is a creature people can't stop watching.’
Time Magazine .
THE BFI'S NEW DIRECTORS
Some 900 people applied for the BFI's New Directors scheme in 1990 of which 9 were successful.
When the results were shown to the press last autumn the reviews varied from ‘utterly cinematic’City Limits , to ‘utterly unpromising’Sunday Telegraph .
Find out just what it is that provokes such different reactions as Kate Ogborn, the BFI's executive producer, presents a selection of films and talks frankly with the directors about their work and what the scheme has to offer.
JIM HENSON'S ANIMATRONICS
© Henson associates 
The award-winning Storyteller series and the Greek Myths programmes delighted parents and scared the daylights out of children with their dramatic stories and spectacular effects.
Both series were commissioned by TVS from Jim Henson productions.
Jim Henson established an international reputation for quality family programming with the Muppet Show and Fraggle Rock .
He also set up the renowned Creature Shops to develop animatronics for the film and television industries and which recently made the masks for Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles .
Duncan Kenworthy, the producer of the two Storyteller series, and John Stephenson, the animatronics expert will explain how it was all done with a little help from some of their fellow creatures.
ELECTRONIC DEMONOGRAPHY
Entitled PZ092 part III, this collaboration between Phantasmagoria, Lighthouse and Brighton Polytechnic will provide video installations at a variety of venues in Brighton like Video Box, Ritz, Comet, Vision Hire and Blockbuster.
Further details available end of April
NOSFERATU: ART ZOYD
Silent films have been accompanied by organists, pianists and orchestras, so why not a high tech rock band?
Art Zoyd's score adds an extra eerie dimension — unsafe and arousing — to one of the most poetic of all horror films: Murnau's Nosferatu .
The quartet carries an instrumental arsenal which gives it the necessary weight to produce the ominous, bass-heavy sounds that accompany Max Schreck's marvellously decrepit, zombie-like portrayal of Count Dracula .
With tours in 18 countries and appearances in the USA and Russia, Art Zoyd ranks as one of the major jazz/rock quartets of the world.
Catch them in Brighton before their London performance in the summer..
GENDER AND SEXUALITY IN FILM
A day conference in association with Lighthouse Film and Video, Brighton Polytechnic and Sussex University's Centre for Continuing Education.
A chance to discuss recent research on sexuality, gender and film screenings through a day of tutor-led workshops, debate and screenings.
How does cinema construct its images of masculinity/femininity, and heterosexuality/homosexuality?
Why has there been such a history of cross-dressing in films?
Is postfeminist film theory merely feminism without women?
Tickets and timetables available from Lighthouse Film and Video, 19 Regent Street, Brighton,(0273 686479 from 1 April..
COMEDY FESTIVAL AT THE DUKE OF YORKS
LAUGHING GAS AT THE MOVIES
Pop corn, carrot cake and a comedy film bonanza presented by Laughing Gas and the Film & Media festival.
Fun movies and personal appearances by comedy guests from filmland.
Directors, stars, writers and even the odd usher…thrill to the sound of your own laughter.
Yet another triumph for good times..
ANIMATION
Aardman Animations, creators of the Oscar winning Creature Comforts which inspired a series of TV commercials, will present and discuss a selection of their recent work.
Specialising in plasticine and model animation, the Aards have demonstrated just how imaginatively these media can be used, bringing their characters to life with vivid observational details and idiosyncratic touches of humour..
ZAP
To celebrate the theme of the festival the Zap has invited a wide range of artists to develop performances around their sense of taboo.
The resulting programme, touching all areas of the performing and plastic arts, dissects and comments upon sex, religion, death and drugs.
Quintessentially Zap — challenging, controversial but always entertaining.
MULTI MEDIA
GOOD FRIDAYS
Installation by Stephen Taylor Woodrow ‘A blasphemous piece of anti-christ trash’.
MOVING OUT
An international co-production between Zap Art, Centre for New Dance Developments (Netherlands) and Love Parade (Berlin).
Director Neil Butler, choreographer Ginny Farman, DJ Chris Coco, sculptor Duncan Whiteman, musician Danial Duffel, filmmaker Adrienne Altenhaus and Circus Irritant work with dancers from Holland, Germany, Iceland, USA and Denmark.
the performance is totally integrated into the Zap dance clubs 5am, Time tunnel and Coco Club with related performances on Brighton and Hove beaches.
It will also appear in the Netherlands.
BETWEEN WALLS LIKE SHEETS
A multimedia extravaganza exploring the erotic, surreal poetry of Ellen Zaks.
The tale of a voyage into the astral world of a secretary revealing beats within..
THE EMBRACE
Installation/performance by Duncan Whiteman.
A loving relationship between two people constructed within the confines of flexible lycra sculpture..
IN TIMES OF PLAGUE
Zincbar Performing Arts
Brighton based multi-media production highlighting the vast changes in human nature created by the 1348 pestilence..
POW WOW
A spectacular destruction of perspective and disordering of the senses.
This is psychic electrolysis for the headstrong..
TOY ‘C’— THUMB CULTURE
A celebration of sexual gratification and expression free from judgement or guilt.
‘Very much on show for our delight, they played with us and they won’..
SYMPOSIUM
1 Paramedia — censorship, secrecy, distortion — the ethics of mediation in a post gulf culture.
2 Pharmakon — contemporary pharmocopia and the political implications of  its' content..
ZAP CABARET
ANDY WALKER'S FAME FRAME
Britain's only weekly new performance platform, focusing on sex, violence and censorship.
To contribute a 3 minute piece call the Fame Frame (0273) 821588 .
A PUBLIC DISPLAY OF INTIMACY
A 21 minute performance about sex.
Andy Walker and Sue Long (Scarlot Harlots, Renaissance, Zap Cabaret) reveal their innermost secrets & desires..
GET YOUR OWN PUB
Mike Lance, legendary landlord of the Greys tells all — even more stories of the everyday pub folk.
The sequel to the sellout premier.
The Argus Hated it..
FRANK SKINNER
1991 Perrier Award Winner
‘…brilliant stuff, ruthless and quick.
You could put Skinner down in front of any audience in any time and place and he would have it in stitches’The Guardian .
POETRY
ROGER McGOUCH
‘Witty, satirical, sketch-like poems on society which also hit hard at a few home truths…
McGough is what poets should be…a people's poet’.
British Book News .
MUSIC
PSYCHIC TV
Temple of Psychic Youth Party.
Live music guest appearances, guest DJ's .
SURFERS AGAINST SEWAGE BENEFIT PARTY
Radical campaigners to save our oceans promise an evening of performance from the sea.
Live music, surf film's mayhem..
THE SOUL REVIEW
Authentic Soul of the 60's and 70's led by Dave Barnard and featuring Steve (Love Affair ) Ellis, 3 singers, horns, rhythm, keyboards — the works — unmissable.
BANQUET
JOURNEY TO THE RED BED
Chef Jeremy Ashpool will arouse your tastebuds with 6 course haute cuisine feast amongst flaming tarts, comedians, falling angels, dancers, and string quartets..
Information
24hr information line
Dial 0891 600 305 anytime, day or night, for recorded information on Festival events and ticket availability.
This line is voice activated and enables the caller to select which information they require.
Easy to follow instructions on how to use this service are given by ringing the above number.
Calls are charged at 36p min. off peak and 48p at all other times.
Information centre
A Festival information point is situated in central Brighton at 111 Church Street, open daily during Festival, 10am–5pm.
Information is also available at the Tourist Information Centre, Marlborough House, on the Old Steine, 9am–5 pm Mon–Sat, and at TICs throughout the region.
In print
Extensive, up to date coverage will be available in local publications, in particular the Evening Argus, Brighton & Hove Leader, The Punter and Festival Times (available mid April ).
Radio
Live coverage of Festival events plus interviews broadcast on Festival Radio.
The frequency will reach Brighton, Hove and the Sussex coast to east Worthing and will be transmitted every day on 100.4 FM from Monday 27 April to Sunday 24 May.
Programme details available in the Festival Times.
Southern Sound broadcast throughout the region on 103.5FM and Radio South on 1323 AM.
For BBC Radio Sussex tune to 202 MW. 148.5 khz or 95.3 FM in West Sussex or, for East Sussex, 258 MW, 116.1khz or 104.5 FM.
Performance start times
It is important that you are in your seat at least five minutes before the start of the performance.
Many of 1992's events will be recorded so the Festival has therefore adopted the policy of not admitting late comers into the auditorium until there is a suitable break in the programme.
It should be noted that for some performances, this may not be until the interval.
Travel to Brighton
By rail Less than one hour from London, Victoria — fastest service 50 minutes.
Cheap day returns available throughout Network SouthEast region (subject to time restrictions).
A regular bus service connects Brighton rail station to the town centre (10 minute walk).
For rail information: 071 928 5100 or Brighton 206755.
By road
Approx 60 miles via A23/M23 from London.
Express coach services throughout the day.
Express coach services throughout the day.
By air
London Gatwick, 30 minutes by train, 25 miles by road.
By sea
From France via Dieppe-Newhaven ferry.
Details of sailings: Newhaven 512266.
Travel around Brighton
Regular bus services along all major routes in town.
Bus information: Brighton 206666.
Taxi ranks are situated at convenient locations in the town centre.
Accommodation
You can make hotel and guest house reservations in Brighton & Hove through the accommodation bureau.
This is a free booking service and is available either by telephone (0273) 27560 or by fax (0273) 747707.
Festival Club — free entry
Every night throughout the Festival there's food, drink and good company until late at the Festival Club in the Old Ship Hotel.
Free admission to the club to anyone holding a ticket for any Festival event that night.
Festival 1993
Anyone interested in putting on an event during next year's Festival should contact the Festival office in October/November for the appropriate form.
Write to The Administrator, Brighton Festival, Marlborough House, 54, Old Steine, Brighton BN1 1EQ.
To be included in this brochure, completed forms must be returned to the above address by the first week in December.
Booking
By post
Complete booking form on facing page for all tickets by post.
Theatre Royal events Bookings must be completed on the lower section and sent direct to the Theatre Royal, New Road, Brighton BN1 1SD.
Cheques for these events must be made payable to Theatre Royal, Brighton and a stamped addressed envelope enclosed for return of ticket.s
For all other events Complete top section of the page and send direct to Dome Box Office, 29 New Road, Brighton BN1 1UG.
Cheques for all these events must be made payable to Brighton Borough Council .
Tickets will be posted to you unless otherwise requested — no stamped addressed envelop is required.
Ticket refunds/exchange
Tickets cannot be exchanged or refunded 
note Booking details omitted as marked
Offer/concessions
Where included, special reduced rates are available for students, senior citizens, UB40 holders & children (under 14).
To be eligible for these please help us by showing any appropriate identification when paying for tickets.
Note — only one concession available per ticket.
Group bookings
10% discount for 10 or more tickets bought at the same time for the same event.
Special needs/access
Please give us a call on Brighton 676926.
We can offer advice on suitability and make appropriate arrangements where possible.
Seating Plan Guide for events at The Dome
When booking for events held at the Dome please help us by indicating which part of the auditorium you prefer.
Letters on the plan correspond to various price bands available.
Ticket prices & auditorium letters appear under each Dome event in this brochure.
Booking for events at the Theatre Royal
When booking for events at the Theatre Royal please note the seating guides which appear next to each ticket price.
For some ticket prices there will be a choice of two areas in the auditorium — please state your preference when booking.
The following abbreviations apply:S — Stalls,RC — Royal Circle,SC — Second Circle,G — Gallery 
BRIGHTON & BEYOND
Exploring the nether regions of East Sussex from cold comfort on the South Downs, to Mexico in Peasmarsh, the Festival is out of the concert hall and into the streets, the sewers…