

University of Bradford NEWS & Views
BRADFORD WELCOMES NEW CHANCELLOR
SIR TREVOR HOLDSWORTH, Chairman of National Power, is installed as the University's new Chancellor today.
Sir Trevor follows in the distinguished footsteps of Lord Wilson of Rievaulx and Sir John Harvey-Jones to become Bradford's third Chancellor.
Chairman of Allied Colloids Ltd, he was born in Bradford and educated at Hanson and Keighley Grammar Schools.
As a leading figure in British industry, Sir Trevor welcomes the current higher education expansion programme.
Business needs universities to provide talented people to spark invention and innovation, as well as managing within industry and commerce, he believes.
‘Never has there been so great a need for the talented people universities can provide and nurture,’ he says.
‘The rapidity of technological advance, the globalisation of markets and the information revolution are combining to transform industry and commerce.’
‘In this new environment business requires many more highly qualified people whose skills and abilities play a major part in determining competitive advantage.’
Awarded the Honorary Degree of Doctor of Engineering by the University in 1983 he will confer Honorary Degrees, following his installation in the Great Hall, on the highly acclaimed concert pianist John Briggs; Peter Flesher, Managing Director of Allied Colloids; Sir Gordon Jones, Chairman of Yorkshire Water and Frank Mumby, former Senior Lecturer in Music at Leeds University and piano tutor to Sir Trevor.
The choice reflects Sir Trevor's interests in business and the arts.
Further details of the Installation Ceremony will be shown in the May issue of News & Views.
LEADING ROLES
THE IMAGE OF SUCCESS
DIRECTOR of the Neuro-Pharmacology Research Group PROFESSOR BRENDA COSTALL was appointed Pro-Vice-Chancellor responsible for financial planning and resources two years ago.
Flamboyant and stylish, she is known for her strong views on promoting the image of the University.
Here she speaks to LESLEY HOWSON and STEPHANIE FERGUSON about her multi-faceted role.
THE FEMININE touches catch the eye, from the dried flower arrangements to the family photographs and even the odd teddy bear called Edwina.
Professor Brenda Costall's office reflects her personality.
It is not in the usual mould of academic domains, more like the executive suite of a high powered business.
Opulent by University standards, all the furniture is co-ordinated.
She swept away the green plastic chairs and bright orange carpet with holes in it that she inherited when she became Bradford's second woman Pro-Vice-Chancellor two years ago.
Image and professionalism are all for Brenda Costall.
Impeccably groomed and known for her love of designer clothes and antique jewellery, she has designs on the University, raising its image in all areas.
She sees the University as a very marketable and successful product.
Not only is it doing well, it should be seen to be doing well.
‘I realised that you can sell your science by being a good scientist, but that you can also sell your science by having a correct image and by pure professionalism,’ she says, elegant in a black and cream two piece.
‘Success shows in your image and appearance and environment.
It's very clear that if you wish to manage at a very high level or wish to influence people you won't achieve that wearing a sloppy sweater and jeans.
Image is not only in the way you look but also in the way you speak and present your image verbally.’
Professor Costall believes that refurbishing her Research office several years ago paid dividends.
‘I found that within the first two years I more than trebled my external income simply because I was entertaining at a large conference-style table in a nicely furnished area.
People just automatically assumed success.
Also, I believe I made it clear that I knew what I wanted from a partnership with a sponsor and was precise and convincing in my presentation.
An ability to hold attention and to sell ideas is crucial for success.’
Still mindful of the University' image Professor Costall pays attention to entertaining visitors from overseas, particularly from America and Japan where it is very formal, showing them the best that Yorkshire has to offer.
But a Spanish visitor once made her realise there was much to be done to improve the look of the University buildings.
‘I asked him what his impression was of the University and I remember him looking at me and saying: ‘Very friendly, very prosperous and doing very well’.
This referred to my office!
I asked him what it felt like when he stood in the Richmond Building Foyer.
‘Very grey’ was all he said.’
After that Professor Costall got to work on what has been affectionately termed her ‘Costallisation’ of the University.
She got the ceiling decorated and made improvements to the entrance to make it more welcoming.
But she says there's still more to be done.
‘Bradford sells itself on its friendly image and I still believe that if we can get kids on to the campus, we will improve recruitment,’ she says.
As chair of the Land and Building Working Party which reports directly to Planning and Resources Committee, Professor Costall is aware that the profile of the University buildings needs to be raised.
‘The campus looks neat, and I am proud of the new buildings, but as one looks down Richmond Road, the image is of derelict mills — I hope one day that the University will own all the derelict land and that we will expand our campus on to it.’
Open and frank, Professor Costall is very accessible.
From the cleaners to the executive she sees that everyone has an important part to play, no one is more committed than she is both to the University and her pharmacological research.
Her day begins at 5am.
She aims to be out of the house by 6am and at her research office desk by 6.30am.
Here she heads the  research team specialising in finding new uses for drugs in the fields of mental illness, anxiety, memory loss and schizophrenia.
There is a sound basis behind her success.
Her international reputation is built on an impressive publication record, 350 refereed publications in scientific journals, 46 chapters in books, 470 publications of conference proceedings, with a further 462 presentations at international conferences, symposia and seminars.
Travel abroad, to the USA, Japan and Europe, is a regular feature of Professor Costall's life.
She is not only involved in drug development but like any good entrepreneur is constantly on the look out for what is commercially exploitable.
There is no doubt that she gets a buzz from her work.
A self-confessed eternal optimist —‘I always see things as a winning situation’— she loves challenges and admits she has a low boredom threshold.
By 8am she's in her office as Pro-Vice-Chancellor and with her secretary Pauline Jennings deals with her correspondence between 8 and 9am.
She looks after buildings and accommodation; approves new appointments; and co-ordinates the activities of senior officers, from finance, personnel, planning and business development to estates.
However, her interests bring an involvement in a wider remit and are seen very much where areas such as Business Development, Continuing Education, Access, Public Relations, the computer centre or the library are concerned.
She sees herself as a driving force to get new ideas for new courses onto the University books particularly interdisciplinary courses and others which, she says, have got glamourous, ‘rather sexy’ images.
‘I think the Electronic Imaging and Media Course is a very good example of a course with a ‘sexy’ image,’she says.
‘It took an awful lot of my powers as Chairman of Academic Review and Resources Committee to steer that course through because it did mean a lot of resource implications that weren't obvious at the beginning.
But once you believe in something you've got to live with it.
Looking ahead she's pleased a lot of new courses are coming on-stream now particularly linking European languages or Management with other areas, whether it is Science or Engineering.
She has strongly supported Pharmaceutical Management for Europe, a very new idea aimed at marketing drugs and integrating drug development at all levels throughout the EC backed by languages and management departments in the University.
‘It is this kind of package of courses which is likely to appeal,’ she says.
She serves on more than thirty committees from chairing the Academic review and Resources Committee, chairing the Research Committee, chairing Appointments Committees dealing with new lectureships to chairing the Modularisation Subcommittee of the Courses and Teaching Standards Committee.
She is particularly proud of her involvement with the recent appointments of a new breed of top entrepreneurial staff.
As Pro-Vice-Chancellor she sees herself as a facilitator for the Vice-Chancellor, the University's Chief Executive.
Wearing her scientific hat she is Director of the Neuro-Pharmacology Research Group.
She often works up to 16 hours a day and says that her role as Pro-Vice-Chancellor does not intrude on her research.
‘One of my parts is very much on the marketing side and this has actually flourished and the demands on my time for giving talks and presentations all over the world at very high levels has become more demanding than I've ever known before.’
A Bradford graduate herself, she is married to Professor Robert Naylor, Head of the Department of Pharmacy.
They met when she was an undergraduate, he a postgraduate tutor, ‘I volunteered to study the central nervous system,’ she says.
‘We went out for dinner and married six months later.’
Often tagged ‘the Varsity Match’, they worked together at first.
But these days Professor Naylor concentrates on treatment associated with cancer chemotherapy while she travels worldwide as a scientist, consultant and super-saleswoman keeping her maiden name.
‘When I got my doctorate I decided I wouldn't change my name,’ she explains.
‘Two Dr Naylors would have been impossible.’
Born in York and brought up in Lincolnshire Brenda Costall went to the same school as Margaret Thatcher, Kesteven and Grantham Girls Grammar.
They made girls stand up for themselves and neatness, grooming and deportment were important.
She recalls they were quite disapproving when she chose to study at Bradford rather than Oxford or Cambridge.
Professor Costall has her finger on the purse-strings and is always mindful that new courses should generate income and be financially viable.
‘As the University is so pressurised for space we must make sure now that we get the best courses that we possibly can and that they will earn the income to justify their inception.’
She believes that University morale nationwide is undergoing change ‘If anything else there is just a little hint of optimism here which wasn't here before,’ she says.
‘There is a feeling now of cooperation which has never ever been in our system at this level before.
Staff and Heads of Departments have absolute commitment to the University of Bradford, so we've certainly got something going for us.’
And for the future?
Only lack of challenge in her job would lure Professor Costall away from Bradford.
‘The other man's grass is always greener and I had the opportunity when I was younger to work abroad.
I've been in the United States, I've been in Europe, but the politics and the way people behave was just the same the world over.
After about five or six years of wandering I returned to Bradford.’
‘If you wish to be an academic in the UK I can't see a better place than Bradford.
The University is small, easy to manage and I think it's providing all of the managerial challenges.
I have a super research team one of the best you could have in this country, equipment, materials, laboratory space, so why move?’
Professor Costall says it is very difficult to be accepted as a research scientist in Japan particularly as a woman.
But one of her proudest moments as an ambassador came when she gave a lecture to 2,000 fellow scientists in Kyoto — and there was only one woman in the audience.
‘Across the balcony there was a banner about a metre high saying; ‘University of Bradford’ and ‘Professor Brenda Costall’beneath.
‘THAT was quite a highlight for me.
I was really proud of that.’
‘Success shows in your image and appearance and environment…if you wish to influence people you won't achieve that wearing a sloppy sweater and jeans.’
PEOPLE AND PLACES
Applied Social Studies
Professor Hilary Rose gave a paper ‘Gender Studies/Women's Studies’ at the Conference on Gender Studies: Issues and Comparative Perspectives in Moscow 19–22 November 1991.
Earlier she gave a paper on Feminist Science Theory at the conference in Minneapolis.
Archaeological Sciences
Professor Mark Pollard recently returned from a snowy weekend in Athens, courtesy of the British School at Athens.
The highlight of the trip was a dinner at the British Embassy, hosted by HE the Ambassador (Sir David Miers), with guest of honour the Rt Hon Sir Geoffrey Howe.
Guests included the Greek Prime Minister (Mr Constantine Mitsotakis), the Deputy Prime Minister (Mr Tzannis Tzannetakis), the Minister of Culture (Mrs Anna Psarouda-Benaki), and a number of sponsors of the Fitch Laboratory of the British School.
Speeches were made by Sir David Miers and Sir Geoffrey Howe, emphasising the cultural debt of Europe to the classical Greek civilisation, and the role that the British School has played in the last 100 years in fostering good links between the United Kingdom and Greece.
The working part of the weekend was a round table meeting of some 25 UK, American and Greek archaeologists and scientists, focusing on the current and future role of the Fitch Laboratory in the expanding programme of archaeological science in Greece.
Much to the amusement of colleagues left in Bradford, it snowed heavily on Saturday night and Sunday morning, forcing the planned trip on Sunday to the American School excavations at Corinth to be cancelled.
In fact, the snow was so heavy that the airport was closed for a time, briefly raising the hope that Professor Pollard would be stranded in Athens for several days!
Fortunately, the snow was cleared and the airport re-opened in time for a Monday morning flight back to London.
Civil Engineering
During the last week of February,Professor Stuart Littlejohn visited New Orleans to attend the international conference on Grouting, Soil Improvement and Geosynthetics, as guest of the American Society of Civil Engineers.
In addition to workshop lectures, Professor Littlejohn presented a keynote lecture ‘Ground Anchorage Technology — A Forward Look’.
The International Society of Soil Mechanics and Foundation Engineering (ISSMFE) has invited Professor Littlejohn to chair a working group to review new and emerging technologies in relation to geosystems and their applications.
The outcome of this work will be published in 1994 following the 13th ISSMFE Congress in New Delhi.
Professor Roger Falconer has been appointed an Overseas External Assessor and Advisor to the Hong Kong Research Grants Council.
The Council advises the Hong Kong Government, through the University and Polytechnic Grants Committee, on the research needs of the higher education institutions in Hong Kong and invites and receives applications for research grants from academic staff.
Dr Chris Snee has been judged the winner of the Geomodel competition, organised by the institution of Civil Engineers South Wales Association Ground Engineering Group.
The intention of the competition is to produce a working educational model which illustrates an aspect of ground engineering.
The winning design will be constructed by, and exhibited in, the TECHNIQUEST Centre in Cardiff, with a budget of £5000.
TECHNIQUEST has been set up to enable visitors to touch and play with hands-on exhibits and experience scientific effects and phenomena.
The exhibition will contain up to 50 models from all aspects of science and engineering.
Dr Snee's winning design shows the effects of pressurising a tunnel in loose water bearing ground in order to balance the external water pressure.
The model allows the viewer to apply the air pressure to a flooded tunnel, causing it to dewater, to increase the pressure and eventually exceed the head of water resulting in a ‘blow out’.
Structures such as buildings placed on the surface will collapse at this stage.
Interdisciplinary Human Studies
John Allcock continued his Jekyll and Hyde existence this month.
He addressed the Refugee Studies Programme at Oxford University on 5 February, on the subject of ‘Borders, States and Peoples: Unscrambling Yugoslavia’.
On 12 February he was the guest of the Durkheimian Studies Centre at St Anthony's College, Oxford, on the subject, ‘Durkheim, Civil Society and Citizenship’.
Whether Yugoslavia or Durkheim represents Mr Hyde he has yet to decide.
Management Centre
Dr Jonathan Winterton appeared before the House of Commons Select Committee on the Mersey Port and Harbour Bill on 13 February.
Opposing proposals to import a further 5 million tonnes of coal, he presented evidence that this was both unnecessary given the trends of productivity and costs within British Coal, and damaging to long-term energy policy since it would lead to pit closures and the sterilization of up to 150 million tonnes of coal reserves.
Dr Mohamed Zairi was invited by the Confederation of Indian Industry (CII) and the Institute of Directors in India to make a tour of India between 3 and 18 February 1992.
The purpose of the visit was three-fold: to guide the CII in setting up the right systems for quality management training in India; to organise a one-day workshop for the benefit of a group of senior managers on the theme of ‘Total Quality Management: How to Make it Happen in India’; to present two papers at the World Congress on Total Quality.
These  papers — entitled ‘Performance Measurement: A Challenge for Total Quality and the Accounting Professions’ and ‘Competitive Benchmarking: Using Customer Feed Back for Superior Performance Standards’— were very well received and the tour as a whole was extremely successful.
Fellow in Music
Two Fellows in Music made unique contributions to MINIFEX ‘92 (Manchester International Festival of Expressionism, 29 February–22 March).
Current Fellow,Graham Coatman has specialised in creating scores for classic silent films.
He played live piano accompaniments to Cabinet of Dr Caligari (March 3), Der Golem (March 7) and Pandora's Box (March 17), at Cornerhouse Cinema.
Paul Robinson (Fellow in Music 1982–85) was commissioned to write a score, played by the Harmonie Band, for the 1923 film Warning Shadows, premiered on 21 March, also at Cornerhouse.
Funding came from North West Arts Board and Goethe Institut, Manchester.
Security
Susan Brewer , first female Security Assistant, joined the University on 27 January 1992.
Susan, who had been working a local boarding kennel where she was particularly involved with Bernese Mountain and German Shepherd dogs, has two Great Danes of her own called Buddy and Holly!
NEW PAYROLL
The University is in the process of implementing a new payroll system, which is planned to become live with effect from the first payment in the forthcoming tax year — i.e. from April 1992.
There will be no change to the way in which staff are paid, or to pay dates.
The major difference of which staff will be aware will be the new payslips, which will display the information supplied in a different format.
Some abbreviations used will change and there may be an increased level of detail shown in some areas.
While it is not anticipated that this should cause any difficulties, if you are unsure about anything which appears on the new payslips, please contact the staff in wages and salaries who will be happy to help you.
(If they sound a little harassed, please bear in mind that they are new to the system and so may take a little longer to respond in the first few weeks of live running.)
We are confident that any problems in the early days of the new system will be kept to a minimum, and that their effect will be outweighed by the advantages of the new system as it comes into full use.
However, please do not hesitate to ask if you think that something is wrong — it is usually easier to rectify differences if they are brought to our attention as soon as they are discovered.
Wages and salaries are available on extensions 3140, 3141 and 3142.
J G Rogers, Senior Assistant Finance Officer, is available on extension 3132.
PENSION MATTERS
It is a generally held view that contributing to a good pension scheme is the best method of saving.
With this in mind members of the schemes operated by the University who cannot achieve 40 years’ pensionable/reckonable service should consider the possibility of making Additional Voluntary Contributions to improve their retirement benefits.
Advice is available from the Superannuation Office — telephone 3143/4.
NEWS & VIEWS
Editor Lesley Howson Tel (0274) 383088
Contributing Editor Stephanie Ferguson
‘News & Views’ is an informal newsletter published during the term for staff and students of the University.
The Editor welcomes articles, letters and comment which should be sent to the Public Relations Unit, Room D19, Richmond Building.
Extracts from ‘News & Views’ should not be published without prior permission from the Editor.
While every effort is made to ensure the accuracy of printed information, readers should be aware that this is an internal newsletter and not an official publication.
The views expressed by contributors are not necessarily those of the University or the Editorial team.
Designed by Robin Pritchard, University of Bradford Graphics Unit.
Produced on Apple Macintosh by Public Relations Unit.
Unless otherwise stated all photographs by the University of Bradford Photography Unit.
Copy deadline for next issue: 5 May
Publication 22 May
Further Copy and Publication Dates: Copy 1 June for Publication 22 June Degree Day issue 9 July 
UFC GRANT AND FUNDED NUMBERS FOR 1992/93
, SENIOR PLANNING OFFICER
AT the end of last month the University received the first information from the UFC on its recurrent grant and funded student numbers for 1992/93.
This was followed last week by a second letter giving more precise details of the make-up of the allocation.
For the mainstream activities of Teaching (‘T’) and Research (‘R’) the University received an increase of 5.8%, compared with an average of 9% for the English universities.
The difference arises because the expected reduction in research income, a trend affecting many universities as a result of a move towards greater selectivity, has not been matched by a corresponding increase in teaching funding.
Fees Only
Additional ‘T’ funding was allocated mainly on the basis of universities' growth in undergraduate student numbers, as measured by their percentage of ‘Fees-only’students.
It should be explained at this point that each university is funded at the full rate for only a core number of ‘Fully Funded’ students in each of 25 ‘narrow’subject groups.
If a university takes further students, as nearly all have, they receive only the student fee, which is between £800 and £2500 less.
It is the percentage of these Fees-only students estimated for December 31st 1991 which dictated whether a university was given an increase in ‘T’ funding.
This increase came in the form of an increase in the number of fully funded numbers.
The UFC gave additional student numbers to those universities whose percentage of Fees-only students exceeded the national average, measured in terms of 6 ‘broad’ subject categories (5 of which are represented at Bradford).
Columns 3 and 4 of the Table shows Bradford's Fees-only percentage compared with the GB average of each of the groups.
Clear Implication
Although the University as a whole was 0.2% above GB average, it fell below average in 3 out of the 5 categories and received no additional numbers in Humanities, Social Sciences or Engineering.
It did receive a modest 137 additional undergraduate funded numbers in the Science and Mathematics categories and a further 55 additional research postgraduates, mostly in Science.
This contrasts with very much larger allocations in many universities with similar research funding levels.
Column 5 shows that the UFC's method of applying a threshold to broad subject categories covering a range of departments is particularly hard on the 7 departments who were above the national average for their particular subject category but will receive nothing.
The clear implication for the University is that growth in some departments but not in others will no longer ensure future funding in any but exceptional cases.
Expansion Process
In the short term, disappointment at this result may be tempered by the knowledge that we do not yet have the burden of the large numbers of additional students already taken by some of the immediate winners in this competition.
In the longer term, however, we know that the UFC intends to force down unit costs as part of the expansion process and that if we do not expand we will have funding removed to bring us down to the unit of resource of those who have.
The failure to win additional numbers for the expansion we have achieved is a clear indication of that movement.
The Vice-Chancellor's message to all departments, as circulated to Standing Committee of Senate, is that it is imperative to make increased student recruitment a top priority for the coming year.
LIFE IN THE DAY
FEEDING THE FIVE THOUSAND
THEY can cook up anything from spaghetti to a suckling pig, cater for Charter Balls to Russian banquets.
They go through 6,000 eggs, 60 giant tins of tuna fish, 24 cases of Coca-Cola and 150 kilos of chips a week, wash mountains of dishes and wait on tables with flair.
In the third of our series STEPHANIE FERGUSON meets the campus caterers who ensure that the university staff and 5,000 students don't go hungry.
IF an army marches on its stomach  then so does the University.
Every day the Catering Department serves up almost 1,000 lunches across the campus, cooks up hot breakfasts for students in hall, creates four-star menus for visitors to the Management Centre and caters for special functions and conferences.
‘We can do everything from a sandwich to a gourmet meal,’ says Assistant Catering Manager Richard Faulkner.
‘We are not nouvelle cuisine but we are artistic with food and noted for value for money.’
The department, headed by Mr Jeff Barker who has been at the University for 27 years, caters for the two dining rooms at the Revis Barber and Dennis Bellamy Halls, serving breakfast and dinner to the 400 students Monday to Friday, breakfast and lunch Saturday and Sunday.
Meals are also provided for the children in the nursery as well as staff and patients in the medical centre where special diets like gluten-free or low cholesterol foods are often needed.
Mr Barker and Mr Faulkner have a far-flung empire, known as the ‘outbuildings’ from the Management Centre premises in Keighley Road, Emm Lane and Heaton Mount to the Sports Centre buffet bar, the Communal Building, Phoenix, Chesham and Horton plus the common rooms.
They all have a morning coffee, afternoon tea, snacks and sandwiches service and vital supplies get through daily with storekeeper and van driver Tommy Dow.
The caterers have to turn hoteliers when it comes to the Executive Development Programmes at Heaton Mount where there are 30 bedrooms, providing top service and up-market menus to appeal to business professionals.
Extensions to four-star hotel standards are due to be completed by October with 96 beds for residential courses.
As well as full English breakfast, and tea with home-made scones, guests can enjoy lunches and dinners with a top hotel touch.
The Catering Manager's office next door to the Refectory in the Richmond Building is the hub of all action where secretary Gill O' Brien runs the daily order books and takes bookings for everything from the Vice-Chancellor's lunches to conference buffets.
Chief Supervisor Liz Perera has everything running smoothly, like a housekeeper at a stately home, taking a medley of jobs from choosing the colour schemes for special functions to calling in the plumber if the dishwasher fails in her stride.
Gill is busy ordering supplies.
‘There are no chick-pea cutlets only spring rolls,’ she tells Richard Faulkner.
Spring rolls it is.
Richard, who started work at the University in 1969 as assistant cook in the halls of residence, has been Assistant Catering Manager since 1973, based at the Revis Barber and Dennis Bellamy Halls, where his deputy, head cook Ian Wade has been ruling the kitchens for 24 years.
‘You name it, we have done it,’ he says.
‘Banquets, balls, prestigious degree ceremonies, and the installation of the new Chancellor, we like to think that as caterers there's nothing we can't do.’
The annual Charter Ball buffet for 1,500 is the catering team's biggest task and for the Installation Dinner Mr Barker will be pulling out all the culinary stops.
The department have fed celebrities from J.B. Priestley to Ken Russell and provided the Princess Royal with tea.
The department use outside advisors to help with ethnic menus for conferences from special  Afro-Caribbean dishes for the Black Housing Association to recipes from an old lady in Keswich for the Vegetarian Society of Great Britain's annual conference.
European Studies also helped translate the menu for a Russian dinner.
In the refectories they try to cater for all tastes with vegan and vegetarian dishes daily, Halal meat for students in hall.
Richard Faulkner meets students when they come to Bradford to work out any special dietary needs.
In the Richmond Building the kitchen brigade is headed by chef Stanley Moulds with special services chef John Newsham looking after luncheons, receptions for the Vice-Chancellor, buffets and function food in the private dining rooms F27 and D5.
Cooks Adele Haley and Jacquie Haworth do everything from fish frying to peeling onions in the massive team effort which brings up to 600 lunches to the tables in the student and staff refectories.
‘We know what's happening day to day,’ explains Liz.
‘A secretary will ring up and tell us a professor has people coming to lunch and so we'll get on with that.’
Chef Moulds order fresh produce from Ogen melons to trout daily and vegetables like cabbage come in bulk ready-prepared to save time.
Sandwiches are mainly bought in, but at the Sports Hall buffet bar supervisor Mary Campbell makes around 1,200 a day.
Staff work shifts, often evenings and weekends depending on functions.
Who's Who in the kitchen also includes the five washing up ladies who tend the machine and conveyor belt full of dishes on a rota system and Peace Studies student Bong Soo from Korea who is in charge of the pots and pans at lunchtimes.
‘We're a happy team,’ says Liz.
‘The staff will always fit in with whatever has to be done.
If the dishwasher breaks down they'll get stuck in and wash up by hand.’
The department has a multi-cultural staff from Polish to Italian to French, all able to pass on their expertise for national dishes when need be.
Fifteen serving staff work in the main refectory with four waitresses in the staff dining room.
Some like Tessa Joseph and Marcia Vanzie also serve at executive luncheons and special functions with Liz leading the team.
The catering staff are an essential ingredient of University life.
Yet, they are only too aware that it can be a very Upstairs, Downstairs job at times.
‘We are basically looked upon as the end of things,’ says Richard Faulkner.
‘People are beginning to come round, it's not as bad as it used to be, but some of the professors can be a bit aloof and you can feel like Cinderella sometimes.’
Mr Faulkner says the caterers are often the first point of contact for conference visitors so high standards of food and service are essential.
‘Our job is an integral part of the function of the University.
If something is wrong with a bedroom or whatever they will come to us.
Often things wouldn't be a success if it wasn't for our contribution.’
Out of the term the department slips into a different mode.
The refectory stays open for staff, visitors and conference work and they cater for many special functions throughout the campus.
The university also has a good wine list to complement its food, from a reasonable house wine to more quality vintages.
From lavish buffets to butties at the Friday night disco the caterers work flat out to feed the five thousand.
One wonders what they could do with five loaves and two fishes…
CROCKERY AMNESTY!
Looked under your plantpots recently?
Any crockery or cutlery lurking in your office or lab?
Then now is the time to return any stray objects to the Catering Department, no questions asked.
Order of the day: Gill O'Brien in action
Chips with everything: Jacquie and Adele get frying
What's cooking?
Richard Faulkner with Chef Ian Wade
Chef's Special: Stanley Moulds in action
THE DAYS OF WINE…
AND WASHING UP
LIKE the chatelaine of a castle, Chief Supervisor LIZ PEREIRA ensures that all aspects of University catering run smoothly.
News and Views gets a flavour of her work from sorting out chip butties to banquets.
9.30am Liz arrives at the catering office and gets out the floats for the refectories and union bar.
She checks the duty rotas, time sheets and usually liaises with main refectory supervisor John Ricketts to ensure all units are fully staffed.
She makes sure morning coffee and beverages get to the outbuildings on campus, then organises staff for special functions that day, checking they have all they need on the trolleys for the VC's or PVC's lunches.
Every morning storekeeper and driver Tommy Dow calls into the office to get the day's orders from Liz for buffets, sandwiches and whatever else is needed.
10.00am During the morning Liz orders non-perishable goods, like 1,000 individual milk portions, and also deals with reps who call in.
She and secretary Gill O'Brien keep order books for everything, notching up 2,880 eggs, 60 giant tins of tuna fish, 30 dozen white baps a week.
Gill takes bookings for functions throughout the university, rings in the chef's orders, types memos and ensures everybody knows what's on.
Liz oversees the accounts and deals with requisitions from the stores.
11.00am If there is a special lunch in F27 Liz helps to lay the table and may also go and serve.
Sometimes she will help out in the staff refectory or arrange catering services for a conference function.
11.30am Liz goes to the main refectory ready to serve on the counter.
2.00–2.30pm She takes her lunch break: ‘Usually a banana sandwich, or I nibble a bit of fruit’, she says.
‘When you are handling food all the time it puts you off.’
After lunch Liz checks all the floats and deposits money at cashiers.
Later she checks memos with John in the refectory about tea and buffet requirements that evening.
3.30pm Liz deals with phone calls from reps and sorts out any maintenance problems like the dishwasher over-soaping or replacing breakages.
If there is a major function she liaises with building services for cleaning, as well as the plumbers and joiners, should anything go wrong behind the scenes.
‘If chef smells gas, or the fridge goes off, I have to see to it.
It's like running a big house.’
‘We find a lot of crockery and cutlery goes missing and trays don't come back,’ she says.
‘We had to go on to plastic teaspoons because the metal ones disappeared.’
She then checks that the barman for the Biko Bar has arrived.
4.00pm Liz finds time for a cup of tea, but she's usually still busy.
If there's a dinner or special occasion like the installation of the Chancellor, she might be bringing wine up from the stores, overseeing the table lay-out, arranging flowers, scheming the candles and napkins.
‘I just use my discretion and hope it's right.’
4.00–5.00pm Liz ties up loose ends, maybe dealing with coffee reps, checking the vending machines.
5.15pm Time to go home to Batley unless she has a special function to prepare for, drinks in the VC's office, or a dinner.
6.00pm She lays the table then helps serve dinner at 8.00pm.
She and the other staff take a break — chef usually prepares them something — then they work through, clearing away and washing up until 11.00–11.30pm.
The crystal glasses have to be carefully washed by hand and the Royal Doulton china stored away.
Out of term Liz is kept busy with conference work and Easter is the peak time.
‘Everybody thinks you are on holiday because the students are not here,’ she says.
In fact the staff tend to work longer hours, midweek and weekends, serving breakfast, lunch and evening meals to delegates, as well as function buffets, often working from 7.00am until late at night.
11.30pm The party's over.
Back at catering HQ Liz ensures that the fridges are locked, that the valves on the washing-up machines are open and that nothing has been left switched on.
She also checks that no-one has been overlooked.
12.00am The kitchens are silent.
The pans scrubbed, ready for another action-packed day.
Liz locks up and hands the keys to the security staff.
Then it's home for a well-earned cup of coffee, and sleep.
Service with a smile: Liz prepares the buffet
NOW MEET SOME OF THE TEAM
Tessa with the trolley
Chef John
Student Bong Soo
Washing-up brigade
Jacquie stirs things up
GRANTS


Applied Social Studies
ESRC
Management of Personal Welfare Initiative Coordination
To coordinate activities relating to the theme of gender across all six projects of the Initiative.
In the first instance this includes a literature review.
Archaeological Sciences Humberside County Council
To enable two graduates of the MSc Osteology, Palaeopathology and Funerary Archaeology to analyse the human remains of around 150 individuals from an Anglo-Saxon site from Castledyke South, Bartonon-Humber for Humberside Archaeological Unit (Humberside County Council).
The material has already revealed evidence for trepanation, a surgical procedure involving removal of a piece of bone from the skull.
Chemical Engineering BICC Pyrotenax
Feasibility Study with BICC Pyrotenax to the value of £10,000.
This provides a bursary for Simon Johnson to study the fundamental, physical and electrical properties of magnesium.
Chemical Engineering Institution of Chemical Engineers
Support for the study of liquid-liquid mixing arranged by Dr David Ellis (Chemical Engineering).
Chemistry and Chemical Technology
For work within the STEP Programme (Science and Technology for Environmental Protection) held jointly with partners at the University of Bath, the University of Palermo and the Institute of Catalysis of the C.S.I.C. (Madrid).
The objective of the two-year programme is to develop technology for the ‘Detoxification of Effluents by Photocatalytic Science and Engineering (DEPSE Project).
Bradford's scientific contribution to the programme will be in the development of photocatalytic particles of high activity, in addition to which it will fulfill the management role of Project Coordination between the partners and with the E.C.
(directorate XII).


Civil Engineering
Investigations of Secondary Flows and Turbulent Shear Stresses in Flooding Rivers
An investigation of turbulent resistance in rivers using a sophisticated piece of equipment: Laser Doppler Anemometer (LDA), which will reveal macro and micro scales of turbulent phenomena in a complex river system and will be able to improve flood alleviation schemes.


Electrical Engineering
VME Based Image Restoration System
To continue development of a real-time image deblurring system for use with a millimetre wave imager at RSRE Malvern.


Electrical Engineering
Teaching Company Programme between Bradford University and Microvitec Ltd
Continuation of Multimedia Developments with Microvitec Ltd.
European Studies ERASMUS
To facilitate student and staff exchanges in a cross-national programme on European integration studies coordinated by the University of Bradford.
Participating Universities include Athens, Bordeaux, Liege and University College Dublin.
The Universities of Lausanne and Rostock are scheduled to join the network in 1992–93.


Management Centre
Kodak Research Studentship
£7,500 per 
TQM-based performance measurement


Optometry
Yorkshire Health
To investigate the prevalence of pre-clinical loss of visual function in diabetes melitus.
The study is to be carried out in collaboration with Drs Usha Dhanesha and David Miles of Airedale General Hospital, and Professor John Weatherill of Bradford Royal Infirmary.
Diabetes is a major cause of blindness, the incidence of which is increasing.
The effect of diabetes on the eye is usually monitored by measurement of visual acuity and examination of the retina for signs of the disease.
However, previous research by this group has shown that some diabetic patients suffer a decrease in visual sensitivity that precedes loss of acuity and retinal changes, and the present study is designed to assess the prevalence of this preclinical dysfunction.
The aims are to provide data that is not currently available about the earliest stages of diabetic eye disease, and enable a reassessment of the screening strategies that are currently used by GPs and optometrists for detecting the condition.


Centre for Conflict Resolution at the Department of Peace Studies
£65,000 for the development of work in conflict resolution
The Department of Peace Studies has recently been awarded two grants, from the Westcroft Trust and the Barrow and Geraldine Cadbury Trust, totalling £65,000 over the next three years.
The money will be used to develop the work of the department in the field of conflict resolution and mediation.
Specifically the money has been used to appoint a Project Officer, Nick Lewer.


Pharmacology
Neuropharmacology Research Group
To support further research into the treatment of mental illness.


Chemical Engineering
BP Chemicals
The aim of this new scheme is to make selected awards to lecturers in Chemical Engineering or Polymer Chemistry who are engaged in research or teaching related to environmental issues.
The theme of environmental protection will be regarded as an essential element of the scheme.
It will also have the objective of attracting and retaining young, high calibre people into the academic field to improve the standard of teaching.
The scheme will be targeted at 25–35 year-old chemical engineers or chemists to encourage them to take up the available lecturing academic posts and to carry out teaching and research on environmental issues.
The theme will be environmental protection in the widest sense which may embrace topics such as safety, reduced energy consumption, waste disposal (incineration or specialised degradable polymers) and reduced emissions by improved control.
Research topics do not need to be immediately related to BP Chemicals operations but they must be on environmental matters.
The scheme will be initiated through the University Link Scheme and other Research Department contacts.
Link Officers will identify interest and seek views on the way in which support can be implemented.
Formal application would then be made to BP Chemicals.
The awards will take the form of a salary top-up for a maximum period of five years.
This will be £5,000 per annum initially for three years reducing to £3,000 and £1,000 in the fourth and fifth years respectively.
During this time consultancy opportunities will be made available to supplement income and to encourage the lecturers and their departments to become self-sufficient.
During the period of the award the lecturer will ideally spend a period of 6–12 months industrial placement at one of the BP Chemicals manufacturing sites or research laboratories.
The research is in the field of renewable energy, in particular the thermochemical processing of wood, agricultural wastes and domestic refuse to produce electricity and fuels.
If these products replace those derived from fossil fuels, it will make a significant contribution to reducing the greenhouse effect.
Apologies to those people who kindly sent us details of their recent grants and who have not been mentioned in this issue.
This is due to lack of space and they will be published in the May issue.
North American Exchange
Pictured are exchange students from Canada and the USA with David Taylor, Chairman of the Undergraduate Programme.
The students are the first to come to Bradford as part of exchange agreements with the University of Carleton, Ottowa and Carnegie-Mellon University Pittsburg.
The agreement with Carnegie-Mellon was drawn up following visits to Pittsburg by Professor David Weir, Director of the Management Centre, who says, ‘We are delighted to be accepted as an equal partner by Carnegie-Mellon which is a school of acknowledged research excellence.
This partnership is part of our strategy of building up a long-term international profile by bilateral relationships with leading players in the major international markets for business education.’
The agreement with Carleton was developed as a result of Professor Peter Buckley's contacts in the field of International Business.
Shelly Whitney, Dawn Millar and Alex Block from Carleton say, ‘Studying at the Bradford Management Centre has been an invaluable experience and has given the Canadian ‘Group of Seven’ a new perspective on International Business.
It may be damp and windy in Bradford but we're not complaining.
Any weather is better  than the -50°C temperatures at home.
We hope that the six Bradford students in Canada are keeping warm.’
A QUESTION OF LEARNING
What is it about this course which helps you to learn?
This is the trigger question which has been used recently to encourage students in the Department of Industrial Technology to contribute to the monitoring and evaluation of the management, delivery and content of their course.
This approach created an environment in which students could present their responses in a personal yet interactive way in an evaluation session which was organised by the Department, but run by two members of staff from the Access Unit.
This division of labour is important.
On the one hand, it signified the commitment of the Department to student involvement in evaluation.
On the other hand, the introduction of staff external to it could be seen to guarantee the objectivity of the exercise for all concerned.
How the Evaluation Session Works
The Opening Gambit
We began by introducing ourselves, explaining the purpose of the session, describing the methods to be used and how the outcomes would be presented to students and to the Department.
At this stage, it was also important to establish that the best results would be achieved if a critical and constructive approach was adopted.
Confidentiality was also guaranteed.
The Next Move
Using the deliberately open ended trigger sentence, we then asked each student to take two minutes, working alone, to identify one ‘good’ factor from their own personal experience of learning on their course.
This could be relied on to throw up ‘bad’ as well as‘good’factors.
The Small Group
We then suggested that people create small groups in which individual responses could be gathered together and discussed before the chosen spokesperson reported back on the collective view.
The Plenary
At this stage, one member of staff understood to record everything said on a flipchart, so that everyone could check its accuracy.
The other staff member co-ordinated the feedback, making it plain that, for these purposes, the repetition of points could be taken as evidence of the strength of shared experience rather than a lack of incisiveness on the part of the spokespersons.
Care was taken not to influence or constrain what students wished to communicate, though, where necessary, questions to clarify issues and comments were asked by staff.
The Outcomes
A report of the evaluation session was prepared, in the first instance, for the Head of Department.
In writing it, Access Unit staff maintained their roles as neutral recorders of student experience and made no comments or recommendations — though these can be provided.
Copies were available for student representatives who could check its accuracy.
They were then invited to a Departmental meeting, also attended by Access Unit staff, to discuss the report and any action which needed to be taken.
‘We know what helps us to learn and we know what hinders us too’
Students from all years in Industrial Technology have now had the opportunity to be involved in this kind of interactive evaluation.
The participation rate has been high and the method of eliciting responses, which identifies individual reactions and then tests them out in two other contexts, has produced a reliable collective record of student experience.
The sessions have also produced a wealth of varied and detailed material, often linked to constructive proposals for the solving of problems, which questionnaires do not elicit.
Feelings have often run high, especially where learning opportunities are perceived to have been mismanaged or ineptly handled.
Yet without question, the overall evaluation of the course was positive and the enthusiasm and commitment of its students, in each year, was unmistakable.
It may be difficult to define ‘quality’ teaching in academic terms, but students in the Department of Industrial Technology have very clear ideas about what promoted and what detracts from their learning.
Watch this Space
The sessions described here have been based on the premise that students, as receivers of teaching provision, can contribute much from their accumulated knowledge and experience — which is also informed by their values and expectations — to the staff responsible for the management, delivery and content of their courses.
The material which has been gathered supports this contention and it also raises a number of issues concerning the needs of staff, as well as students, at a time when the total quality of the teaching/learning experience is assuming a certain prominence throughout the HE sector.
If you want to know more about this method of student evaluation, contact Gina Mitchell in the Access Unit on 3220.
Grand tour starts here…
Music for Lunch , the University's series of free lunchtime concerts at the Alhambra Studio on Wednesdays, 1.05pm continues to attract good audiences.
Forthcoming concerts promise a feast of music from all around Europe.
Janet Russell (March 25) performs traditional and contemporary songs that don't duck today's issues — especially women's — with wit and humour.
San Petronio Players (April 1) will transport you to Venice, with music by Monteverdi, Cavalli and Vivaldi.
Peter Hill (April 8) is a magical pianist whose programme consists of Chopin and Messiaen.
Music for Lent and Passiontide features in the Bradford Choristers recital (April 15), including Allegri's Miserere.
Following the Easter break,(May 6)Julia Mills (saxophone) and Nikki Iles (piano) play music by Bach, Bozza and Debussy as well as jazz transcriptions by Bill Evans.
Miriam Roycroft (cello) and Darius Battiwala (piano) play Shostakovich and Mendelssohn sonatas (May 13).
A trip to Spain with guitar duo Peter Wiltchinsky and Robin Hill (May 20) includes music by Giuliani, Gaugi and de Falla.
…and ends with Venetian Festival
The University Chamber Choir , who have been selected to compete in the Sainsbury's Choir of the Year Competition, and sing at the installation of Sir Trevor Holdsworth as Chancellor will be joined by the Chamber Orchestra for a concert in Bradford Cathedral on May 20 at 7.30pm.
The programme will include contrasted settings of Beatus Vir by Monteverdi and Vivaldi, as well as ceremonial music by Gabrieli and Gussago.
Theatre in the Mill
Maybe it's time you came down to see what's going on at Theatre in the Mill.
You may be intrigued, you may be enlightened, you may be astounded, you may be amused, but you'll certainly be glad you came!
1–2 MAY at 7.30pm —‘The Dorm’— The Mandela Theatre Company.
The award-winning Mandela Theatre Company fuse humour, mime and breakneck physicality in ‘The Dorm’.
In a superb performance they expose the struggle to survive in a Youth Detention Centre.
6–7 MAY at 7.30pm & Matinee 1.00pm 6 MAY — Roald Dahl's ‘Fantastic Mr Fox’— Open Hand Theatre Company
It's sure to be a full house for this very popular Company's lively version of Roald Dahl's ‘Fantastic Mr Fox’, so book early.
Animals are under threat from man, and children of 6–10 and adults will in turn be spellbound and surprised by the wickedly clever use of puppets, masks and actors in this adventurous tale.
15–16 MAY at 7.30pm —‘From Honey to Ashes — The Spirit of Hive’— The Practice
‘Richly poetic script…striking images…uniquely theatrical…
’(The Guardian).
The Practice present radically new and challenging theatre throughout Europe.
In ‘From Honey to Ashes — The Spirit of Hive’ a scene of tragic innocence is shattered by the entry of a third person.
The Practice weave together music, sound and dialogue to produce sculptural, physical, visceral drama.
22 MAY at 7.30pm —‘States of Grace’— Interference Theatre Co-op
The big freeze.
At the last holiday resort in the world a small group of guests are cautiously testing the air.
‘States of Grace’ looks at a society poised on the brink of destruction.
Highly visual, physical theatre with an original score by Mark Webber.
23 MAY at 7.30pm —‘Funny’— Lovely Plays
A company which dares to be different.
‘Funny’ is about a comedian trapped in his theatrical role — funny, audacious, subversive.
NOTICEBOARD
House for Sale
Gilstead, Bingley Well-maintained, spacious, inner town house located in small cul de sac.
Three bedrooms, gas central heating, full sealed unit double glazing, garage, manageable gardens.
Easy access to Bradford.
£49,500 o.n.o.
Contact   
Free to a Good Home
Two loving and affectionate young cats, just one year old, brother and sister, both neutered.
Breaks my heart to part with them but I am going to live abroad and cannot take them with me.
I have photos if any interested party would care to have a preview.
Please contact  
GENERAL NOTICE
Work will be carried out relaying pavings in Library Square from Monday 23 March for a period of approximately four weeks.
The contractors have been requested to maintain safe routes of access to the Library throughout the contract, but your co-operation and forbearance would be much appreciated during this time.
University of BRADFORD CONFERENCES EXHIBITIONS ACCOMMODATION
WELCOME TO BRADFORD
Situated in the heart of the U.K. Bradford is easily accessible by road, rail and air.
The University's pleasant campus is only a short walk from the bustling city centre and is ideally situated for conferences, meetings and exhibitions.
Like all Bradfordians, we pride ourselves on the warmth and sincerity of our welcome.
As one of the ten largest cities in Britain, Bradford has many attractions.
High on any list must be the National Museum of Photography, Film and Television, the recently refurbished Alhambra Theatre, the historic quarter of Little Germany, with its grand architecture, and the colourful Asian shops and restaurants.
The countryside is so close you can walk to it from the city centre.
To the West are the rugged moors of Brontë Country, and the magnificent Dales and Peaks are only an hour's drive away.
So, whether you are visiting our city for a holiday, short break or a business meeting or conference, you can be sure that your stay will be a memorable one.
THE UNIVERSITY
‘Making Knowledge Work’ is the University's watchword and this is no idle boast.
Over the last 25 years, Bradford University has set out to serve society through excellence in teaching and research, by advancing learning and by applying knowledge for the benefit of all.
It is at the forefront of research and teaching in many disciplines and has formed close links with industry and commerce locally, nationally and internationally, whilst, at the same time, providing a caring and supportive environment in which students and staff can develop their abilities to the full.
It is virtually impossible to quantify the achievements of the University over the past 25 years.
In that time it has awarded almost 30,000 at various levels, while staff have published over 12,000 books or research articles, and given almost 10,000 papers at conferences.
These are the tangible results of its activity, and take no account of the quality of the educational and indeed life experience gained by those who have passed through its doors.
The University is a living community, which grows and changes with the surrounding society.
Skilfully landscaped, the campus offers much to the visitor — not only accommodation, excellent food and a meeting place, but also a relaxing and friendly atmosphere in pleasant surroundings with a wide variety of sports facilities and entertainment such as discos, concerts and sports events.
Whether a conference delegate or a visitor to our city — we try to make your stay an enjoyable and successful one.
We will be glad to assist you with any special requirements you may have and to offer you our hospitality and advice throughout your visit.
CONFERENCES, EXHIBITIONS AND MEETINGS
Whatever the size of your requirements, we try to suit every need.
With over 100 individual meeting rooms available on campus, we are used to accommodating for as few as 20 or as many as 1,000 delegates.
Amongst the facilities available are the following:
COMMUNAL BUILDING
1) Meeting Rooms
The Meeting Rooms are particularly suitable for informal workshops and seminars, as well as‘classroom’ sessions.
All four rooms are linked by double-door access, Meeting Rooms 3 and 4 being divided by a partition which can be removed to create a larger meeting area, which is useful for bringing together syndicate groups.
These rooms may also be of interest to those conferences mounting large exhibitions on the lower level of the Communal Building.
2) Lower Level
These four areas can be used separately or in combination for exhibition purposes; full electrical support can be arranged.
Other uses are for banquets, dances and social functions, with a notable attraction being the longest bar in West Yorkshire!
The area is licensed for 1200 people.
CONDITIONS OF LETTING for Residential Conferences and Courses
1.
Bookings and Charges
1.1
Written acknowledgement or receipt by the University of a booking form completed by the Organisers of a conference/course shall be confirmation that the booking has been accepted by the University.
1.2
Unless subsequently agreed in writing, the charges relating to booking shall be those expected to be current at the time of the conference.
However, the University reserve the right to vary the charges from those confirmed at the time of booking by giving notice to the Organisers not less than 10 weeks in advance of the commencement of the conference/courses.
2.
Cancellations
2.1
No deposit is required at the time of booking but the following cancellation arrangements and charges shall apply.
2.2
A percentage of the total conference/course charge, including catering charges, shall be payable in the event of cancellation of the booking as follows.
10% in the event of cancellation within 8–20 weeks of the date of commencement of the conference/course.
20% in the event of cancellation within 22–55 days of the date of commencement of the conference/course.
40% in the event of cancellation within 21 days of the date of the conference/course.
3.
Shortfall in numbers
Final numbers for accommodation and catering services are required not less than 21 days prior to the date of commencement of the conference/course.
A charge of £5.00 will be made for each unfilled place in excess of 15% of the final numbers for which accommodation and catering services have been confirmed.
4.
Organiser's Duties
The Organiser shall ensure that
4.1
The total number of persons using the accommodation shall not exceed the number for which it has been booked;
4.2
Outside contractors are not brought on to the University's premises except by prior agreement with the University;
4.3
The conference/course and all functions relating to it are
(a) conducted in a lawful and orderly manner such that no nuisance or annoyance is caused to the University or others lawfully on the University's premises and that the University's name or standing is not brought into disrepute.
(b) carried out in accordance with the terms and conditions of any  licences by which the function, or any part of it, is permitted;
4.4
The University is informed at least 14 days in advance of any meeting or other event at which the speaker or the subject matter to which the meeting or event related is of such a nature that difficulties might be caused for the University in the discharge of its legal responsibility to ensure that freedom of speech within the law is secure for persons using its premises;
4.5
they comply with the reasonable instructions of the University and its Officers for the proper and efficient management and protection of the University's facilities, premises and property.
University's Duties
The University shall provide the accommodation, catering services and other services specified in writing in the booking and which the University has undertaken in writing to provide, except in circumstances in 6.1 of these Conditions.
6.
Liabilities
6.1
The University accepts no liability for loss arising from the failure of electricity, heating systems, water supplies, fire, flooding or for any other cause beyond its reasonable control which may cause the University's premises or part of them to be temporarily closed or the booking to be interrupted, interfered with or cancelled.
6.2
the University accepts no responsibility for loss or damage to property brought on to University's premises.
The University shall not be liable for any consequential or other loss, damage or injury howsoever caused which may arise out of or in connection with the use of the University's premises by conference/course participants, the Organiser, their agents, servants or contractors.
6.3
the Organisers shall accept full responsibility for making good any damage caused to the premises, furniture, equipment or other property of the University by conference/course participants, the Organisers, their agents, servants or contractors, and for the cost involved in any substantial alterations of the normal furniture layout of the accommodation to be used, or, where more than normal costs are involved, in cleaning it and restoring it to order after use.
6.4
The Organisers shall be liable for and shall indemnify the University against any claims against it of whatsoever nature including, but not limited to, claims in respect of death, injury, loss or damage where any such claim is caused by or arises by reason of the acts, omission or negligence of conference/course participants, the Organisers, their agents, servants or contractors.
7.
Insurance
The Organisers shall effect insurance covering the above- mentioned risks in such sum as shall be adequate in all the circumstances for the benefit of the Organisers and the University.
CHESHAM BUILDING
The suite of lecture theatres on the fourth floor is of particular interest to conferences planning larger simultaneous sessions.
Each lecture theatre can, however, be hired separately.
In addition there are ten, flat-floored seminar rooms with capacity for 30–50 people in classroom-style arrangement.
The Foyer on the ground floor of the Chesham Building offers suitable space for small exhibitions and poster sessions or can be used for registration purposes.
ASHFIELD BUILDING
All rooms are equipped with white boards, screens and overhead projectors.
All but one room are in the main part of the building.
Lift access is available through the Pemberton Building (adjacent).
The basement room is accessed from outside.
RICHMOND BUILDING
The Great Hall has 247 fixed seats and a maximum of 399 linked seats downstairs (can be adjusted to less if required) and 326 seats in the balcony.
The major halls in the Richmond building provide excellent venues, particularly for large conferences.
In addition, there are 6 other tiered lecture theatres (each with a capacity of 70–80 people) and over 25 seminar/classrooms (to seat 20–60 people).
All are located in close proximity to one another, providing scope for multiple syndicate as well as plenary sessions.
A full range of audio-visual equipment and technical assistance is available.
Please refer to our tariff of charges for details of these services.
Electrical supplies and additional lighting can be booked for exhibition purposes.
State-of-the-art visual equipment complements our extensive facilities, with up-to-the-minute computer links available in two of the lecture theatres.
A CCTV system is also in operation, allowing delegates in different theatres to participate simultaneously.
An induction loop has been installed in the Great Hall for the benefit of the hearing-impaired.
The loop operates in the flat floored area of the lower level from the stage to the front of the tiered seating and is fed from signals from the existing amplification system and, therefore, can only be used in conjunction with that system.
Organisers should notify the University as to whether the induction loop facility is required during the period in which the Great Hall is in use.
There is a sign in the entrance to the Great Hall notifying those who wish to use this facility to alter their hearing aids to the ‘T’ setting.
ACCOMMODATION AND CATERING
Some rooms are especially adapted for visitors with physical disabilities.
Car parking space is available at the Halls of Residence in Laisteridge Lane and near the residences on the main campus.
Although some of the residences have electric razor sockets in the rooms, conference guests are advised to bring with them an adaptor for use in a light bulb socket.
A limited number of adaptors may be available on request.
During your stay at the University of Bradford, there will be a number of people available to assist you.
There are porters available in the Halls of Residence throughout the day.
The duty porter can be contacted at the Dennis Bellamy Hall Reception (for those resident at Dennis Bellamy/Revis Barber or Charles Morris Halls of Residence) or at the Student Services Reception, Communal Building Level O (for those resident in Shearbridge Green and in Kirkstone and Longside Halls.
Security staff are available 24 hours a day in the Richmond Building Reception and can be contacted on Extension 4894 on any internal telephone or 4499 in an emergency.
The Dennis Bellamy/Revis Barber Halls are licensed for the sale of liquor either to residents or guests or, during permitted hours, to those taking table meals.
Extended bar opening hours may be arranged on request, and facilities for sherry receptions are available.
Refreshment services can normally be made available close to your meeting.
We also like to cater for any specific menu request and, given ample notice, provide for special dietary requirements of individual visitors.
You will find examples of sample menus on the enclosed sheets.
Whatever your needs, you can be sure of top standards and top value for money.
We are committed to making your stay a pleasant one.
GENERAL INFORMATION
The following information on facilities on and around the campus may be of interest to delegates.
The Sports Centre offers first-class facilities for all the major indoor sports, including squash, badminton, indoor tennis, weight training, cricket and golf practice.
A climbing wall, sauna bath and solarium are also available in the Centre, together with a 25-metre swimming pool.
A flood-lit, all-weather playing area in the grounds of the Dennis Bellamy/Revis Barber Halls provides a full-sized hockey/soccer pitch and five-a-side soccer facilities during the winter season.
From Easter onwards, the area is laid with eight tennis courts and three five-a-side pitches.
Two squash courts, cricket nets and jumping pits are also available.
During vacations, priority will be given to formal sports conferences and courses, but otherwise all facilities are available for casual use to all visitors.
Equipment for all sports can be hired from the Reception Desk in the Sports Centre.
HOW TO GET HERE
ROAD
Bradford is connected to the national motorway network via the M606.
Approximate journey times are: London 4 hours, Manchester 1 hour, Leeds 20 minutes.
An extensive coach service connects most parts of the country to Bradford's Transport Interchange.
RAIL
Bradford Exchange Station, located in the city's Transport Interchange, has extensive rail links.
Approximate journey times are: London, King's Cross 2½–3 hours (high speed train) Edinburgh 4½ hours, Birmingham 3 hours, Manchester 1 hour.
A taxi service is always available at the Transport Interchange to take you to the University.
AIR
There are direct regular air services into Leeds/Bradford Airport (located 7 miles from the city) from Aberdeen, Amsterdam, Belfast, Cardiff, Dublin, Edinburgh, Glasgow, Guernsey (summer only), Jersey (summer only), London (Heathrow and Stansted) and Paris.
International connections can be made through Heathrow, Amsterdam or Paris.
A taxi journey from the Airport to the University takes approximately 20 minutes.
There is an hourly bus service during the day from the Airport to the Transport Interchange in the city centre.
Many internal and international flights can also be made into Manchester Airport, located 57 miles south-west of Bradford.