

1
Escape or Enlargement?
Every type of fiction depends for its defining and acceptance on certain conventions which are, in effect, agreements between author and reader.
The basic convention underlying all fiction marks its difference from fact.
The form of story depends on rearrangement.
The disparate elements of human experience are selected and ordered in a structure which includes its own version of time, place and personality.
Tidiness takes the place of disorder, compactness of meandering, outline of formlessness.
We are invited by the story-teller to believe that the part-random, part-intended day-to-day course of life would lend itself to discipline, with a beginning, a middle and an end.
In spite of attempts, from time to time, to re-establish the formlessness of ‘real life’, in fiction, story exists almost always by courtesy of a ‘shape ’.
While the adventure depends like any other fictional form on this agreed rearrangement of reality, it also works on conventions of its own which have often seemed to take it still further away from that reality.
Dictionary phrases defining adventure as ‘a hazardous enterprise or performance’ or ‘a novel or exciting incident’make it clear that this is a kind of fiction offering surprise rather than confirmation, strangeness rather than familiarity.
The reader's expectation is to be satisfied by the unexpected: he is to be taken away from normal concerns by events of an exaggerated, heightened nature, often taking place in exotic, distant surroundings.
Another hyperbole must be added to this.
To quote the dictionary again, the word ‘adventure’ contains in it an element of the unexpected, of chance and Fate, which means that the protagonist must be able to call on more than normal attributes to meet the challenge set for him.
We may expect, to some degree, a hero (or, more rarely, a heroine) of more than ordinary stature.
Any novel invites one to enjoy a vicarious experience outside one's own life.
The size and force of the experience offered in an adventure story means that it has attracted to itself, more than any other fictional form, the pejorative label of ‘escape’.
Is it fear of fictional artificiality or a puritanical distrust of pure pleasure which has led to an increasing relegation to the status of ‘popular’ and, by implication, ‘inferior’literature of a genre which has myth and legend as its ancestors?
As Paul Zweig commented:
The modern world's dismissal of adventure as an entertaining but minor experience is unprecedented.
Few cultures have been so willing to tempt the gods.
That we should do so says a great deal about the arrogance of our cultural values.
The compulsion to arrange books and authors in hierarchies is no new thing.
Almost ninety years ago Stevenson's romantic adventures were put in their place by a reviewer in the London Daily Chronicle who remarked that ‘great literature cannot be composed from narratives of perilous adventures’.
In the increasing number of critical surveys of the English novel published during the present century Conrad is the sole writer ever to be included in the safe, accepted procession from Fielding to Henry James and beyond who could, to some degree, be considered to write of adventure in the traditional sense; and it is always made perfectly clear that Conrad's moral and philosophical probings constitute his true value, his story-telling expertise being, by implication, no more than a means to an end.
The assumption behind this critical selectiveness is confirmed by the one exception I have been able to find, in a brief, perverse and witty account of the English novel composed by Ford Madox Ford for American students.
His unusual preferences culminate in the following declaration:
Marryat — as a writer read by boys, men being already too dulled in the sense at twenty to appreciate him — has probably, through the boys, exercised the greatest influence on the English character that any writer ever did exercise.
His magnificent gifts of drawing — not exaggerating — character and of getting an atmosphere have so worked that few of us have not been to sea in frigates before the age of eighteen and come in some way in contact with non-comfortable men and women.
I have seldom been so impressed as when, the other day, I reread Peter Simple for my pleasure.
It was to come into contact with a man who could write and see and feel.
For me, nothing in War and Peace is as valuable as the boat-cutting-out expeditions of Marryat and for me he remains the greatest of English novelists.
His name is not even mentioned in the manual of literary dates with which I have just been refreshing my memory.
Happy the students who were inspired to independent judgements by this shrewd praise of a master of his particular genre.
Such dissenting voices are rare.
Colin Watson ruefully accepted, twelve years ago, the ‘attitude of good-natured, if slightly supercilious tolerance’ with which reviewers treated the latest batch of detective stories.
The forthright tones of Quentin Oates were heard more recently in The Bookseller suggesting that ‘a sensible, enthusiastic feature’ about adventure stories would do a power  of good to readership and publishers' advertising alike.
The accepted view holds its own.
A panel of former Booker Prize judges questioned on a television programme in 1983 were agreed that the prize was for ‘serious’ novels and was unlikely to be awarded to a thriller, however skilful or original it might be.
The junior adventure story has not suffered the same extremes of literary discrimination.
This may be because of the built-in didactic nature of any story written specifically for the young.
The adventure story offers the writer as many chances as the more staid domestic chronicle does for the exploration of the progress of a young person towards adulthood.
At the same time, many critics show notable preference for stories with a moral conclusion over those which seem to offer simple entertainment; and any critic who looks at a book from the angle of the potential reader rather than of the book itself is in danger of being tempted by false hierarchies.
But from a general view the status of the junior adventure story is unassailable.
Paradoxically, it is because the adventure story is essentially youthful as well as mature that it is a valuable part of adult literature.
Yet this, too, is often seen not as a value but as an additional reason for not taking the genre seriously.
The accusation that the adventure story offers an escape for adult readers implies that the escape is into a kind of second childhood or, at the least, suggests a limited expectation of a novel's purpose.
Michael Innes's analysis of one of his characters, a creator of best-selling crime novels, expressed this view by implication:
His imagination was of the refrigerating sort from which the fantasies of boyhood can step with convincing freshness; and it was this quality, no doubt, that made the stories the instant and almost embarrassing success that they were.
The literary judgement contained in the phrase ‘almost embarrassing success’ is offered in another way when the author, writing this time under his real name of J. I. M. Stewart, led his readers to an understanding of a super-hero, spy and adventurer whose exploits were made possible because he had retained the boyhood characteristics nourished by a certain area of reading.
The famous explorer Mogridge is seen by his university friend Duncan Patullo as, in fact, an overgrown schoolboy:
A single glance at the actual contents of Mogridge's cupboard embarrassed me.
I don't think I'd have been more so had the door opened on, say, a Teddy Bear, redolent of the fabulous Oxford of Evelyn Waugh.
The first thing I saw was a batch of Biggles books, stacked beside several of their Kaiser's War equivalents, written by  a man called Percy F. Westerman.
Then I saw — rapidly — The Scarlet Pimpernel, The Riddle of the Sands, King Solomon's Mines, The Four Adventures of Richard Hannay, Revolt in the Desert.
There were dozens of books of that sort.
The majority, which I didn't have time to scan, appeared designed for juvenile rather than adult readers.
The attitude of Patullo, a conventional, observant, middle-class intellectual, is a familiar one, and so is his ambiguous attitude to this kind of reading, expressed in a later comment on the unexpected heroism of the man he had regarded with a certain scorn:
The Mogridge of Mochica wasn't much more than a boy.
But he took charge of men; organized them; persuaded or inspired or commanded them to endure incredible things.
It was a thoroughly down-to-earth job in a way.
But what enabled him to put it through was a high romantic imagination.
The door to childhood which the adventure story is supposed to open to the adult may also involve the childlike activity of role-playing.
Kornei Chukovsky, in his account of his boyhood in Odessa in the 1890s, described how he and his friend Timosha used to climb into deep rubbish boxes:
…to tell each other stories about cannibals and cowboys, path finders, volcanoes and African mirages.
It was a very peculiar thing.
The minute we got settled down in the bottom of our Kalamachka, rocking as if we were inside a boat and ‘talking about Baghdad’, we felt transported to another country.
And we ourselves became different people from those we had been a minute ago, when we were teasing Filimon the goat or getting into a fight with Pechonkin's street gang.
The same kind of escape (or enlargement, if you look at the process in a favourable light) is allowed for in a discussion of half a century ago in which the thesis that all novels contributed to a sense of escape from the artificial complexities of civilisation was turned to a commercial purpose.
The adventure story was particularly favoured as a genre to be attempted by the aspiring writer:
Romance and vicarious excitement are what the average reader wants; he has enough of what is drab, prosaic, and everyday.
People like even their sunsets to be a little embellished.
Their imaginations are eager to go rather more than half-way to meet the audacious writer.
The pallid, underpaid, underfed city clerk does not want to read about cheap boarding houses, suburban back gardens, and dingy offices.
In his dreams he is wild, untamed, primitive man, and with Jack London sails strange seas, or with Tarzan fights lions single handed.
To today's citizen this method of escaping from the monotony of everyday life may seem näive and even ludicrous.
The modern world is more likely to forget its apprehensions in what Brian Aldiss has called ‘cosy catastrophe’.
The formula of the bookstall blockbuster is only too persuasive, offering an optimistic view of social dangers and confusions.
John Sutherland includes disaster tales among the types of best-sellers which he discusses, for this reason:
…within the disaster area there are discovered close-knit groups — little communities, families, husbands and wives — all brought into even closer intimacy by the catastrophic events that overtake them.
And in a larger sense community is affirmed, and the complexities of social life dissolved.
Officers of law and practical, simple, good men take command.
Public servants (nurses, firemen, pilots etc.) are glorified in their competence to handle emergency, and a new social solidarity between previously antagonistic groups is forged.
We may well feel cynical about the type of best-selling adventure which assumes heroism without accounting for it.
Yet for ten novels of adventure using this formulaic, superficial method there will be one, if we can find it, which by stretching the convention of improbable excitement by an acceptance of human nature both as it is and as it can be, offers not an escape but an enlargement of life through imagination.
We may consider it a virtue rather than a vice that we possess and exert the power to live, as it were, outside ourselves.
John Carwelti argues that certain types of formula-stories, ‘Adventure, Mystery and Romance’, must be judged by their own standards and conventions and he deplores the literary assumption that this type of writing is ‘subliterature’.
‘The trouble with this sort of approach’, he suggests:
…is that it tends to make us perceive and evaluate formula literature simply as an inferior or perverted form of something better, instead of seeing the ‘escapist’ characteristics as aspects of an artistic type with its own purposes and justification.
After all, while most of us would condemn escapism as a total way of life, our capacity to use our imaginations to construct alternative worlds into which we can temporarily retreat is certainly a central human characteristic and seems, on the whole, a valuable one.
This temporary retreat may bring the immediate refreshment of change or it may widen our horizons either by romantic hyperbole or by an unexpected psychological authenticity close to the reality of life as we know it.
Anthony Burgess drew a distinction between Graham Greene's serious novels which ‘probe into the world as it really is’ and the ‘entertainments’which, he claimed, ‘falsify the world, manipulate it’.
Yet he made the distinction invalid by admitting that ‘in the work of the writer who has serious pretensions we often gain a new image of the world, an insight into human character’.
Whatever Graham Greene intended by the use of the label ‘entertainment’ for certain of his novels, some of us have found a greater intuition and emotional force in The Man Within than in the more elaborate analysis of personality in The Heart of the Matter or A Burnt-Out Case .
It is, perhaps, a matter of balancing intention against the total literary tone and integrity of each book.
Literature works by the sum of its elements, not by any one of them.
The balance of reality and hyperbole in the adventure story can be its downfall or its glory.
Nowadays we may respond more readily to the sharpness of actuality than to the romantic atmosphere more natural to the adventure story in the past.
Harvey Darton's definition of the nature of King Solomon's Mines and Treasure Island touches present-day taste very closely, with its prescription of ‘surprise upon surprise, each one sudden, but each one also natural, capable of rational and brave explanation when you knew all the facts.’
Yet, for adults and children alike, the enlarging ideal is as necessary as the acknowledgement of the actual.
Graham Greene regarded Rider Haggard's greatest achievement that he ‘fixed pictures in our minds that thirty years have been unable to wear away’ and he defined the sphere of imagination when he wrote of his memories of the characters in the Quatermain novels:
Quatermain and Curtis — weren't they, even when I was only ten years old, a little too good to be true?
They were men of such unyielding integrity (they would only admit to a fault in order to show how it might be overcome) that the wavering personality of a child could not rest for long against those monumental shoulders.
A child, after all, knows most of the game…it is only an attitude to it that he lacks.
He is quite well aware of cowardice, shame, deception, disappointment.
Sir Henry Curtis perched upon a rock bleeding from a dozen wounds but fighting on with the remnant of the Greys against the hordes of Twala was too heroic.
These men were like Platonic ideas: they were not life as one had already begun to know it.
Even so it was a life, an approach, a horizon as necessary to the nourishment of young and old as the most penetrating picture of what we like to call reality.
2
The Romanticising of Fact
The predominant conventions of the adventure story, the victory of good over evil and the happy ending, have led to a subtle demotion of the genre from the highest ranks of literature on the grounds that its main aim is a contrived entertainment; for experience suggests, often though not invariably, that the challenge of adventure is more likely to meet with disaster and defeat than survival and triumph.
The particular colour which fiction casts over action in this type of story, in rearranging its components, is usually termed ‘romantic’— a word, as I shall try to show, that can be used with many meanings.
How far is it inevitable that the manipulation of fact for the purposes of fiction leads to romanticising?
One branch of adventure may serve as example, the sea story, in two kinds in particular— the story of endurance in the face of natural disaster and the historical adventure with its most popular subject, the British Navy in the Napoleonic period.
Artistically, Conrad must be allowed pre-eminence, yet he insisted, against the determined assumptions of his readers, that he was not a writer of ‘sea-stories’, while in his novels he both used and contradicted the conventions of the adventure story.
In fact, to discuss the reason why his work is the exception rather than the rule in the category of traditional adventure is to find one way to define that category.
Conrad was well aware of the many facets of the word ‘romance’— idealism towards women and events, the hero's victory over extreme hazard, exotic details of place and circumstance.
The retired seaman Peyrol offers almost a catalogue of such familiar elements as he recalls:
…a multitude of impressions of endless oceans, of the Mozambique Channel, of Arabs and negroes, of Madagascar, of the coast of India, of islands and channels and reefs; of fights at sea, rows on shore, desperate slaughter and desperate thirst, of all sorts of ships one after another: merchant ships and frigates and privateers; of reckless men and enormous sprees.
Yet Conrad uses these elements, which we may term romantic, in a way that sets him far from stories, seemingly similar, by (say) Rider Haggard or Buchan.
Occasionally he will offer a character in the true romantic style, but it will be a minor character.
The young Russian trader with his brown holland suit almost obscured by coloured patches, a youth whose courage in venturing into the dark interior of Africa is viewed with astonished admiration by Conrad's foremost narrator, Marlow, belongs to the familiar heroic convention:
He surely wanted nothing from the wilderness but space to breathe in and to push through.
His need was to exist, and to move onwards at the greatest possible risk, and with a maximum of privation.
If the absolutely pure, uncalculating, impractical spirit of adventure had ever ruled a human being, it ruled this bespectacled youth.
Youth was, for Conrad, a period all too brief when romance prevailed over practical considerations, when it flourished because of inexperience and for want of maturity.
It was a time which Conrad allowed himself to regret, through his characters, but not to exalt above other periods and other philosophies of life.
At the end of the story significantly called Youth , a story in which Conrad calls on his own memory of the testing of ardent feelings in critical conditions in describing the last fatal, curtailed voyage of the old Judea , Marlow as narrator, sitting in comfortable middle age among men who, like him, had served an apprenticeship at sea, challenges them to deny that this was the best time of their lives:
And we all nodded at him: the man of finance, the man of accounts, the man of law, we all nodded at him over the polished table that like a still sheet of brown water reflected our faces, lined, wrinkled; our faces marked by toil, by deceptions, by success, by love; our weary eyes looking still, looking always, looking anxiously for something out of life, that while it is expected is already gone — has passed unseen, in a sigh, in a flash — together with the youth, with the strength, with the romance of illusions.
Of The Shadow-Line , a story still more autobiographical in its essence, Conrad said that he was aiming at ‘the presentation of certain facts, which certainly were associated with the change from youth, care-free and fervent, to the more self-conscious and more poignant period of maturer life’.
Against critics who had accused him of choosing to write of the sea and lonely islands in order to have greater freedom for his imagination, he protested that his own youth had worn ‘the sober hue of hard work and exacting calls of duty, things which in themselves are not much charged with a feeling of romance’ and that if he had any ‘romantic feeling of reality’it was disciplined by ‘a recognition of the hard facts of existence shared with the rest of mankind’, a recognition which, he believed, tried to make  the best of the hard truth and to discover in it ‘a certain aspect of beauty’.
The beauty he saw was, for him, in the fallible yet indestructible spirit of man.
It was a beauty more apparent to him in man's defeat than in his triumph.
His overriding literary aim was to make his readers realise through their senses, through the power of words, his own uniquely ironic vision of life, his own unusual conception of the heroic.
Romance, in his novels, is set against the inconvenient intervention of reality taking the form of chance.
Not, for him, chance as the hero's luck but as the effect of random events on the particular weakness or strength of an individual.
His most successful hero (and neither word is really suitable, in any case) is Captain McWhirr of the Nan-Shan , a middle-aged man whose prosaic letters to parents and then to wife, full of comments like ‘On Christmas Day at 4 p.m. we fell in with some icebergs’, bore them into coma.
The sheer stolid, unimaginative common sense of the man (stupidity, to his lively young mate Jukes) brought the ship through appalling seas and produced the only possible solution to the confusion into which the typhoon had thrown the precious dollars of his Chinese passengers.
The irony in the kind of unconscious, unsung heroism described in Typhoon is significantly reversed in Lord Jim , where in similar circumstances (an old ship threatened by tempest, a challenge to ship's officers, a crowd of helpless passengers) it is imagination that is the cause of the failure of a ‘hero’.
Here is a young man of twenty-three, second mate of the Patna , who secretly hopes that his life of efficiency will become romantic:
On the lower deck in the babel of two hundred voices he would forget himself, and beforehand live in his mind the sea-life of light literature.
He saw himself saving people from sinking ships, cutting away masts in a hurricane, swimming through a surf with a line; or as a lonely castaway, barefooted and half naked, walking on uncovered reefs in search of shellfish to stave off starvation.
He confronted savages on tropical shores, quelled mutinies on the high seas, and in a small boat upon the ocean kept up the hearts of despairing men.
Always an example of devotion to duty, and as unflinching as a hero in a book.
It is Jim's book-nourished imagination, in fact, that betrays him into unheroic behaviour.
Instead of‘saving people from sinking ships’, when the Patna , carrying hundreds of Malayan pilgrims on the way to Mecca, strikes a hidden wreck and appears to be sinking, Jim at first dissociates himself from the deplorable trio of captain and officers, when they lower the only boat for their escape; and then, on an impulse he can never explain, jumps  overboard to join them, leaving the passengers, as he believes, to certain death.
The irony of his failure to act as a hero is as severe as anything in Conrad.
The ship remains afloat and is towed by a French gunboat to the port where the four in the small boat, picked up by a passing ship, are duly landed and detained for a court-martial.
Jim had not in ‘a small boat upon the ocean kept up the hearts of despairing men’.
On the contrary, he had spent the hours of peril trying to establish in his mind his superiority to the abject cowardice of his companions, seeming more concerned with his own soul than with the fate of the helpless pilgrims on the Patna .
As Conrad, through the narrator Marlow, follows the wanderings which Jim undertakes to escape the imputation of cowardice, he contrasts the romantic and the realistic view of the case as he assembles opinions of Jim, elicited or overheard by Marlow.
Marlow himself, listening to Jim's confused, hesitant version of the affair as the court-martial proceeds, realises that ‘with every instant he was penetrating deeper into the impossible world of romantic achievements’ and cuts across the young man's evident yearning to make some heroic restitution by the blunt reminder, ‘If you had stuck to the ship, you mean!’
The wise old merchant Stein defends imagination as man's most valuable driving-force:
‘A man that is born falls into a dream like a man who falls into the sea.
If he tries to climb out into the air as inexperienced people endeavour to do, he drowns…
The way is to the destructive element submit yourself, and with the exertions of your hands and feet in the water make the deep, deep sea keep you up…’
But the French officer who had controlled the dangerous tow from the bridge of the battered Patna looks at courage and cowardice in another way:
…one may get on knowing very well that one's courage does not come of itself…
There's nothing much in that to get upset about.
One truth the more ought not to make life impossible…
But the honour — the honour, monsieur!…
The honour…that is real — that is!
And what life may be worth when…the honour is gone…
I can offer no opinion.
Nor does Conrad offer an opinion.
Jim never escapes the torment of self-doubt, even when in the remote kingdom of Patusan he has given all his energy and his intelligence, as well as his physical courage, to settling internal feuds and establishing prosperity — when, in fact, he has become to his people ‘Lord  Jim’.
The disreputable, starving pirate Brown, invading the peaceful settlement which Jim has recreated by his own efforts, excuses his attack on the village with unconscious force, enquiring:
…whether he himself — straight now — didn't understand that when it came to saving one's life in the dark, one didn't care who else went — three, thirty, three hundred people.
Jim feels ‘as if a demon had been whispering in his ear’ and goes to his death with the whisper still sounding, killed by the people he had tried, in one final, tragic mistake, to save for the future.
Was it heroism or was it, as Marlow suggests, ‘his exalted egoism’ that brought about the death of Lord Jim?
In a traditional adventure story the pursuit of personal honour is drawn to an absolute conclusion.
The hero is vindicated as a character completely realised, uncontradictory even when(as so often in Stanley Weyman, for instance ) he steps aside from the path of correct behaviour.
Action in the majority of adventure stories is seen both to affect and to be affected by character but in the end it is action that has the final word, in the romantic happy ending in which the heroism of man is affirmed.
In Lord Jim there is no final word.
Jim remains an enigma, penetrated through action only to a certain point.
Action has been a means, not an end.
Actively employed at sea for nearly twenty years, for the most part in Far Eastern seas which can legitimately be called romantic, Conrad had no need to add extra colour to his raw material, nor did he have to go beyond fact to find episodes, incidents and nuggets of action to transfer to fiction.
He did not in the simplest sense romanticise fact but used it as a way of making his readers see a complex and various world.
The sea and ships, his raw material, were not altered but were enlarged by his vision of life, for which vision they served as examples of larger issues.
Each ship he described is a microcosm, an enclosed community where individuals will be challenged by nature and by the crowded pressures of their comrades in service: each is, besides, a microcosm standing, in an archetypal metaphor, for the whole world.
Nobody except Masefield has ever matched the precision, the pictorial strength and intensity of Conrad's descriptions of storm and calm, of men working or at ease, contending or submitting.
But in all these descriptions, as in his characters and his story lines, we are taken from the particular to the general; we are led to see that it is not what happens that is important nor what effect action has on the people concerned, but what meaning we can extract, or guess at, from the impact on our senses and our intellect of the whole.
To take one example, in The Nigger of the Narcissus we are shown the paddle-steamer as she draws out of harbour in a composite picture of image and actuality:
She resembled an enormous aquatic black beetle, surprised by the light, overwhelmed by the sunshine, trying to escape with ineffectual effort into the distant gloom of the land.
She left a lingering smudge of smoke on the sky, and two vanishing trails of foam on the water.
On the place where she had stopped a round black patch of soot remained, undulating on the swell — an unclean mark of the creature's rest…
but from this precise description we are drawn into a larger concept:
The passage had begun, and the ship, a fragment detached from the earth, went on lonely and swift like a small planet.
Round her the abysses of sky and sea met in an unattainable frontier.
A great circular solitude moved with her, ever changing and ever the same, always monotonous and always imposing.
Conrad used the adventure story for purposes which stretched it perhaps beyond its technical bounds.
Another writer with a far briefer experience of life under sail, John Masefield, stands by contrast right in the centre of the convention of action and narrative in which the glory of adventure-story lies; for at least one period of his life Masefield would have agreed, as Conrad would not, that he was a ‘writer of sea-stories’.
Masefield's years in training on the Conway and his scant year at sea were among many experiences in his early life in which he pursued a quest for beauty, in nature and in man, a quest whose romantic zest was combined with a strong interest in technical matters, in the structure and working of everyday.
The raw material of his experience was transmuted into story — for whether he was working in the poetic or prose medium, Masefield was above all a story-teller.
His novels, and in particular two novels of the sea which in many ways closely resembled certain of Conrad's extended stories, assert the pre-eminence of story, of what happens next: in the balance he holds between character and event, in the way he directs his narrative, he provides almost a blueprint of the classic adventure genre.
In his buoyant narrative style, his particularly exact, observant eye for detail, his confident concentration on a particular event coloured by emotion but not by an intensity of analysis, he offers a significant contrast to Conrad's dense, probing accounts of similar events.
Where Conrad was essentially dramatic in his use of a background of storm and danger to show off his characters, Masefield in Victorious Troy and The Bird of Dawning gives  character and background equal rights.
In these two magnificent novels, sea and sky and ships become, as it were, characters themselves, acting as stabilisers in a way for the romantic, poetic colour implied in the titles of the books and constantly correcting what might otherwise be a predictable good-luck formula of a hero's triumph over great odds.
A poet's imagery throughout the descriptions of storm and weather is strengthened by a visual exactness and a sense almost of an external agency inimical to man: it is no accident that at many points the movement of waves is compared to the malice of active devils.
Masefield's extreme selectiveness in the choice of words turns description into its own form of narrative, reflecting the responses of the characters to immediate circumstances but also giving individual life to those circumstances.
Here is a moment when the danger to the dismasted Hurrying Angel becomes apparent to the exhausted crew as the light grows and they can view the sea they had been fighting in the dark:
All the dirty surface was made filthier by scufflings and smearings of tattered foam, cruddled like old wool.
All the rags of newspapers, that a mob will scatter, seemed to have been scattered on the sea and then danced and trodden on till mess was everywhere.
In such a mess in a town the lighter fragments blow about: the main squalor is on the ground.
Here the whole filthy floor was alive and lifting with menace.
It was raggedness linked with raving and ruin, such as none there had looked at nor dreamed of.
The scene is observed but it also has its own life and its own place in the narrative.
Masefield's descriptions of storms, of a typhoon in the South Pacific and a sinking wreck in the Atlantic, are notably technical, and his account of the efforts of his two heroes to avert disaster is professional in its detail.
In learning exactly what they do, as well as what they think and feel, we get to know the two young men who affirm, for him, the indestructible spirit of man (which, to Masefield, was above all symbolised by Troy as he saw it).
The challenge which they have to face is summed up almost casually as Cruiser Trewsbury talks to a seaman in a pause from effort.
He answers Chedglow's question ‘What do you call real, sir?’:
‘When you've got nothing except just your bare life and you're up against destiny or death.
When you're up against your Fortune, whether it goes for or against you.’
It is a moment when despair could have defeated the men, enduring hardship in a small boat after the sinking of their clipper  ship.
It is also a moment of generalisation for the twenty-one-year-old second mate who on this voyage from Australia, carrying grain and bent on winning the famous gain-race, had had to contend with an arrogant and hostile captain and who had cast off his boat, after a collision in the dark had given a mortal blow to the Blackgauntlet and he had waited in vain for orders.
This strong, confident youth takes command as an almost prosaic hero.
It is through common sense, fair dealing and strength of will that he dominates the men he now has to command, first for days in an open boat with scant food and water and then in the Bird of Dawning , a rival grain-clipper found deserted and drifting and brought once more into the final and victorious stages of the race.
Masefield declines to overstress Cruiser's success.
He offers us a practical young man who, unprepared for such a challenge, faces it boldly, controlling moments of doubt simply because there is so much to be done that there is no time for introspection.
Yet there is more than a simple, professional solution to an unusual but possible problem at sea.
Cruiser's words about Fortune echo through the book by virtue of Masefield's narrative method.
The Bird of Dawning , like Victorious Troy , is a novel without chapters and without formal pauses of any kind in its sequence of events.
Instead, the narrative is shaped by internal rhythms, by a dynamic of mood and tone and by an unseen control of pace in which tension is slackened, sometimes by a particularly close attention to detail, sometimes by the interpolation of dialogue into the account of the movements and actions of certain individuals, sometimes by one of those exuberant lists of objects which Masefield clearly enjoyed compiling and which bring a peculiarly droll, unexpected quirkiness to relieve the enumeration of dangers from wind and water.
Humour is one of the most typical ingredients in Masefield's adventure stories as a whole.
In the two sea-stories it is an important clue to character as well as a way of releasing tension.
More especially it is a means of showing the changing moods and capacities of the hero of Victorious Troy , a younger hero than the capable Cruiser Trewsbury.
Dick Pomfret, senior apprentice on the Hurrying Angel , is seventeen and still dependent on his elders for advice and leadership.
He is in his third year at sea when the  misjudgment of Captain ‘Battler’ Cobb, reckless with drink and determined to win the grain race, runs the ship into a typhoon in the South Pacific, where she is dismasted and the Captain is seriously injured.
With the experienced old mate Duckwich killed and the second mate overboard, Dick finds himself in command  of a ship whose survival seems doubtful indeed.
Moments of self-doubt, fear, determination and rapid planning come over as pauses in an extremely close, tense account of the measures taken by Dick and his crew to cut wreckage clear and get the ship under control.
His thoughts are random and rambling, not intense but swift and changeable, often involuntary (as he remembers incidents at home) and often compelling (as he regrets the passing of Duckwich, a strong influence on him).
At one moment of inaction he checks over what he has done and what still remains to be done, in an unspoken conversation when he imagines he is being examined for his second mate's ticket, his present goal in life and the strong motivation of his apprenticeship.
In this dialogue Masefield offers a brief recapitulation to steady his headlong narrative and offers also a facet of the lad's character, linking the ebullience of youth to the enforced maturity of the adventure.
Dick fancies that the Examiner has asked him why he has not thought of rigging a drogue (a thought which has in fact harassed Dick for some time).
His reply is terse and informative:
‘Because our decks are full of wreck and awash.
Because the officers are gone and the Boatswain drunk.
Because it's black as pitch and blowing like blazes, and any man moving on deck will be washed from Hull to Hackney before he can cast a rope from a pin.
If you and your kind had made it obligatory for a ship to carry a drogue, all ready bent, for letting go, I would have let one go.
You haven't, and I haven't got one, and the time's long past for rigging one.
If you believe in a drogue, or sea-anchor, up-hook, scratch-in, and rig one, then ride it out and ride with it and tell me when you sight London Bridge.’…
and he supplies an equally appropriate riposte from the Examiner:
‘I will make note of these expressions, Mr Pomfret, which seem to me to be a part of that insolence which accompanies intolerance to veil incompetence.’
The literal reader might suggest that an articulate and stylistic expression of doubt in this vein is unlikely on a dismasted ship wallowing in stormy seas — might, that is, if Masefield's story telling did not preclude such comment.
By his technique, by the force of words and theme, by the disciplined speed of his narrative, he draws us into a fiction which takes off from a foundation of known fact and recognisable truth.
There is his Author's Note to Victorious Troy to assure us that he has spoken with a boy whose experience had been similar to that of Dick Pomfret and that cases where dismasted sailing ships without officers had  been brought to port by boys were not unknown, but we hardly need this assurance in order to believe that Dick, not unaided but with a responsibility beyond his years, did in fact bring the Hurrying Angel home in the end.
If the word romance suggests improbability more often than not, then Masefield's sea-stories are basically realistic rather than romantic, in tone as well as in material.
During the 1960s these two sea-adventures were republished for young readers in Penguin's Puffin division; there was more confidence then than there seems to be in the eighties that the accessibility of Masefield's story lines and his energetic prose would justify offering to capable readers in the early and mid-teens novels written for adults.
In the same period a man with seventeen years of experience as apprentice and officer in tankers, passenger- and tramp steamers all over the world was at the height of a career as a popular author of tales which bore the legend ‘a story for boys’ on title-pages as well as on dust-jackets.
Richard Armstrong's books divide naturally into two sections.
One group of stories follows a fashionable course in involving lads in the mid-teens (the almost obligatory age for junior adventure heroes for many decades) with criminals of one kind or another.
In The Lost Ship , for instance, a couple of merchant navy apprentices, overboard by accident from a tanker, are picked up by a sinister couple planning to snatch gold from a wreck on a Caribbean island, and in Horseshoe Reef a similar young couple is rescued from shipwreck by a strange, isolated family with criminal intentions.
The sea served Armstrong as a background to adventures with a more mature approach to character and circumstance, in books like Island Odyssey , a tale set in Crete in 1941,The Mutineers , in which a setting resembling Easter Island backs up a narrative strongly resembling Lord of the Flies , and The Albatross , a striking version of Chaucer's Pardoner's Tale which I shall return to.
But his personal experience of sea and ships is more directly reflected in a group of documentary adventure stories written with that special educational purpose that characterises most fiction for the young.
The first of these,Sea Change , was awarded the Carnegie Medal in 1948 and in an interview the author explained the way in which he was using the adventure-story genre:
I wanted as far as possible to forearm the boy at the beginning of adolescence — not ramming a weapon into his hand willy-nilly, but showing him the size and shape of it and where it lies in such a way  that he would take it up without realizing he was doing so and find himself using it when he needed to.
To this end he set out to give a ‘factual picture of life as it comes at a boy in the Merchant Service’, offering details of the kind of people he would meet and ‘some of the problems and emotional conflicts he would have to face…’
The first prerequisite of this plan was, of course, completely authentic details; the second, an ultimate moral message:
I try…to make him aware…of his own power, his value as a human being; to give him confidence in himself, in the richness of life in the real world and his capacity for living it.
The lesson was offered in the particular terms of the four years, from sixteen to twenty-one, which a youth would expect to spend as an apprentice working towards officer status; it was to be interpreted by each of the readers according to his own aim in life.
Sea Change and its successors have something in them of the career novel, a popular genre in the first decades after the Second World War, as well as the more general intention of inspiring youth to purposeful activity and ambitions.
The result of this is very evident in the style and approach of the six books of which Sea Change is the prototype.
When Cam Renton, central character of that book, joins the Langdale as junior apprentice at the age of sixteen he has already served a year of his training and is disillusioned about the whole process.
He explains to his fellow-apprentice Rusty Roberts, a less ambitious lad:
‘I started with a whole lot of ideas and a plan.
I wanted to learn.
I wanted a second mate's ticket; I wanted to get on to the bridge and do things.
And what's happened?
I've spent a year…polishing brass, chipping rust, and slapping paint on bulkheads, and so far as being a deck officer goes, I'm just where I started.’
Cam endures in a hostile frame of mind a voyage carrying cargo to the Caribbean, resenting the work given to him by the mate, indulging in futile practical jokes against him which are coldly ignored and doing his work with sullen reluctance.
Gradually his attitude changes, partly for the almost absurdly simple reason that the weather changes from uncomfortable cold to pleasant warmth and partly because he is too intelligent to be totally unaware that he is learning, whether he wants to or not.
He realises that certain members of the crew, the hated mate Andy among them, have a quality which he begins to define:
He saw, for instance, that they seemed to watch both sky and sea continuously — the shape and colour and movement of the clouds; the run of the sea and how the crests curled.
They seemed to smell the air and if a lone bird hove in sight, they'd pick it up when it was no more than a speck and watch it till it disappeared, and everything about it would be important to them — the direction of its flight, the way it flew, its height above the water, and so on.
Then they were different in their attitude towards the ship.
To them she was more than a mass of steel and wood; she had moods and feelings which they understood and to which they fitted their own.
The lessons continue.
Cam is denied the colour and glamour of Barbados as he is kept at work on a tally of the cargo as it is landed: later, a talk with the captain helps him to see this and other causes for resentment in a different light.
His true capacities are tested, first as he battles with the rest of the crew against a fire in the cargo of coal and then as one of the holding crew on the tanker Arno , found badly holed and abandoned and taken into tow.
When the tow-rope breaks in a storm and the Arno is separated from the Langdale , Cam has to take over the duty of navigating in difficult circumstances, advised by the wounded mate, and he proves equal to the challenge.
The final paragraph of the book confirms its purposive, optimistic tenor:
They arrived in Liverpool after an uneventful railway journey and for the second time in three months Cam walked along the dock wall looking for the Langdale; but now there was confidence in his stride and eagerness in his face.
He had found his lost road and knew nothing would ever turn him from it again.
It is a logical ending to a book whose purpose is directly stated and kept consistently in the forefront of the narrative.
At its simplest the didactic element is shown in the way action is halted from time to time so that the author can explain, in plain, precise detail, a point of navigation, ship's structure or deck organisation.
This is of course something extra to the continuous backing of detail, of weather conditions, locality and so on, which is part of the texture of this kind of story; it is delivered in a more deliberate and even laboured manner.
The open way in which Richard Armstrong introduces passages of this kind is matched by the very explicit tone in which his message is spelled out.
As Cam listens to the captain's wise comments on the youth's complaints:
[he]…began to understand for the first time just how much there was in this business of being a ship's officer.
He saw how every little  niggling thing old Andy had given him to do counted — how one developed his muscle, another his eye, a third his judgement of time and distance; how each hour he spent working with the foremast hands taught him to know and understand them better against the day when such men as they were would look to him for guidance.
And gradually it came clear to him that every job the mate had given him had been carefully chosen to help him on his way to the bridge.
The chances are that in an adult novel — certainly in Masefield's sea-stories — this kind of instant personal illumination would have been avoided: the alternative, an allusive type of dialogue, would have shifted the emphasis from what is really authorial statement to an implied point of character.
One fundamental difference between junior and adult fiction is that many (in certain periods, most) writers for children feel they must tell their readers what they want them to know or to feel.
The artistic, literary value of adventure stories for the young is hampered by this kind of declaration of intent.
In any piece of fiction there must be room for the reader — room for him to jump at a suggestion, to insert himself into a story, to respond to hints and clues: to be told what is offered to him is to encourage him to read passively and so to give him less than he deserves.
Richard Armstrong's documentary adventures, exciting and authentic as they are, have a strain of sententious comment which deadens the flow of narrative and may even set up a certain resistance on the reader's part.
Each of the novels in the group initiated by Sea Change has a particular theme in the service of which the characters are drawn.
The Big Sea is built round the rules and rewards of salvage at sea, illustrated by the fortunes of the S.S. Kariba , fatally damaged on a voyage from the Mississippi to Greenock, a voyage intended to be her last.
The two contrasted apprentices deepen the theme as their attitudes become apparent, Dave as romantic about the superannuated ship as Jonty is cynical.
Character is calculated exactly to support the theme of hierarchy on shipboard in Trial Trip , where a galley boy discovers that he is not entirely free to resume a schoolboy friendship with Tich, now in the second year of his apprenticeship, and in Out of the Shallows , where a sixteen-year-old apprentice with a decided chip on his shoulder suffers from the complications which friendship with a steward brings, particularly as the steward, a thoroughly shifty individual, is merely using him as a way of furthering his own ends.
In these and other books of the same kind the central characters strongly resemble one another and fulfil similar roles in the  action as examples of young people learning by experience — and, for the most part, experience of an unexpected and dangerous kind.
Anything more probing than Richard Armstrong's treatment of his apprentices would have disqualified the books from the definition suggested in a dust-jacket comment on a sea-story three decades older about ‘a wholesome tale with plenty of seawater in it, and a fine run of breezy adventure’.
Yet if Richard Armstrong was writing according to a tried formula, concrete detail and well-conceived plots and the firm line of his character drawing helped him to achieve a special, moderate, even low- keyed reality in his books.
Stories about merchant navy apprentices (or, equally, naval midshipmen) are able to avoid false romanticisation because this is an area where youth under training has in reality to respond to emotional and practical challenge rapidly and thoroughly.
Courageous behaviour and dogged endurance are more believable here than in many other types of adventure-story.
Besides, Richard Armstrong was careful to allow his young heroes the support of older men whose experience could be called upon at need.
So, in Danger Rock , the practical knowledge of small ships and heavy seas belonging to the sailor known as Shelty is available to the apprentice of eighteen, Jim Naylor, who for his part rises to the challenge of danger (when he and his fellow apprentices land on an uninhabited island off the Newfoundland coast after their ship has been holed by ice) because he has been trained with command in mind.
These are stories written well within calculated limits and those limits include a certain simplistic idea of heroism, unaffected either by irony or by a variation of mood, an idea very different from the intensely human variables in the adult novels by Conrad and Masefield which I have already discussed.
This is very obviously the approach of someone writing exclusively and specifically for the young.
The final paragraphs of The Lame Duck , a vigorous tale of a convoy attacked by submarines in the North Atlantic during the Second World War (a story partly based on the true fortunes of the San Demetrio ), may serve to illustrate this point:
Only then, with their perilous passage ended, did her crew agree to transfer themselves to the destroyer.
And there these twelve men and two boys, who, with nothing much but bare hands, the sailor man's gift for improvisation, and their indomitable guts, had fought sea and fire for their ship and won, were cared for and each of them given his heart's desire.
Gib Sparling had his ham and eggs, and Scruffy the pleasure of watching somebody else peel spuds; Dutch  his pea soup thick enough to skate on, and Tex his coffee and bed with clean white sheets; and so on through the list.
But Bull Barlow wanted nothing.
He watched them eat and, listening to their carefree laughter, was content.
He had kept faith with the Old Man and brought them home.
It was not until a decade or so later, when the Junior adventure story was beginning to examine the nature of heroism more searchingly, that Richard Armstrong ranged beyond the frontiers of his documentary adventures into a world of greater hazards, a more exacting world for the writer to describe.
Free from the constraints of didacticism, allowing his particular example to make a point without feeling he had to underline it, he showed in The Albatross four sharply realised apprentices learning too late the lessons of experience which greed and folly had brought to them.
In introducing his characters he follows his usual method of direct statement in thumbnail sketches of red-haired Judd, the slow-witted giant Brett, ruthless, brilliant Wick and the plodding conformer Stringy.
Initially these are single-point characters, each designed to make a particular contribution to the course of the story, but during the narrative the lads, all around seventeen or eighteen, act with a degree of independence which lends a new depth to the book.
For they have the capacity to change — for example, Judd's enthusiasm for their treasure-hunting plan turns to disillusion as he watches greed enhance Brett's obstinacy and rouse passive Stringy to obstructive malice.
These are far less formal, contrived changes than those in the documentary novels.
A simple plot gives room for a rapid but intense picture of disintegration.
The Yaruba is sent from Texas to San Fernando with a supply of drinking water for the port, devastated by earthquake.
While the slow process of discharging cargo goes on the four apprentices, firm friends in spite of temperamental differences, are fired by legends of hidden treasure to explore the hills behind the town in their free time.
With a reasonable amount of intelligent deduction and a good deal of luck they find the loot of churches on the Spanish Main hidden by the priest-turned-pirate Domingo Mugnoz.
Casting scorn on Stringy's suggestion that they ask the mate's advice on what to do with their almost embarrassingly rich discovery, the other three youths make feverish plans.
They steal a schooner and embark on a voyage through the Caribbean and along the Central American coast, terrified of retribution but indulging in the comfort of increasingly fantastic plans for a luxurious future.
The distasteful physical proximity on a small craft, the slow effect of fear and the inevitable hostility born of greed breaks a unity of purpose precarious from the  outset.
Quarrels, arguments, in Brett even the beginning of mania, lead to inevitable tragedy.
The story ends as it began, with a boy of seventeen rescued from an inflatable life-raft in a confused, incoherent state.
Through Judd, sole survivor of the enterprise, the treasure gone and his companions dead, the sorry tale is pieced together.
The use of flashback alone, teasing the reader's attention with its enigmatic promise of a strange tale, suggests how far removed this book is in technique and emotional depth from the simple formula of Richard Armstrong's documentary adventures.
The tightness and speed of the narrative, too, has its effect on the direct, concrete prose style which, too often in the earlier books, had become prosy and had lost shape in informative interpolations.
Told retrospectively as though from Judd's disjointed, unhappy remembering, the book achieves a sad, distant, emotional intensity which gives it a special unity of tone.
Above all, the reader is led into the inevitable decline from triumph to despair not by authorial direction but obliquely through Judd's halting attempt to understand what has happened.
The combination of suggestion and statement is especially striking when the youth recalls the way the four had divided the treasure, on Brett's insistence:
Judd saw his own hand, held hovering uncertainly over the heap of treasure, quiver as Stringy's had done and wondered if that meant he looked as mad as the rest of them did; and he wanted to say they could have it, that he was opting out and they could divide his share among the three of them and stuff it.
‘It wasn't being noble or any of that sort of saliva,’ he said afterwards.
‘I was just dead scared without knowing why…’
We are never told exactly why.
As much because of what is left unsaid as because of what is directly described,The Albatross is one of those exceptions which suggest that the junior adventure story has always suffered under unnecessary limitations: the names that stand out in the genre are those who in various ways have ignored or overridden these limitations.
Two limitations in particular have driven young readers for many decades to prefer adult adventure stories to those written specifically for them or at least to find more satisfaction in junior tales with adult heroes.
They can then be spared the basic unreality of young people triumphing in circumstances too much for their capacities as well as the inevitable thinness of emotional experience which is bound to restrict the scope of an author wanting  to draw characters in the round rather than stereotypes.
The sea-story, as I have suggested, demands less falsifying of youth's capacities since, in both navy and merchant navy ships, boys in their middle and even early teens have been called upon to act beyond their years often and as a matter of course, from the period, so fruitful for novelists, of the Napoleonic Wars to the present day as Richard Armstrong described it.
From this point of view at least the actions of the young do not need to be romanticised.
As for reality in character-drawing, the ancestor of the English sea-story, Marryat, had his own way of dealing with the difficulty.
His novels, whether for young or adult readers, are centred on boys in the process of growing to manhood: he does not probe in depth into the feelings of his young heroes, but he does develop them in relation to events in which they may play convincingly passive or active roles in the fortunes of war.
This method is especially valuable in adding depth to the story of the Beverley children unfolded gradually and thoroughly in The Children of the New Forest .
It is obscured to some extent by the heavily didactic purpose of Masterman Ready and this may partly account for the fact that young readers have always claimed the adult novel,Mr Midshipman Easy , as their own, even though it must always have made considerable demands on their reading skills and their understanding.
This is not to claim that Marryat ever intended his sea-stories to be read primarily as studies in character.
His approach to personality, by way of descriptive set-pieces, robust dialogue and direct explanation, may seem to be less subtle and complex than the post-Freudian attitude of C. S. Forester and Patrick O'Brian.
Yet for psychological insight and acute comment it is not easy to match the way Marryat, in Percival Keene , states and develops the situation of an illegitimate boy steadily and tenaciously working out how to persuade his noble father, under whom he serves as midshipman and later as lieutenant, to acknowledge him openly and alter his reserved, cold but unmistakably responsible behaviour towards his son.
The emotional warmth of this novel never exceeds the space allotted to it in a strongly active story but it does benefit by one physical fact of great importance to any sea-story — the constriction in terms of space on a ship, intensified in time of war, the effect of protocol and strict discipline and a lack of privacy on normal human feelings.
The social and cultural conditions under which Marryat and his successors have written, even up to the present, have led them to explore individual personality mainly  in terms of officers and warrant officers rather than members of the lower deck.
Dana claimed that he expanded his diary into the narrative Two Years Before the Mast (the significant subtitle is ‘An authentic narrative of a sailor's Life at Sea’) in order to represent the seaman's view ignored in other sea-stories, but as a young undergraduate, sent to sea for his health, he presented a life of hardship and monotony from an educated point of view and seems in any case to have been more concerned with exact recording of weather, cargoes and seaman's techniques than with personal behaviour and attitudes.
In the matter of social balance one could say that most sea-stories, from the time of Marryat onwards, romanticised fact at least by omission.
Those who demand strict realism in fiction of this kind might take the same extreme view as Patrick O'Brian's sardonic Dr Maturin who, in discussing the Spithead Mutiny with his more conventional friend Captain Aubrey, pronounces himself in favour of the rebellion:
‘You take men from their homes or their chosen occupations, you confine them in insalubrious conditions upon a wholly inadequate diet, you subject them to the tyranny of bosun's mates, you expose them to unimagined perils; what is more, you defraud them of their meagre food, pay and allowances — everything but this sacred rum of yours.
Had I been at Spithead, I should certainly have joined the mutineers.
Indeed, I am astounded at their moderation
,
Maturin counters the captain's protestation that happy ships did exist by asserting that harmony on a ship depends ‘upon the whim, the digestion and the virtue of one or two men, and that is iniquitous’.
Authority —‘that egg of misery and oppression’ as the doctor has it — is the norm in the long line of historical adventures drawing for material on the extensively recorded history of the navy in the Napoleonic Wars; but the outstanding writers in the genre look round widely from this stance.
It is not necessarily romantic — that is, restrictive, unreal, exaggerated — to draw on the upper deck for the individual characters whose attitudes and decisions are to be the driving force of a story.
If Marryat made this choice, it was because he wrote from within the experience of many years serving in the navy from 1806, not continuously but when employment was available: more than one of his novels was written in the cabin of a ship under his command.
In a prefatory note to his first novel he told his readers, ‘Except the hero and heroine, and those points of the work which supply the slight plot of it, as a novel the work itself is materially true, especially in the narrative of sea-adventure, most of which did (to the best of our recollection) occur to the author.’
Many of his lower-deck characters were comic figures — Chucks the boatswain in Peter Simple , for example, whose passionate desire to be a gentleman is satisfied when in return for his help with the newly constituted Danish Navy he is awarded the title of Count Schucksen, or Muddle the carpenter in the same book, who believes the world works in a repeating cycle of 27,672 years.
But the roles assigned to the various characters, and the preponderance of officers over seamen, was a matter of literary choice and not of social prejudice.
Marryat's common-sense attitude to life was certainly not insensitive.
When the seaman Peters, a thief and later a mutineer, protests against the commuting of the death sentence to the disgrace of being flogged round the fleet, Marryat as author finds it a matter for critical comment that the members of the court-martial are clearly surprised that a mere seaman should act from a sense of honour:
…they meant well — they felt kindly towards him, and acknowledged his provocations; but they fell into the too common error of supposing that the finer feelings, which induce a man to prefer death to dishonour, are only to be recognised among the higher classes; and that, because circumstances may have placed a man before the mast, he will undergo punishment, however severe, however degrading…in preference to death.
This is only one of many instances of the breadth of Marryat's view, the sturdy wholeness of his reconstructions of life on men of-war and escort vessels at a crucial period of British naval history.
Although each of his books has a compact plot and a central, young hero, he was always ready to shift the point of vision from this hero.
We cannot as readers see this as a fault, since it made for such richness of scene and mood, though Marryat seems to have felt it so.
Reflecting on the author's problems, he confessed that ‘On turning over the different chapters’ of The king's Own , he felt that the designated hero, Willy Seymour, was not sufficiently ‘the hero of my tale’:
As soon as he is shipped on board of a man-of-war he becomes as insignificant as a midshipman must unavoidably be from his humble situation.
I see the error — yet I cannot correct it without overthrowing all ‘rules and regulations’, which I cannot persuade myself to do, even in a work of fiction.
Trammelled as I am by ‘the service’, I can only plead guilty to what it is impossible to amend without commencing de novo — for everything and everybody must find their level on board of a king's ship.
Yet it is in the management of his various heroes that Marryat's reliable treatment of fact is most apparent.
These young men — sanguine, bold, resourceful and opportunist as they are — do seem to be cut from the same cloth.
Yet as individuals they are believable, not only for themselves but by virtue of their involvement with other people and the opinions of their behaviour that come to us from their shipmates and their superiors.
This does not mean to say that Marryat was writing documentary fiction.
If his novels are in any way romantic, it is because of the melodramatic plots, whether (as in Poor Jack or Jacob Faithful ) they have a rags-to-riches theme or whether they turn on the discovery that the humble hero (like Percival Keene or Willy Seymour) is really of noble birth.
The sequence of accidents through which the hero has to steer his suffering way to achieve fame and fortune (even to the extent, in Peter Simple , of years incarcerated in Bedlam by a wicked uncle) must be viewed in the context of society nearly two centuries ago; even so, these are organised, contrived and deliberately sensational plots which serve to contain the sprawling, spanking reality of Marryat's detail.
Michael Sadleir suggested that it was partly from professional jealousy of his enormous popularity that Marryat's contemporaries ‘treated him with patronising tolerance as a jolly tarpaulin who told a rattling good story’.
Certainly Marryat encouraged comments of this kind by the breezy attitude to his work with which he saw fit to hide a sincere purpose.
He told his readers:
…if I calculated stages before I ordered my horses, I should abandon the attempt, and remain quietly at home.
Mine is not a journey of that methodical description; on the contrary it is a ramble hand-in-hand with Fancy, with a light heart and lighter baggage; for my whole wallet, when I set off, contains but one single idea — but ideas are hermaphrodite, and these creatures of the brain are most prolific.
To speak more intelligibly, I never have made any arrangement of plot when I commenced a work of fiction, and often finish a chapter without having the slightest idea of what materials the ensuing one is to be constructed.
At times I feel so tired that I throw down the pen in despair; but it is soon taken up again, and, like a pygmy Antaeus, it seems to have imbibed fresh vigour from its prostration.
He summed up the disseminated structure of his novels (often in his case a necessary result of serial publication, but also probably a matter of personal preference), in the same work, when he compared the chapters of a novel to a convoy of vessels and himself, the inventor, as a man-of-war turning attention now  to one ship, now to another, in order to bring them all safely to port.
The deeper purpose of his novels was no more than one must expect from any responsible man who draws on his experience and knowledge of the world for readers who will rightly expect both the general and the particular in the fiction.
Marryat was no ‘Jolly tarpaulin’ but he chose to please his readers in the way that best suited his circumstances.
He believed that the true art of novel writing was to draw characters who became ‘beacons’ pointing to moral truths as well as vehicles of ‘amusement’, and that:
…crime and folly and error can be as severely lashed, as virtue and morality can be upheld, by a series of amusing causes and effects, that entice the reader to take a medicine, which, although rendered agreeable to the palate, still produces the same internal benefit as if it had been presented to him in its crude state, in which it would either be refused or nauseated.
The broad-minded opinions and solid common sense of this robust story-teller are expressed sometimes in dialogue in which officers (and, interestingly, sometimes officers and men) exchange views on slave-trading, naval punishments, privateering, or discuss the attributes of a good or a bad captain.
Occasionally the author, with the privilege of his time, directs a disquisition straight to the reader, but such interpolations, and even the wild doodling with which, now and then, he seemed to be whipping up his flagging invention in order to fill a prescribed number of pages, contribute to a unique, first-hand view of the navy in Nelson's day, delivered through narratives whose combination of tight, lateral movement and meandering subincidents has never been surpassed.
Virginia Woolf defined it inimitably when she wrote that ‘for pages at a time he writes that terse springy prose which is the natural speech of a school of writers trained to the business of moving a large company briskly from one incident to another over the solid earth’.
The satisfied reader, rejoicing in Marryat's broad humour, his acceptance of and delight in the vagaries of mankind, his shrewdness and his talent for controlling the varied pace of his stories, may well decide that his greatest virtue could be the sheer confidence of the man, his assurance that the hierarchies and authority in which he has been trained and which form the basis of his novels are essential to the well-being of his country and its navy.
Far less obvious and less easy to rebut than the imperialism of Henty and Ballantyne, Marryat's good-humoured, unselfconscious, professional patriotism is the ultimate strength of his  work.
Today we may find his attitude most approachable when it is oblique, as it is in Mr Midshipman Easy , when the sense and reason behind naval rules and regulations are stated through the absurd mistakes, misconceptions and malfeasances of a youth who has been brought up to believe in the ideal of total equality.
Writing of what he knew at first-hand, Marryat could be allusive in a way which later writers could not emulate.
Virginia Woolf stressed the difference between contemporary and historical detail when she wrote:
…no living writer, try though he may, can bring the past back again, because no living writer can bring back the ordinary day.
He sees it through a glass, sentimentally, romantically; it is either too pretty or too brutal; it lacks ordinariness.
But the world of 1806 was to Captain Marryat what the world of 1935 is to us, at this moment, a middling sort of place, where there is nothing out of the way in a sailor with a pigtail or in a bumboat woman volleying hoarse English.
Therefore the world of 1906 is real to us and ordinary, yet sharp-edged and peculiar.
One writer of our time might have induced Mrs Woolf to modify her words.
Patrick O'Brian, surely the most closely related of Marryat's successors, understands very well that rare concomitant of the adventure story, the effective partnership of mind and body in action, and displays this in a continuing group of adult novels which give a notable unlaboured picture of the Nelson era.
It is true that the carefully authentic material has to be explained more fully than it had to be for readers of Marryat's day, who could be supposed to possess a modicum of previous knowledge of naval affairs.
This may be shown by comparing two passages concerning one particular concept of honour held by the navy in the period concerned.
Marryat's Percival Keene, writing a report to the Admiralty of an action in which he has acquitted himself well, sees his success realistically, while he is happy to acquire the reputation of a hero:
Although the despatch was written modestly, still the circumstances in themselves — my having recaptured an Indiaman, and earned, by boarding, a vessel of equal force to my own, and superior in men — had a very good appearance, and I certainly obtained greater credit than I really deserved.
It was not at all necessary to say that I hoisted French colours, and therefore took the schooner unawares, or that at the time most of her men were on board of the Indiaman; the great art in this world is, to know where to leave off, and in nothing more than when people take the pen in their hands.
Marryat's readers would bring at least some associations and some understanding to this piece of special pleading.
Patrick O'Brian's sardonic Dr Maturin, in conversation with a philosopher deeply interested in the ways of naval life, and perplexed by certain tactics in an engagement just ended, is more obviously explaining , and to O'Brian's readers as well as to Professor Graham, when he enlarges on the customs of war:
‘To the nautical mind some false signals are falser than other false signals.
At sea there are clearly-understood degrees of iniquity.
An otherwise perfectly honourable sea-officer may state by symbol that he is a Frenchman, but he must not state that his ship has struck upon a rock, nor must he lower his colours and then start to fight again, upon pain of universal reprehension.
He would have the hiss of the world against him — of the maritime world.’
This example of peculiarly nautical logic, coloured by Stephen Maturin's ironic view of men and affairs, cannot escape the air of an exposition.
All the same, Patrick O'Brian's skill in stitching what is, to him, historical fact into a unified fabric helps us to forget the often tiresome contrivances of historical fiction.
In the ten books so far published about the fortunes of Jack Aubrey there is a remarkable absence of hindsight.
One particular test at hand for critics is the way Nelson is approached: references to him in the conversation of Aubrey and his fellow officers are natural and appropriate to men who were pursuing the same career at the same date.
The minutiae of naval, political and social life are introduced with the utmost literary tact so that the reader can enjoy the piquancy of surprise and can sense the author's secret enjoyment of allusions which give the books their total authenticity.
The eccentricities of Dr Maturin are endured with fortitude by his landlady; her opinions are indicated, in a direct account of his situation at a particular period in his life, with perfect naturalness:
Some of his little ways had indeed been quite surprising in the past, seeing that they ranged from the quartering of badgers, rescued from a baiting, in her coal-shed to the introduction of separate limbs and even of whole orphans for dissection when they were in good supply towards the end of winter; but she had grown used to them little by little.
Patrick O'Brian surmounts a more difficult problem in a scene where Aubrey and Maturin exercise their passion for music in the captain's cabin.
Jack describes how ‘London Bach’ had written pieces for his uncle and how he had searched the papers of the  copyist for the originals.
The ensuing exchange between the two close friends is a fair example of the way a fiction-writer can combine, in the neatest and most intriguing manner, supportive material with the implied interplay of personality.
Stephen Maturin, in the dry tone with which he recognises unobtrusively the exuberance and naïveté of Lucky Jack Aubrey, receives the news that ‘Bach had a father’ with:
‘Heavens, Jack, what things you tell me.
Yet upon recollection I seem to have known other men in much the same case.’
‘And this father, this old Bach, you understand me, had written piles and piles of musical scores in the pantry.’
‘A whimsical place to compose in, perhaps; but then birds sing in trees, do they not?
Why not antediluvian Germans in a pantry?’
‘I mean the piles were kept in the pantry.
Mice and black-beetles and cook-maids had played Old Harry with some cantatas and a vast great passion according to St Mark, in High Dutch; but lower down all was well, and I brought away several pieces, 'cello for you, fiddle for me, and some for both together.
It is strange stuff, fugues and suites of the last age, crabbed and knotted sometimes and not at all in the modern taste, but I do assure you, Stephen, there is meat in it.’
Later, Stephen being absent, Jack looks to music to calm certain professional anxieties but in exploring the great Chaconne of the Partita in C he is almost unnerved by the force of the work compared with the Scarlatti and Hummel pieces with which he and Stephen had so often relaxed.
The author seizes on the chance, as he often does, to suggest a sensibility in his hero, the impetuous, extrovert Aubrey, but such moments are never allowed to become sentimental, any more than the frequent musical excursions of captain and doctor are offered as in any way exceptional.
Poetry and music, well attested as pastimes of both upper and lower deck in the period concerned, come to us in rehearsals for a noisy and enthusiastic Messiah in which hierarchies are temporarily forgotten, in the verse-contests of two junior officers partial to odes, in the stamp of hornpipes and the therapy of farces and dramatic interludes and, pertinently, in the comments of the inartistic, like the complaint of Aubrey's cantankerous servant Killick, exasperated by the noise of a first attempt at ‘Old Bach's D Minor double sonata’:
‘There they go again, tweedly-deedly, tweedly-deedly, belly-aching the whole bleeding night, and the toasted cheese seizing on to their plates like goddam glue, which I dursen't go in to fetch them; and never an honest tune from beginning to end.’
Patrick O'Brian's long sequence of sea-adventures gives the lie to the dogma that the genre does not allow for any real development of character.
He has the advantage of having devised a series of self-contained but effectively linked novels, full of properly casual back-references, in which he can show his hero changing with circumstances from the exuberance of a young lieutenant, to whom personal courage, seamanlike skills and informed opportunism have brought reputation and wealth, to a middle-aged man still exuberant but oppressed with financial cares and by the continual malice of personal enemies.
Aubrey's personality and in particular his approach to command are accounted for reasonably and naturally.
With the robust acceptance of hardship and violence proper to his time, he is opposed to flogging and has an open demeanour towards his crew which makes him popular but still respected.
There is nothing at all romantic about this sympathy for the underdog: as a midshipman, we are told, Aubrey had been disrated for an unsavoury escapade and had served a long period on the lower deck, an experience which he never forgot.
Throughout the sequence of novels there is an element of inconsistency, of the unexpected and unpredictable, in Jack Aubrey, fostered in action and also in the vaned comments of his shipmates and crew.
Most of all the unusual complexity of this particular hero is made possible by his friendship with Stephen Maturin, which begins when the doctor joins the Sophie , Jack's first command, as ship's surgeon.
The special isolation of a naval captain means that an author looking for a confidant for his hero as an essential device of character-drawing is debarred from using a member of the ship's company.
The surgeon, a special case in terms of employment and status, is useful as an exception.
Besides, his professional duties allow the author greater variety of incident, and Maturin brings two extra dimensions to the stones, for he is a keen experimental naturalist and, at the same time, a secret agent for the British government.
His given personality — passionate for freedom, eccentric in person and behaviour, sardonic and observant — is a foil for the traits in Jack which bring misfortune as well as success to his career.
In a sense Patrick O'Brian may be said to offer two heroes, each capable both of influencing events and being affected by them.
Their public and private lives (and, with Maturin, the secret manoeuvres of espionage) are related to historical event skilfully and with perfect propriety.
History can vouch for the kind of rapid change of fortune and geography which beset Aubrey and Maturin, nor are their actions ever allowed to be  improbable.
In an Author's Note to the first book,Master and Commander , Patrick O'Brian assures us that ‘…very often the improbable reality outruns fiction’ and offers enough information about his sources (in log-books, diaries and other contemporary records) to confirm the authenticity of the events through which he displays his characters.
The long blockade of the French fleet, the shifting alliances in the Mediterranean and the Middle East, the war with America, the Baltic and East India convoys, the movements of power in the Caribbean, the capture of Mauritius from the French — in these and other historical situations Jack Aubrey and his surgeon are variously involved, always as unmistakable individuals, never in any way distorting the known course of history.
Neither character could exist for the reader without the novelistic skill, the use of every fictional device to support them: nor would either live for the reader without their close relation to the fate of nations, the constant background of these magnificent tales.
One of the concomitants of O'Brian's writing, the blessed undercurrent of humour, by no means common in sea-stones, takes many forms.
The relish in broadly comic scenes confirms his descent from Marryat, so evident in the tone and flavour of his books in general.
To the interplay of character in its amusing aspects O'Brian adds a sense of the ridiculous which often relaxes tension and sharpens the reader's response to intricate action.
In H.M.S. Surprise the difficulties the doctor endures in controlling one of his live specimens, an over-affectionate sloth addicted to alcohol, inspire laughter and add one more point of variety to a narrative of natural and man-made challenge.
In The Ionian Mission , a hilarious account of the crew exercising a rhinoceros on deck has a serious point behind its absurdity: the animal is a diplomatic gift from the British government to one of the most tricky and desirable potential allies in the Eastern Mediterranean.
Jack's inexorable, slow jokes (one about weevils crops up several times) and Stephen's reaction to them help to build up personalities which exist both independently and in relation to one another.
The resemblance to Marryat in O'Brian's novels is unarguable in general terms and may even be more than a broad likeness.
It may be no accident that Jack Aubrey shares with Marryat himself a reputation for saving an unusual number of ‘men overboard’.
It is possible that the character and appearance of Stephen Maturin owe something to the friendship between Captain M. in Marryat's The King's Own and the surgeon MacAllen, a dedicated amateur naturalist who used the ships on which he served as convenient repositories for live and dead specimens from their ports of call.
It could be, too, that the unusually complex character of Captain Hawkins, an illegitimate son of Peter Simple's uncle, a man moved by obsessive jealousy, eroded by concealed cowardice and capable of the most intricate plotting against the young hero, has something to do with one of O'Brian's most impressive studies of character, the officer Lord Clonfert who, in The Mauritius Command , more than once frustrates Aubrey's plans and perplexes to the point of real suffering the open-minded captain with his extraordinary psychosomatic state.
Both Marryat and O'Brian made the most of the peculiar circumstances of life in Nelson's navy, the enforced closeness of hostile personalities and the system of rewards and punishments which left much scope for personal vindictiveness.
Maturin's secret missions and Aubrey's orders involved them in dangers very often due to the malice or ambition of individuals rather than to the fortunes of war.
Both Marryat and O'Brian chose to write historical adventure rather than a more sober kind of historical fiction because of an abiding interest in human nature.
In this, as in their treatment of fact, they are essentially realistic rather than romantic writers.
Novels in any genre reflect the temper of their times and, in practical terms, are affected by changes in popular taste.
The ‘Jack Aubrey’ sequence — broad and bold in humour, sophisticated in narrative techniques, sardonic in tone, politically alert — is designed for adult readers with somewhat different expectations from those who, during the thirty years between 1937 and 1967 and afterwards, followed the fortunes of C. S. Forester's Horatio Hornblower in a series of novels describing in an  inconsecutive but neatly planned order his career in the navy of the Napoleonic period from midshipman to admiral.
Forester's fiction is as meticulous in detail and as active in plots as that of O'Brian, yet the Hornblower novels are basically romantic adventures, built on sentiment as much as on action and answering more directly than the Aubrey tales to the simplest conventions of the adventure story.
Forester's huge and enthusiastic public received Hornblower as a ‘real’ person.
This is well enough attested by the existence of a Hornblower Club in which aspects of his life could be canvassed seriously and by C. Northcote Parkinson's ‘biography’,The Life and Times of Horatio Hornblower , with its elaborate statement of provenance (the lifting of a hundred-year-old embargo on three boxes of family papers).
Far more than a ‘companion’ to the Hornblower novels, clarifying and extending the historical background and arranging the events of the hero's life in chronological  order instead of in the irregular order imposed on readers by the dates of publication of the books, Parkinson's book is related in intention, though not in style and tone, to the amiable pamphlets published from time to time summarising the relationships and activities of the fictional inhabitants of Coronation Street.
Forester allowed himself a novelist's licence in The Hornblower Companion , where admirably executed maps with concise accompanying comment helped to establish the factual background of his stones.
The useful information in this book is shot through with the engaging assertion that the books are biographical and that when he journeyed to some of the scenes of Hornblower's exploits the author was truly following in the steps of his hero.
In a note on naval patrols off Cape St Vincent, referring to Hornblower and the Hotspur he wrote:
Unfortunately the conscientious student who reads the official reports will find no mention either of the Hotspur or of the Félicité and may naturally experience doubts as to whether there ever was a Captain Hornblower, but if he once accepts Hornblower's existence he may at least agree that Hornblower's action in this case displayed remarkable self-denial as well as the clarity of vision worthy of a hero of fiction.
This is the special pleading of an author thoroughly at home with his subject and satisfied with — indeed, enjoying to the full — his approach to it.
Where in his character-drawing O'Brian touches the reader's imagination by the unexpected, Forester satisfied his readers by helping them to a complete acquaintance with his officers and men.
Familiarity can only be achieved by simple, direct and unchanging characterisation and this Forester provided.
In uncomplicated prose he steered his readers through the episodes of his hero's life, repeating at intervals Hornblower's mannerisms (his repressive ‘Ha-hm’, his almost unseemly giggle in moments of crisis), his physical attributes (a homely appearance, an unfortunate tendency to seasickness) and the deeper, clinching duality of his nature.
It is with this basic contradiction that Forester avoided sentimentality.
Hornblower is not a romantic hero but a hero in spite of himself.
He is capable of cold-blooded or berserk courage in desperate moments yet is constantly afraid of being cowardly.
Quick and bold to seize the occasion for a night attack, an escape or a ruse, he suffers before and after any such action from painful self-doubt and exhausting self-analysis.
When Forester first introduced him as captain of the frigate Lydia , in The Happy Return , he announced in plain terms the contradiction in his nature:
He had performed a most notable feat of navigation, of which anyone might be justifiably proud, in bringing the ship straight here after eleven weeks without sighting land.
But he felt no elation about it.
It was Hornblower's nature to find no pleasure in achieving things he could do; his ambition was always yearning after the impossible, to appear a strong silent capable man, unmoved by emotion.
The paradox recurs throughout the sequence of novels.
Hornblower is no more comfortable with himself as an admiral, commodore of a Baltic convoy, than he was as a junior captain.
In the full flush of eager planning, in the excitement of disciplining intuition by stern reasoning, he is warned by the response of his subordinate to his behaviour:
There was eagerness and excitement in his voice at once, echoing the emotion which must have been obvious in Hornblower's tone — Hornblower took notice of it, and as he buckled his waistband he reaffirmed his resolution to be more careful how he spoke, for he must regain his reputation as a silent hero.
Moved by the decorations of the chapel at Westminster and the array of victorious, distinguished officers allied with him in the Order of the Bath, Lord Hornblower is true to his distrustful self.
He ‘felt a surge of patriotic emotion within him’ but almost at once he ‘incontinently began to analyse his wave of emotion and to wonder how much of it was due to the romantic beauty of his surroundings’.
Growing older, learning to conquer his diffidence as he wins fame and fortune, still Hornblower does not change.
It is in the nature of Forester's aim that he does not.
Nor is there any real evolution, only the inevitable modifications of time, in his personal feelings, the loyal determined affection for his drab wife Mana, his jealous longing for Lady Barbara Wellesley and his brief encounter with Mane de Graçay during his escape from France.
Here are none of the divagations and contradictions with which Patrick O'Brian follows the course of Aubrey's life with Sophia or Maturin's long, difficult passion for Diana Villiers.
The course of Hornblower's love for the forthright (and fictional) sister of the noble Wellesleys, developed through his uneasy, self-tormenting thoughts, plays the central part in the novels demanded by their romantic tone and structure; in the way the two proud individuals adjust to an intimacy which disturbs their essential need for privacy of character, in Hornblower's emotional vacillations when in perilous circumstances he meets Mane de Graçay again, his behaviour and musings are consistent with his given character.
This is not to use the term ‘romantic’ in the pejorative sense  in which it must be used when speaking of the film made of The Happy Return , in which Lady Barbara, envisaged as a coy, magazine-cover blonde (and without the hereditary Wellesley nose) fluttered her eyelashes at Gregory Peck as an equally improbable Hornblower.
Yet Hornblower's agonisings over thoughts of Barbara in the arms of her husband do verge on the sentimental and the hackneyed as Hornblower suffers ‘a white hot wave of passion as he thought of her, slim and lovely, understanding and sweet’.
The progress of the affair, its curtailment and ultimately happy ending, is described in terms significantly different from the matter-of-fact reference to it in Parkinson's ‘biography’:
Had he and his guest been lovers on board the Lydia ?
So far as one can tell from the scanty evidence available they had been something short of that.
Hornblower could not afford a scandal nor could he dare to offend the Wellesleys, who were rapidly gaining importance.
It would appear from the sequel that Lady Barbara would have been more reckless and that it was Hornblower's caution which prevented the friendship from becoming a romance.
Love and honour, the pivotal themes of the Hornblower books, and essential to their success, are held in a balance which at times seems to hamper the essential directness of Forester's narrative technique.
The escape from France described in Flying Colours offers him the chance of the kind of swift, concrete description in which he excels but too often the pace slackens overmuch as Hornblower's emotions are analysed with an almost sentimental thoroughness.
It is, to be sure, the element of sensibility which has attracted many of Hornblower's readers but many more will remember with greater satisfaction the account of Hornblower's stand against four French ships-of-war, in A Ship of the Line , in which professional skill, emotional introspection and moment-to-moment physical behaviour are unerringly matched.
At moments like this Forester writes within the conventions of the genre and uses them superbly.
In such rapid alternations of mood he rescues his hero from the risk of monotony in the way he has chosen to reveal his feelings.
We can only know these feelings from Hornblower's own unspoken soliloquies.
There is none of the variety which O'Brian provides through the intimate or casual conversations of Aubrey and Maturin: although circumstances allow Hornblower a little more than a restricted relationship with his loyal and devoted lieutenant Bush, it is never a Personal friendship.
Nor has Forester the weapon of humour at his disposal, except in occasional moments when he allows his hero to appear in an  almost ludicrous light.
We may remember with pleasure the picture of the skinny midshipman stuffing his stockings with oakum to give the impression of a properly gentlemanly leg.
We may remember the unusual play on Hornblower's self-distrustful temperament in Hornblower and the Atropos , when as the official organiser of Nelson's funeral procession down the Thames he is beset by disaster.
The barge carrying the body springs a leak, his ceremonial uniform is soaked as he frantically bales, he worries about the expensive watch which he has inadvertently left on the coffin, the ceremony leaves him with a bad cold which he tries, not altogether successfully, to hide when he is presented to the King.
The poised, lively writing in this incident adds a different dimension, unfortunately a rare one, to novels which for all their scholarship and vigour seem for the taste of the eighties a little sedate, a little soft — in short, a little too romantic.
It was in fact somewhat of a surprise to see cadet editions of a few of the Hornblower novels published for readers in the early and mid-teens, since neither Forester's open, smooth narrative style nor his approach to sex and violence could be considered exacting or improper where young readers were concerned.
In the apt selection of active incidents, the clear response of a hero to the challenge of danger and the support of interesting detail, Forester's books followed the conventions of adventure-story which had governed ‘boys' stories’ for two centuries and the undercurrent of irony in the presentation of Hornblower as reluctant hero was hardly insistent enough to perplex immature readers.
Moreover, Forester (like most of his contemporaries and successors in the sphere of the naval sea-novel) offered enough young characters to reassure boys and girls engaging with adult fiction, since he rearranged historical fact to the extent that his midshipmen were invariably between fourteen and eighteen: those older, even middle-aged men, soured by repeated failure to pass as lieutenants, were not suitable for his purpose.
The junior adventure story has always had to reconcile two contrasting points.
Action, and dangerous action, must be successfully encountered by heroes too young and inexperienced for such success to be guaranteed or even probable.
The artificiality of so many boys' adventures is the result of miscalculation in this aspect of story-telling.
Naval midshipmen, like their counterparts in the merchant service, may be authentically involved in vigorous, violent action in fiction, as they were in fact, at least until the recent past.
When the author of The Three Midshipmen reflected that his three heroes, supposed to be his former schoolfellows at  ‘dear old Eagle House’, had in a few years ‘crossed swords with real red-capped or turbaned Mohammedans, fought with true Greek romantic pirates, hunted down slavers, and explored African rivers with voracious sharks watching their mouths, hungry crocodiles basking in their slimy shallows, and veritable negroes inhabiting their banks’, this  rhodomontade , appealing to the eager youth of the mid-Victorian period, was entirely justified.
ret there were differences between the attitude of W. H. G. Kingston to his heroes and Marryat's to Peter Simple or Jack Easy in adult novels, differences reflecting the special constraints on fiction written specifically for young readers.
There can be no doubt that the prolific Kingston gave boys what they wanted.
In a list of favourite boys' books compiled by Edward Salmon in 1888, Kingston came second to Dickens, and Salmon observed, ‘Mr Kingston is Captain Marryat transformed from a novelist into a juvenile romanticist’.
As a juvenile romanticist Kingston, like his contemporary Ballantyne, used the device of the intrusive author accepted in his time and, besides, the didacticism expected in books for the young, didacticism made easier by the continuity and the extent of time afforded by serial publication in the boys' magazines of the period.
As editor of The Colonial Magazine, Kingston's Magazine and The Union Jack (the last-named started in 1880, the year of his death, and taken over by Henty), Kingston could claim all the space he needed to express his views on the importance of colonisation and use the experience he gained from working for the Colonial Land and Emigration Board.
His address to the prospective readers of the first issue of Kingston's Magazine in 1859 is significant:
My great aim is to give you a periodical which you will not throw aside as soon as read, but which you will value and look over years hence as an old familiar friend, when you may be battling with the realities of life under the suns of India, in the backwoods of Canada or the United States, or the grassy downs of Australia, over the wide Ocean among the isles of the Pacific, or on the distant shores of Columbia.
The imperialist attitude was accommodated in his books all the more easily because he put the emphasis on service and sacrifice rather than on nationalist domination or material gain: an approach that may seem hypocritical to present-day readers was sincere enough in a man who set out to be a philanthropist and reformer and became a best-seller.
He was fortunate in that his choice of subjects and his robust story-telling were perfectly in  tune with his reading public.
Besides, such a prolific writer could hardly be ignored and his popularity moved through many decades by its own momentum, rather as Enid Blyton's has done in the middle years of the present century.
The appetite for travel tales was insatiable at a time when so many young people were taking the chance of good fortune in lands newly opened up, often in aided emigration schemes such as Kingston himself administered.
He was a keen traveller and could write of many European countries, as well as Canada, the United States and Scandinavia, from personal knowledge.
As for other parts of the world, he assured his readers that:
…those countries which I could not visit in my proper person, I have so attentively read about, that as I turn round a globe I can almost fancy that I know the appearance and characters of the portions of the great world itself which lie mapped out under my eye, and observe all that is going forward on its surface.
At all events, wherever I have wandered I have had my eyes open and my senses awake.
Without indulging in passages of inactive description, he extended to his readers a panoramic view of the world, making good use of the duties performed by the navy in the aftermath of the Napoleonic Wars to keep up the colour and excitement of adventure.
Britain's role as Kingston described it could be called that of a peace-keeping force, and his stones of intrigue and skirmish are punctuated by anti-war sentiments.
When Midshipman Jack Rogers, trying to identify a distant ship, hopes it may be a Frenchman and declares ‘the French will never like the English till they have taught us to eat frogs, and have thrashed us on a second field of Waterloo, and I hope that time may never come’, his friend Alick Murray defends French courage in war and laughs at Jack's belligerence.
The author draws the conversation to a close with the comment that Murray was still too young to realise that ‘fighting under any circumstances is a dreadful business, and that the person who gives the cause for the fight does a very wicked thing, utterly hateful in the sight of God.
Never let that truth be forgotten.’
The complicated politics which lay behind expeditions against slave-traders, pirates or opium-traders, diplomatic missions to Indian potentates or corrective action against insurgents in South America and the Caribbean, are plainly stated rather than analysed or qualified.
Once the national point of view has been established the decks are cleared for the exploits of three young heroes to whom battle is fun and orders exist to be  cunningly circumvented when there is a chance of appealingly extraneous adventure.
This limited view is dictated by the convention within which juvenile heroes usually operate in fiction.
Kingston's three midshipmen are carefully chosen to satisfy the contemporary patriotic line.
Jack Rogers, son of a land-owning family in East Anglia, is sturdily English; Terence Adair (inevitably nicknamed Paddy) has been sent to sea to relieve the pressure on an impoverished though aristocratic Anglo-Irish family; Alick Murray, the necessary counterbalance to the impetuous courage and reckless exuberance of the other two, is soberly and morally Scottish.
The schoolfellows had been appointed to the Racer together through the efforts of a family friend of the Rogerses, and they serve together for much of their time at sea, occasionally allotted to different ships so as to give the author freedom to range more widely in space and circumstance.
Like Ballantyne, Kingston used the different temperaments of his youthful trio to keep their exploits within reasonable bounds.
Obliquely flattering his readers by introducing them to boys near their own age involved in surprising and exciting events, he also invited them to wishful thinking, if not to identification, by emphasising the youth of his heroes and underplaying the responsibility and enforced maturity belonging to midshipmen in the early and mid-teens in reality.
Adventure in Kingston's stones is fast and active but it is handled with a light touch.
When Jack and Alick, after being shipwrecked and narrowly escaping murder, starvation and sundry other perils, are reunited with Terence on board a brig-of-war, he declares it is worth being lost when reunion is so pleasant and ends with a flourish: ‘Old fellows, I knew you would come back somehow or other; I always said so; astride of a dolphin, if in no other way…’
The operative word in the four books about this carefully selected trio is ‘scamper’.
Undoubtedly Kingston's favourite verb, it is used again and again to describe the alacrity with which his heroes rush into adventure: by contrast, their enemies often scamper as well, but away from danger rather than towards it, thus implying the superiority of the British race which is taken for granted in the yarns of the last century.
As Jack and his friends grow older their pace necessarily slows a little but there is still an impetuous tone about their exploits as lieutenants, commanders and even as admirals, and their courtships as well as their warmongering are still basically ‘fun’.
To avoid exaggerating this necessary aspect of the stones (necessary because the later books are not addressed to more mature readers but to those who, feeling they really know Jack, Alick and Terence, would resent their becoming staid and solemn), Kingston introduced in the second book another trio of lads who filled the spaces left by the midshipmen now promoted in The Three Lieutenants , a sequel if ever there was one.
We meet Jack's younger brother Tom, Paddy's nephew Gerald Desmond and Alick's cousin Archie Gordon.
These three carry on the irresponsible practical jokes and illicit enterprises of their seniors, borrowing boats while in harbour and exploring themselves into danger, invariably rescued by improbably patient sailors.
Temperamental differences operate once more with this new trio of junior heroes, whose elders, the three lieutenants, regard their pranks with mild amusement.
Carrying out a siege in Brazil against rebels, Tom and Gerald, happy to be put in charge of cannon instead of their earlier muskets, describe their efforts against the stone walls of the enemy as ‘very good fun’ and are mildly reproved by Archie, who cries, ‘I don't call that fun’, as:
…a round shot struck a seaman at one of the guns near them on the breast and laid him dead on the deck, before he had time to utter a groan.
A grapeshot, the next moment, hit another man on the shoulder, and he was carried below.
Two others were shortly afterwards wounded.
Their light-hearted attitude balances the greater seriousness of events in The Three Commanders , for they still scamper into adventure as their respective ships operate against slave-traders off the African coast and when they carry troops and fight battles off the Turkish coast during the Crimean War.
Their elders in more serious mood watch from a distance the Charge of the Light Brigade and, in the course of discussing the future of their young relatives, indulge in a dispute for and against the innovation of steam in naval vessels.
Predictably, Irish Terence Adair believes that ‘if steamers come into vogue, they will do away with all the romance once upon a time supposed to belong to a naval life’ but the Scotsman's more practical view chimes in with Jack's opinion.
When Alick Murray suggests:
‘…it will be a great thing not to have to depend on the fickle wind for making a passage, and still more to know that we may pounce down upon those rascally fast-sailing dhows whenever we can sight them in a calm, and be sure of overtaking them…’
sensible Jack determines to improve on his knowledge of engines.
All the same, the phrase ‘pounce down upon’, like the word ‘scamper’, is in keeping with the attitude to adventure which is still apparent even after the three commanders have found  suitable wives and have won promotion to the rank of admiral as a result of successful expeditions in the Pacific.
The use of coincidence, timely rescues and convenient accidents persists in the final book of the sequence,The Three Admirals .
Indeed, the proliferation of adventures in the South Atlantic, Abyssinia, China, Japan and New Guinea, with the addition of the Maori Wars, shipwreck and the challenge of life on a desert island, earthquake and eruptions, suggests that Kingston was at last finding it difficult to adapt his exalted heroes to the kind of narrative his readers expected.
The heroes of the next generation, now lieutenants, sustain most of the action, still able to regard as fun the missions which their elders discuss more seriously in terms of Britain's rule as a force for justice and peace in the world.
This is of course having your cake and eating it, an achievement to which Kingston owed the enormous popularity of his naval as well as his other yarns.
The facts of British intervention round the globe could, in his brief, be treated with a confident and (for many decades) an acceptable blend of sturdy patriotic fervour and romantic exhilaration.
The formula was to be used, with suitable modifications, right up to and occasionally beyond the 1940s.
The trick, of course, is to give young heroes quick wits and ingenuity as well as an impetuous and opportunist temperament, so that any opening for individual enterprise against the enemy can be plausibly taken: at the same time the status and responsibility of a midshipman, however young, which allows him to direct his seniors in dangerous and often illicit exploits will also ensure that he will have the backing of those older men and the support of their common sense, experience and physical strength.
It is far easier to convince readers of the courage and invention of a youth of fifteen or so when he is foiling the enemy with a clever disguise or a neatly gymnastic escape than when he is in grim and bloody action on board an enemy ship — not only easier, but more in keeping with the romantic excitement proper to adventure-story.
Showell Styles chose with acumen the incidents to make up four successive junior novels, beginning with Midshipman Quinn , which followed the fortunes of Septimus Quinn from his fifteenth to his seventeenth year.
Writing almost a century after Kingston, he fulfilled the expectations of his readers with less melodrama in his plots and a more responsible attitude to life in his young hero, but Quinn is a very obvious descendant of Marryat's Peter Simple and Kingston's Jack Rogers in his lively opportunism and his youthful capacity for living in the present.
He is introduced literally with a bang, explaining in his pedantic way an  alarming explosion in his room to his clergyman uncle as ‘a little experiment’:
‘It had occurred to me that if the substance known as Potassium Chlorate were to be contained in some small vessel with the right quantity of Sulphur, and the compound impacted — that is to say, if I hit it a pretty fair whack with a pestle — the result would be an explosion.’
His uncle's testy interruption is followed by a more dramatic one as Admiralty orders arrive for Septimus to join the frigate Althea as junior midshipman; but, not to be diverted from his experiment, he uses a similar home-made bomb to good effect when the coach is held up by highwaymen on the Portsmouth road.
Some months later he is still obstinately experimenting, in the stretches of inaction while the Althea is engaged in the blockade of Toulon.
Reporting to the captain the reason for, and extent of, the explosion in the ship, the first lieutenant brings the culprit with him:
The midshipman was dark-haired and studious-looking.
Beneath a cocked hat somewhat too big for him his small face, pale despite the sun of a whole Mediterranean summer, was much more calm and composed than that of the man behind him.
He was wearing a pair of steel-rimmed spectacles.
Curiosity, quick wits and a degree of practical skill, presented in a measure appropriate to a precocious, solitary youth, make Quinn's exploits plausible.
The escape, made possible in part by the chemical explosion in Quinn of the Fury , is followed by a series of independent forays in which Quinn seizes a French sloop carrying hides by following it into a secret harbour and pretending he and his men are drunken sailors returning on board, rescues Royalist prisoners from a castle by skulking and climbing, seizes another French ship by disguising the prize vessel under his command as French, and outwits a pirate ship by means of a collision (rescuing, by the way, a young Contessa who adds a romantic touch to the story).
Any reader literal enough to doubt Quinn's success in those matters is likely to be diverted by the thrust and crackle of action rapidly described and by the element of chance so quickly exploited by the boy.
His is a temperament well calculated to flatter and intrigue readers in the early teens and to draw them into vicarious adventure.
The need for reality is satisfied in that Septimus Quinn, for all his impetuosity, does not look upon war as fun, nor does he abdicate his responsibility for the men whom, from time to time, he is called upon to lead.
Yet he is far from being a copy book hero.
There is sly humour in the choice of an undersized, bespectacled, studious youth as the instigator of so much bold harassment of the enemy but it is humour grounded in a psychologically apt interpretation of his character.
Like Hornblower, whose temperament was delighting readers with its contradictions at the same time as that of the Quinn adventures, Septimus has adopted certain measures of what could be called self-defence.
Where Hornblower's cough is designed to give him time to avoid embarrassment or to get out of a tight corner, Septimus puts on his spectacles, which in fact he only needs for reading, when he needs time to think of a way out of a difficulty or the chance to seem more confident than he really is.
It is a novelist's trick, useful for recognition when a character is used in a series of stones: it is also properly matched to the portrait of a youth who is intelligent but not physically impressive.
Humour is a good way to stabilise a character which could be over-romanticised.
There may be a certain exaggeration in the statement that Napoleon had offered a reward for the taking of ‘the English incendiary ‘Kvinn or Quin’ who had been responsible for the burning of three French battleships in the Gulf of Villefranche last year’but the sixteen year-old's behaviour while in prison in Toulon is entirely in keeping with what we know about him:
Septimus, who was a philosopher by nature and had been in a French prison before, made the most of his breakfast in a way peculiarly his own.
He turned it into a four-course meal, thus:
Bread.
Bread washed down with coffee.
Bread dipped in coffee.
Coffee.
It is a useful authorial device to offer readers an unheroic hero so as to escape romantic cliché.
To a great extent this is the reason why Forester's self-deprecating Hornblower is more believable than Alexander Kent's Bolitho or Dudley Pope's Ramage.
Showell Styles balanced the junior tales about Septimus Quinn with a sequence of adult novels built round a middle-aged naval officer who, at thirty-three, had moved only from midshipman to the unsatisfactory rank of acting lieutenant because of intermittent periods of unemployment at the end of the eighteenth century and a sad lack of useful patronage.
The deliberately impassive front cultivated by Michael Fitton, hiding reckless courage and a talent for improvisation, provides a different example of the way a novelist can colour and intensify fact without falsifying it.
The contrast between Fitton's studied calm and the bravura of his victorious naval actions is neither romantic nor realistic.
Showell  Styles's sea-stones, moderately coloured by invention, provide entertainment in the broadest sense.
If the events in each of his series did happen or could have happened, they come to us with the optimistic tone, the promise of a happy ending, which we expect of the classic adventure story.
One could hardly find a more severe rebuttal of this convention than the latest contribution to the junior Napoleonic adventure, Jan Needle's A Fine Boy for Killing .
The ‘fine boy’ with the grim destiny is Thomas Fox, a boy of fifteen whose father, a small farmer, has entrusted him for the first time with a flock of sheep for Portsmouth market.
Inexperienced in the ways of the world, the boy is tricked into accepting money from a plausible and (to Thomas) impressive midshipman, a year younger than he but already well instructed in ways of avoiding the various laws against press-ganging.
In a day and a night of violence and imposture William Bentley, working for his uncle, the captain of the frigate Welfare , also succeeds in capturing Jesse Broad, a smuggler returning with a cargo from a French ship.
The terrified farmboy, Thomas, miserably seasick but comforted by being set to tend sheep, calves and poultry in the depths of the ship, is protected so far as it is possible by the sturdy Jesse, but both are subject to the appalling cruelty of the captain, Daniel Swift.
His sadism is satisfied, at least at first, within the permitted limits of naval discipline, but it is accompanied by unpredictable moods and actions which disturb and perplex the crew to the point of mutiny, terrified as they are by the hostile surveillance of the officers and the malicious spying which William Bentley the midshipman carries on by his uncle's order.
The inevitable revolt shows only too plainly the helplessness of the seamen against the power of authority.
As fighting on board goes first one way and then the other, the captain strikes Thomas Fox to death with a belaying pin in an access of rage because the boy, genuinely unaware of the seamen's plotting and almost insensible after hours at the masthead in icy weather, does not give him the names of the conspirators.
Captain Swift and his party are set adrift but the good fortune customarily accorded to characters in the right is this time acceded to those whom we must call villains.
Quickly picked up near Cape Town by a passing ship, Swift, in the confidence of sealed orders and of his own determination, persuades the captain to divert his passage to track down the Welfare .
The mutineers, driven by weather to abandon their plan of escaping round the Horn into the Pacific, are intercepted and taken back to England, where Jesse and those of his comrades who have survived are tried and hanged.
The stark events of A Fine Boy for Killing are no more and no less authentic than the events of Showell Styles's novels or those  of O'Brian and Forester.
There is as much evidence for unhappy as for happy ships.
The difference is in emphasis and in conclusion.
Instances of cruelty and mania, in O'Brian and Forester, are not minimised, but they are subordinate to the drive of a story towards the traditional and expected ending in the triumph of right over wrong, of good over evil.
The facts of sea-warfare are not ignored but there is no concentration on their gruesome aspects and, usually, plain statements do not extend to an analysis of the effect of conflict on individuals.
The contrast between the accounts of battle within the conventions of adventure-story and Jan Needle's deliberate departure from these conventions may be shown in two contrasted passages.
In Marryat's Percival Keene the author, speaking through his hero, describes a moment after a battle against a Dutch ship when the young midshipman is sent below by the captain to report on casualties:
…
I got a lantern and commenced my examinations.
I found fourteen wounded men waiting the doctor's care in the gun-room, which was almost a pool of blood.
In the steerage there were nine who had been dressed, and four in their hammocks who had undergone amputation of the arm or leg.
I then went down into the cockpit, where I counted eleven of our best men lying dead.
Keene's matter-of-fact approach to the grisly scene allows for no introspection on his part, nor are the feelings of the wounded men explored.
Marryat was not avoiding actuality: his authentic plots did not extend to emotional exploration.
But a complete, inexorable account of violent suffering is essential to the deepening horror of Jan Needle's story.
Statement is shot through with feeling in the long, passionately detailed account of the mutiny.
At one moment the boatswain Jack Allgood comes out of a berserk rage to realise that he, a warrant officer, has allowed his hatred of the captain to lead him into mutiny; the points of physical detail enforce his emotional agony:
There was between them and the quarterdeck a group of men who had left the fighting.
They were standing about as if in a daze, gazing about at the littered corpses and wounded.
Some held bloody cutlasses drooping in their hands.
One or two were weeping.
As the Welfare lurched and another thundering beating of canvas came from aloft, Mr Allgood emerged from the group.
His face was covered in blood and one arm hung limp beside him.
He stared aloft, then shook his head.
Matthews hailed him.
‘Ahoy Mr Allgood!
Here by the cutter!
Quick man!’
The boatswain shook his bull head again and began to walk towards them.
‘Here man,’ said Matthews, when he had arrived.
‘We have got to get this ship under control.
She will beat herself to pieces else.’
The huge warrant officer stared at him unseeingly.
He blinked red rimmed eyes.
His face was livid and bloody.
He looked beaten, hurt.
‘Oh God,’ he said at last.
‘Oh God, what have I done?
Oh God, the shame of it.
To raise a hand against an officer.
To start a mutiny in His Majesty's Navy…
The man is a villain, double-dyed.
But to mutiny, Jesse Broad, to raise a hand against an officer of the King.’
The extreme realism in this tragic adventure (realism, that is, in the sense of a deliberate emphasis on the unpleasant aspect of adventure) constitutes a reaction against the essentially optimistic approach to violent events which can be seen in many other branches of adventure-story.
Noticeable in the last decade or two in fiction, it is a reaction that could be called political.
Jan Needle's story shows inexorably the workings of a system in which power could corrupt.
It is not only the exaggerated violence and horrific detail of the book that marks it as a portent of change within the genre.
As the title suggests, this is the tragedy of Thomas Fox; the narrative draws out the disintegration, physical and mental, of an innocent boy caught up in a world of inexplicable rules and inescapable brutality.
But it is also the tragedy of William Bentley, a tragedy because he too is a boy caught in circumstances which he is incapable of understanding and which will, finally, leave him totally unfit for the life he has been trained for.
For all his arrogance, William Bentley is still at heart an innocent boy, a fourteen-year-old brought up to believe himself superior and privileged and flattered at receiving the trust of his uncle, whom he admires for his firmness of purpose.
As the youngest midshipman, William is especially concerned to demonstrate his toughness and capability in rivalry with his messmates.
Accepting without question his uncle's explanation that, as captain, he cannot be too directly concerned with the minutiae of shipboard life, the boy eagerly agrees to spy on the seamen and find out their weaknesses and their delinquencies.
He is boy enough to enjoy, though with misgivings, a brutal practical joke against the ineffectual tutor who is supposed to educate the group of youths.
He is bitterly humiliated when he is beaten in a fist-battle with Thomas Fox, arranged by the captain as the climax to a day of races and contests organised to keep the hands occupied while the ship is becalmed.
William is humiliated  not because he is defeated (he had half expected this) but because of the shepherd boy's refusal to go on hitting him.
William orders:
‘You must fight, Thomas Fox.
You must hit me, you know.’
‘No,’ said Thomas.
‘Your poor face, Sir.
I have hurt you, child, and I am very sorry.’
A silence fell over the ship's company that was appalling.
Not a man stirred, hardly a breath was drawn.
William Bentley's face, already pale, drained slowly of blood until it was glaring white.
His mouth opened, his eyes glittered with rage.
The roar of laughter that burst out was something he never forgot.
This bitter education continues through the increasing violence of the voyage in the Atlantic.
Doubts assail the boy.
Knowing as he does that his uncle has to hold down by discipline a crew with an unusual number of criminals and malcontents, he is still disturbed by the flogging of Jesse Broad and Joyce and the masthead punishment of Thomas Fox.
Acting bravely and with initiative during the mutiny, he is oppressed with shame when he remembers certain arrogant and cruel actions of his against the crew.
In part he is swayed by fear of his fate at the hands of the enraged seamen: in part he is driven by an awakening of conscience as painful as the circulation returning to the frozen body of Thomas Fox when he is brought down from the masthead.
At the end of the book the two ‘heroes’ are dead but Bentley, who has been obliged to watch the hanging of Jesse Broad on the day of his fifteenth birthday, is left to come to terms with his life and his position.
Jan Needle leaves us to imagine the boy's future.
He has said enough to ensure that we will take his point.
What he has done, in fact, in this remarkable book is to cut across the basic acceptance of ‘good’ and ‘bad’characters.
He has shown good in Allgood and even in the evil captain, bad in the intermittently cowardly surgeon, a mixture of impulses in William Bentley.
He has implied by his character-drawing that adventure stones need not be concerned with absolutes.
This is, again, a decisive change in the genre in our time and one which is likely to have lasting effects on it.
3
Honour and the Unattainable Ideal.
The romantic element in adventure stones is one of several processes of selection by which a writer takes from his raw material — from real life, if you like — what he needs for his particular fiction.
But the word romance has for most people the immediate association of love and, in the main, of heterosexual love.
In this sense the particular manipulation of reality found in the adventure story, at least until the past two or three decades, has been away from the practicalities of extended cohabitation, whether in or out of marriage.
The wedding bells that sounded on the last page of so many ‘romantic’ novels of the last century are still sounding in certain genres but in the adventure story they seldom sound at all.
For at the heart of that dominant form, the quest-story, there lies very often a denial of fulfilment.
Man seeks a distant, passionately desired ideal: often, he is happiest when he fails to find it.
The most significant stones of man's quest for woman in this genre — like Rider Haggard's ‘She’ novels, Masefield's Odtaa and Sard Harker , William de Morgan's Joseph Vance , Milton's Lost Horizon — override the convention of the happy ending in a conclusion of happy pessimism, an almost cherished melancholy, a sense of emotional growth coming from loss and failure.
The special, complex mood communicated to the reader through this kind of romantic adventure has as its literary results a particular intensity of emotion fostered by a constant shift of pace, tension and suspense.
At its best it satisfies the sense of hubris in all of us and helps us to forget the inevitable contrast between real and ideal, in human love as in every other human impulse.
This happy pessimism is a far more compelling element in adventure stones, to my mind, than the cheerful man-gets-girl conclusion of the general run of romance-adventures.
Certainly the word ‘romance’ cannot be tied down to any one meaning.
This is very clear in the swashbuckling tale given that very title, compounded by Conrad and his close friend Ford Madox Hueffer (afterwards Ford Madox Ford) in what may surely be called the Golden Age of the classic adventure story.
The novel Romance can almost be read as a series of definitions designed to emphasise the elusive, personal nature of the word.
The young hero, John Kemp, grows up with the ardent expectation of rose-coloured, agreeable adventure:
It was, I suppose, what I demanded of Fate — to be gently wafted into the position of a hero of romance, without rough hands at my throat.
It is what we all ask, I suppose; and we get it sometimes in ten-minute snatches.
‘Rough hands’ and brief snatches of pleasurable exhilaration alternate in an intricate tale of innocence threatened by evil.
In trouble after a smuggling affray, early in the nineteenth century, John Kemp escapes to Jamaica and works his way to prosperity as a plantation owner.
Before long he is involved, through loyalty to a Spanish relative, in the vexed affairs of old Don Baltasar, whose seaboard estate is being used as a refuge for pirates secretly commanded by James O'Brien, a villain with a front as a respected official in the Jamaican government.
To the still ardent John Kemp the old Don is a romantic figure, while Don Baltasar for his part dreams of England as a glamorous country, free from the political pressures of his own adopted land.
The constant dangers and perplexities that beset John Kemp arise from the ferocious enmity of O'Brien, whose hatred of anything English is increased by his hopeless love for the Don's daughter Seraphina, for whose sake he moderates from time to time his evil power over the old aristocrat.
To John Kemp Seraphina becomes the beloved ideal as well as the victim of persecution whom he vows to rescue.
The authors of this perfervid, crowded adventure use the first person device to plot the course of Kemp's feelings concurrently with the bold actions in which he is conventionally heroic.
The mood of this unusual story is alternately sentimental and active, its hero alternately introspective and confident, but the predominant note is one of ‘romance’ in its most popular sense.
Of Seraphina, John confesses:
…she remained to me always unattainable and romantic — unique, with all the unexpressed purposes of love such as no world had ever known.
And naturally, because for me hitherto the world had held no woman.
She was an apparition of dreams…and yet I was permitted to whisper intimately to this my dream, to this my vision.
There is no sense of possible anticlimax when reality cuts across Kemp's idealistic view of the girl.
Escapes involving desperate small-boat journeys, tramping over difficult terrain, the physical distress of thirst and hunger, show Seraphina as a courageous young woman but, still, as the idealised beauty.
Kemp looks at her as they shrink within a dark cave, besieged by O'Brien and his men:
In the guise of a beggar-maid, and fair, like a fugitive princess of romance, she sat concealed in the very heart of her dominions.
During their subsequent separation and his long sojourn in an English prison, where he is saved from the gallows only by a last-minute reprieve, his vision of her becomes intense and idealised.
At this point in the tale most readers would expect a tragi- heroic ending, and indeed in the hands of Rider Haggard or Masefield this would almost certainly have been the case.
But having viewed the past in romantic terms through the eyes of their hero, the authors bid farewell to him in his retrospective old age as the husband of the refound, finally-won love.
In doing so they offer, it seems, their most conclusive definition of the word that has inspired their fiction:
And, looking back, we see Romance — that subtle thing that is mirage — that is life.
It is the goodness of the years we have lived through, of the old time when we did this and that, when we dwelt here or there.
Looking back, it seems a wonderful enough thing that I who am this, and she who is that, commencing so far away a life that, after such sufferings borne together and apart, ended so tranquilly there in a world so stable — that she and I should have passed through so much, good chance and evil chance, sad hours and joyful, all lived down and swept away into the little heap of dust that is a life.
That, too, is Romance!
A bold assertion of reality indeed and very far from the idealised approach to love in adventure in another collaboration.
In The World's Desire , Rider Haggard and his close friend Andrew Lang presented as it were their thesis of romance in a turgid tale based on certain theories of their time concerning possible trafficking between Achaean Greece, Crete and Egypt under the Ramessids.
Archaeology was only an excuse for a highly personal interpretation of myth in which Odysseus, seeking ideal beauty, finds it in Helen, surviving in Egypt as a seemingly immortal, ageless goddess.
Although a plot of sorts involves the intrigues of the Egyptian Queen, whose enfeebled brother and consort has no power to break her obsessive love for ‘the Wanderer’, the story turns on the simple fact that Odysseus must for ever love an unattainable ideal.
He is promised that he will enjoy Helen, but only in death:
For though here on earth she seems to live eternally, it is but the shadow of her beauty that men see — each as he desires it.
In the halls of Death she dwells, and in the garden of Queen Persephone…
His consolation has to be that although she is, as an ideal, constantly changing, ‘yet she dies only when the race of men is dead — then to be gathered to the number of the Gods.’
The unattainable ideal woman was to become something of an obsession for Rider Haggard, idealised but hardly ideal, for the strange being he introduced in She was both good and evil, goddess and witch.
Though he allowed himself no fewer than four books (She, Ayesha, She and Allan and Wisdom's Daughter ) in which to analyse this character, he never seems to have decided exactly what she was meant to represent or how far she was intended to be a symbol of the ‘world's desire’.
There is a difficulty here.
She and the sequels have suffered far more from changes in social attitudes and literary expectations than the rest of Rider Haggard's adventures have.
The extraordinary decadent sensuality of the books and their moral and sexual elusiveness seem nowadays a particularly unpleasing example of social hypocrisy.
Besides, Rider Haggard's attempt to present ‘She’ as a kind of divinity seems nowadays either absurdly grandiose or ludicrous.
The fact that ‘She’ appears to those privileged to see her as a veiled figure and that her lustrous orbs, dazzling limbs and perfect ankles are revealed with tantalising slowness, has a rather different effect on today's readers than it no doubt had when the book was first published, very nearly a century ago, in 1887, to be greeted with a storm of ecstasy or alternatively of appalled disapproval, which lasted for many decades.
(I can remember, when I was a child, watching with amazement as my book-loving grandmother burned a copy of She on the sitting-room fire.)
Rider Haggard's heroine (if such a general term can be applied to her) is introduced in terms that were to become very familiar in his fiction, as a fabled white goddess-figure ruling over an unknown tribal kingdom in unexplored Central Africa.
The difference between ‘She’ and the similar female figures in The Ivory Child, The Treasure of the Lake and The Holy Flower is that ‘She’has, it appears, already lived for three thousand years when two travellers, handsome Leo Vincey and his guardian, Professor Holly, discover her in a volcanic fastness, once the ancient kingdom of Kôr.
A priestess of Isis, the beautiful Ayesha had broken her vows for love of a Greek soldier Kallikrates who, in his turn, was in danger because of his love for the Egyptian princess Amenartas.
Failing to win his love, Ayesha had killed him and had been condemned by Aphrodite to an eternal existence of longing and jealousy.
Amenartas, escaping from Ayesha's  wrath, had borne a child whose line persisted through the centuries to end with Leo Vincey, who is as much a descendant of Kallikrates as he is a reincarnation of him.
The extraordinary background of this veiled beauty is at first revealed only in hints and large generalisations as Ayesha woos Leo Vincey as her reincarnated lover, and the story was not extended significantly until thirty-six years later when Rider Haggard indulged his passion for Ancient Egypt and for the occult by giving Ayesha a family and a local habitation in Wisdom's Daughter .
This crowded historical panorama of war and the power of beauty describes the birth of Ayesha as the mortal daughter of noble Arabian parents but suggests in recounting her long training in mysticism under an Egyptian priest and her guardianship of the Fire of Immortality in the shrine at Kôr that she is to be regarded in part as a spiritual being.
The first, brief account of her long love for Kallikrates which Ayesha gives to Leo Vincey and his guardian in She is expanded in Wisdom's Daughter to emphasise this spirituality and to excuse her sin as being due to the inexorable power of love.
When Kallikrates and Amenartas, in their life of exile, seek refuge in Kôr and are confronted with Ayesha, he argues his case:
‘I love Amenartas with my body and am bound to her, but it is not so with my spirit.
Our souls, I think, are far apart.
Oh! hear me witness that my heart is set on higher things; it would sail into far seas unvisited of man, but always there is this anchor of the flesh chaining it to its native shore.’
In an agony of choice between human and ideal love Kallikrates tries to kill himself: he refuses to enter the fire in which Ayesha has already achieved immortality and the force of her spiritual power kills him.
It seems clear that Rider Haggard intended Ayesha in part to embody a moral distinction between physical and ideal love.
Leo Vincey is forced by the events of She towards the same decision as the one which destroyed his counterpart Kallikrates.
While he and Holly are exploring the caves and valleys of Ayesha's African kingdom, Leo loves and is loved by Ustane, whose human warmth and generosity provide a contrast to the exalted claims and petulant jealousies of Ayesha.
Using her temporal power to have her rival killed, Ayesha easily overcomes Leo's horror by the unconquerable combination of physical beauty and mental dominance.
Holly, watching as his ward is seduced, comments:
I looked up again, and now her perfect form lay in his arms, and her lips were pressed against his own; and thus, with the corpse of his  dead love for an altar, did Leo Vincey plight his troth to her red-handed murderess — plight it for ever and a day.
For those who sell themselves into a like dominion, paying down the price of their own honour, and throwing their soul into the balance to sink the scale to the level of their lusts, must win deliverance hardly.
As they have sown, so must they reap and reap, even when the poppy flowers of passion have withered in their hands, and their harvest is but bitter tares, garnered in satiety.
Punishment for sin comes quickly.
Revealing her inmost secret, Ayesha leads Leo and Holly by a perilous mountain route to a cavern where the Fire of Immortality appears intermittently.
In what seems a somewhat specious argument, she urges Leo to bathe with her in the fire so that their mortal sins may be purged: but although the fire at first seems to do her no harm as she shows him the way into it, the self-seeking nature of her love becomes evident as her ageless beauty is destroyed:
Smaller she grew, and smaller yet, till she was no larger than a monkey.
Now the skin had puckered into a million wrinkles, and on her shapeless face was the stamp of unutterable age.
I never saw anything like it; nobody ever saw anything to equal the infinite age which was graven on that fearful countenance, no bigger now than that of a two months old child, though the skull retained its same size; and let all men pray they never shall, if they wish to keep their reason.
Rider Haggard's mouthpiece through this turgid mixture of heightened passion and exalted mysticism is a middle-aged but still susceptible university professor swayed by Ayesha's beauty but still detached enough to observe her effect on Leo (who is, it must be confessed, a bone-headed and highly conventional aristocrat-hero) and her wilful inconsistencies of mood and intention.
There would of course have been no story if the author had not given Ayesha enough of human frailty and caprice to bring about certain changes in the circumstances of her rule over the cannibalistic Amahaggar and her relations with Leo Vincey.
Yet Rider Haggard seems to have been dissatisfied with his presentation of the character (and naturally he must have been influenced, as a professional novelist, by the enormous popularity and sales of She ) and he did not resist the temptation to give his readers a further insight into her.
In an Author's Note to the second book about this strange being,Ayesha , he wrote:
Not with a view to conciliating those readers who on principle object to sequels, but as a matter of fact, the Author wishes to say that he does not so regard this book.
Rather does he venture to ask that it should be considered as the conclusion of an imaginative tragedy (if he may so call it) whereof one half has been already published.
The unearthly, mysterious aspect of beauty is emphasised at the end of a book which is in many ways a repetition of its predecessor.
Ayesha reintroduces the central figure reborn from the apparent death at the end of She and now the sole survivor of the cult of Isis, living in a volcanic mountain fortress, this time in Tibet, and with some difficulty holding her power against a wild tribe in the valley, partly consisting of survivors from Alexander's army, under the control of Queen Atene, who proves to be a reincarnation of the Egyptian princess, Amenartas, beloved of Kallikrates.
To this hidden land come Leo Vincey and Holly after twenty years of wandering in search of the goddess woman and here the pair of them are involved with the rebellion of Atene and her husband against the secret ruler Ayesha, now called Hes (or Isis).
Victorious in war, and victorious also against the wiles of amorous Atene, Leo is taken to the ruler, who reveals herself to him as Ayesha and challenges him to view her in her hideous age.
In a fairy-tale scene he kisses her and she becomes beautiful, but after their betrothal she confesses her past sins and the weakness of her nature, imploring Leo to love her only in a spiritual sense.
His reply is immediate and definite:
‘But, Ayesha, I am no god; I am a man, and as a man I seek the woman whom I love.
Oh divest thyself of all these trappings of thy power — that power which strews thy path with dead and keeps me apart from thee.
If only for one short night, forget the ambition that gnaws unceasingly at thy soul — I say forget thy greatness and be a woman and — my wife.’
Tempted by his ardour, Ayesha warns him of the danger if she does as he desires.
When she kisses him as a woman, he dies: she casts herself into the Fire, taking his body with her: and Holly seems to see her alive and radiant, a woman whose sins have been compounded.
Nothing could be less conclusive than this sensational ending to a turgid and inflated romance, nor does Rider Haggard's elaborate initial paraphernalia of the letter and package coming to the author from Holly after the old man's death convince one any more successfully of the ‘tragedy’ of the lovers than does the equally elaborate account of the ‘letter and two packets’containing Leo Vincey's family history and Holly's account of the events of She which, we are asked to believe, reached the author a few  years after he had first seen Holly and the golden-haired hero Leo Vincey in a Cambridge street.
There was perhaps a better chance of enlisting the reader's belief in Ayesha in involving her with that most believable hero, Allan Quatermain.
She and Allan has, so far as the plot goes, the look of an afterthought, with a patchwork plot full of echoes of Quatermain's other adventures and placing Ayesha in the same kind of danger from rebellion and rivalry which made up the story lines of She and Ayesha .
But whether Rider Haggard wanted to move his mysterious veiled woman somewhat further from the realm of allegory near which she certainly appeared to reside in She and Ayesha , or whether he was merely exercising the husbandry of a writer who had created in Quatermain a remarkably useful narrator and wanted to make the fullest use of him, the fact remains that the ‘She’ of She and Allan is more shrewdly realised as a woman than in the two preceding books, even if her self- centred mysticism is still as grandiose and woolly as it was.
The link between Allan and the beautiful Ayesha is not altogether satisfying.
The intervention of the unsavoury witchdoctor Zikali, who appears to be in mental communication with Ayesha as she rules in Kôr, in a way diminishes her immortal, all-powerful aspect, yet it is easy to believe that Allan, always tormented by memories of his two beloved wives, Mane and Stella, should be persuaded by Zikali to visit Ayesha and win through her power a glimpse of the lost ones.
It must be admitted, too, that sceptical Allan, who resists Ayesha's sexual dominance except in one brief moment, gives us a far less exalted and unreal portrait of her and a more active, interesting view of her circumstances than the sententious scholar Holly did.
The cover picture of a paperback edition of She and Allan published for popular consumption in 1960 implied that this was a ‘romantic’ novel, but the orthodox young, handsome ‘hero’depicted there bears little relation to the ‘insignificant and withered hunter’whose presence, helped by that of the warrior Umslopagaas, coolly acceptant of mystery, pulls this tale of Ayesha round into the robust atmosphere of Rider Haggard's most typical African adventures.
All four books about Ayesha, defined by courtesy and by their subject-matter as adventure stones, contain in fact relatively little action.
Although in each one Ayesha is engaged in military as well as emotional conflicts, the sequence of events is suspended on endless dialogue as Ayesha defines or defends her amorphous philosophy.
In She and Allan a substantial subplot concerning the kidnapping of half-Portuguese Inez Robertson by the Amahaggar  and her rescue by Allan and Umslopagaas, and the tremendous duel between the Zulu warrior and Ayesha's gigantic adversary Reza, lightens the inflated, intense musings of the goddess woman.
Moreover, Allan offers a description of her which seems more explicit than any offered through another mouthpiece.
When he is first led into her presence she is veiled ‘but with her draperies so arranged that they emphasised rather than concealed the wonderful elegance of her tall form’ and ‘two plaits of glossy, raven hair’, each ending in a ‘single large pearl’, appear beneath her veil.
The feminine beauty so parsimoniously revealed is, almost always, taken calmly by the sardonic, fatalistic hunter but he does see beyond the woman:
Mystery seemed to flow from her; it clothed her like the veil she wore, which of course heightened the effect.
Beauty flowed from her also; although it was shrouded I knew that it was there, no veil or coverings could obscure it — at least, to my imagination.
Moreover she breathed out power also; one felt it in the air as one feels a thunderstorm before it breaks, and it seemed to me that this power was not quite human, that it drew its strength from afar and dwelt a stranger to the earth.
Rider Haggard offered this strange combination of a Gibson Girl and an embodiment of ancient divinity as the nucleus of adventure stones in his characteristic mixture of vigorous narrative and personal philosophy but his portrait of a distant ideal, strongly affected by his own reticences and sublimations and those of his time, is hard to take seriously today.
The fact that the adventure story has always been very largely the province of male writers does not necessarily mean that the female characters in such fictions will be less ‘real’ than the heroes or villains.
Convention dictated, however (and still does to some extent), that dangerous physical action is the part of heroes, not of heroines.
In the kind of fiction under consideration here, the quest draws on the traditions of chivalry, traditions which are romantic in the sense that reality is softened, that a heightened emotional response to a distant ideal is interposed between the hero's initial motive for action and his expectation of reward.
This is very clear in Masefield's analysis of one such romantic hero, the almost impossibly self-denying Captain Margaret, who has vowed his life to the service of a woman long loved and now married to a villain:
It was a great nature, checked by some hunger of the soul, which (this is the source of all beautiful desire) would perhaps have destroyed the soul, had it been satisfied.
As Rider Haggard's novels about Ayesha presented her in part as a symbol of the ideal woman, so Masefield showed Olivia Stukeley in this light, as Charles Margaret saw her:
He felt that human beings were all manifestations of a divine purpose.
Perhaps that lovely woman was an idea, an idea of refinement, of delicate, exquisite, right grace, clothed in fitting flesh, walking the world with heavenly intention.
The captain's love remains on this exalted plane throughout scenes of action in which idealism is not always satisfactorily integrated.
Set in the late seventeenth century, this story of a three-cornered relationship depends on active events vigorously described but ill supported by very generalised characters.
Captain Margaret is the owner of the privateer The Broken Heart with which he intends to open up trade in the Spanish Main with the Indians whom he hopes to rescue from the harsh exploitation of Spanish settlers.
His love for Olivia obliges him to take her, with her husband, as passengers to Virginia, where Stukeley hopes to escape from debts and the legal action of certain victims of his villainy.
The idealised concept of Olivia requires that she must be impossibly innocent.
Where Charles Margaret is moved by the chivalric ideal of honour towards women, Olivia's sense of honour requires of her a complete loyalty to, and trust in, her husband.
The only way Masefield can make this credible is to present her as a kind of child-bride, a happy innocent; necessary as this may be to both the theme and the plot of the book, it does not allow her to develop beyond the limits of a type-character.
This is very evident when we compare the actual words Masefield uses when he describes the moment when Olivia is forced to accept the warnings of the Governor of Jamestown about her husband's past and to face the destruction of her romantic view of their marriage.
The words in fact are intended to reflect her night-time, miserable feelings but they only reflect Masefield's failure to render her as a human being:
All her nerves shook with it, as though the blow struck her in her face.
He had sworn at her, jeered at her, called her a lump of cold batter, told her to get to the devil, told her that he was sick of the sight of her, that he had married her for her money, that if she gave him any more of her canting preaching he'd hit her one that she'd remember.
Later in the night, as she lay crying at his side, he bade her for God's sake to stop snivelling, so that he might get to sleep.
As she could not stop, he had arisen, telling her that she might cry  herself sick, but that he was going to Mrs Inigo, a woman who wasn't quite such a cold poultice.
She had not stopped him.
She could not stop him.
He had gone from her, leaving her life too empty for her to wish even to kill herself.
The character of Olivia carries no more conviction when after dangerous conflicts and escapes on the Spanish Main and after Stukeley's treacherous dealings with the Spanish government on the Isthmus of Darien and his death from yellow fever, she falls into Charles Margaret's arms.
The happy ending seems as much a contradiction of the melancholy, idealistic tone of the book as the ending of Conrad and Ford's Romance did.
Captain Margaret is about ideals, about aspects of love described in terms of three very generalised figures (for even Stukeley, vigorous though his idiom and behaviour may be, is not a ‘real’ villain in the sense of that tongue-in-cheek villain, Abner Brown, in the fantasies The Midnight Folk and The Box of Delights ).
Like Multitude and Solitude , it is an early exploration of the quest-adventure, man's search for beauty as an ideal in human form, which Masefield was to bring to fruition in two later novels,Sard Harker and Odtaa .
As a setting for these adventures Masefield invented the ‘Sugar States’, somewhere in Central America (a place used again in his fantasy-adventure for children,The Midnight Folk , as well as in a sea-adventure,The Taking of the Gry ).
Here two men, a ship's officer and a gently born younger son sent from England to make his way in the world, are involved in certain events which are, as it were, by-products of civil war.
In the province of Santa Barbara, in 1887, as we learn in Odtaa (chronologically the first book, though written and published second) a mad dictator, Don Lopez, withstands a determined but seemingly hopeless attempt by a heroic friend of the people, Don Manuel, to overthrow his tyranny.
Ten years later, as Sard Harker relates, Don Manuel has become dictator and is establishing order and prosperity in the ten provinces of the Sugar States.
Justifiably defined as romantic adventures, the two books follow their quest-plots to very different conclusions, but each is a poet's novel, with the pursuit of ideal beauty as the ultimate goal and with the chivalrous service of a man for a woman as its motive force.
The tragic heroine of Odtaa , as she appears to the other characters in the story, is idealised in two senses.
Carlotta de Leyva belongs to one of the liberal families opposed to the dictator Lopez and as the betrothed of the leader of that opposition, Don Manuel of Encinitas, she is to some extent a figurehead, a political symbol: moreover, to the youth of eighteen, Highworth Ridden, who is introduced to her soon after his arrival in Santa Barbara, she is an ideal because she is in effect the first woman who has ever touched his love, as someone to be served, not someone to aspire to.
Looking back on the bitter, dangerous adventure he undertook in her service, years later, Hi Ridden still sees her in a romantic light:
It is difficult to set down what she was to me.
‘Calf-love’, I suppose most people would say.
Well, there is a generosity in calf-love that gives it a grace: not that mine had any grace.
I saw her on only one day twenty-two years ago: I have thought of her every day since; not as a lover of course(for years past) but as a spirit apart, unlike anyone else that ever was…
She was the most exquisite thing: in life marvellous, in the unspeakable end, heroic: and always so beautiful, so gracious.
All who knew her felt this: she had cruel enemies, the mad, the diseased, the godless, the savage and the greedy hated her.
The active, courageous aspect of Carlotta and her lover Don Manuel is suggested now and again in the echoes of the conflict heard by the reader before they are heard by Hi Ridden.
Passionately anxious to serve Carlotta, he undertakes to take a message from her to Don Manuel, at a time when he and his followers are seriously threatened by the dictator.
Hi's desperate overland journey is interrupted by weather, by bandits, by the hazards of terrain: finally captured by Lopez's Reds, he learns that even while he was pressing forward with his message, Carlotta had been seized by Lopez and, after refusing to pray to him as the God he declares himself to be, had been brutally slaughtered by the public hangman.
This intensely concentrated yet spacious journey-tale gives an impression of urgency by Masefield's typical ‘and-then’ pattern and the energetic sequence of dangers and escapes which comply with the title (Odtaa is ‘One damned thing after another’)— not as flippant a title as it might sound but an example of Masefield's virtuosity in the way he can mix humour, tension and deep emotion without self-consciousness.
The tragic ending of Hi's chivalrous mission is proper to the emotional tone of the book: his feelings, his anxiety and longing, his anger and impatience, his hope and fear, run along with the concrete, forceful adventure plot and give it purpose.
As well, Hi's reflections on Carlotta establish her as a real woman as well as an ideal of love and beauty.
Hardly operating as a character in the story, Carlotta is always vividly present in it.
The tensions of Sard Harker lead ultimately to the uniting of lover and beloved rather than to tragedy; the prevailing note is not foreboding but a painful and frustrating postponement, again  by the hazards of an overland journey.
Romance, in this book, is a very different matter from the heightened, chivalric tone of Captain Margaret .
Masefield's choice of his central characters, at least in his later novels, was always a little unexpected, and there is a particular piquancy in the seemingly inappropriate nature, as a romantic hero, of Chisholm Harker, nicknamed Sard ‘because he was judged to be sardonic’ and defined as a proud, reticent, austere man.
But we are soon warned that the young officer in the Venturer hides in his memory the image of a girl met years before, so that his response to a strange night-vision seems entirely logical.
On his first sea-voyage, as the ship lay in the harbour of Las Palomas on its way to Santa Barbara, he had woken to the sound of words in his ear perhaps inspired by the strange familiarity of the house of Los Xicales, glimpsed from the ship, perhaps indeed a prophecy that he would meet the girl of his memory in that very house.
The interaction of chance and personal agency is of great importance in Masefield's adventure novels: dogged by ill fortune, by evil coincidence, by accident, his heroes face the odds in a way that is both practical and ideal.
Sard Harker cherishes the vision of the flower-encompassed house for ten years before, in 1897, he revisits it, to find it empty and shut up, and resolves to forget the distant figure of the girl he has always hoped to find.
His resolve ends when again he wakes at dawn with prophetic words in his ears.
The ship is due to sail that day: on shore with the captain at a prize-fight, he overhears a plot to kidnap a certain American lady visiting Los Xicales with her brother, and rides out on a bicycle to warn them but also expecting that this will be the moment foretold for that second meeting.
A feeling of mystery irradiates the scene at the house which he has so far only glimpsed from a distance:
A woman stood at the door of the French window, half in the verandah.
He could not see her face, since it was turned from him, but there was something about her that made his heart stand still.
She spoke as he closed the door:
‘I will water the xicales, Hilary,’ she said, ‘and come back when you are alone.’
Her voice rang in his brain like a memory: she closed the glass door behind her, and passed by the verandah steps into the garden out of sight.
He does not see her face: it seems that she is not the Juanita he has kept in his mind: yet he is haunted by an inexplicable likeness and is perturbed by the young American's cool reception of his warning.
The dangerous journey in store for Sard is not in fact  in pursuit of the ideal woman, but a prosaic attempt to get back to his ship before it sails, an attempt frustrated by the theft of his bicycle and by wanderings that involve him with a silver-train and a period in gaol, the traverse of an appalling desert and a rock-strewn mountain.
The immediate physical obstacles in the way and the suppressed anxiety about the threat of kidnap merge in the implied soliloquy which does half the work of describing the journey, intensifying the sense of danger and of nightmare slowness.
Masefield's continuous narrative method depends on internal changes of pace, on stresses in the placing of words and phrases.
In Sard Harker there is a complete change of tempo when Sard, finally reaching Santa Barbara, is told that Miss Kingsborough has already been found.
Before he discovers that this is a lie put out by her enemy, he has various practical duties to perform in connection with the wreck of the ship he should have joined.
The result is that the final confrontation with the evil Sangrado, the melodramatic scene of occult horror from which Margarita is rescued and the revelation of her true identity, take on a particular sharpness of surprise, a tone of active, romantic effort quite different from the tensions of Sard's wanderings.
Yet it is a logical ending, a romantic ending, if you will, but one drawn into reality because of the almost casual, incidental humour, the personal tone of dialogue and the secret, passionate, poetic feeling that moves Sard all through his adventure.
Masefield's unique narrative style is at its most sustained in these two novels.
The brilliant clarity of his prose, the steady forward pace, bring the reader close to the actions and moods of the travellers.
It is as if the writer were drawing, in words, one of those pictorial maps where each point of approach is represented by a picture, each landscape captured on the page in one carefully selected view described in a concrete, unfussy, immediate way.
No description is inorganic.
Each time action is halted for the sake of a picture, it is a picture coloured by the mood of the viewer and confirmed by concrete detail.
The romance of ardent feeling and eager endeavour never becomes cloying or sentimental because it is sustained by, included in, that movement in space and time which we can call the action of a story.
Masefield held a balance of action and emotion in his adventure stones which has never been equalled.
I have called Odtaa and Sard Harker poet's novels.
Almost always considered secondary to his poetry, Masefield's fiction has the same basic theme, man's search for beauty — in nature, in ideas and, often, in the ideal of womanhood.
The physical beauty  of Carlotta de Leyva and Margarita Kingsborough is important in the novels, not as a snare in the way that Rider Haggard sometimes seems to imply that Ayesha's beauty was, but as an embodiment, an example of the ideal.
The chivalrous impulses of Hi Ridden and Sard Harker are natural and human as well as idealistic: if they had not been, the novels would have lost much of their vigour and point.
Many novels of adventure have been based on the chivalric theme of service to women.
This theme reflects the concept of chivalry deriving in the mid- and late nineteenth century in part from the Gothic revival and defined in the seminal work of Kenelm Henry Digby,The Broad Stone of Honour , published in 1822 and 1823 with the significant title ‘Rules for the Gentlemen of England’.
The concept of honour as it appears in the adventure stones of the late nineteenth century was at least partly an artificial code belonging to the ruling or leisure classes, requiring a dedicated loyalty towards women, family honour and masculine comradeship which owed little to common sense or practicality.
It was essentially a masculine code, and those who often find it unacceptable in fiction may find some support in the comment of the Duchess of Omnium, regarding her noble husband's often inconvenient scruples, that ‘Men shouldn't be made of Sèvres china, but of good stone earthenware’.
Certainly the theme of honour in an adventure story has to be accepted in an historical context and if possible with a determined suspension of disbelief.
How many of the popular novels of the past evoke derision rather than appreciation if we read them in too literal a spirit!
We have to think ourselves back into a social system and culture very different from our own if we are to respond, in the way P. C. Wren required, to the improbable events and exalted sentiments of the three Geste brothers who, to serve their adored aunt and their fraternal obligations, vanished into the Foreign Legion, taking upon themselves the imputation of having stolen the blue diamond which she had long ago sold and replaced by a fake for the sake of her extravagant husband.
How cruel, to present-day ears, sounds her final comment on the misguided heroism of the brothers —‘a beau geste indeed’.
The self-imposed exile of the handsome flâneur , the Honourable Bertie Cecil, hero of Ouida's Under Two Flags , and his secret, heroic service with the French against the Arabs in North Africa, depends in the same way on the reader's acceptance of social and military codes of honour strained to the limit to provide a sensational story.
Fiction reflects the changes in the concept of honour, personal or institutional, sorting out the basic scruples of conscience and the natural feelings of compassion and devotion which must be newly defined for each and every period in time.
Paul Girouard in The Return to Camelot pointed out that the chivalric code of conduct ‘never recovered from the Great War partly because the War itself was such a shattering of illusions, partly because it helped to produce a world in which the necessary conditions for chivalry were increasingly absent’ and that the absence of so many men at the Front ‘had put women in a position of responsibility which made many of them distrust chivalry as a form of concealed slavery’.
It is still possible to adapt oneself to the atmosphere of the romantic, chivalric adventure provided we can be genuinely captured by the characters.
This may mean ignoring the frequent assertion by critics that in adventure stones character must be subordinate to action.
By this dogma, Conrad's novels should be regarded as outside the conventions of the adventure genre because of the dominance of self-analysis in them.
Lord David Cecil wrote of Conrad:
His ideal hero was a knightly hero who besides being brave and loyal was dignified, chivalrous, compassionate and vowed to the service of a rigid standard of personal conduct, the slightest violation of which is an unappeasable torment to his conscience.
It is a stain on his inner ideal of himself, his honour; and the conception of personal honour is the centre of Conrad's moral system.
The man who preserves it is saved, the man who loses it is damned.
Personal honour will affect us in so far as we can believe in the man or woman who defends or loses it.
The Geste brothers are stereotypes and may be laughed at with impunity: but Charles Wogan, as A. E. W. Mason saw him in Clementina , and the ingenuous John Ridd, self-revealing narrator of Lorna Doone , exemplify the intricacies of love and honour in a way that transcends period and social niceties.
The particular combination of dignity and personal pride which governs John Ridd's behaviour through his many years of devoted service to Lorna Doone is carefully related to the social attitudes of rural Somerset at the time of the Restoration.
Indeed, the romantic flavour of the story depends in part on the tantalising yet inevitable growth of love between the yeoman farmer, proud of his physical strength and family background yet accepting his place in society below the squirearchy, and the girl, supposedly one of the Doones, aristocrats in exile after the Civil  War, but in fact the kidnapped daughter of noble Scottish parents.
John Ridd's sense of honour is practical as well as idealistic and his motives are relevant outside their historical context.
Besides, his robust narrative voice carries with it a quiet irony as the reader sees more than he realises of this attractively vigorous and unaffected hero.
It may be as much for the homely, recognisable nature of this particular hero as for the energy and drama of the story that Lorna Doone has remained a classic for more than a century, and a classic adopted by the young for their own reading.
It is mainly to adult adventure stones that they must look for the romantic and chivalric manifestations of love towards which they reach in adolescence; such feelings are by convention regarded as unseemly and unsuitable in books written specifically for the young.
Isabelle Jan surmised that the lack of ‘the essential emotional outlet of erotic passion’ in children's literature led to ‘more or less disguised and distorted substitutes for adult love’but goes on to point out that passionate feeling can be, and is, expressed strongly in family relationships.
Such relationships belong to problem novels, rather than to novels of action, to fiction where a place is not the scene in which action develops but a certain spot where characters place themselves in order to talk.
Dialogue or soliloquy come first: action is confined to minor stage directions concerning gesture or the kind of movements called, by biologists, displacement activity.
When young people play central parts in adventure stones, their motives and actions are as a rule suitably moderated nor are they expected to concern themselves with elaborate points of honour.
Yet this is an area where the emotional strength of junior adventures, so often timid and inadequate, could be deepened if the concept of honour in its universal sense were to be recognised.
A remarkable film of 1955,Rebel without a Cause , claimed as ‘new realism’ when it was first screened, showed delinquent boys and girls in the mid-teens proving their worth in ‘chicken’contests whose violence, distorted as it is by social pressures, does express a genuine personal pride: the dares and challenges of the groups of Hell's Angels today, leading to criminal actions, have a distant debased origin in the concept of honour.
The remarkable novels of S. E. Hinton — for instance,The Outsiders and That Was Then, This Is Now — describe the operation of honour as it exists within American city gangs with a passionate conviction one looks for in vain in many similar contemporary adventure fictions.
The concept of honour, artificial as it can often seem, can be an abiding emotional force in fiction, but only when it is  demonstrated fully and specifically through believable characters as well as believable action.
To take a particular example, loyalty to a cause and to an individual is demonstrated with great variety in a body of fiction which has come to be known generically as Ruritanian romance.
4
Ruritania
The barrister Anthony Hope Hawkins was walking back from Westminster Crown Court to the Temple on 28 November 1893, having won his case, when the idea of Ruritania came into his head:
Arrived at my chambers, I reviewed it over a pipe and the next day I wrote the first chapter.
Though sometimes interrupted by law work, I sat tight at the story, sometimes writing as much as two chapters a day.
I was only once seriously ‘stuck up’; I seemed to have got ‘The Prisoner’ so tightly shut up in ‘Zenda’that it was impossible to get him out of it.
But that difficulty was in the end surmounted and, on the whole, the writing was easy and pleasurable.
A light touch, no excessive ambition but an evident enthusiasm, produced a masterpiece.
With The Prisoner of Zenda and its sequel,Rupert of Hentzau (and with the less well-known novels,The Heart of Princess Osra and Sophy of Kravonia ) Anthony Hope created a subspecies of the adventure story and a useful literary adjective.
Taking the ingredients of the cloak-and-dagger historical novel current in his time, he gave his imaginary country certain recognisable Central European characteristics but only one or two passing references to Vienna and Dresden gave it anything like a real location.
Ruritania and its dynastic problems remain separate from the complexities of Europe at the end of the nineteenth century.
Dorothy Sayers, discussing the literary tastes of one of her characters, the Russian exile Paul Alexis, said of the Ruritanian type of story that ‘the greater European powers of the League of Nations had nothing to do with the matter’:
The rise and fall of governments appeared to be a private arrangement, comfortably thrashed out among a selection of small Balkan states, vaguely situated, acknowledging no relationships outside the domestic circle.
No literature could have been better suited for the release of the subconscious.
Anthony Hope's detachment meant that his story could be free from contemporary political overtones: if he was expressing any apprehensions about the state of Europe, they were not visible in his books as they are in Erskine Childers's thriller,The Riddle of the Sands , or in Buchan's ‘Ruritanian’ novels.
To the conventions  of the romantic historical novel, then, Anthony Hope added the colour of society in his day and the pattern of love and courtship which appear, in a far less interesting way, in his novels of his own London society, and he drew in a more general way from the Victorian version of medieval chivalry, with its idealisation of woman and its desire for service to an ideal.
As Paul Girouard puts it:
Anthony Hope's inspired invention of Ruritania allowed him to move his English hero straight from modern clubland into a world of castles, kings, beautiful women, and feudal loyalties.
The invention of Ruritania led to many descendants, all declaring their ancestry in the ‘a’ suffix, from Buchan's Evallonia and George Birmingham's Lystra to countries invented for young readers like Frances Hodgson Burnett's Samavia, Noel Streatfeild's Livia, Serraillier's Silvania, Adnan Alington's Rumelia and Harnet Graham's Zoraya.
The likenesses and differences within this unique group of adventure stones are illuminating from the point of view of both social and literary change.
Anthony Hope would hardly have supported any grandiose claims for his tales of Ruritania.
He himself said that the root idea of The Prisoner of Zenda was ‘the old and wide-spread theme of ‘mistaken identity’ as a starting-point for the writer's development of ‘characters, emotions and incidents and his exploration of dramatic possibilities’.’
Modestly he suggested:
I think that the two variants which struck the popular fancy in my little book were royalty and red hair — the former is always a safe card to play, and its combination with the latter had a touch of novelty…
and he could be pleasantly practical about the craft into which he channelled his surplus energies.
The writer, he said:
…reminds me — more than anyone else — of a village cobbler sitting alone in his little shop, cross-legged and considerably absorbed in patching an old shoe to make it fit for more service.
The Prisoner of Zenda and its sequel certainly bear witness to their author's craftsmanship.
His skill in exploiting the idea of mistaken identity ensures that there is no slackening of interest in two novels which are in fact extremely simple in structure, combining lateral movement (on foot, on horseback and, rarely, by train) from the city of Strelsau to the castle and hunting lodge of Zenda and back again and with dialogue through which the motives of these movements are explored and explained.
Both plot and character depend for their effect on the theme of honour  which underpins the two books.
Without this theme, the novels might not have survived, let alone become minor classics; but without characters properly created to promote the theme, there would have been no organic life in the books either.
The starting-point, then, is the idea of identical men of very different environments and the hereditary reasons why English Rudolf Rassendyll so strikingly resembles Rudolf, King of Ruritania.
As the narrator of The Prisoner of Zenda , Rassendyll is at first inclined to be deprecating about the relationships between ‘the palace at Strelsau or the castle of Zenda and Number 305 Park Lane, W.’ He is well aware that his brother, Lord Burlesdon, prefers to forget the misbehaviour, in 1733, of Rudolf the Third of Ruritania and the Countess Amelia, wife of the fifth Earl of Burlesdon and twenty-second Baron Rassendyll, which resulted in the transmission of certain characteristics (’long, sharp, straight noses and a quantity of dark red hair’as well as blue eyes rather than the dark hue more common to the Rassendylls) in several generations of the family.
It was to satisfy a roving disposition and an idle curiosity rather than any deep ideal that Rudolf Rassendyll, man-about-town, decided on impulse while travelling in France to visit Strelsau for the coronation of Rudolf the Fifth.
The fact that he had been given the Elphberg name of Rudolf by a Royalist father was of small importance to him, nor was he at first more than casually intrigued when he woke from a strangely prophetic dream in the forest of Zenda to hear two men discussing the remarkable resemblance between him and the King.
He was respectful but unalarmed when the King appeared and after a moment's silence he chose to laugh at the likeness and the revelation that they were distant cousins; indeed, so little was Rassendyll impressed that he noted that the King's mouth lacked ‘something of the firmness (or obstinacy) which was to be gathered from my close-shutting lips’.
This was the first of many hints by which the reader would come to understand, before Rassendyll himself, how deep and important the difference in character was by contrast with the ‘striking, salient, wonderful’ physical likeness.
The neat, symmetrical plot turns on just this physical likeness.
Invited to join the King, with his companions the Chancellor Colonel Sapt and his aide-de-camp Fritz von Tarlenheim, on the ruler's last night of freedom before he takes up the burden of the Crown, Rassendyll is conveniently available to step in when the monarch collapses, drugged by wine presented by his jealous brother Black Michael.
Rassendyll accepts the plan in a spirit of adventure and with some reluctance sacrifices his beard to the  need of the moment (a practical detail which helps veracity at the right time).
The impersonation so lightly undertaken proves necessary for more than one day, for the King becomes the ‘Prisoner’ of his ruthless brother.
It is renewed (in the sequel,Rupert of Hentzau ) for a further period when, after an interval of some years, the machinations of Michael's nephew Rupert lead to the King's death and loyal Sapt appeals to Rassendyll once more for help.
The plot of each book is built on the physical fact of impersonation: the emotional content depends on character, as the Englishman in effect proves himself worthy to be a king in more than mere appearance.
This does not imply that Rassendyll is developed as a character in the round.
His role is to exemplify the theme of the two novels, the conflict between love and honour.
Introduced initially as an agreeable aristocrat, he faces his first real challenge when he falls in love with the King's cousin and destined bride, the Princess Flavia, with chivalric self-denial.
When circumstances have revealed his true identity to Flavia, and she has reaffirmed, with some maidenly shame, her own love for him, he accepts exile from her in terms which are general and romantic rather than individual:
‘…your ring shall be on my finger and your heart in mine, and no touch save of your lips will ever be on mine.
So, may God comfort you, my darling.’…
and he renounces all but one annual link with her, at which time he meets von Tarlenheim in Dresden and receives from him:
…a little box; in it a red rose, and round the stalk of the rose is a slip of paper with the words written: ‘Rudolf — Flavia — always’ and the like I send back by him.
That message, and the wearing of the rings, are all that now bind me and the Queen of Ruritania.
Three years later, after a letter unwisely sent by Flavia has fallen into the hands of the bitterly ambitious Rupert of Hentzau, Rassendyll has a harsher temptation to withstand.
The King's death must be concealed if the throne is to be secured for Queen Flavia.
He could fall in with the desire of Sapt, marry her secretly and fill the empty place in the Elphberg dynasty.
The struggle with his conscience comes to the reader at second-hand as the narrator, von Tarlenheim, watches him pacing in the garden and guesses at his thoughts.
This puts any deep analysis out of the question and Rassendyll can remain the conventional, generalised preux chevalier which the story demands, dying with his  honour intact but with his love unachieved.
His courage and nobility are innate rather than acquired through circumstances; he is no commoner swept into lofty office but an Elphberg by inheritance.
The contrast between the two men of near-identical appearance is shown in a less formal, more novelistic manner in the character of the King, depicted in The Prisoner of Zenda as a weak, pleasure-loving young man trying to equip himself for his destiny and in Rupert of Hentzau as a man ill in body, weaned by matters of state, gradually coming to resent his obligations to the man whose courage and energy have twice saved his position for him and burdened by jealous suspicions of his wife's fidelity.
Brief though von Tarlenheim's account of the King's behaviour is, it is enough to establish a genuine emotional situation and to explain the change in the Queen, from the regal figure of The Prisoner of Zenda , proud in the confidence that the honour of Ruritania will be safe for ever with her, to the woman weary of renunciation who, in Rupert of Hentzau , breaks the compact of silence with her dangerously imprudent letter.
If Flavia's passion and occasional petulance in the second book diminish her from the dedicated Elphberg to a woman of lesser breed, she becomes more individual, a more positive key to the course of a story which, as compelling as The Prisoner of Zenda in its chases and escapes, its dark streets and darker forests, and as strongly tied by the theme of honour, is subtly more human than its predecessor.
There was no room in either of the two books for more than a suggestion of the way a woman might be changed by a complicated political and personal dilemma.
The subtle and interesting studies of personality in The Heart of Princess Osra and Sophy of Kravonia show what Anthony Hope could do when he decided to shape his fiction wholly round a feminine concept of honour.
If the two novels were to be recast in late post-Freudian terms it would be clear how completely our attitudes have changed towards amatory and social matters: it is difficult to read the Ruritanian stones now in the way Anthony Hope's first readers did and not to dismiss them as mere escapist romances.
To read them in an historical frame of mind is to see the death of Rassendyll, by an assassin's bullet, not as a fortunate escape from prolonged misery but as the formal seal on a pact of honour.
Von Tarlenheim shows the way to a proper assessment of the theme of Rupert of Hentzau , as of The Prisoner of Zenda :
To me it seems now as though all had ended well.
I must not be misunderstood.
My heart is still sore for the loss of him.
But we saved the Queen's fair fame, and to Rudolf himself the fatal stroke  came as a relief from a choice too difficult: on the one side lay what impaired his own honour, on the other what threatened hers.
As I think on this my anger at his death is less, though my grief cannot be.
To this day I know not how he chose; no, and I don't know how he should have chosen.
Yet he had chosen, for his face was calm and clear.
If Rassendyll escapes being a sentimental hero it is because of the spare, simple plots and the headlong speed of the narrative which carry his idealistic musings along.
The importance of speed and simplicity in stones of this type and theme is evident if we compare Rassendyll's moments of decision with the amorous niceties of some of Jeffery Farnol's heroes who offered succulent romance to the readers of a later decade through elaborate problems of honour.
The unique atmosphere of Anthony Hope's Ruritania, its compound of energy and idealism, of courtly formality and personal passion, has never been precisely evoked in any of its numerous imitations.
Parody can sometimes get to the heart of the matter in a way that imitation cannot, and George Birmingham's King Tommy is genuinely Ruritanian in its quirky way.
Whether this ebullient novel of 1923 is to be considered as a parody or just as a light-hearted analogue of The Prisoner of Zenda , the resemblances are too close to be mere coincidence.
The cast of characters is evidence enough of the approach: a fashionable young baronet intended by his ambitious politician uncle to marry the Princess of Lystria; an exiled king running a fashionable London restaurant; two pretty dancers, one royal and one plebeian; a curate on holiday who strikingly resembles the baronet — with such components, the square dance performed through Central Europe is both neat and exciting.
It allows for gentle but shrewd mockery of Ruritania, most of all when Tommy Norreys, mistaken for Lord Norheys, is actually crowned King of Lystria.
The plan meets the garrulous approval of the exiled monarch Wladislas, who calls himself ‘a middle-class professional man’ and who is relieved to escape from the rivalry of priests and nobles and the expense of entertaining courtiers of extravagant tastes who ‘love dressing up in uniforms, putting on swords and attending state balls’and whose appetites are such that ‘a bullock roasted whole and a couple of pigs go no distance at a supper table in Lystria’.
The gentle mockery of Ruritanian dignity continues in the account of Tommy's reception at the palace by the Patriarch and his entourage:
The other two held aloft a kind of canopy made of embroidered silk, not unlike a huge two-handled umbrella.
If they had held it, as they should, over the Patriarch's head, it might have kept the dew from settling on his mitre.
Held crooked, a little behind him, it served no useful purpose.
But it was highly striking and ornamental…
and in the entertaining glimpse of the new King:
Tommy had been fitted out by Count Albert Casimir in a very handsome crimson silk suit with a jacket laced hussar fashion, with gold.
I noticed that he wore one of his own clerical collars round his neck.
Perhaps this was his idea of full dress for a ceremonial occasion.
Perhaps he did it to please the Patriarch.
The phrase ‘fitted out’ neatly underlines the attitude of the narrator, the curate's Uncle Bill (whose voice is, of course, the author's).
The verbal pinpricks are shrewdly administered in a story indulgent to the conscious flippancy of the early 1920s; from our own angle of vision it seems as though one socially artificial and isolated world is being used to comment on an earlier, equally artificial and isolated one.
The courtly side of Ruritania which George Birmingham happily played with gave another writer in the 1920s, Dornford Yates, a way to embellish thrillers which were basically unoriginal.
In his ‘Chandos’ novels he created a kind of private Ruritania in sundry duchies and noble estates within the borders of Austria, combining a high idealistic approach to women and active physical courage in a setting of noble families and ancient domains which offer in some ways a post-war version of Anthony Hope's novels, though his plots concerned private theft and murder rather than matters of state.
However convenient the conflict of love and honour may have been to Anthony Hope as the motive force of his books, he treated it seriously within their emotional climate.
Dornford Yates expressed his idea of honour in a tone of heightened sentiment and suggested sexuality, an obverse perhaps of the permissiveness of that post-war society.
He seems to have found it more difficult to extrapolate remote, romantic adventures from the complex, changing world of the 1920s and after than Anthony Hope found it to transport a late-Victorian man-about-town to a small Central European kingdom.
At any rate Dornford Yates's highly artificial, mannered prose style, which may have spelled ‘romance’ to his first readers, moves his books further from us today than Anthony Hope's active style and his very moderate use of courtly language.
The prose of Dornford Yates, intended to evoke the codes and  idiom of chivalry, has been described as ‘Lincoln's Inn prose laced with Jacobethan’.
His characters never wash their hands but ‘lave’ them; his robust heroes are ‘gentle’and ‘debonair’; feet are ‘shod’, fields are ‘meadows’and pigs always ‘swine’, while tags from the Bible and Shakespeare encrust the tales further.
Such mannerisms muffle the cleaner, more direct prose that carries splendidly compelling descriptions — static, of dungeons, thickets, wells and tunnels or active, of fist- and gunfights, sieges or car chases.
His proper names show the same self-conscious striving for a romantic atmosphere.
Within Carinthia (itself a province sufficiently remote from the Austria known to the 1920s to seem Ruritanian) lie the castles of Littain, Hohenem, Varvic, Midian, Reichtenberg and Gath; the noble heroines make their champions free of such Christian names as Leonie, Olivia and Marya; pseudonymous villains like Barabbas, ‘Rose’ Noble, Pluto and Onon Forecast cast their shadows forward to the works of Ian Fleming and the only truly villainous female glares at her enemies as ‘Vanity Fayre’.
All this is top-dressing.
There is no genuinely heroic tone in the books.
In Blind Corner Dornford Yates condemned his characters to days of digging for the Wagenburg treasure in a well so deep and cold that Richard Chandos comments on the absurd situation in which he and his comrades, who have bought the castle under the noses of their villainous rivals, live in constant dread of discovery, while their enemies, in possession above, come and go as they please.
A reader has pencilled the following comment in a library copy of the work:
But in that case, why could they not have called in the authorities and have the other fellows cleared out?— only this would have made but a tame end to the story.
A timely point and one which could be made into a test of this kind of narrative by which an author may be seen to have succeeded or failed to create the necessary suspension of disbelief.
It is the emotional and dynamic tug of a story which must prevent us from reading in too literal a spirit.
Chivalry is a dominant thread in the Chandos thrillers rather than a serious theme.
This is partly to say that Richard Chandos and his frequent companion-in-arms, George Hanbury, are commonplace adventurers compared with Rudolf Rassendyll, in spite of the resonance of Chandos's name.
More important, the code of honour is hardly consistent.
The claim of the ‘good’ characters to the Wagenburg treasure is no better justified than that of the rival  party under Ellis, even if his murder of a secret service man does inspire Jonathan Mansel, who makes a third with Chandos and Hanbury, and who heard the dying man's last words, to engage upon the adventure:
Whether the lust for gold had mastered us, whether a hatred of the thieves suffused our outlook, whether their attempts to thwart it had not toughened our resolve I cannot say: but I know that after the bomb had been thrown into our midst, we would, one and all, have died in agony rather than let the treasure fall into the enemy's hands.
The buccaneer impulse revealed in these artless words accounts for the vigorous campaigns against other villains in other castles, though the immediate object is almost always the traditional one of help for a distressed damsel.
Ruritanian romance, like any other kind of adventure story, has the prime duty of making the artificial seem real, of establishing validity for a studied, carefully composed sequence of events.
It is perhaps in part a matter of date which makes Dornford Yates's novels seem high-flown and absurd to us where we can accommodate ourselves to the formalities of Anthony Hope's Ruritania.
The society in which Dornford Yates's chivalrous heroes ride out in their Rolls-Royces to combat evil is too near to our own to be viewed historically.
The beautiful, high-born maidens who wait to be rescued, or who in chaste comradeship help in their own rescue, are too readily recognised as akin to the heroines of our own time.
Anthony Hope wisely avoided set-piece descriptions of his noble ladies: in Dornford Yates's portraits chivalry becomes ludicrous.
Idealising his tall, slender ladies, he dwells lovingly on tiny feet from which their champions remove dainty shoes.
He ignores the fact that tall girls would probably have feet of commensurate size: foot fetishists would not find size-seven brogues as attractive as court slippers several sizes smaller.
On a less superficial note, the chastity which is an essential part of the chivalric code is presented in terms of sentimental sensuality disguised in a semblance of courtly love.
In Perishable Goods , Jonah Mansel's restraint in concealing his love for Adèle, wife of Boy Pleydell, is made more difficult when the villain Rose Noble uses stolen letters to force Mansel into submission.
Chandos, as narrator, describes the two who have agreed to remain loving friends with the luscious approval that ‘suddenly faced with life in the midst of death, two natures so alike and so peerless should have comforted each other’; they have in fact exchanged a kiss.
Mansel lies wounded and apparently dying:
Upon the great bed sat Adèle, steady-eyed as ever, but very pale.
She might have been Eve, as Milton has pictured her, sitting upon the green bank, looking into the pool.
Her left arm propped her, and she was sitting sideways, after the way of a child: one ring of the broken handcuff was still about her slim leg.
Her hand was in Mansel's, and their two hands lay in her lap: her beautiful head was bowed, and her eyes never left the eyes of the man she loved.
On her other side lay Testa [Mansel's terrier], close up against his lord.
Mansel's left hand was upon him; but though, I think, he would have licked it, the poor scrap never moved, but lay as still as an image, with his chin on his little paws and his eyes upon Mansel's face.
It is only too easy to isolate the hectic emotionalism and artificial situations in the Chandos novels at the expense of their considerable virtues as thrillers, ingeniously varied in scene and skilful in the use of pace and tension.
Yet because Dornford Yates did to some extent invoke Ruritania in plot and mood it is fair to point to the way in which the code of chivalry has been debased and sentimentalised.
This is all the more apparent when the Chandos stones are compared with three linked novels —Huntingtower ,Castle Gay and The House of the Four Wind — in which John Buchan at the same period explored the code of honour through the fortunes of Saskia, a distressed maiden, and the dynastic troubles of the fictitious kingdom of Evallonia.
Although there is much in these three books to put them in the category of Ruritanian adventure, Scott may be a stronger influence.
It is significant that Buchan gave his middle-aged hero, the Glasgow grocer Dickson McCunn, a literary ancestry:.
the dedication to Huntingtower explains that McCunn can claim descent from Baillie Nicol Jarvie in Rob Roy and that ‘he can count kin, should he wish’ with Rob Roy himself through ‘the auld wife ayont the fire at Stackavrallachan’, while a secret fervour for the lost cause of the Stuarts helps to equip the sedentary, fifty-five-year-old grocer of the 1920s for unexpected challenges.
The development of Dickson McCunn as a hero will be considered more fully later.
At present his status in the three books is relevant because it serves to establish Buchan's particularly energetic version of Ruritanian adventure and the irony and humour with which he tempers the romantic colour of his fiction.
Three men of traditional type act as foils to McCunn.
John Heritage, an avant-garde poet, reveals the heart of a Rassendyll when Saskia appears to call forth his chivalrous pity; her absent  fiancé Alexis, toughened by circumstances as an exile in Australia, is as regal and remote a figure as the villain Paul Abreskov, impelled to crime through the bitterness of physical imperfection but magnificent as a ‘lost angel’.
The contrast between these three characters with their orthodox ancestry in story and the plain, middle-class grocer is a piquant one.
Buchan chose to express it indirectly through the musings of the young Russian princess Saskia:
‘I have been back among the fairy tales…
Mr Heritage?
He is youth…and poetry, perhaps, and a soldier's tradition.
I think I know him…
But what about Dickson?
He is the petit bourgeois , the épicier , the class which the world ridicules.
He is unbeatable.
The others with good fortune I might find elsewhere — in Russia perhaps.
But not Dickson.’
Alexis replies in the voice of British patriotism and political awareness:
‘You will not find him in Russia.
He is what they call the middleclass, which we who were foolish used to laugh at.
But he is the stuff which above all others makes a great people.
He will endure when aristocracies crack and proletariats crumble.
In our own land we have never known him, but till we create him our land will not be a nation.’
Huntingtower , a story of exotic intrigue, is Ruritanian in tone if not in geography, with the exiled princess imprisoned in an ugly pseudo-Tudor mansion at the instigation of Paul, who needs the jewels she has guarded for her fellow-exiles for his plots against the Evallonian government.
It is her gallant courage as much as the danger she is in which impels Heritage and his chance-met companion Dickson McCunn to rescue her from her prison and, eventually, to defeat her persecutors.
The novel departs clearly from Anthony Hope's tale in this element of the power politics of the 1920s.
Buchan used Evallonia as an image of the great power which he feared and the fictitious kingdom, into whose affairs McCunn stumbles more completely six years later (in Castle Gay), is allowed convincing links with reality:
It will be remembered that a republic had been established there in 1919, apparently with the consent of its people.
But rifts had since appeared within the lute.
There was a strong monarchist party among the Evallonians, who wished to reinstate their former dynasty, at present represented by an attractive young prince, and at the same time insisted on the revision of Evallonian boundaries.
But in fact the fortunes of Evallonia are not of prime importance in the novels, either as romantic or actual politics.
The  moves and countermoves of Republicans and Royalists in two rented Scottish mansions, Castle Gay and Knockraw, are directed by Buchan to one point, the apotheosis of a middle-aged man, Thomas Carlyle Craw, who has risen by his own efforts from a poor background to become the millionaire owner of an influential newspaper group.
He has built up a reputation for naïvely self-important pronouncements on the state of the world and for a determined shunning of personal publicity, but circumstances force him to stand by his words when the Evallonian Royalists seek his support.
The troubles of kidnapped, intimidated Craw are central to the book but not in the usual romantic way, in spite of the Jacobite overtones of the plot and the brief appearance of the Republican leader, the Communist Mastrovin, ‘the most subtle and dangerous mind in Europe today’.
Castle Gay is not primarily a thriller in spite of its lively excitements.
The gleeful irony in the tale dominates it as it explores the character of a testy, vain man of sedentary habits changing into a comparatively humble, sensible and useful citizen.
High adventure drew from Dickson McCunn a latent heroism: Thomas Carlyle Craw had buried his sense and courage far more deeply but they are at least glimpsed at the end of an adventure story which interprets the concept of honour in terms of individual rather than of chivalric motives.
A castle, a mansion and an inn in Austria provide a more directly Ruritanian setting for The House of the Four Winds but the coincidental meetings and puzzles of identity which engage Dickson McCunn and other characters from Castle Gay are worked out with a somewhat mechanical expertise.
The groups in Evallonia — the supporters of the romantic Prince John, the Juventus league of disaffected youth and its leader, the dashing Countess Araminta Troyos, the sinister Mastrovin and his anarchic associates — serve almost too obviously to express once more Buchan's fears for the post-war world of the 1920s and after.
Randal Glynde, as a secret agent, analyses the situation formally:
‘We are now in the midst of the retarded liquidation of the war.
I do not mean debts and currencies and economic fabrics, but something much more vital — the thoughts of man.
The democracies have lost confidence.
So long as they believed in themselves they could make shift with constitutions and parliaments and dull republics.
But once let them lose confidence, and they are like children in the dark, reaching out for the grasp of a strong hand.
That way lies the dictator.
It might be the monarch if we bred the right kind of king…
Also there is something more dangerous still, a stirring of  youth, disappointed, aggrieved youth, which has never known the discipline of war.
Imaginative and incalculable youth, which clamours for the moon and may not be content till it has damaged most of the street lamps.’
The important point about disillusioned youth is somewhat slackly followed up in the book.
Its champion, Countess Araminta, is conceived as a woman of the calibre of Hilda von Einem in Greenmantle but she never fulfils this introduction, while Mastrovin, that ‘survivor of old black days’, is helpless against the common sense of McCunn and the elementary cunning of the diplomat Archie Roylance.
The status of royalty comes in for summary treatment when one candidate for the throne of Evallonia, offered the support of the young revolutionaries, declines the honour.
Count Jovian, after three years at an English university, has no mind to sit on a throne:
‘…in such a thing I do not trust myself.
Your wretched England has spoiled me.
I do not want pomp and glory.
I should yawn my head off in a palace, and I should laugh during the most solemn ceremonies, and I should certainly beat my Ministers.
I desire to remain a private gentleman and some day to win your Grand National.’
In the end it is left to Dickson McCunn to further the romantic element of the book when he impersonates the chosen royal candidate, the elderly and ailing Archduke Hadrian.
There is a peculiar appropriateness, especially to readers of today, in the use of the Glasgow grocer to reconcile the mixture of Ruritanian romance and political forecast in this late Buchan thriller, whose emotional direction is never entirely clear.
Another romantic element is introduced intermittently through the attachment of the aristocratic Alison Westwater and humble Jaikie Galt, a rugby player of international repute whose lighthearted approach to Evallonian politics deepens as he listens to Alison's analysis of the situation.
If the Ruritanian tributary was to flow into the country of junior fiction, it could only be in a narrower channel.
Of the two aspects of chivalric honour, love and patriotism, the former would be misplaced in an adventure story for children.
By the time the permissive climate of the late 1960s had come to allow boys and girls to admit tender feelings for one another, the first faint notes of anti-sexist protest ensured that girls would no longer be content to be victims awaiting rescue by dauntless boys.
Politics, however — at least in the sense of nationalist feeling — had for many decades been an important and  even a dominant theme in children's fiction, and we would expect to find Ruritanian stones using nationalistic honour as a theme at least in books where adventure made any pretence of being more than a game.
Even so, that mixture of emotion and social need, of personal pride and territorial inspiration, which we call honour, is not easily brought to life for young readers.
Frances Hodgson Burnett found a way by describing how a father handed on his code of honour to his son.
The honour of Samavia, the restoring of the true monarchy after five centuries of unrest and tyranny, provide the theme of The Lost Prince , underpinning a plot which in its own way echoed the rags-to-riches pattern of other novels by Frances Hodgson Burnett, for adults as well as for children.
The Lost Prince is in more than one sense a transitional book.
Samavia is represented as a small country, unstable in government and under pressure from stronger neighbours.
The story takes place at an unspecified date but clearly in the years immediately before the First World War.
It was written during the latter part of 1913 and the first half of 1914 and for part of that time the author was travelling in Austria.
The situation in Europe and especially the history of Serbia must have influenced her in her choice of subject and in this sense her book looks forward to Buchan rather than back to Anthony Hope.
There is, though, no overt mention of current international affairs.
This romantic tale casts back to Ruritania especially in the implied distinction between city and country.
It is shepherds and mountain folk who have remained loyal over the centuries to the true royal line.
In caves and hill-strongholds the legend has persisted of the Lost Prince, Igor Fedorovitch, said to have survived the assassination of his father; and it is mainly among ‘simple, pastoral folk’ that the Forgers of the Sword have been slowly gathering support for the restoration of the rightful king, after his existence and identity have been discovered.
The defence of honour as a theme gives emotional and moral substance to a book that has also the ingredients of a junior adventure story.
A journalist living in straitened circumstances in London, Lorestan has brought up his son Marco to feel an intense loyalty to the country from which they are exiled.
When the story begins Marco, a strong, handsome lad of twelve, is beginning to see more meaning in the oath he has so often sworn on his father's sword, brought out from its hiding-place under the floorboards of their lodging:
‘The sword in my hand — for Samavia!
The heart in my breast — for Samavia!


The swiftness of my sight, the thought of my brain, the life of my
life — for Samavia!
Here grows a man for Samavia,
God be thanked!’
Explaining, now, more of the past history of Samavia, Lorestan reveals that the Lost Prince has been found, the time has come for the corrupt government to be overthrown and the message must be carried through Europe that ‘the lamp is lighted’.
The years of training in which Marco has learned from his father to be brave and loyal, to be secret and silent, are now to be proved: he is to be the messenger.
Education is dominant in all Frances Hodgson Burnett's novels.
The Lost Prince in particular belongs to a long tradition of didacticism in stones for the young while in its rapid pace and direct style it looks forward to the growing body of junior adventure stones of the late 1920s and the 1930s when children were to play a leading, active part in important, often great events.
Marco has been brought up by his rather in a way designed to fit him for the future.
Dramatic irony allows the reader to know that he is in fact the son of the ‘Lost Prince’, and a lost prince himself, rather than, as he supposes, one of many Samavians of high birth long in exile.
Beside this deliberate, purposive teaching the author has set a second kind of education which is just as moving and as important to the story.
On his way home to Philibert Place one day, Marco wanders through an alley to waste ground where a hunchbacked boy pushing himself on a makeshift trolley is reading to his ragged companions from a newspaper — about Samavia.
This first encounter between Marco and the boy known as the Rat is not friendly — at least not until the two lads, each with his own particular air of authority, have confirmed their direct loyalty to the disturbed country and have begun to work out for the ‘Club’ a youthful but intelligent strategy for revolution.
The Rat, rough and aggressive as he is, has been, like Marco, educated by his father, but in a random way:
…his wretched father, who had each year sunk lower and lower in the underworld, had been a gentleman once, a man who had been familiar with good manners and had been educated in the customs of good breeding.
Sometimes when he was drunk, and sometimes when he was partly sober, he talked to the Rat of many things the boy would otherwise never have heard of.
That was why the lad was different from the other vagabonds.
The boy's natural intellect had somehow survived and grown in unpromising circumstances.
He had added to the crumbs of  education thrown to him by his father an ambition of his own focused on Samavia — not, to him, a real place so much as a symbol of satisfying large issues to take him out of a drab world.
Marco's father realises that the quick wits developed in the London slums and the boy's everyday, practical good sense make him a perfect companion (aide-de-camp, as he likes to be designated) for the quietly ardent, reflective Marco.
He offers to Samavia a loyalty as warm as Marco's but deriving partly from hero-worship as he comes to find in Lorestan a father-figure.
The two boys become in a sense a composite hero, complementary to one another and useful to the story in a purely formal way.
For the dialogue needed to reveal character there must be two people and in many scenes on the journey through Europe two questers are needed to enhance tension and to shape events plausibly.
Besides, Marco is in something of the position of Anthony Hope's Rassendyll: he is a representative, the royal candidate, as well as a boy of twelve, and we need to feel that he stands a little apart from the stance of an ordinary boy-hero.
There is a significant difference, and I do not feel it is only a class and an age difference, between the spare dignity of the oath Marco has learned from his early years and the oath which the Rat has devised as part of the game he has created for his Club:
‘To swear to stand any torture and submit in silence to any death rather than betray our secret and our King.
We will obey in silence and in secret.
We will swim through seas of blood, fight our way through lakes of fire, if we are ordered.
Nothing shall bar our way.
All we do and say and think is for our country and our King.
If any of you have anything to say, speak out before you take the oath.
Marco's devotion to Samavia, given his reflective nature, could easily have seemed priggish if he had not had the Rat as a foil, with his quick memory and his youthful ingenuity.
Lorestan has equipped his son, over painstaking months, with tools for the journey — maps, languages, portraits of individuals to be assimilated.
He has equipped him, too, with a moral certainty which the Rat recognises and envies.
To him it is like magic, but Marco explains it as laws of nature as seen by his father:
‘You have to be either on one side or the other, like an army.
You choose your side.
You either build up or you break down.
You either keep in the light where you can see, or you stand in the dark and fight everything that comes near you, because you cannot see and you think it's an enemy.’
The practical street-boy had, as it were, foreseen what the enterprise would need while he was developing what his gang enjoyed as a game:
‘To all the Secret Ones in Samavia, and to the friends of the Secret Party in every country, the sign must be carried.
It must be carried by someone who could not be suspected.
Who would suspect two boys — and one of them a cripple?
When my father is drunk and beats me, he does it because I won't go out and beg in the streets and bring him the money I get.
He says that people will nearly always give money to a cripple.
I won't be a beggar for him — the swine — but I will be one for Samavia and the Lost Prince.
Marco shall pretend to be my brother and take care of me.’
The final plan, as it is adapted and developed by Lorestan, has less of a boy's melodrama in it but it is the Rat's plan, and it is the Rat who advises Marco to pose as a poor, insignificant boy so that the two of them can reach Samavia without attracting attention.
The contrast between the two boys, fruitful as it is for the novelist, is strong both in the early part of the story, when they are in training, and in the second phase when they work their way from Paris to Rome, to Salzburg, to Vienna.
Shrewd and observant, the Rat is the perfect aide-de-camp, keeping guard at a theatre in Munich where Marco is in danger from kidnappers, watching in the rain under a bush in the garden where a certain prince sympathetic to the cause is to be given the sign.
There is one particular reason why the Rat must be given the role of alert guardian and subordinate.
All through the book there are two points of expectancy for the reader.
First, when will Marco be recognised as the Lost Prince and, secondly, when will he realise his identity?
Though the successive events of the journey are exciting in themselves, dramatic irony adds an edge to them, becoming more telling as the Rat begins to guess the truth.
When an old woman on the mountain curtseys to Marco, when a priest takes the boys to the cave where loyalists have gathered and shows them a portrait of the historic Ivor, the story rises to a climax, but not to the final climax.
This comes only when, after a lowering of tension, the boys are summoned from London to the newly constituted Samavia and Marco, expecting to see his father as a loyal subject near the throne, is rewarded to the full for his devoted service, as he realises it is his father who is the restored King.
Even when The Lost Prince was first published it was often criticised as sentimental but the richness of the story depends on  its emotional tone, on the strands of love, devotion and dependence in Marco's love for his father and on the underlying sense of honour which is communicated in different ways by Lorestan, Marco and the Rat.
It is true that Frances Hodgson Burnett probably also put into the character of Marco, as she did with that of Cedric Errol, something of her own feelings for her dead son Lionel.
Ann Thwaite, in her biography Waiting for the Party , suggests the relevance to The Lost Prince of a certain incident in October 1913.
When two friends, travelling with Mrs Burnett, returned from a visit to an art gallery and showed her a photograph, Mrs Burnett wrote to her sister Edith:
When I looked at it, I cried out in spite of myself.
It was a photograph of a portrait by Van Dyck — the portrait of a boy about fifteen — a young Prince Ruprecht von der Pfaltz of Bavaria and he was so like Lionel that it brought one's heart into one's mouth.
The head, the eyebrows, the shape of the face, the eyes were Lionel's very own.
It gave me strange things to think of when I found myself looking at my own boy's face in a picture painted three hundred years ago!
So Marco, as a character, may carry an intimate image for the author as well as the romantic aura of hidden royal descent.
All the same, he is a boy and not a symbol.
His reactions to a challenge and his mode of speech, his capacity, are all those of a boy trained for a certain duty but not distracted from his natural instincts and responses.
His behaviour is in strong contrast, for instance, to that of Kingston's three swashbuckling, scampering apprentices whose exploits delighted readers of an earlier generation.
The serious backing for the adventure of the lost prince, compounded as it is of romantic but genuine love of country and an equally genuine love of son for father and father for son, gives Frances Hodgson Burnett's tale a richness of texture and an emotional maturity which is not easily matched in later stones for children adopting a similar subject.
If there is any true successor to Frances Hodgson Burnett in her shaping of Ruritanian adventure-romance for young readers that successor is surely Violet Needham, whose linked tales of an unlocated ‘Empire’, the neighbouring kingdoms of Flavonia and Monte Lucio and the duchies of Ornovitza and Trollac, were published between 1939 and 1956.
The nearest to a map-reference which Violet Needham ever gave for her fictional countries may be found in a casual conversation between two schoolboys, one of whom has recently visited:
‘…a queer little place called Ornovitza, tucked away in an eastern corner of Europe, it's rather of the Republic of San Marino type, only it isn't a republic, it's a Duchy.’
Hugh goes on to describe the country:
‘…very flat, all canals and marsh land and big meres; pretty dreary in winter, I expect, though I believe there's very good duck shooting there.’
Unlocated, then, as far as the stones go.
Hilary Wright, in an article on Violet Needham, points out that the various countries are ‘clearly recognizable as pre-1914 Austria-Hungary, with contributions thrown in from France and the Netherlands’, and that it was a world in which Violet Needham had lived herself.
Her father, ‘a younger…and illegitimate, though much loved, son of the eccentric 2nd Earl of Kilmoray’, served in the First Life Guards and was military attaché in Rome from 1895 to 1901; her mother was the daughter of ‘a Dutch nobleman of ancient lineage who had made a fortune out of East Indian tin’.
Born in 1876, Violet Needham was educated at home with a governess like any other conventional girl of her class in the late nineteenth century and grew up ‘to think as a European’.
Hilary Wright feels it would be wrong to call her books ‘Ruritanian’ since they were authentically based.
Yet their geographical characteristics follow the needs of the adventure-plots, with woodland for concealment, canals for transport, mountains where peasants remain loyal to exiled royalty, cities where intrigue is fomented; the association with Anthony Hope's Ruritania seems clear enough.
Precise dating of events is no more necessary than precise locations.
Internal evidence in regard to such details as the use of motor cars or the social idiom and manners of the characters suggests the first two decades of our century but the wise reader will accept a certain anonymity as an integral part of the fiction.
The stories are distanced from any recognisable reality by the tight pattern of codes and relationships proper to the exalted status of the characters and by the tone of the story-telling.
Paradoxically this makes the moral and dynastic problems in the books less taxing to young readers, because they are isolated from the pressures of their own time.
Unfamiliar, clearly posed, these problems are made accessible not quite as history nor yet as fantasy but with something of the acceptable plainness of fairy tale challenges.
These are transitional novels.
In plots and themes they form a bridge from The Lost Prince to the more obviously juvenile world of adventure which Arthur Ransome and others  opened up in the 1930s.
Hilary Wright places the works clearly in period:
Her first published work,The Black Riders , was originally told as bedtime stones to her four small nephews and written down at their insistence, in 1918.
When it was shown to publishers, however, it was rejected as ‘too difficult’, and indeed its young hero has to resolve the different claims of loyalty to an oath and his friends or his duty to his country as represented by the autocratic but not tyrannous government.
The story was put aside for twenty years, then rescued by the wife of one of the now adult nephews, shown to a publisher relation, tried out satisfactorily on his own children and brought out to resounding success.
Violet Needham was by then sixty-three, but for the next eighteen years she produced on average a book a year; not until she was eighty-one did her last book,The Sword of St Cyprian , have to be turned down because her powers were failing.
The moral problems which Violet Needham set for her heroes and heroines, the points of honour appropriate to their royal or aristocratic heritage, belonged to an earlier society than that of her eventual readers, but the exhilaration of adventure was there to help them.
It was possible for a middle-class reader to sympathise with a girl, even if she were a countess, when she entered upon the search for an ancient royal treasure in a thoroughly youthful way, or with a boy who, even if he were a king or at the least a count in eclipse, faced danger and responsibility with the doubts and the dutiful idealism of a public-school upbringing.
Generalisations about dates and trends are always subject to reservations.
Adventure stones overlap in their subject matter, attitudes and characters in a way that can be confusing.
There are constants, all the same, and it is in tracing the way the attributes of adventurous children — their courage, their resourcefulness, their loyalty — change yet remain the same, that the traditions of the adventure story can be verified.
The most obvious link with The Lost Prince (I do not suggest it was a conscious one) is The Emerald Crown , the story of fourteen-year-old Alexander Valesciano, brought up in England by his mother's people and taken after her death to Mavonia, a kingdom usurped from his paternal ancestors seventy years earlier.
The circlet of gold and jewels is a potent symbol of the Vallens dynasty which is re-established through diplomacy and through the wishes of the nation: the acclaiming of the ‘lost prince’ by mountain families, hereditary guardians of the Crown, is strongly reminiscent of the recognition of Marco in Frances Hodgson Burnett's story.
But Alexander and his friend Christine  (who performs something of the Rat's role as aide-de-camp) carry on the quest in the spirit of the junior adventure of the 1930s, with the equipment proper to their years of curiosity, keen eyes and perseverance.
Moreover, Alexander faces a moral problem which Marco, dedicated from his youth to a service in Samavia, did not have to face.
Brought up in an English public school, Alexander is introduced very suddenly to his new destiny and he reacts predictably; when he examines the documents attesting to his birth he feels ‘a sudden thrill of pride’:
Flavonia might not be one of the great powers, but still the name of Vallens had stood, for generations, as a shining example of honour, chivalry and known to all the world…
but the idea of becoming a king seems absurd and increasingly distasteful as Count Trollac, leader of the movement for restoration, explains his obligations.
‘I won't be a king,’ he muttered to himself; ‘they can't force me to; I'm free to make my own life.
I mean to live in England and be a Master of Hounds, not a rotten little king of a rotten little country.
If my father had wanted me to be a king, why didn't he become king himself?
He chose to be an English country gentleman.’
The boy had never been told that his father was killed in battle in Flavonia, in an earlier attempt to seize the throne for the Vallens dynasty.
He accepts the acclamation of the mountain men as a way of saving his playmate from rough handling, after she has found the Crown.
It is not until he sees the motto ‘Quit you like men’ on the Vallens tombs in Flavonia that ‘the burden of fear and foreboding slipped from him’and he sees the task before him not as that of a king struggling after an impossible ideal but as that of a man playing a man's part:
…he might be young, lonely and not a little bewildered, but the way was clear before him at last; he had taken his orders and been given the pass word, he could win through.
The conclusion, grandiloquent as it is, is consistent with the honest fears of a young hero who belongs as much to the junior fiction of the 1930s and early 1940s as to the climate in which Frances Hodgson Burnett was writing.
The behaviour of Violet Needham's young characters and the patterns and manners in her books make them period pieces nowadays; her prim, earnest, winning girls and ardent, courteous boys are as alien to our times as Marco Lorestan is.
We may find a common denominator in one particular character who plays  central or peripheral parts in seven of her ‘Empire’ books.
We first meet Richard Faucenbois as a boy approaching his twelfth birthday in The Black Riders; The Stormy Petrel and The House of the Paladin return to the boy at fourteen and fifteen, when he has already earned his nickname of the Stormy Petrel, and in The Betrayer he moves into his sixteenth year with agonising decisions to make; in three later books (Richard and the Golden Horseshoe, The Red Rose of Ruvina and The Secret of the White Peacock , he is in his mid-twenties and the chases and escapes of youth have been put aside for the role of diplomat and teacher.
If the boy Dick is recognised in the civilised, thoughtful young man, it is only in one constantly mentioned physical trait, his steady, ‘unwinking’ eyes, and in his sense of responsibility towards the Empire and the allies whose support he helps to win.
The later books have very much the air of contrived sequels, with young conspirators or princes in training cut from the same pattern and taking, one by one, the centre of a story, none of them capturing attention as the Stormy Petrel had done as a boy.
Dick Faucenbois is a character who lives in the memory, an individual in his eager response to adventure, exciting sympathy for his loneliness and admiration for his courage and his quick wits.
With much that is traditional in the traits and circumstances he is given in the story, he is none-the-less real to the reader, partly because the three earliest books in which he appears are so fresh and vital, so full of striking incidents and unusual settings.
In part, too, it is because of the entirely natural way in which Dick's thoughts and feelings are interwoven with his activities.
His father had died serving the Empire as one of the Black Riders and as the boy looks down on the great imperial road from the quiet house of his foster-parents he listens to tales of the powerful Count Jasper, Governor of the Citadel and commander of those orthodox forces.
He suffers a first conflict of loyalties when he helps the strange man who calls himself Faraway Moses to escape from the Riders and learns that a confederacy is working in secret to reform a government that favours rich against poor, ‘not with rifle and sword’, as the conspirator tells Dick, but:
‘…with pen and ink, printed pamphlets, anonymous articles in newspapers, a speech here, a word there, a message given or sent.’
With the ardour of his age Dick agrees to carry a vital message across the frontier into Flavonia: delighting in unexpected action, he is afraid only of being late and failing in his mission and it is  the free resourcefulness of a boy that ensures that in spite of accidents the message does get through.
A lonely childhood, a youthful longing for adventure, made it easy enough for Dick to lay aside his devotion to an almost legendary father and to dedicate himself to the service of a man who gave him the emotional security and incentive he had lacked for so long.
Later he had a sterner challenge to face, one which more closely affected his personal sense of honour.
When Faraway Moses, who was once Count St Sylvain and a Black Rider, is captured and imprisoned, Jasper the Terrible, who has made himself responsible for the boy in his own household, offers to release the man who has become like a father to Dick if he will reveal the names of the other Confederates.
Tried almost beyond endurance, Dick keeps silence.
There is another lesson to add to this bitter one.
As Dick comes to know Count Jasper he no longer sees him as a villain and realises that this inscrutable man is in his own way working for the same ends as the conspirators.
Events which begin by offering the boy exciting adventure end by teaching him — about people, about statecraft — and confirming in him the steadfast loyalty to the Empire which is evident in his later exploits.
The adventure stones which last longest and date least are, I believe, those in which the hero at least, and perhaps other characters as well , develop as a result of the challenges offered to them.
This applies particularly to stones designed for young people but because they are still growing and changing themselves, the moral and psychological lessons must not be rigid or overstrained for these young readers.
If the Stormy Petrel does not seem priggish it is because his appetite for action and mystery is always as evident in the stones as his steadfast loyalty and his intelligence.
Already in The Black Riders , though, he has begun to grow up and Violet Needham has begun to equip him for the role of teacher and mentor even as he is still meeting the challenge of danger with the eager opportunism of a boy.
When he appears again in The Stormy Petrel , part of his duty is to encourage the prospective King Carol, a timid boy under Count Jasper's Regency — a boy who, as Dick complains, knows ‘a lot out of books’ but nothing about ‘real things’, which he defines as:
…the everyday sort of things, finding one's way in the dark, using a compass, picking a lock, making up one's mind quickly, the sort of things that one wants if one's in a hurry or a tight corner.
Similarly, education and adventure are mingled in The House of the Paladin , when Dick, on holiday in the Duchy of Ornovitza, is swept into a conspiracy against the young Duchess Anastasia.
There is an element of humour in this story as the eleven-year-old girl, brought up by a cynical, unloving father to be arrogant and self-sufficient, is helped by the bracing company of Dick and his holiday companion Hugh Vallens to relax and enjoy a little fun.
All the same, the theme is still national honour and personal loyalty, the lessons which Dick teaches to Anastasia as successfully as he had taught them to the weak but responsive Carol.
In these three first ‘Stormy Petrel’ stones the theme is supported by skilful narration, sensitive character-drawing and carefully controlled settings supporting the accepted tone of high adventure.
Sometimes we seem to be in an almost oriental land of Byzantine decoration, sun and olives; at other times sleighs and snowy mountains provide the backing for action.
In The House of the Paladin waterways and boats are skilfully used to prolong tension in a country which Hilary Wright thinks derives from the author's knowledge of Holland.
In subsequent books the landscapes are less vivid and Dick's intervention in times of stress seems less precisely motivated, though he still flies over troubled waters as his guardian, Count Jasper, supposes he always will.
There is even an echo of the testing time of his twelfth year in the fourth book in the sequence,The Betrayer , when he has to find a way of helping one of the Confederates, involved in a misguided conspiracy against the young Emperor, without being disloyal to his ruler.
Not yet sixteen, Dick still has a youthful attitude to adventure and the new challenge makes him feel, as he says, like a tightrope walker; but, to the reader, the impetus of personality has somehow been lost.