

ITALY Complete
‘WHEN IN ROME DO AS THE ROMANS DO’.
An old adage, possibly even a cliché, but not a bad philosophy if you want the sort of holiday where you can get involved, meet local people, be an individual rather than part of a package.
We take Italy personally.
For the last 60 years we have been organising holidays to Italy, and only to Italy.
Unlike most tour operators, who are happy for you to go to any one of several countries, we are thoroughly biased — we want you to come to our OWN country.
We want to invite you to our home.
We want to show it to you as we know it.
We want to share the beauty, the grandeur, the history, the tradition.
We would like you to join us for dinner, meet our friends, enjoy a glass of wine or two over something as simple as a plate of pasta, or as extravagant as a six course meal.
We will make you very welcome.
Benvenuti .
ITALIAN RIVIERA
LAKES AND MOUNTAINS
VENETIAN RIVIERA
ADRIATIC RIVIERA
TUSCANY
UMBRIA
ABRUZZO
APULIA
NEAPOLITAN RIVIERA
BASILICATA
CALABRIA
SARDINIA
SICILY
Rome — St Peters
The Hermitage in Assisi
BEACH HOLIDAYS CITIES 2 & 3 CENTRE HOLIDAYS……
COUNTRY VILLAS & HOTELS LAKES & MOUNTAINS CRUISING TAILOR MADE HOLIDAYS…
ITALY COMPLETE
Soft golden sands, blue skies, warm sea, a little nightlife, a friendly hotel and Citalia — the classic get away from it all holiday.
Wonderful Italian style, in an environment which has enchanted visitors for centuries.
The choice and contrasts are amazing, the old Renaissance world sits side by side with Italy's renowned style and sophistication.
An Italian holiday has special qualities — quality food and wine, and accommodation you can, of course, take for granted.
Best of all is the quality of life because with Citalia you will find experience and expertise has allowed us to develop that certain relaxed lifestyle perfect for a holiday.
BEACH HOLIDAYS
Italians are born lucky — we must be to have such a long and glorious coastline constantly changing flavour region by region.
The contrasts are amazing.
In the south Apulia and Calabria — the so called‘heel’ and ‘toe’— still maintain a rustic charm virtually unchanged through the centuries.
In the north, the Italian Riviera, next door to the glamour of Monte Carlo and the Cote d'Azur, has the old-fashioned charm of a well-established, popular resort area.
Of course we must not forget our island jewels of Sardinia, Sicily, Elba, Ischia, Lipari and Capri.
Miles of golden sands along the Adriatic.
Stunning views on the Neapolitan Riviera, family bays in Apulia, and tiny hidden coves, where the hills come down to the sea, on the Tuscany Coast.
BEACH CHARGES
You may find that some beaches are private and a charge is made, but wherever possible we have included any beach charges in the price of your holiday (see p.225).
TOURING HOLIDAYS
Because there are so many things to see we have programmes designed for those who like to travel around, including five splendid coach tours.
The first — Inspirational Italy — covers the heart of Italy — including Florence, Siena, Rome and the major areas of artistic interest — with the option to add a week's stay in Sorrento.
The second — Secrets of Abruzzo — takes you on a seven-night tour including the natural beauty of the National Park, with the option to combine the tour with a week on the beach.
Third is the Midsummer Spectacle which includes a night at the opera.
Fourth is our Flavour of the North tour to Verona.
Cortina and Venice Lido with an optional stay-put week in the lakes.
And finally the Sicilian Carousel, a round trip of Sicily with the option to add on a week in Taormina.
CITIES
Ever since the days of the Roman Empire the Italians have been great builders.
It was in cities such as Rome, Venice, Florence and Verona that the Renaissance started — the re-awakening of the arts, new directions in painting and architecture — movements which were to span the continents and leave a legacy of culture unequalled anywhere in the world.
These cities have endured through time.
Everything and nothing has changed.
The hustle and bustle of modern life occurs in the shadow of history.
Art and sights straight out of the history books are to be seen at every turn, yet now these are modern cities too, alive with their own 20th century energy and enthusiasm.
Our hotel selection is vast, from the family-run two star to world famous properties such as the luxurious Cipriani in Venice.
This year, for the ultimate in flexibility, Citalia has expanded the choice of city holiday durations.
Now you can leave on any day you like, stay between two and seven nights, or for 14 nights, and then return on the day you choose.
The choice is yours (airline regulations permitting).
2 & 3 CENTRES
It would take years to see all the delights and pleasure which Italy has to offer.
By taking a two or three centre holiday you at least have a chance to see as much as possible.
The two and three centre holidays in this brochure are designed to offer the best of both worlds and combine old favourites with one or two unusual ones.
Why not try Sorrento and Capri; the Tuscan or Umbrian countryside with Florence or Rome; or combine Tuscany and Umbria for a unique feeling of Italy's stunning landscapes.
Alternatively contact our Tailor Made Holidays Department on 081–688 9989 and let them help you mix and match a special combination of your own.
Class resort style — Viareggio
The mighty Colosseum — Rome
Romantic Venice
COUNTRY VILLAS AND HOTELS
We would not like to give the impression that Italy is all holiday resorts and art cities alone.
In truth Italy is predominantly a rural and agricultural country.
The beauty and simplicity of our countryside offers the most intimate, and to many the ultimate insight into the pleasures of our way of life.
Taking a holiday here offers the chance to taste the real Italy, the Italy of ordinary everyday folk.
For those who wish to immerse themselves in our lovely landscapes, for 1992 we have a much expanded selection of country villas, castles and hotels of character, set in hidden away places often so obscure even we had trouble finding them!
Peace and tranquillity, happiness and laughter, passion and song, food and wine, art and beauty — this is the living Italy at its most real.
Don't miss it!
VENICE SIMPLON — ORIENT-EXPRESS
What more romantic way to start a holiday than travelling on the Venice Simplon-Orient-Express?
A classic journey in classic style — Citalia offers you the chance to enter a bygone era where tradition abounds and the commitment to impeccable service is paramount.
This is a unique journey — a chance to step back to the days of sumptuous style, to the days when international travel was lavish and luxurious, when railways meant romance and trains meant tradition.
The choice is yours, you can travel one way or double the luxury with a return journey.
Whatever you choose it all adds up to luxury glamour, romance, elegance, and Citalia.
Who would possibly ask for more?
See pages 208 and 209.
THE CHOICE IS YOURS Tailor-Made Holidays
The most important factor in planning your holiday is that you want every detail to be perfect for you not a holiday perfect for someone else.
We understand that and when it comes to tailoring a perfect holiday, our flexibility, specialist knowledge and personal contacts give you more choice than with any other holiday operator.
JUST TELL US WHAT YOU WANT…
And our knowledgeable consultants will go to work creating an itinerary just for you (see the sample itinerary below).
For instance, our own three-centre holidays may not visit a place you want to see, or stay long enough for all you want to do.
One call from you or your travel agent on 081–688 9989 is all it takes.
Our new computer reservations system lets us give you a costing quickly and efficiently normally confirming flight and hotel availability on the spot.
We can take your booking for the entire trip: air or rail travel, car hire, and reservations for anything from a honeymoon suite in a five-star luxury hotel to a self-catering villa for families travelling together.
WE CAN ALSO ANSWER QUESTIONS…
Because we know Italy so well, we can give you detailed information other tour operators simply can't.
Even if you decide none of the resorts, hotels or cities featured here is quite what you have in mind, we can still help.
You will feel confident knowing your independent holiday is backed by the same high standard of our reservations service.
LAKES & MOUNTAINS
When it is time to relax and really get away from it all, Italians head for the hills and the spectacular scenery for our country's lakes and mountains.
Here it is tranquil, there is a  rarefied atmosphere — still deep blue waters.
The pace of life slows and it is easy to unwind.
The resorts are elegant and easy on the eye, the hotels are stylish and airy.
When you need to escape from it all — Citalia have just the holiday for you.
CRUISING
The ancient civilisations explored the Mediterranean by sea, and now you too can sit still in a floating hotel while we move the scenery around you.
This summer there is more choice than ever — four sumptuous stay and cruise itineraries offering you the very best of Italy and beyond.
Sail aboard the SS Monterey, MV La Palma and the TV Ausonia, to ports in Turkey, Greece, Spain and Yugoslavia.
Your holiday starts in style with a stay in a city such as Venice, a lakeside resort or coastal gems like Sorrento.
SAMPLE ITINERARY
THE BRIEF:
Fly from London on a Saturday two week holiday to give a real taste of the countryside pleasures of Tuscany and Umbria.
To include car hire.
THE ITINERARY:
SATURDAY
Depart London Heathrow for Pisa, where your hire car awaits you at the airport.
Drive to the Hotel Leon Bianco in San Gimignano. 7 nights in Tuscany.
SATURDAY
Depart Leon Bianco and drive to the Tre Esse Country House in Assisi.
7 nights in Umbria.
SATURDAY
Leave Assisi, drive to Rome Airport for return flight to Heathrow.
Above you will find a sample itinerary, prepared to a brief given to us by an imaginary customer.
It will give you an idea of the information you should have at hand to make best use of our services.
Country area comforts
Superbly scenic lakes and mountains
NEW FOR 1992 HOTELS, VILLAS, APARTMENTS TRAVEL IN STYLE AND COMFORT WITH CITALIA
THE COMPLETE CHOICE
Citalia RECOMMENDS
Even among a superb selection of hotels we do of course have a few favourites which we think are exceptional, and merit extra consideration.
HIGHLY RECOMMENDED
IMPERIAL HOTEL TRAMONTANO — P.20
Overlooking the beautiful Bay of Naples, this Sorrento hotel is inspiring.
Once a private mansion, it is a classic hotel in the best tradition.
HOTEL BRISTOL — P.21
Everything an Italian family holiday hotel should be, this Sorrento property has comfortable rooms and a delightful bar cascading with greenery.
FORTE HOTEL VILLAGE.
— P.40
The Forte Hotel Village lacks nothing.
Traditional style cottages and villas set amongst extravagant gardens — secluded, private and relaxed.
HOTEL CAPO BOI — P.42
Set on the south east of Sardinia, the beach is on your doorstep, and two pools, tennis courts, and watersports await.
NEW FOR 1992
Citalia is pleased to introduce new resorts and country areas.
In the Italian Riviera we now offer Monterosso, in the Cinque Terre; in Sardinia there is now Alghero in the north; there are new properties in the country areas and in the lakes and hills regions you can select retreats in Brenzone near Malcesine and Ovindoli; and on the Neapolitan Riviera we have added Paestum and Castellabate.
OVER 60 NEW HOTELS
Citalia prices itself on the unrivalled choice of accommodation it offers and this year the range is even further expanded with the addition of 60 new hotels.
Properties such as the Ponte Sisto and Firenze in Rome and Venice, the Hotel and Apartments Rely in Brenzone and the Jaccarino in Sorrento.
NEW FLIGHTS
To increase your flexibility and choice, Citalia has expanded its range of flights to now offer London Gatwick to Alghero, Manchester to Verona, Bristol to Naples and Stanstead to Florence.
GOLDEN CHOICE
From the Golden Age of the Renaissance, through the days of the Grand Tour and right up to the present day, Italy has been the Golden Land.
A natural choice for sophisticated visitors seeking culture, style, art and elegance.
They demanded the very best in everything, especially in accommodation and service and so the very best hotels in Europe were built to cater for their every whim.
They still exist, these fabulous hotels.
Magnificent buildings filled with magnificent things.
Palaces for the discerning, providing the very best that Italy has to offer.
The cuisine is incomparable and the cellars are treasure houses of vintage after vintage of superb wines.
Naturally they are in the very best locations, have the best views and are truly cosmopolitan in their ambience and atmosphere.
For those to whom this type of style and experience are their most important consideration we have collected the very best of the very best — our Golden Choice.
They are all exceptional, most are five star.
They are identified by the special Golden Choice symbol.
Need we say more?
Superb position — Grand Hotel Excelsior Vittoria
SELF CATERING HOLIDAYS
A self catering holiday, in a typical Italian villa or apartment, is the only way to really absorb the true lifestyle of our country.
We have a range of attractive properties throughout the country.
You can stay near the beach, in the countryside in the character historic properties of Tuscany and Umbria, or even in the cities of Venice and Florence.
All are comfortably appointed and equipped to the standards of the normal Italian house — as many are the holiday homes of Italians themselves.
A quick trip to stock the fridge, the larder and the wine rack and everything is set for a fantastic holiday, with the freedom to come and go when you choose, eat the very best available in the shops, try out the local wines and generally ‘go native!’
Often it may be helpful to have the freedom of a car and we can organise car hire for you.
In more secluded areas where we consider a car to be essential, we include this in the overall holiday price.
It makes your holiday look a bit more expensive at first, but it allows you to make the most of your stay.
HAND PICKED PROPERTIES
No other UK operator knows Italy like Citalia — after all no one else has our specialist experience.
Because we ourselves are Italian we live and breathe Italy and all things Italian, we see places all the year round — not just during a brief flying visit which is all other operators can afford.
We talk to hoteliers and developers on a day to day basis, we work with them as they make long term plans.
That in turn allows us to look ahead and find the best, it allows us to offer even better holidays to you.
ACCOMMODATION RATINGS AND FACILITIES
The old, the new, the traditional, the modern, the sophisticated, the famous, the charming — the choice is yours because nowhere you will find a range of accommodation such as we have within this brochure.
As Italians we have high standards, but would happily recommend all these hotels to a good friend.
Your only problem is choosing, and before you choose read these words to understand a few basics about the quality of Italian accommodation.
HOW WE CLASSIFY OUR HOTELS
With every hotel description we give the property's official star grading as allocated by the Italian National Tourist Office.
These grades are currently being reviewed so some may have altered slightly since we went to press, but they range from the 2∗ to 5∗.
At times prices may seem a little inconsistent.
Prices for 3∗ and 4∗ hotels are sometimes similar this is to reflect location, facilities, standards and our not inconsiderable ability to negotiate excellent deals.
A SPECIAL NOTE ABOUT 2∗ HOTELS
There is as yet no common European standard for the classification of hotels, and this can on occasion lead to quality variations between centres.
Italian standards tend to be slightly more old fashioned and individual and therefore higher than many new resorts.
This is particularly true of many 2∗ hotels which under less stringent classifications, would easily rate 3∗.
Our 2∗ hotels are generally family-run properties with a high standard of personal service.
They are comfortable, wellappointed, and highly recommended.
Indeed in many ways you may well find yourself treated as part of the family.
We think this is an excellent way to get to know our country and our people, and, if you are travelling with children you will be even more welcome.
CITALIAN EXPRESS
Our Citalian Express has proved an extremely popular success.
As the countryside rolls by, you relax in comfort.
From London's Victoria station you are quickly at the channel ports, here you board our specially chartered weekly train from Boulogne through the landscapes of France and on to Rome.
An ideal way to start your holiday, this special train can give you easy access to the Neapolitan or Italian Rivieras, the Adriatic and Venetian Rivieras, to Lake Garda and Lake Maggiore or to the Tuscany Coast.
Our pricing system means rates quoted are for two sharing a cabin but when three travel together considerable savings are available.
See pages 214–216.
DRIVE YOUR OWN CAR
For the ultimate freedom to explore at leisure Citalia gives you the choice of a motoring holiday.
Drive your own car all the way, or let the train take you part of the way with a SNCF motorail package to Milan or Rome.
Alternatively fly and hire a car or motor home.
Most rates are lower than last year's levels.
Citalia has much to offer the motorist — from maps to RAC insurance deals — see p.218–219 and special April and October prices — see p. 12–13.
FLY WITH CITALIA
Citalia feature both scheduled flights by national carriers — Alitalia and British Airways — and a range of Special Flights aboard Britannia, Dan Air, Caledonian GB Airways and Monarch.
We pride ourselves on having secured excellent, often especially upgraded, inflight services for our customers and offer a large number of Saturday departures.
Our holidays depart from six regional airports — Heathrow, Gatwick, Birmingham, Glasgow, Manchester and Bristol and set you down in one of 16 Italian airports.
Flight timings have been selected for the convenience of daytime departures with new routings this year from Gatwick to Alghero, Manchester to Verona and Bristol to Naples.
Villas of character and charm
Friendly Citalia Representatives
The Complete Specialist
1931–1992 going from strength to strength
Citalia is part of CIT owned by the Italian State Railways
‘The Italy that only Italians can show you…’
For over 60-years CIT and CITALIA have been showing holidaymakers the pleasures our country has to offer.
We are Italy's most experienced travel organisation, owned by the Italian State Railways, and unrivalled in our knowledge of holiday opportunities.
We long ago lost count of the number of satisfied customers with whom we have, over the years shared our holiday philosophy and way of life.
Suffice it to say that very few come to Italy only once — most are more than happy to return time and time again.
We pride ourselves on our in-depth knowledge and understanding of all Italy's many important facets.
We know the favoured resorts and city-sights musts, and we also know those less recognised, hidden hideaways, properties of charm and character in tranquil settings.
All the holidays in this brochure are specially designed to give you the chance to see Italy as we see it, to experience the truly unique character, the natural beauty and the very varied flavours found throughout our country.
We know Italy as only Italians can, and you can rest assured that the Citalia staff are experts in their chosen field — Italian holidays.
Being an excitable sort of race there is an incredible number of things we would like to show you.
Lakes and mountains, beaches and islands, friendly hotels and Renaissance grandeur, there is honestly so much that you will simply have to come and see us year after year.
THE CITALIA PRICE PLEDGE
‘We guarantee that the price of your holiday will not be subject to any surcharges except for those resulting from government action.
Even in this case, we will absorb an amount equivalent of 2% of the holiday price which excludes insurance premiums and any amendment changes.
Only amounts in excess of 2% will be surcharged, but where a surcharge is payable there will be an administration charge of 50p per person together with an amount to cover agent's commission.
If this means paying more than £10 on the holiday price, you will be entitled to cancel your holiday with a full refund of all money paid except for any premium paid to us for holiday insurance and amendment charges.
Should you decide to cancel because of this, you must exercise your right to do so within 14 days from the issue date printed on the invoice.’
CITALIA REPRESENTATIVES
Although we offer holiday packages, we tend to find that the Citalia holidaymaker is often more discerning.
Independent travellers are generally and altogether more knowledgeable about what they want from a holiday.
We aim to ensure our staff are trained to meet those needs.
We like to think of you not as clients, but as guests, or as you may well discover even as a part of the family.
Accordingly you will find that our team of Representatives do not come in the traditional mould.
Ours have been selected as real Italian enthusiasts, highly trained in all aspects of travel, experienced and experts in their field — full of local knowledge.
You will find our Representatives in most areas and resorts featured in this brochure waiting to help smooth your way.
Fluently bilingual they will help you make the most of your holiday.
Pride may be an old-fashioned word, but they are proud to work for Citalia.
We find it makes a lot of difference.
The Citalia difference.
YOUR GUIDE TO ITALY
To help you make the best decisions and to ensure you quickly get to understand the way Italy and the Italians work, when you book we will send you a complimentary booklet ‘Welcome to Italy’ full of advice and information.
Enjoying your holiday
Citalia's informative Representatives
Historic Paestum
CELEBRATION PACKAGE
Birthdays, weddings or anniversaries — whatever the reason you have to celebrate.
Citalia can help you celebrate in style.
Call us and for a cost we will ensure champagne, fruit and flowers are in your room awaiting  your arrival.
But remember included in the holiday price, we have already negotiated many little extras to make your holiday special.
Simply refer to the Citalia Value panel on each page.
CHAUFFEUR SERVICE
Your Citalia holiday can now start at your front door!
Guy Salmon is a name synonymous with fine cars and service for over 50 years.
We are pleased to feature their Chauffeur service — an efficient and unique way of travelling to the airport or Victoria Station.
Book directly with Guy Salmon chauffeur Service at their London Reservations Centre, telephone 071–730 1717.
VENICE IN PERIL
Changing tides and climate, new demands and general wear and tear are eroding Venices' foundation.
To help preserve its treasures Citalia is donating £2 to a crucial restoration fighting fund for every customer booked to the city.
EVEN MORE HOTELS
Despite the definitive nature of this brochure, we still cannot include the six hundred plus hotels that we work with in Italy.
There are many, many more — like the luxurious Bernini Bristol situated on one of the world's most famous streets Rome's Via Veneto.
In the foothills of the Alps  there's the Hotel Belvedere in charming and picturesque Bassano del Grappa, and in Lerici in Liguria Citalia can offer the Hotel Doria.
You simply have to ask.
TRAVEL DELAY PROTECTION
DELAY PROTECTION — INCLUDED IN HOLIDAY COST
There are those occasions completely beyond our control when a flight is delayed, but since this is the start of your CITALIA holiday, we believe it's our responsibility to look after you and we always do our best to provide meals at meal times and accommodation on overnight delays.
We have therefore included in the cost of your holiday insurance protection: after a 12-hour delay at the start of your holiday, you have the right to cancel and get a full refund of all the money you have paid us, excluding insurance premiums — or, if you continue on your holiday, we will give you £20 compensation for the first 12- hours' delay: for each subsequent 12-hour delay we will give you a further £10 — up to a maximum of £100 per person in total.
PRE-DEPARTURE HOTELS
If you require an overnight stop near your departure airport, Citalia has negotiated special deals on your behalf with the following hotels:
Gatwick — set in over 100 acres of woodland the Copthorne Hotel.
Monday–Thursday £75.00.
Friday–Sunday £60.00.
Heathrow — the newly refurbished Sheraton, situated 1 mile from Heathrow.
Monday–Thursday £93.
Friday–Sunday £69.
Manchester — Britannia Country House.
Monday–Thursday £50.00.
Friday–Sunday £25.00.
Prices shown are for double rooms.
Full details will be sent with holiday documentation.
TOURISM FOR TOMORROW
As a member of the influential travel trade body — Tour Operators' Study Group — we are proud to support the Tourism for Tomorrow Awards, a major initiative by TOSG together with the British Tourist Authority and Thames Television's ‘Wish You Were Here’ programme.
Three awards will be made annually to resorts or specific projects in the UK, Europe and worldwide which achieve a balance between the needs of tourists protection and environment.
Details are available from TOSG, 66 High Street, Lewes, East Sussex, BN7 1XG.
BCP CAR PARKING
For customers wishing to leave their cars close to Gatwick airport Citalia has an agreement with BCP car parking.
Cars have 24 hrs security and BCP offers a full range of services including a shopping service and a regular bus to and from both Gatwick terminals.
Details will be sent with holiday documentation.
CITALIA RESERVATIONS
Our highly sophisticated computer reservations system, is fast and efficient.
Our reservations staff are experts in all things Italian.
Call, or ask your agent to call, and you can be sure of service second to none.
Bernini Bristol in Rome
The Copthorne Hotel
MORE TO DO……
MORE TO SEE, MORE TO EXPERIENCE
GOLF, TENNIS
GOLF
Italy is a country packed with things to do and sights to see, and if it is sports you are looking for, Italy is, again, the place to go.
There are excellent golf courses the length and breadth of our country and to help you find the ones which best suit you, we provide this simple golfer's guide.
Take advantage of the superb quality of Italian Golf courses called ‘amongst the best in Europe’.
TENNIS
For the energetic, whose holiday would be incomplete without time on the tennis courts, Italy has just the answer.
There are tennis courts at many of our hotels and within the resorts and to help you make your holiday choice we provide this brief guide.
The following hotels have tennis facilities available on or nearby their grounds:
A selection of Italian Golf courses
Golfing in the Lake area
Tennis at Hotel Lacona in Elba
FLAVOUR OF CHIANTI
To really get to know a country, you need to get to know it in some detail, and to allow you the chance to know the fascinating world of Chianti, Citalia this summer offers its Flavour of Chianti programme.
This is a voyage of discovery during which guests stay in selfcatering apartments on the 12th century Melazzano Estate, about a mile from ancient town of Greve in Chianti.
There, the hosts are our Tuscan expert Mario Baiocchi and the Anichini family whose ancestors have lived here for the past 300 years.
Signora Anichini, the proprietress and her daughter Lisa are extremely gifted and their repertoire of authentic recipes includes some purely peasant dishes passed down through generations.
Lisa now enjoys sharing her knowledge and conducts cookery lessons 3 evenings a week.
The convivial atmosphere of a ‘house party’ prevails, as guests are given cookery demonstrations and invited to ‘try their hand’before sampling many delicious traditionally Tuscan dishes.
Then there are the cellars of three neighbouring estates to explore and a comprehensive daily programme of tours designed to give a unique insight into the history, lifestyle and landscapes of this beautiful region.
For 1992, Citalia offers Flavour of Chianti departures on (Booking code TCW03): 2, 9 May £659 and 3, 10, 17, 24 Oct £724.
Melazzano Estate — home of the ‘Flavour of Chianti’
GREAT SAVINGS FOR
Early Bookings
Citalia is determined that Summer 1992 is going to be even better value than ever before .
Citalia is offering an  unprecedented range of good value deals to entice the early booker.
Customers confirming bookings before 31 January 1992 are entitled to substantial discounts off a wide range of holidays, these are detailed below.
Furthermore, as a long established holiday specialist CIT is introducing a brand new programme — Lansdowne Cities offering holidays to 16 of the world's most famous cities including Paris, New York and Amsterdam.
REDUCED SUPPLEMENTS
20% Reduction on supplements at selected Tuscan and Umbrian self catering properties in addition to the offers detailed below.
Customers booking an apartment with an occupancy of more than 5 receive a 20% discount off the under-occupancy supplement.
For example 3 customers booking the 6 bedded II Gastaldo apartment (in the Palazzo Del Castaldo p.198) receive a 20% discount off the £15.25 supplement, a saving of over £44 per person.
Reductions available at the Oliveto and V.Burali p.180–181 (excludes supplements July and August), Castel Ruggero p.186, Castelnovo P.194, La Panoramica p.195 & P.D.
Castaldo p.198.
BOOK BEFORE 31st JANUARY 1992 AND RECEIVE
£25 or £50 SAVINGS SEE TABLE BELOW
£25 Lansdowne Voucher per customer
IMPORTANT — Please note that 20% reduced supplements, £25 and £50 reductions and Lansdowne vouchers are available for bookings confirmed before 31 Jan 1992.
All other others on these pages are applicable for customers booking at any time.
GREAT CHILDREN'S REDUCTIONS
Citalia's generous children's reductions apply to children aged (on the date of return travel) from 2 to 11 inclusive and up to 16 for self-catering.
Reductions are available throughout the season on all departures by air, car, Citalian Express and cruise holidays.
Reductions apply to basic holiday cost and do not include supplements.
Reductions do not apply to coach tours or to suites in hotels..
Please note that the Forte Hotel Village (pages 38–41) and the Capo Boi (pages 42–43) have their own child reductions that are shown on their respective pages
SPECIAL MOTORING OFFERS
Citalia is offering some remarkably low prices for motorists taking their own cars in April, May and October to selected Country Villas in Tuscany and Umbria, and to apartments in Brenzone on Lake Garda and Diano Marina on the famous Italian Riviera.
Below is a table of properties where reductions are available.
The table also includes the date band from which prices should be reduced.
For example, at the Castelnovo apartment type C, 4 customers taking their own car on 25 April for 14 nights are entitled to a reduction of £270 per person.
This should be deducted from the date band 25 April–8 May which shows a price of £454, therefore the price of the holiday is £184 per person.
Citalia VALUE
As fans of ‘la dolce vita’ we like, whenever possible, to include those little extras which help make life just that little bit more comfortable.
A bowl of fruit in your room, a bottle of wine, a special meal or commemorative glass of bubbly to help celebrate your great occasions.
These are the pampering touches — they make your holiday special and add up to very good value for money.
Hotels which indulge you a little in this way are noted on the resort pages.
SAVE EVEN MORE ON THE ORIENT EXPRESS
Citalia is delighted to offer increased value on the world's most famous train.
Discounts are available for customers returning from Venice on the Venice Simplon-Orient-Express or on selected dates.
See p. 208–209
GROUP AND 3RD PERSON REDUCTIONS
For Italians it is almost always ‘the more, the merrier’ and to make it easier for you to party as a party, we have a special group offer which gives one free place for every 20 paying customers.
If three adults book a twin room with extra bed, they get an £11 reduction on holidays up to seven nights, £22 on 14 night breaks (not applicable for coach tours).
So travel in company and save your money too.
Italians love children
Celebrate with Citalia
A sunny curve of breathtaking views and historic sights
NEAPOLITAN RIVIERA
The Neapolitan Riviera extends in a lazy curve around the Neapolitan coast and its very name evokes images of Italy at its sunniest.
Naples, the capital city, once captivated Europe by its artistic patronage and a Victorian ‘Grand Tour’ was barely conceivable without it.
Today's visitors come simply to relax and to be revived by the pleasures of sun and sea.
This region is crammed with sights of remarkable beauty.
Awe-inspiring Pompeii, peaceful Positano, the glorious Amalfi coastline and the Bay of Naples — beginning at Ischia, ending at Capri and offering stunning panoramas dominated by Vesuvius.
‘Un pezzo di cielo caduto in terra’— a little piece of heaven fallen on earth — is how the Neapolitans describe it — perhaps they are biased but, having sampled its delights, we think you'll be forced to agree with every word.
Ancient Landmarks
Start inland with Pompeii and Herculaneum, the two ancient cities buried by the eruption of Mount Vesuvius in AD 79.
Then there is lively, brash and colourful Naples Iaden with museums and priceless treasures, or a short steamer or hydrofoil ride away — Capri and Ischia.
Try the ‘Amalfi Drive’ along the cliffside, among olive trees and citrus groves, to enchanting towns like Amalfi, Positano or Ravello.
Stroll among streets lined with orange trees in Sorrento, take a horse-drawn ‘carrozza’ ride or simply admire the fabulous views.
Visit the Royal Palace and formal gardens of Caserta, designed to rival Versailles, or wonder at the crater of Mount Vesuvius and Solfatara.
Further afield is the ‘Eternal City’— Rome, crammed with historic landmarks, and alive with an energetic lust for life, all accessible for a day trip.
Shops with Style
On Capri and Ischia dazzling boutiques sell marvellous leather shoes and very chic clothes.
In Sorrento, there is the main Corso Italia or the narrower Via San Cesareo for little shops selling embroidery, lacework, inlaid wood, Capodimonte china, coral jewellery and cameos.
There are many open-air markets and the Amalfi Coast is the place to find attractive majolica and bright ceramic ware.
Wines and liqueurs are inexpensive.
Sorrento's fishing harbour — Marina Grande
Sightseeing around the coastline
Ancient town of Paestum
Take a break for a Cappuccino
Amalfi's famous cathedral
‘A region crammed with remarkable beauty and ancient fascinations, striking landscapes and azure seas.
Relaxed and enchanting — this is Italy at its sunniest.’
So much to do, where next?
NEAPOLITAN RIVIERA
Sorrento
Perched on the cliffs, high above the Bay of Naples, Sorrento's position is quite simply breathtaking.
Set amidst the olive groves, orange trees and a sea of terracotta roofs, it nestles on a plateau high above the sea.
Once in the resort the view from Sorrento town is equally splendid, stretching out across the wide Bay of Naples to Vesuvius — hazily outlined in the far distance.
This is a stunning setting of endless panoramas, where sophistication and style mix with the happy-golucky lust for life so typical of southern Italy.
The town itself is thoroughly delightful with the old fishing harbour of Marina Grande, the many boutiques of Via San Cesareo, the lively market of Piano di Sorrento and the colourful Tarantella dancers all impossible to resist.
From here, trips to Pompeii, Capri and along the Amalfi coast are absolute musts.
‘A stunning setting of endless panoramas, where sophistication and style mix with the happy-go-lucky lust for life so typical of southern Italy.’
Sorrento's splendid views
Lush Sorrento
Much to explore
Marina Grande
Hotel Del Mare ∗∗
Guests always find a warm welcome at the Del Mare — a small hotel with a really friendly atmosphere, run by the Galno family.
The hotel is set just 75 yards from the beach and Marina Grande harbour, and 500 yards (up a steep road) from the resort's main shopping street (regular local bus service available).
There are two sun terraces — one by the lounge and bar, the other on the roof overlooking the Bay of Naples — and a lift.
Public rooms are air-conditioned in July and August.
The bedrooms are simply furnished and have a telephone.
Price includes bed and breakfast.
Beach charges are not included.
Supplements per person per night: Single room £3.75; Balcony £1.95
Citalia VALUE
Del Mare
All guests are given special rates at the hotel's town centre restaurant Jaccarino, Gardenia & Girasole Honeymoon and silver anniversary couples receive a bottle of sparkling wine and flowers and fruit.
THE CHOICE IS YOURS SEE PAGE 5 Tailor-Made Holidays 
Hotel Del Mare
Hotel Girasole ∗∗∗
This is a small family-run hotel.
Recently refurbished, the lounge-bar and dining-room are open-plan and the food served is simple.
There is a roof terrace, a shady garden, a beautiful pool (open from 1 June) and a terrace ideal for the lunch time snacks served from the pool bar.
Set on the main road — 15 minutes walk from the resort centre, local buses stop nearby.
Bedrooms, served by a lift, are fairly basic.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast except for April departures when only bed and breakfast are included.
Beach charges not included.
Supplements per person per night : Supplements for 3–30 Apr available on request; Single room £4.75; Garden view & balcony £2.95.
The family-run Girasole
Hotel Jaccarino ∗∗∗∗
This impressive hotel is set back 20 yards from the mountain road and offers breathtaking views.
Minutes from the centre of Sant' Agata it looks out at the Bay of Naples and onwards to Mount Vesuvius.
Originally built by the Jaccarino family (who also own the renowned Hotel Tramontano), the hotel has now returned to their ownership and been beautifully refurbished.
The wonderful restaurant offers local specialities, the enormous, flower-bedecked terrace has stunning views, and the bar and lounge open onto a terrace and overlook the pool.
A courtesy bus runs to Sorrento three times a day stopping at the Tramontano for access, by lift, to the beach.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Entrance charges to the beach are included (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £4.50; Front sea view and terrace £3.25.
Relax in the lounge at the Jaccarino
The Jaccarino's pool
Hotel Gardenia ∗∗
The Hotel Gardenia is a warm and friendly hotel featured by Citalia for over seven years.
It is situated on Sorrento's busy main street, half a mile from the town centre.
Among its facilities the hotel has a tea garden/piano bar, a TV lounge, a lift, an indoor bar and a reception lounge.
The management prides itself on the true Italian-style home cooking served in the dining-room, and the excellent roof-top terrace affords beautiful views over Sorrento and the Gulf of Naples.
The hotel shares a large swimming pool situated behind the hotel amongst scented orange and lemon trees.
All the bedrooms have been newly refurbished and have telephone and double glazing.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges not included.
Supplements per person per night: Single room £3.95; Front sea view £1.95
The leisurely Gardenia
Hotel Villa Parco ∗∗∗∗
The Villa Parco is part of the esteemed Parco dei Principi complex, and has one of Sant' Agnello's loveliest settings.
Less than 20 minutes walk from the centre of Sorrento, guests can take the lift down to the hotel's private beach or use the adult and children's sea-water pools.
Snacks are served from the beach bar and garden terrace.
There is a restaurant, bar and airconditioning, and guests can share all the facilities of the Parco dei Principi.
The twin bedrooms have telephone, TV and balcony or terrace.
Singles overlook the road but have a sea view and terrace.
Three bedded rooms comprise a twin and a single with shared bathroom.
The price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges included (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £9.75.
The lovely setting of the Villa Parco
Hotel Bellevue Syrene ∗∗∗
This 18th century mansion stands magnificently on the cliffs overlooking the Bay of Naples.
Antique furnishings and paintings preserve its tremendous character, with lovely touches such as the pretty decor of the dining-room and the terraces set beneath pine trees.
Wisteria adorns the restaurant and bar and open-air music and dancing is offered throughout the summer.
There is a private lift down to the bathing platform (open 1 May to 30 September) where changing huts, sun-beds and umbrellas are all available at a charge.
Bedrooms, all with balcony, maintain the charm and character of the old mansion but offer modern bathrooms and comfortable furnishings often with antiques.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges are not included.
Supplements per person per night:Front sea view £7.25.
Friendly service Bellevue and Citalia style
The 18th century Bellevue Syrene
Sorrento's lively harbour
The azure waters of Sorrento
Hotel Alpha ∗∗∗∗
The Alpha has been a favourite with Citalia customers since 1976.
It has the loveliest of gardens and is situated in the residential area of Sorrento known as Sant' Agnello.
The centre of Sorrento is about a 15 minute walk away but buses and a light railway run regularly to and from the town.
Other shops and bars are closer and the lift down to the beach is just 250 yards away.
The hotel is personally run by the D'Esposito family who take particular pride in the restaurant.
There are several terraces and gardens around the pool (with a children's section) and a huge terrace on the roof.
Snacks are served by the pool at lunch time.
There is a bar and, once a week, live music.
Bedrooms, served by a lift, are bright and modern with telephone, colour TV and twins have a balcony.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges not included.
Supplements per person per night: Single room (on request) £8.90.
The Alpha's pool amidst lovely gardens
Relax at the Hotel Alpha
Hotel President ∗∗∗∗
Set in the most peaceful of  surroundings above Sorrento and the Bay of Naples, this hotel can rightly claim it has some of the best views on the coast.
There are attractive gardens with a swimming pool (and children's section), and a whirlpool, a roof-top solarium, table tennis and mini-golf.
Snacks are served at the pool bar.
The excellent restaurant has a panoramic, openair terrace.
There is live music to entertain guests several evenings a week.
A courtesy bus runs regularly into the centre of Sorrento and local buses stop nearby.
The hotel's twin bedrooms have TV and telephone.
The price includes dinner (or lunch), bed and breakfast.
Beach charges are not included.
Supplements per person per night: Single room £12.50; Front sea view and balcony £8.50.
Peaceful panoramas at the President
Sorrento sunset
Citalia VALUE
President, Alpha & Villa Parco Honeymoon and silver anniversary couples receive a bottle of sparkling wine and flowers or fruit.
Imperial Hotel Tramontano ∗∗∗∗
Citalia is proud of its long association with this elegant hotel.
From its central position perched high on the cliffs, it offers a breathtaking view across the Bay of Naples.
It has an illustrious past, first as a grand private mansion and then as a hotel and has been visited by many crowned heads of Europe and many great literary figures such as the poets Milton, Shelley and Keats.
The period furnishings of the lounge and bar are bordered by a terrace and the adjacent restaurant offers some excellent views.
There is a wide choice of dinner menu and the management prides itself on offering service of a fine standard.
The pleasant swimming pool is enclosed by lush, sub-tropical gardens with a summer bar and relaxing terraces.
Lunch time snacks are available from the pool bar in high season.
There is a small TV lounge and a room for playing cards.
As you would expect from a former private home, the bedrooms vary both in size and decor.
All have a private telephone.
A private lift leads to the seafront, beach entrance is complimentary and deckchairs and umbrellas can be hired.
The main square of Sorrento is within five minutes walk.
The price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Supplements per person per night:Supplements for 3–30 Apr available on request; Single rooms £7.25; Front sea view £5.75; Front sea view and balcony £7.25.
Panoramic dining at the Tramontano
The Bay of Naples
Harbourside Sorrento
Imperial Tramontano has an illustrious past
A terrace with a view at the Tramontano
Tramontano's pleasant pool
Perched on the cliffs, Imperial Tramontano
Hotel Bristol ∗∗∗∗
The Hotel Bristol is run by the Acampora family and is one of the most popular hotels in Sorrento.
Situated on a busy road, just 10–15 minutes walk uphill from the centre of town, the hotel's excellent facilities include a top-floor swimming pool with dazzling panoramic views of the resort's breathtaking bay, a roof-top restaurant called ‘La Tenda’ where light lunches are available from mid-June to September and a solarium equipped with relaxing sun-beds.
Of the range of comfortable public rooms and terraces, the lounge-bar perhaps deserves special praise for its profusion of colourful flowers and lush, cascading greenery.
A pianist plays here several nights a week and from 15 June to 15 September a discotheque is held weekly near the swimming pool.
From May to September there is a weekly gala dinner.
Other activities available to hotel guests include table tennis, crazy golf, Italian bowls and a sauna.
The hotel consists of three inter-connecting buildings set against the cliff side.
There is a children's pool and, in the main building, a restaurant, a comfortable lounge and a bar.
All the hotel bedrooms are on the first and second floors and have a colour TV, a radio, a telephone and air-conditioning (from 15 June to 15 September).
The price includes dinner (or lunch), bed and breakfast.
Beach charges are not included.
Supplements per person per night:Supplements for 3–30 Apr available on request; Single room £7.95; Single room with front sea view £3.25; Front sea view and balcony £7.75.
The popular Bristol
Piazza Tasso in the heart of Sorrento
Cliffside setting for the Bristol
Comfortable lounges, Hotel Bristol
Hotel Riviera ∗∗∗∗
The Riviera is a modern hotel five minutes walk from the bustling Corso Italia, it is situated in attractive gardens with a large pool overhung with willows and pines.
A lift leads from the terrace to a private jetty with towels, deck-chairs, sun umbrellas and a beach bar.
There is an elegant lounge, bar and restaurant and light lunches are available at the snack-bar from midday to 1500 hrs.
A piano bar is open twice a week.
There is a children's pool, and cots and highchairs are available.
Public tennis courts adjoin the hotel and water-skiing, wind-surfing and scuba diving (certificate required) are available.
There is a lift and air-conditioning.
Bedrooms have TV, hair dryer and balcony.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges included (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £16.50; Front sea view (on request) £16.50; Side sea view and balcony £6.50.
Riviera's attractive pool
Grand Hotel Ambasciatori ∗∗∗∗
Perched high above the bay, this hotel is 10 minutes walk from Sorrento's centre.
There is an elegant lounge and restaurant, a bar, and live music twice a week.
A lift descends to the beach and sun deck.
The pool (open from 1 April) has a children's section and bar.
The hotel is air-conditioned (1 June to 30 Sept).
Standard rooms overlook a busy road but those with sea view are quieter.
Twins have a balcony.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges included (see p. 225).
Supplements per person per night:Supplements for departures 3–30 Apr available on request; Single room £9.95; Full board £10.50; Front sea view £9.75; Side sea view £6.50.
Ambasciatori — perched on the clifftops
GOLDEN CHOICE
Grand Hotel Excelsior Vittoria ∗∗∗∗
This hotel is just off the main square of Sorrento, with a private lift linking it to Marina Piccola.
Exquisitely furnished with antiques and fine paintings, it has impressive lounges and a bar which opens on to a large terrace where dancing can be arranged.
There is a pool and children's pool, with bar; a hairdressers and TV room.
Staff offer efficient, unobtrusive service at the restaurant which overlooks the harbour.
Bedrooms have mini-bar, TV and hair dryer.
Superior twin rooms with terrace & sea view are also available.
Price includes dinner (or lunch), bed and breakfast.
Beach charges not included.
Supplements per person per night:Supplements for departures 3–24 Apr available on request; Single room £15.95; Full board £18.50; Front sea view £15.50.
GOLD PLUS
Private transfers to and from your hotel are available for up to three Golden Choice customers at £113 per car.
Please indicate your request on the booking form.
Sorrento's breathtaking vista
Elegant dining at the Vittoria
Excelsior Vittoria above Marina Piccola
The exquisite Excelsior Vittoria
Positano
‘A delightful jumble of pretty painted houses clinging to the hillside.’
Flanked by two ancient watchtowers, Positano is a delightful mosaic of pretty, painted houses of every colour.
Clinging to the hillside amid scenic splendour, these houses sternly defy gravity by not tumbling down to the sea below.
There is a small beach and as the beach cannot be reached by traffic, so there is a really relaxed, holiday feel.
A pathway ambles up beside art galleries and chic boutiques to the domed church.
Evenings can be lively in peak season when several discos are open, but a more leisurely pastime is to stroll the flower-flanked roads, or admire the view  at night
Hotel Conca d'Oro ∗∗∗
This is a simple, friendly pensione set into the hillside and run by the Cappiello family.
Reached via 100 steps, there is a bar, lift and restaurant where guests can dine al fresco with breathtaking views.
The basically furnished bedrooms have front sea view and balcony or terrace (sometimes shared).
Price includes dinner (or lunch), bed and breakfast.
Beach charges not included.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £2.50; Full board £2.95.
Traditional style at the Conca d'Oro
Sunny Conca d'Oro
Hotel Villa Franca ∗∗∗∗
Sit at the bar or relax by the pool on the stunning roof-top terrace of the Villa Franca and below the village of Positano stretches downwards to the shoreline — the most marvellous sight.
Set in a commanding position, this is an excellent hotel with pool, refined, elegant public rooms and a welcoming atmosphere.
On the floors hand-painted ceramic tiles and a graceful decor are complemented by soft, warm furnishings.
In the restaurant guests are offered traditional cuisine.
Bedrooms have balcony, side sea view, mini-bar, TV and air-conditioning.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges not included.
Supplements per person per night:Single room (on request) £18.75; Front sea view £7.50.
Villa Franca's sunny pool
Villa Franca's stylish bedrooms
Colourful shopping
Positano
Hotel Casa Albertina ∗∗∗
Removed from the noise and bustle of the automobile age by a flight of steps, the Casa Albertina enjoys a lovely hillside position a 15 minute walk from the centre of pretty Positano.
Set back from the road the hotel is reached through picturesque roads of characteristic pastel colour buildings.
The attentive owners, the Cinque family, see to it that their visitors never foresake modern comforts.
Beautiful ceramic floor tiles make the public rooms a fresh and welcoming cool retreat in summer.
There is a roof-top sun terrace with panoramic views of the town and the sea, a lounge, bar and restaurant.
The latter often serves a buffet breakfast on the terrace in mild weather, and always offers well-prepared Italian cuisine at dinner.
The comfortable, traditionally furnished bedrooms all have a private balcony overlooking Positano.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges not included.
Supplements per person per night:Single room (on request) £9.25.
Pretty Positano
The peaceful Casa Albertina
Enjoy the sunny terrace at the Casa Albertina
Hotel Le Agavi
Le Agavi is a first-class hotel built high on the hillside overlooking the Bay of Salerno.
Lovely landscaped terraces rise in tiers above the swimming pool from where the views are quite superb.
The centre of Positano is reached by hotel mini-bus.
A pebble beach, situated on the bay below the hotel, is reached by cable-car and 350 steps.
The hotel is fully air-conditioned and boasts a terraced restaurant with views overlooking the bay.
The bedrooms are either in the main building or in one of two adjacent villas (situated below the main hotel and reached by cable-car).
All the bedrooms have TV, radio, mini-bar, telephone, sea view and a balcony.
The price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges included.
(see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room (on request) £21.75; Full board £24.50.
A pool with a view — Le Agavi
Le Agavi — built in the hillside
GOLDEN CHOICE
Hotel Le Sirenuse ∗∗∗∗∗
This is a unique, deluxe hotel, housed in an 18th century villa owned by the Marquis Sersale's family.
Set in the hillside, the furnishings are elegant and dotted with fine antiques.
The management prides itself on attention to detail and offers a bar and a dining-room which extends onto a large verandah with beautiful views.
There is a pool with a bar for light snacks, and a lift to the beach.
All bedrooms have front sea view and terrace.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges included (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room (on request) £30.95; Full board £30.95; Suite (on request) £24.95.
GOLD PLUS
Private transfers to and from your hotel are available for up to three Golden Choice customers at £139 per car.
Please indicate your request on the booking form.
Sirenuse — a new addition for 1992
Sirenuse — a relaxing drink
Ravello
‘A tranquil hill-top setting amidst pine trees and vineyards.’
Ravello sits above Amalfi in a tranquil hill-top setting, amidst pine trees and vineyards.
Here a total sense of calm prevails and only church bells disturb the peace.
Generations of visitors have delighted in this exquisite little town's beauty and in the stunning views it affords.
The famous composer Wagner was just one of many illustrious visitors to the town, finding inspiration at the 11th century Villa Rufolo for Kingsor's Magic Gardens in ‘Parsifal’.
Scent and colour still run riot in the gardens and in early July this, and Ravello's cathedral, become venues for a Wagner music festival.
There are more beautiful gardens at the Villa Cimbrone, which offer superb panoramas of the rugged coast.
Beyond the cathedral and the little churches, visitors can walk up the mountainside to the tiny, medieval village of Scala.
For sea bathing there is Minori, or you can visit Amalfi by local bus.
Resting in Ravello
Colourful streets
Pretty churches to visit
Hotel Graal ∗∗∗
The Hotel Graal has a matchless setting, situated high on the cliffs overlooking vineyards and lemon groves onwards to the sea.
The views are quite magnificent, especially from the swimming pool (open 0800–1200 hrs, 1400–1800 hrs) and the terrace where cool, relaxing drinks are served.
The bedrooms look out over picturesque Ravello whose main square is only an easy five minutes walk away.
The Hotel Graal was recently refurbished and all the bedrooms have a telephone.
The twin bedrooms have the benefit of a small balcony with lovely views to the coast.
There are two comfortable lounges for relaxing in, a bar, a delightful panoramic restaurant, a lift and provision for lunch time snacks.
We regret, the hotel does not accept infants under the age of two.
The price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges are not included.
Supplements per person per night:Single room (on request) £7.25; Full board £7.75.
A stunning setting for the Hotel Graal
Hotel Graal — high on the cliffs
Local flavours await
Hotel Graal's panoramic restaurant
Hotel Parsifal ∗∗∗
This is a charming, small hotel with a delightfully pretty terraced garden and restaurant, overlooking Maiori below.
Meals are personally supervised by the owner, Signor Camera, and can be served on the terrace.
There is a lounge with TV and bar/snacks service.
Ravello centre is five minutes walk away and the coast, three miles away, is served by local bus.
Bedrooms have front or side sea view.
Price includes dinner (or lunch), bed and breakfast.
Beach charges not included.
Supplements per person per night:Double for sole occupancy (on request) £12.25; Front sea view £2.95.
The Parsifal's pretty terrace garden
The charming Hotel Parsifal
Hotel Giordano & Villa Maria ∗∗∗
The Giordano is set in gardens near Ravello's main square and the beautiful Villa Maria is five minutes walk away overlooking the coast.
They share the large pool with bar at the Giordano, where discos and pizza parties are held end of July to mid-Sept.
Main meals are served at Villa Maria although the Giordano does have its own breakfast room.
Infants are not accepted.
The price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges are not included.
Supplements per person per night:Single room (on request) £10.25; Full board £12.95.
Relax at Hotel Giordano
Hotel Giordano's pool set amidst gardens
Hotel Caruso ∗∗∗∗
Lovingly converted from an Italian palace, the Caruso has marvellous rambling gardens and terraces with superb views of the coast.
The hotel grows its own produce and its wines are highly recommended.
Fine old paintings, marble columns and period furnishings add charm.
There is a lounge, with bar service and a restaurant and dining terrace.
Breakfast can be served in the bedrooms.
Twin rooms have a front sea view and some have balcony.
The price includes dinner (or lunch), bed and breakfast.
Beach charges are not included.
Supplements per person per night:Single room (on request) £11.50; Front sea view £4.75.
The Hotel Caruso once an 11th century palace
Hotel Marmorata ∗∗∗∗
Converted from a 17th century paper mill, this hotel is built into the cliffs just half a mile from the resort of Minori.
An extremely tranquil property, its surrounding views are really quite magnificent.
There is a swimming pool, sun terraces, snackbar and a highly-acclaimed restaurant.
Boats can be hired in high season and, once a day, a courtesy bus operates to the centre of Amalfi (two miles away) and into Ravello (four miles away) for those who wish to explore.
The bedrooms all have colour satellite TV, mini-bar and air-conditioning in high season.
The price includes dinner (or lunch), bed and breakfast.
Bathing platform charges are included.
(see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room (on request) £10.25; Full board £15.95; Front sea view £3.50.
The tranquil Marmorata
The Marmorata built into the rocks
Peaceful Ravello
The 17th century building of the Hotel Marmorata
GOLDEN CHOICE
Hotel Palumbo ∗∗∗∗∗
A 12th century palace enhanced by graceful Moorish architecture, the Hotel Palumbo has the exclusive atmosphere of a warm and welcoming country house hotel.
Perched on the mountain close to the main square of Ravello, guests here can look out over the highly productive vineyards and dazzling blue sea.
Many illustrious visitors, including such notables as Wagner, Oscar Wilde, Garbo and Bogart have enjoyed the style and comforts of this hotel.
It is tastefully appointed with many fine antiques and  select paintings.
There is an elegant restaurant which boasts a romantic balcony overlooking the glorious Amalfi coast, and, for a lovely lazy start to the day, breakfast roomservice is offered at no extra charge.
There is a sun terrace, garden and elegant Arabic-style bar.
Citalia is pleased to offer bedrooms in either the main hotel or in the four-star residence which is conveniently situated just 20 yards away.
The price includes dinner (or lunch), bed and breakfast.
Beach charges are not included.
Supplements per person per night:Single room (on request) £19.95; Full board £9.50.
GOLD PLUS
Private transfers to and from your hotel are available for up to three Golden Choice customers at £172 per car.
Please indicate your request on the booking form.
The graceful Palumbo
Ravello — streets to explore
Amalfi
‘One of the wonders of the Neapolitan Riviera.
A glorious town set in a valley below steep rugged hills.’
One of the great wonders of the Neapolitan Riviera, this glorious town is set in a valley below steep, rugged hills.
Terracotta roofs, cupolas and campaniles rise in neat symmetry above a wide, blue bay, among terraces of orchards and vines.
Amalfi is a warm and colourful town which has long attracted scores of celebrities.
It is a resort proud of its fascinating heritage which once placed it among the wealthiest of trading republics — rivalling both Venice and Genoa.
Glimpses of the past are revealed in the cathedral, in the ruins of the Arsenal and among local craftsmen who continue traditional papermaking.
There are ancient passageways full of shops and in the old, Moorish quarter there is a market.
Hotel La Bussola ∗∗∗
Overlooking Amalfi's central promenade La Bussola is across the main coastal road from a private bathing platform with (mid-June to mid-Sept) complimentary deck-chairs and umbrellas.
The hotel's dining-room and fourth-floor terrace have excellent views and there are also comfortable lounges, a TV room, snack bar and lift.
The resort's main square is a 150 yard stroll away.
All the twin rooms have sea view and balcony.
The price includes dinner (or lunch), bed and breakfast.
The bathing platform charges are included (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £5.95; Full board £7.25.
Hotel La Bussola right by the sea
Hotel Miramalfi ∗∗∗
Clinging to the clifftop high above the sea, the Miramalfi boasts one of the best panoramas of Amalfi.
This is a wonderful hotel which has been popular with Citalia customers for many years.
The Mansi family owners take great pride in ensuring guests have a memorable stay.
There are two comfortable lounges, one with TV and a bar, and a spacious dining-room which overlooks the bay and offers a choice of menu.
There is a private lift down to the sea water swimming pool and sun terrace.
The bright and comfortable bedrooms have telephone and a sea view.
Twins have a balcony.
The price includes dinner (or lunch), bed and breakfast.
Bathing platform charges included (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £2.25; Full board £7.50.
Clifftop setting for the Miramalfi
Hotel Luna Convento ∗∗∗∗
Only five minutes walk from central Amalfi and close to the seafront this hotel is on a corner site of the main coast road and boasts an intriguing past.
St. Francis of Assisi originally founded the cloister which now encloses a garden and well.
The restaurant has arched windows with beautiful views.
There is a sea water pool, sun deck, pool bar, lounge, bars and a smart high season night-club beneath the hotel.
Bedrooms have TV, telephone, sea view and balcony.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges included (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room (on request) £13.50; Full board £12.50.
Luna — a hotel with an intriguing past
Pretty Amalfi
The Luna's welcoming bar
Hotel Cappuccini Convento ∗∗∗∗
Once a medieval convent, this hotel perches high on the cliffs above Amalfi in an absolutely spectacular position.
Guests are transported by lift from the main coastal road to the garden setting.
The medieval character remains and the 12th century cloisters and church remain surprisingly intact.
The basic bedrooms have been converted from the monks' former cells and have telephone.
To reach the sea below guests can take the lift, footpath and flight of 177 steps down to a small private beach.
The hotel's restaurant, offers guests the option of dining outside, al fresco, on the pergola terrace.
The price includes dinner (or lunch), bed and breakfast.
The entrance charges to the beach are included and sun-beds can be hired there.
Supplements per person per night:Single room (on request) £13.50; Full board £12.50.
Set beneath the hills — beautiful Amalfi
Hotel Belvedere ∗∗∗∗
Hotel Belvedere has a superb location at Conca dei Marini with dazzling coastal views.
Set on a convenient bus route to Amalfi (three miles away and also served by the hotel's mini-bus for a small charge) there are many tranquil terraces and a cliffside swimming pool reached by private lift.
There is a spacious lounge and a panoramic restaurant supervised by the owner, Signor Lucibello.
The public rooms are traditional in style and bedrooms have a front sea view, balcony or terrace.
The price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges are not included.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £12.50; Full board £18.50.
A sunny terrace at the Belvedere
Character and comfort at the Cappuccini
GOLDEN CHOICE
Hotel Santa Caterina ∗∗∗∗∗
Perched on the cliffs this hotel is in a spectacular position amid lemon groves 20 minutes walk or a short bus ride from Amalfi.
Two lifts link it with the private sun terrace, bathing platform and sea water swimming pool below.
Marble columns, archways and plush furnishings abound.
From June to September snacks and light lunches are served by the pool.
The garden annexe offers secluded peaceful rooms.
Standard rooms in the main building overlook a main road and have a side sea view but no air-conditioning.
Superior twin rooms have a front sea view, mini-bar and air-conditioning when necessary.
Twins have a balcony.
Price includes dinner (or lunch), bed and breakfast.
Beach charges are included (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single rooms £12.50; Superior room £18.75; Full board £18.75; Suite £61.95.
Reductions per person per night : Annexe £12.50.
The stunning Santa Caterina
Santa Caterina's pool — spectacularly set
Relaxing at the Hotel Santa Caterina
Right on the cliffs — Hotel Belvedere
Browse in Amalfi
Paestum & Castellabate
‘Set beside beautiful bays.
Perfect for exploring wild mountain scenery and unspoilt villages.’
Home to some of the world's best preserved Greek ruins, Paestum is a town where historic interest, scenic beauty and fine, long beaches compete for your time.
Castellabate is set along a beautiful bay on the Gulf of Salerno — the perfect base for exploring wild mountain scenery and unspoilt villages.
In July and August watersports are available from the sandy beach nearby at Santa Maria.
The temples at Paestum
Beach at Castelsandra
Castellabate
A walk near Le Palme
Hotel Le Palme PAESTUM ∗∗∗
From this hotel it is just a short walk through pine woods to the private, sandy beach with beach bar and restaurant (open from 1 May–30 Sept).
This is a new hotel in a quiet yet rural spot, with restaurant, bar, swimming pool, tennis court and children's play park.
Windsurfing, beach volley ball and table tennis are all available.
At the hotel there is a disco which is open from 10 July–20 Aug.
However customers should take a break from the beach and visit two of Paestum's most famous sights, the Bascilica and the temple of Neptune, ancient Greek architecture at its finest.
The bedrooms are simply furnished and have a large balcony and air-conditioning.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges included from 1 May to 30 Sept (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £7.50.
The pleasant pool at Le Palme
Relax on Le Palme's beach
Hotel Castelsandra CASTELLABATE ∗∗∗∗
The Hotel Castelsandra is an ideal choice of hotel for those who wish to combine relaxed, lazy days with a little energetic activity.
Set in wooded seclusion, several hundred feet above the bay, the hotel has wonderful views of the coastline and on a clear day guests can see the island of Capri and the glorious Amalfi coast in the distance.
The hotel is run as a sports club and offers a vast selection of sporting activities (1 June to 30 Sept) included in the price.
There is a swimming pool with bar and children's pool, and among the complimentary amenities available are tennis courts, billiards, wind-surfing boards, pedaloes, a catamaran (small fee payable for insurance), and canoes.
Here too, guests can learn to scuba dive and, for a charge, can join a diving excursion organised by the hotel's scuba diving school to explore a marine park with sunken sailing vessel and submerged ancient city.
Other activities available at a charge are horse riding, water-skiing, sauna, massage, tennis and wind-surfing lessons.
The hotel is fully air-conditioned and offers a varied choice of menu in the restaurant.
The hotel is surrounded by unspoilt rugged countryside, mountains, hills and forests.
The pace of life is slow and easy and the nearest villages are the sleepy fishing village of San Marco, and San Maria.
A shuttle bus operates to the hotel's reserved section of beach at San Maria, which is accessed via 70 steps down from the road and has a beach bar.
Price includes full board.
Beach charges included (p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £5.95; Sea view and balcony £3.95.
2 CENTRE HOLIDAYS
Why not combine Paestum or Castellabate with another resort on the Neapolitan Riviera?
For instance, spend 7 nights in Sorrento, an ideal base for exploring historic Campania, followed by 7 nights relaxing at the Castelsandra.
Please telephone Tailor Made Holidays on 081–688 9989.
Citalia VALUE
Le Palme
Honeymoon and silver anniversary couples receive a bottle of sparkling wine and flowers or fruit.
Guests are entitled to complimentary tennis.
Castelsandra
All guests receive: Full day boat trip to Palinuro plus barbeque lunch.
One hour water skiing and scuba diving at sea.
A complimentary membership card which entitles guests to use of piano bar, billiard room, shuttle service to the beach, day time tennis courts, table tennis, windsurfing, pedaloes canoes and catamaran, sophisticated 10% discount off all excursions.
Panoramic outlook, Castelsandra
Castelsandra's lovely beach
A warm welcome, Castelsandra
Explore Paestum
Sunny poolside bar, Castelsandra
Horse riding at Castelsandra
Capri & Ischia
‘Two classic islands floating in a sparkling sapphire sea.’
Ischia is an incredibly pretty island of colourful houses and a sea of chestnut forests and vineyards encircling Monte Epomeo.
The largest island in the Bay of Naples it boasts a bustling port, thermal spas and sandy beaches.
The town of Ischia Ponte is linked by causeway to the 15th century Aragona Castle.
Nearby, is pretty Lacco Ameno and Forio, the wine-growing centre.
Capri is a classic holiday island where exquisite belvederes overlook sparkling seas; palms neighbour olives and pines; Monte Solaro soars and the coast of grottoes has a rugged charm.
Yachts anchor at Marina Grande where a cable car runs to Capri Town.
The real romance begins when the daytrippers go.
Hotel Europa Palace CAPRI ∗∗∗∗
Set among olive groves and vineyards on the hillside of Anacapri this hotel has magnificent views over the sea.
There is a pool and health centre, and tennis courts and the chair-lift up to Monte Solaro are nearby.
There is an elegant lounge and a pianist entertains guests in the piano bar several times a week.
Bedrooms have radio, TV, mini-bar, telephone and airconditioning.
Some rooms with a patio garden and a small pool are also available.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges not included.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £6.50; Front sea view and balcony £15.50; Private garden & pool (on request) £62.75.
Dine at the Europa
Poolside pleasures at the Europa
Hotel La Floridiana CAPRI ∗∗∗
At the heart of the resort, this hotel is just 10 minutes from the piazzetta.
Surrounded by lush greenery, it is a simple, family-run hotel overlooking pine trees and the sea.
There is a TV lounge, bar and panoramic dining-room serving island specialities.
Nearby there are public gardens, public pool, tennis courts and a disco.
Bedrooms have telephone, safety deposit box and balcony.
Price includes dinner (or lunch), bed and breakfast.
Beach charges are not included.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £9.25; Front sea view £2.95; Full board £15.50.
The family-run Floridiana
Incredibly pretty Ischia
Pottery from Campania
Gardens of Augustus
GOLDEN CHOICE
Grand Hotel Punta Molino ISCHIA ∗∗∗∗∗L
Just 20 minutes walk from the port, this hotel has two pools, terraces and paths to a private sandy beach and jetty.
There is a bar, lounge, restaurant and late-night piano bar.
A gala dinner is held fortnightly and lunch is al fresco.
Thermal treatments are offered.
Bedrooms have air-conditioning, TV, mini-bar, and hair dryer.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges incl. (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £19.25; Front sea view £19.25; Full board £14.95.
Punta Molino — a peaceful hideaway
Hotel La Residenza CAPRI ∗∗∗∗
La Residenza is in Capri town, set in pretty gardens.
There is a fresh water pool with bar, a panoramic sunbathing terrace and an airy, first-floor restaurant with sea views.
Bedrooms have mini-bar, TV and air-conditioning.
Price includes dinner (or lunch), bed and breakfast.
Beach charges are not included.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £12.50; Front sea view and balcony £9.95.
Terrace at La Residenza
Hotel Elma Park ISCHIA ∗∗∗∗
Set amidst lush greenery and surrounded by a large flower garden, this is a tranquil hotel 500 yards from the sea and boasting stunning panoramic views.
There are two thermal swimming pools, tennis courts, a gymnasium, hair and beauty salon, a boutique, table tennis and Italian bowls.
A complimentary minibus service runs daily to the private beach, just over a mile away, where there is a shoreside restaurant for lunch.
The spacious bedrooms have direct-dial telephone, mini-bar, colour TV, airconditioning and a balcony with sea view.
Price includes dinner (or lunch), bed and breakfast.
Beach charges included (see p. 225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £6.95; Full board £7.95.
Bedroom at the Elma Park
Relax at the Elma Park
Citalia VALUE
At all hotels honeymoon and silver anniversary couples receive a bottle of sparkling wine and flowers or fruit.
Punta Molino
A room upgrade to a seaview room is offered to all guests arriving and departing between 2–23 May and 26 Sep–30 Oct (subject to availability).
Elma Park
Guests are served a complimentary afternoon tea and are entitled to 2 hours per week of tennis, ladies are also offered a complimentary facial.
Guests staying 7 nights or more are offered a day's complimentary car hire (full insurance included) and those staying 14 nights are also entitled to an excursion to Capri.
A magical island — shimmering shores and ancient history
SARDINIA
A wild and mountainous island with vast, white sandy beaches, Sardinia is one of the most exclusive holiday spots in the Mediterranean.
The island spans over 200 miles by road from north to south and within its borders the proud Sardinians are happy to boast their own language, customs and intriguing culture.
You are sure to receive a warm welcome.
High in the mountains, isolated and remote from the hassles of bustling cities, traditional family life has changed very little over the centuries.
Even along the coast in the marvellous new holiday centres, you will appreciate the deep blue seas and surprisingly uncrowded beaches, and wonder at the mountains and fragrant, herb-scented woods which tumble down to the shore.
Sardinia can offer a multitude of prehistoric and ancient remains, beautiful caves and underground lakes, superb sports, and colourful festivals.
There are endless possibilities for good gourmet wining and dining with style, tasting the superb local delights.
Explorers' delight
Sardinia appeals greatly to explorers — especially the adventure zone of the mountains — and a hire car is the best way to get around.
Over 7,000 ‘Nuraghe’— the strange, cone-shaped megalithic structures of stone — dot the wild landscape and the massive ruins of Nuraghe Su Nuraxi are among those worth seeing.
Head towards Gennargentu and look down over the vast, untamed terrain where sheep graze among herbs and shrubs.
The west of the island is mainly devoted to vineyards and citrus orchards, the rugged east famed for the jet-set capital, Costa Smeralda.
Gourmet Dining
In Sardinia dining is about excellence from start to finish and even the most demanding of gourmet will be well satisfied by the choice and quality.
For antipasti, try ‘salsiccia’— sausage, and ‘prosciutto’ local ham, sometimes made from wild boar.
Typical pasta dishes are ‘malloreddus’ and ‘gnochetti alla sarda’.
Roast suckling pig or kid and a rich variety of shellfish will be found further down the menu.
Unique Crafts
Sardinia's craftsmen offer a bonanza for the bargain-hunter — unique handicrafts are numerous and include hand-woven rugs, baskets, pottery, and coral jewellery produced with love.
The price is generally open to negotiation so feel free to haggle.
Famed for watersports
Renowned for its clear blue waters
Splendour of Sardinia
A Sardinian vista
‘A wild and historic, mountainous island where herb-scented woods tumble down to a shoreline of vast white sandy beaches — beautifully unspoilt and crowd free.’
A feast at the Forte Village
Forte Hotel Village
‘Sardinia's most exciting holiday playground — a marvellous estate of pine forest, gardens and dazzling white beach.’
The south-west of Sardinia, boasts innumerable beaches of soft white sand and seas as clear as any topical paradise.
Here, in beautiful pine wood settings are some of the most prestigious and exclusive hotels in Sardinia.
Many of these, like the Forte Hotel Village, are fully self-contained, you might describe them as small holiday resorts in their own right, offering everything you need for a marvellous stay in unspoilt surroundings, away from the more commercialised resort areas.
Watersports are one of the great attractions in this part of Sardinia — there can be few better places to master the art of wind-surfing or waterskiing than here!
There is plenty of scope on dry land too — tennis, often on floodlit courts for cooler evening play, horse riding treks for the day into the herb-scented woods and mountains, or golf at the exclusive 18-hole Is Molas Club.
While many visitors are simply content to unwind on the beach or indulge in a little holiday sport and activity, others have the opportunity to gain a better insight into the history and customs of this beautiful region.
Forte Hotel Village, Hotel Castello and the Villa del Parco are Sardinia's most exciting holiday playground, welcoming guests from all around the world.
Ever since the opening of this exclusive holiday complex in 1970, Citalia has enjoyed a very special relationship with the Forte Hotel Village, ensuring that now, over 20 years on, no other tour operator has the same knowledge and experience of the Village as we do.
The setting is perfect…a marvellous private estate spanning fifty five acres of pine forest and flower-filled gardens beside a dazzling white beach on the south coast.
Escapists will revel in the tranquillity of the surroundings which are like a castaway paradise, yet offering complete dependability in terms of comfort and service.
Expertly managed by Trusthouse Forte along with some of the world's prestigious properties, the Forte Hotel Village continues to attract the most discerning Citalia guests for whom highest standards are met.
Food is a particular highlight — always beautifully presented and with a huge choice at every meal.
This, along with the ‘Terme del Parco’ Health and Beauty Centre ensures that as the Village enters its twenty second year, the quality is as high as ever before.
Terme del Parco gym
Lively nightlife
Lush settings
Sumptuous breakfast
Sports For All Sorts
For the keen sportsman, the village is like a holiday dream come true.
Starting on dry land, there are 12 hard tennis courts, floodlit at night, two open-air squash courts and a daily programme of games and activities ranging from aerobics and trampolining to volleyball, basketball and table tennis.
The Water Sports Centre is fully equipped with wind-surf boards, sailing dinghies and complete facilities for scuba diving including a training pool.
You can water-ski, take off on a boat excursion or just savour the pleasure of swimming and snorkelling in crystal clear seas.
Within walking distance are the horseriding stables where lessons are available as well as trekking for more experienced riders.
In fact, tuition and advice are available in a multitude of sports under the trained eye of friendly, experienced coaches.
The use of sports facilities is included in the holiday price with the exception of tuition, horse-riding, water sports and golf (the 18-hole Is Molas Golf Club is ten minutes drive away).
Health & Leisure Centre
Set right in the centre of the Forte Village is the ‘Terme del Parco’, an exclusive health and beauty centre which is an experience in itself.
Covering 13,000 square metres and designed to be both relaxing and inspirational, the centre's facilities are quite simply superb.
There are saunas and Turkish baths to steam your cares away.
A gymnasium boasts the most modern of techno-gym equipment for an exhilarating workout.
There are seawater pools with hydromassage beds and thalassotherapy, and physiotherapists are on hand to check your health or ease away your aches and pains.
When you feel it is time to soothe away the ravages of sea bathing and a little too long on the sun bed, there is a hairdresser and a beauty salon.
For the ultimate pampering there is a massage centre where the range of invigorating techniques includes Shiatzu and underwater massage.
Whichever facilities you choose to use you will find yourself delighted by the centres setting.
Especially For Children
The entire village is a children's paradise, a stimulating world just waiting to be discovered.
Parents can entrust their offspring to the Mini-Club which is located between the beach and the square which offers supervised activities for 2–11 year olds and an adventure playground open from morning until evening.
A daytime nursery for infants under two is available at an extra charge as is evening babysitting.
Other amenities include a children's restaurant and shop.
Some Enchanted Evening
Evenings are always special at the Forte Hotel Village.
Watch a cabaret in the Piazza, try an exotic cocktail from the bar and dance the night away at the discothéque or nightclub.
For Extra Convenience
Major credit cards can be used for payment or village extras.
Other services include a hairdresser, barber, laundry, safedeposit, telex, fax and nurse or doctor on call.
Pure Relaxation
Relaxation comes naturally at the Forte Hotel Village.
The sea is as crystal clear as any spot in the Caribbean you might care to name.
The gardens are quiet and secluded, the service is friendly and magnificent meals tempt the most jaded appetites.
Or why not just be pampered at the superb Health and Beauty Centre located by the deluxe Villa del Parco.
Holidays afloat
Breakfast at the Colosseo
Forte Village colour
Fine cuisine
Tennis courts and Baia delle Palme pool
Forte Hotel Village ∗∗∗∗
This unique village has been a particular favourite with Citalia customers for many years.
Opened in 1970 by Charles Forte, now Lord Forte, the village is built on a vast estate, lavishly covered in pine woods and colourful shrubs.
The cottages and rustic buildings are typically Sardinian in style with terracotta roofs, shuttered windows and high-beamed ceilings.
Inside, a subtle colour scheme of white or light pastel shades is complemented by cool tiled floors and modern facilities.
Pathways criss-cross the grounds among the pine trees linking the cottages to the central piazza, the swimming pool complexes and the beach.
The magnificent sea-water pools with water chutes, underwater music and waterfalls are landscaped into an exotic setting of typical palms and flowers.
In addition, there are two fresh-water pools, one with diving boards.
Peacocks and swans roam wild in the grounds and there are lots of tiny corners, among the sweet-scented flowers, perfect for lazing on a sunbed.
Here, no matter what type of accommodation you choose, your holiday base is always close to many amenities and activities.
Your Choice of Accommodation:Accommodation at the Forte Hotel Village is in superior rooms.
All rooms have private facilities with shower, telephone, colour satellite TV, mini-bar and safety deposit box.
Room service is available for continental breakfast and daytime drinks and snacks.
Superior Pineta Rooms:These are housed in attractive twostorey buildings and bungalows situated in a single area of the village among the pine woods.
They comprise a twin-bedded room with patio or terrace.
A separate area is available for a third bed.
Some interconnecting twin rooms are also available on request.
Superior Garden Rooms:These are housed in bungalows situated throughout the village.
They comprise a twin room with patio or terrace, or a room with three beds and patio or terrace.
Interconnecting twin rooms with shared bathroom and patio are also available.
Superior Mare Rooms:These are the closest to the beach.
They comprise either a twin room with patio or terrace; a three bedded room with patio or terrace; or a family suite of two interconnecting twin rooms with shower room and patio.
Supplements per person per night:Single Pineta/Garden/Mare (all on request) 27 Jun–24 Jul £39.25; 25 Jul–21 Aug £52.25; all other times £27.50.
YOUR PASSPORT TO DINING
Upon arrival, you will receive a visitor's card which entitles you to breakfast and dinner.
Breakfast on the Colosseo terrace is a generous buffet.
For dinner you can choose the Torre Grill or the Pineta, an open-air restaurant noted for its vast buffet and carvery.
In high season a variety of specialist restaurants are available (opened at the managements' discretion) at no extra charge but do require a reservation.
Details on arrival.
You may be tempted by Brazilian, French, Spanish or Scandinavian restaurants.
There is also a pizzeria, creperie and spaghetti house.
CHILDREN'S REDUCTIONS
Ages specified below apply to the child/infants age on the date of return travel.
Child reductions at the Forte Hotel Village, Hotel Castello and Villa del Parco apply to the following dates:
Infants under 2 FREE on departures 30 May, 26 Sept and 3 Oct.
Conditions:reductions are only available where children are sharing a unit of accommodation with two or more adults; to qualify for the infant rate, the infant is not counted as one of the ‘persons sharing’ in a unit of accommodation.
Reductions are all subject to availability of appropriate accommodation.
Infants under 2 are not entitled to a separate aircraft seat.
YOUR HOLIDAY INCLUDES
Accommodation in superior or deluxe rooms or bungalows.
Full breakfast with cooked and cold dishes; dinner at the Colosseo/Pineta or the Torre Grill, including half a bottle of house wine and mineral water.
Fresh beach facilities, use of swimming pools and water slides.
Free tennis (12 floodlit courts), table tennis, bowls, water polo, volleyball, aerobics and mini football.
Wind-surfing, water-skiing, sailing, scuba-diving and horse riding all at an extra charge, together with tuition in most sports.
Nightly entertainment with floor shows, dancing, discothéque and piano bar.
Free children's mini-club (2–11 years) open all day; paddling pools and large adventure playground.
N.B. All facilities are subject to weather conditions and may be limited in early and late season.
Watersports fun
‘Fortino’childrens playground
A great start to the day
Superb pools
GOLDEN CHOICE
Hotel Castello ∗∗∗∗
The Castello is a stylish, top-class hotel.
Set among the pine trees just a few yards from the white sandy beach, the hotel has immediate access to all facilities in the Forte Hotel Village, at no extra charge, in addition to its own select amenities.
These include a  pool set in sunny terraces, a chic cocktail bar and a lounge, several beachside snack-bars and an elegant restaurant where a buffet-style candlelit dinner can be enjoyed outside to the accompaniment of light music.
Bedrooms are all ‘Superior’ twin-bedded rooms, with air-conditioning, safety deposit box, mini-bar, TV, balcony and sea view.
(View may be obstructed by pine trees.)
A limited-menu room service is available.
Deluxe rooms available on request.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Supplements per person per night:Single room (on request) 27 Jun–24 Jul £39.95; 25 Jul–21 Aug £52.25; all other times £27.95.
GOLD PLUS
Return private transfers are available for up to three Golden Choice customers at £97 per car.
Please indicate your request on the booking form.
The elegant Castello
Villa del Parco dining
Splash around
Hotel Villa del Parco ∗∗∗∗
This is a most luxurious, hotel set in large gardens close to a complex of pools.
There is a roof-top restaurant, overlooking the Village, where breakfast and dinner are served mid-June to early Sept, and at other times guests dine at the Castello.
Guests can use all Village facilities, the pool at the Castello and two reserved tennis courts.
Exclusively featured by Citalia in the UK, guests choose from three different types of accommodation: DELUXE ROOM — two king-size beds, balcony or terrace; DELUXE BUNGALOW B — large twin room with terrace or DELUXE BUNGALOW A (on request)— large twin bedded room with separate sitting room.
All are air-conditioned with mini-bar, TV, safety deposit box and direct-dial telephone.
Room service and beach towels are provided without additional charge.
Interconnecting rooms are available.
The price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges are included (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room (on request) 25 Jul–21 Aug £92.95; 6 Jun–24 Jul & 22 Aug–25 Sep £49.60; all other times £30.95.
Splash around
Playing outside a bungalow ‘Mare’
Superior bungalow comforts
The Parco's exclusive restaurant
Villasimius
‘Set in a little valley of orchards and vines, and guarded by rugged scenic mountains.’
The Gulf of Cagliari in the south of the island boasts a marvellous variety of tiny, pine-fringed coves and broad sandy beaches in settings of great natural beauty.
Capo Boi, a small cape tucked into the eastern curve of the bay, is certainly one of the loveliest.
Guarded by rugged mountains and an ancient water-tower, it lies just four miles from Villasimius in a little valley of orchards and vines.
The capital of Sardinia, Cagliari, is about 30 miles away and well worth visiting for its many museums and churches.
Westwards, the road follows a tortuous route towards Capo Spartivento on the southern tip of the island.
Here, close to the popular resort coast of Santa Margherita di Pula, you will find the fascinating city of Nova and near too is the Romanesque Church of Sant'Efisio, a place of pilgrimage in early May.
Hotel Capo Boi ∗∗∗∗
An oasis of tranquillity in the Gulf of Capo Carbonara, the Capo Boi stands in lavish, well-kept gardens beside a crescent of silvery sand.
Peace and quiet are easy to find even in the height of the season, for the hotel is splendidly isolated, away from traffic and the merest hint of a crowd.
Very many guests return year after year to appreciate the relaxing ambience, fine food, good facilities and the opportunity to totally unwind.
Here, you can enjoy a sunny ‘al fresco’ breakfast each morning on the terrace.
Then, at lunch time, a sumptuous buffet is spread out at the rustic beach restaurant — a leisurely meal with as many helpings as you choose!
In high season this restaurant offers à la carte dining in the evening while the main diningroom serves both international and local dishes from a choice of menu.
There are two large swimming pools landscaped within the grounds, where you can laze on a sunbed for an afternoon siesta.
Thatched umbrellas and deck-chairs are provided for sunbathing down on the beach.
Bring a snorkel and flippers if you have them, or hire them locally, and you can explore little rock pools and the offshore reef, teeming with fish.
Otherwise, the hotel's own range of watersports includes windsurfing, water-skiing and sailing.
Local catch
Lavish gardens
A family feast
The Capo Boi in its beautiful grounds
On dry land there are four floodlit tennis courts for cooler evening play.
On Saturdays, during July and August, a discotheque opens up in the evenings.
From June to mid-September there is a piano bar, or you may simply prefer to just sit on the terrace with a cocktail at sunset.
Many families come here during the peak season.
Swimming lessons are available for children and there is masses of space to play in the grounds.
Infants of under two years will be served meals in their rooms before restaurant service begins.
It should be noted, however, that no special children's activities are organised.
The village of Villasimius, four miles away, can be reached by occasional local buses or may be explored by taking Citalia's new excursion.
Bedrooms have mahogany coloured furniture and all have telephone.
Standard rooms have a mountain view but no balcony, while Superior rooms have a balcony overlooking the pool and garden.
Centrally positioned Superior rooms with enhanced view are now available.
The price includes full board.
Please note that only Visa credit cards are accepted.
Beach charges included (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room on request (double for sole use) £49.95; Superior £10.95; Superior with enhanced view £12.25.
EXCURSIONS
The Capo Boi is the ideal base for a really lazy, sun and beach holiday, but for when you are ready to venture away from the shore, Citalia this year offers two excursions.
Once a week guests have the opportunity of a day trip to Sardinia's capital, Cagliari, where you can explore the bustling shops and a market.
On one evening each week, guests can take an after-dinner excursion to the nearby town of Villasimius to stroll the shops, cafés and bars and sample a little of the low-key local nightlife.
These special excursions are bookable in resort, please see your Citalia Representative at the Capo Boi.
CHILDRENS REDUCTIONS
Special childrens offers are available for the following departures for a child sharing a room with two full fare-paying passengers.
The reductions below replace those described on page 13.
Infants up to age two:FREE Children 2–11 years inclusive: Departure date 16, 23 May.
FREE Departure dates 30 May, 6 and 13 June reduction 70%.
Departure dates 20 and 27 June, 4 July, all September departures reduction 60%.
Departure dates 11 July to 29 August reduction 30%.
Children 2–11 years inclusive not sharing with two full fare passengers: reduction 25%.
Your private beach
Enjoy a cool aperitif
Can you  think of anywhere better for breakfast?
Fun on the beach
Southern Sardinia
‘A region of fragrant pine woods, dazzling white beaches and gentle translucent seas.’
Here leisurely days are the keynote — relax among the fragrant pine woods or on the dazzling beaches, watch the gentle seas turn from pale to dark translucent shades of blue.
That is the charm of Sardinia's southern resorts.
By car you can explore an unspoilt region of stunning mountain scenery, fresh orchards and attractive little villages where everyday life has hardly changed in years and still revolves around the old church square.
Hotels shelter discreetly among refreshing pine trees or beside sumptuous sandy shores, and everywhere there is an opportunity to relax, to enjoy a wide variety of watersports or to play a few rounds at the 18-hole Is Molas Golf Club.
The cosmopolitan city of Cagliari is only 25 miles away.
The Is Morus beach
A windsurfer's world
Sample local cuisine
Residence Bouganville Self Catering
These apartments are 350 yards from the beach and half a mile from Villasimius with its shops and trattorie.
Apartments: Types A1 and A2 — double bedroom, a lounge with two divan beds, a kitchenette and a shower.
Types B1 and B2 — double bedroom, a twin room, a lounge with divan, kitchenette and shower.
Types A1 and B1 are on the first floor with terrace, Types A2 and B2 are on the ground floor with patio.
All have telephone and safe deposit.
There is a bar with TV, pool and garden.
A refundable deposit of approx. 300,000 Lire payable on arrival.
Supplements per person per night:Types A1/A2:27 June–29 Aug for 3 pers £9.50, 2 pers £28.50, all other times 3 pers £4.95, 2 pers £21.50.
Types B1/B2:27 June–29 Aug for 4 pers £7.25, all other times 4 pers £3.25.
Bouganville — close to the beach
Hotel Flamingo ∗∗∗∗
Set in gardens bordering soft white sands, the Flamingo located in the Santa Margherita di Pula area is an established favourite with Citalia customers.
It offers 126 comfortable bedrooms in a relaxed setting.
The hotel is surrounded by extensive grounds and nearby guests can spend leisurely days exploring the fragrant pine woods of the region or swimming in the translucent azure seas which lap gently at soft sandy shores along this wonderful coastline.
There is a large fresh-water pool, where a lunch time buffet is served each day, tennis courts, mini-golf, windsurfing, water-skiing and pedalo hire are available.
Children have their own small pool and a playground.
Other amenities include a games room, shop and air-conditioning throughout.
All the hotel bedrooms have telephone and balcony.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges included (see p.225) Please note credit cards are not accepted.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £7.50; Sea view £3.25.
The Hotel Flamingo has extensive grounds
Is Molas Golf Hotel ∗∗∗∗
Just ten minutes drive from the beach at Santa Margherita di Pula, regular visitors will know the Is Molas best for its championship 18-hole golf course.
But, set in extensive gardens, among the smooth, green fairways, the hotel also has two beautiful swimming pools, two floodlit tennis courts, a solarium, sauna and a delightful restaurant and bar.
A ten minute drive by complimentary shuttle bus brings guests to a private beach where sporting activities such as sailing, wind-surfing, scuba-diving, fishing and horse riding can be arranged.
The hotel is fully airconditioned and all 84 bedrooms have telephone, colour TV, minibar and balcony.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges and green fees included (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room (on request) £9.95; Full board £21.75.
Is Molas Golf Club
Relax by the Is Molas pool
Santa Margherita di Pula
GOLDEN CHOICE
Hotel Is Morus ∗∗∗∗
Casual and relaxed, yet very exclusive, Is Morus has an idyllic eucalyptus and pine wood setting beside a private sandy beach.
With 18 well-appointed bedrooms, it has excellent facilities and assures the highest standards of comfort and service.
The cuisine is excellent and the amenities quite exceptional.
There is a fresh-water swimming pool, and tennis, wind-surfing and waterskiing are also available; complimentary green fees and transport to the 18-hole Is Molas Golf Hotel's course.
In the evening guests dine by candlelight in the terrace restaurant.
Bedrooms have air-conditioning, mini-bar, telephone and 24-hour room service.
Superior twin rooms with sea view are also available.
The price includes dinner (or lunch), bed and breakfast.
Beach charges included (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room 22 June–20 Sept £20.50, all other times no supplement; Full Board £24.95; Superior twin £20.50; Twin in villa £20.50.
GOLD PLUS
Private transfers are available for Golden Choice customers at £187 per car.
Please indicate your request on the booking form.
Is Morus — between mountains and sea
A pool set among gardens
NORTHERN SARDINIA
Alghero
‘A beautiful city in a lovely setting — steeped in history and blessed with huge sandy beaches.’
Once a valuable and historic site, Alghero has witnessed much upheaval and many a conflict.
It has a rich and colourful history, which can still be traced in its fortifications, towers and old city gates.
Today its atmosphere is more convivial, its aspirations more leisurely.
It is a beautiful city, in a lovely setting — clearly built for noblemen and dominated by the city's landmark, the 16th century cathedral.
Alghero is at the heart of some of Sardinia's most attractive coastline.
It has a small harbour and is well-equipped to meet all a visitor's needs.
North of the city runs a huge sandy beach, bays and undeveloped coves; to the west lies one of Sardinia's great natural wonders — the dramatic cliffs and views of Capo Caccia with two huge rock formations in the sea.
Enjoy a stroll
A stunning vista
Hotel Porto Conte ∗∗∗
This is an excellent hotel set on its own beach on the Baia di Conte.
Built in a typical Mediterranean style on two floors, the Porto Conte offers professional service throughout and an excellent choice of good food in its restaurant.
Public rooms are spacious and include a TV lounge, card playing area, discotheque and bar.
There is a swimming pool and children's pool, two tennis courts, Italian bowls and table tennis.
Sail boats, motorboats and wind-surfs can be hired from the beach.
The pleasant bedrooms all have a balcony or terrace.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Children's meals are available for 10,000 Lire a meal.
Beach charges are included (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room (on request) £9.50.
Porto Conte has its own beach
Hotel Oasis ∗∗∗
One of the best three star hotels of the area, the Oasis is on the edge of the town and a short walk from the Lido beach.
A modern property, spotlessly kept, its facilities include a spacious lounge area, bar, discotheque (open 1 June–15 Aug), restaurant and lift.
A large swimming pool (open 1 Jun–15 Aug) is set in pretty gardens and served by a snack-bar, walk through a small pine wood and an underpass leads to the beach.
Occasional special evenings are held for guests' entertainment and on Fridays a cold buffet is served.
Bedrooms have telephone and balcony.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges are not included.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £3.75.
Hotel Oasis — one of Alghero's finest
Hotel dei Pini ∗∗∗
Set facing the sea with a small beach of fine sand, this hotel has one of the best positions in the resort.
There is a tennis court and the opportunity for guests to learn wind-surfing, water-skiing, horse riding and dancing (charges payable locally).
There is a piano bar (from June to September), restaurant and a barbecue is held once a week.
The bedrooms are fairly spacious with balcony overlooking the sea or the pine woods which surround the building.
Price includes dinner (lunch), bed and breakfast.
Beach charges included (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room (on request) £15.50; Front sea view £1.75; Full board £3.50.
In a fine position — dei Pini
Hotel Rina ∗∗∗∗
Built in 1990, the Hotel Rina is a modern, well-furnished property set away from the main road.
There is a large reception area, a bar and a lift, and in the dining-room both the food and service are good.
The hotel is just over a mile from the town centre and 150 yards from the Lido beach.
Its 80 bedrooms all have telephone and TV with European channels and twin rooms have a sea view.
Price includes dinner (or lunch), bed and breakfast.
Beach charges are not included.
Supplements per person per night:Single room (on request) £8.25; Balcony £2.25; Full board £9.50.
The very modern Rina
Hotel Baia di Conte ∗∗∗∗
The largest and most well-equipped hotel in Alghero, the Baia Dei Conte is a real luxury hotel.
Set on a private beach of fine sand, facilities include three swimming pools, table tennis, bowls, mini-golf, volleyball, basketball, tennis courts and two outdoor restaurants.
There is a fitness room, sauna and hydromassage, and a wide range of watersports available on the beach.
Inside there is a large buffet restaurant, piano bar, boutiques, hairdresser, newsagents, laundry and discotheque.
There is an outside children's club for youngsters aged 4 to 12.
All the spacious bedrooms have a radio and air-conditioning.
Price includes dinner (or lunch), bed and breakfast.
Beach charges included (see page 225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room (on request) £24.95; Room with garden view and balcony £8.25; Balcony and sea view £14.95; Full board £10.50.
Baia di Conte — superbly equipped
One of the pools at the Baia di Conte
Citalia VALUE
Honeymoon and silver anniversary couples receive a bottle of sparkling wine and flowers or fruit.
A patchwork of cultures amidst sunny sweeping bays
SICILY AND LIPARI
Sicily, the largest island in the Mediterranean is a place of immense beauty and historic interest.
Greeks, Romans, Saracens and Normans have all left behind a rich cultural heritage of theatres and temples, bridges and aqueducts, churches, towers and palaces.
The peak of Mount Etna dominates the eastern part of the island.
Far smaller is Mount Stromboli in the Aeolian islands which gives a spectacular performance with nightly fireworks and glowing sparks.
The volcanic nature of the Aeolian islands benefits the visitor by warming the local waters to ideal bathing temperatures and the clear blue waters are superb for underwater swimming.
The islands are also renowned for their thermal springs and sulphur baths.
Island Sights
Perhaps the most beguiling resort in Sicily is Taormina — hugging the hills and commanding the most spectacular views of the bay below Mount Etna.
The amphitheatre is just one of the many majestic Greek monuments in Sicily.
Other places to explore include the Valley of the Temples in Agrigento and the ruined city of Selinute.
Syracuse and its picturesque old town on the island of Ortigia retain an ageless charm, and inland are fortified towns like Enna.
Lipari, largest of the Aeolian islands has a delightful port and walled Acropolis.
There is an excellent  archaeological museum, and island hoppers can visit Vulcano, Stromboli and Panarea.
Feast of Fish
Take a generous helping of pasta, add tomatoes, anchovies, capers or aubergines cooked in olive oil and you have the basis of true Sicilian cuisine at its best.
Seafood is popular and the Aeolian islands are famous for their shellfish, especially the spiny lobster.
Try ‘cassata Siciliana’— a delicious ice-cream studded with candied fruit, or excellent pastries filled with sweet ricotta cheese and candied fruit.
The fertile volcanic soil of the lower slopes of Mount Etna produce delicious inexpensive red and white wines which can accompany any type of meal and to finish, try a glass of sweet dessert wine Marsala or Mavasia from the island of Lipari.
Sicilian Carousel
At the town's new cultural exhibition — the Sicilian Carousel — myths, legends history and people of the entire island of Sicily are brought to life through a unique blend of audio presentation and displays.
All Citalia customers have entrance included to this perfect way to discover times past .
Browse and Buy
In Taormina, the Corso Umberto — the town's main thoroughfare — caters to all fashionable tastes, and the winding back streets offer a range of shops with specialities which range from delicately embroidered blouses which may be made to measure, colourful pottery and terracotta statuettes dressed in 18th century costumes.
In Lipari, take home dessert wines, a white pumice stone from the beach and locally made jewellery created either from the red coral which grows offshore or from obsidian, the dark red and black volcanic glass which makes the beaches sparkle wonderfully.
The awe-inspiring Greek Theatre
The choice is yours!
OPERA
From the end of July to September, Taormina hosts a range of cultural events in the breathtaking setting of the Greek Amphitheatre.
Opera, ballets and concerts are planned for 1992 including Wagner's ‘Die Walkure’ and Strauss’‘Elektra’.
Taormina Beach
‘Islands of immense beauty and historic interest each with it's own special fascination.’
Stop for an espresso
Taormina Beach
‘Nestled below the colourful town, a trio of pebbly strands dotted with fine beachside hotels.’
Below the historic monuments and flowery belvederes of Taormina town lies a trio of pebbly strands, dotted with fine, beachside hotels and friendly bars.
This is Taormina Beach, linked to the upper town by bus and by cable-car.
Here you can sunbathe, swim and discover the quaint village atmosphere of Letojanni and Mazzaro.
GOLDEN CHOICE
Hotel Mazzaro Sea Palace ∗∗∗∗∗L
Situated on its own private beach in Mazzaro Bay, this deluxe hotel is only a few minutes walk from the cable-car to Taormina.
Guests relax on the beach or by the salt-water pool situated on a flower-bedecked terrace.
The restaurant overlooks the bay and in high season guests can dine on the terrace.
There is a piano bar, lounge and cards area.
Twin rooms have a sea view and balcony adorned with flowers and plants.
The hotel is airconditioned in high season.
Price includes dinner (or lunch), bed and breakfast.
Beach charges included (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:No single room supplement; Full board £18.50.
GOLD PLUS
Return private transfers to and from your hotel are available for up to four Golden Choice customers at £127 per car.
Please indicate your request on the booking form.
The Mazzaro Sea Palace and its private beach
Villa Sant'Andrea ∗∗∗∗
The impressive Villa Sant' Andrea stands in beautiful terraced gardens beside Mazzaro Bay, about 100 yards from the cable-car to Taormina.
The hotel was originally a private villa, built in the early 19th century and converted in 1950.
It is a comfortable and relaxing place to stay.
Dining is delightful either in the restaurant or on the terrace overlooking the bay, and a piano bar operates most evenings.
The exquisite decor is tasteful and includes many antiques and paintings dating back to the original period.
Bedrooms are in two buildings.
All have TV, double glazing and a sea view.
There is room service and airconditioning.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges included (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £18.50; Balcony £4.50.
Villa Sant'Andrea beside Mazzaro Bay
Villa Sant'Andrea — once a private villa
Hotel Ipanema ∗∗∗∗
This is a friendly, well-run hotel 150 yards from the cablecar to Taormina town and convenient for the beach.
It has a superb roof-top terrace and a small pool with breathtaking views.
The restaurant offers a varied Italian menu, and the owner Signor Valastro provides a warm welcome.
A weekly gala dinner is held with folk music, and a piano bar provides music three times a week.
The hotel is air-conditioned and offers a complimentary shuttle bus to the nearby Equador beach.
Bedrooms have a balcony and side sea view.
Price includes dinner (or lunch), bed and breakfast.
Beach charges for the Lido Equador included (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room (on request) £8.30.
The Ipanema's superb sun terrace
‘A town with a story where the high belvedere has been coveted by Greeks, Romans, Saracen, Normans and Bourbons alike.’
Greeks, Romans, Saracens, Normans — all came to love Taormina.
Nestled on a mountain terrace nearly 1,000 feet above the azure sea, from here the views are magnificent and a cablecar links you to Taormina Beach below.
History is told throughout the town — Greek amphitheatre, Roman arcading and a ruinous odeon, moorish detailing on the lintels of palazzi, medieval castles and baroque churches.
But don't think Taormina lives only for its past — around every corner there are stylish shops, fine restaurants and piazzas crowded with cafés.
Terra Rossa Apartments Self Catering
A mile or so out of Taormina, the Terra Rossa complex of 35 apartments in nine buildings is to be found in a quiet, rural setting, wonderfully secluded and in an extremely panoramic position.
A relaxed, informal atmosphere prevails, with energy only really needed for a walk to the beach — 500 yards away down 300 steps.
Each apartment has basic, simple furnishings and a two-ring stove, living accommodation, shower room, and patio or terrace.
All share a sunny pool.
Type A studios for 2–3 people are on the ground floor,Type B two-bedroomed apartments for 4–5 people are on the first floor.
Safety deposit boxes are available at a supplement payable locally.
Car hire is recommended.
Beach charges are not included.
Supplements per person per night:Type A : For 2 pers £4.50;Type B : For 4 pers £3.25.
Citalia VALUE
All Citalia customers have entrance included to the Sicilian Carousel exhibition.
See p 48.
Honeymoon and silver anniversary couples staying at the Villa Sant'Andrea, Ipanema and the Mazzaro Sea Palace receive a bottle of sparkling wine and flowers or fruit.
Villa Sant'Andrea
£66 reduction for all guests staying 14 nights arriving on or between 2 May–13 June, 1 and 26 Sept–23 Oct.
Local entertainment
Terra Rossa — new for 1992
Panoramic views from the Terra Rossa's pool
Local delicacies
Pensione Villa Greta ∗∗
The Villa Greta boasts excellent views of Etna and the sea from its terrace restaurant.
A little out of Taormina, on the road to Castelmola, this is a quiet property built against the cliffs and immersed in sub-tropical vegetation.
Many steps link the hotel to the road, where buses run regularly into town.
This is a friendly, family-run pensione offering excellent value and homecooked meals.
There is a relaxing terrace and a bar.
During grape picking Signor Lombardo, the owner, invites guests to visit his vineyard on the slopes of Etna where he produces a wonderful red wine.
Bedrooms are basic but have telephone.
Price includes dinner (or lunch), bed and breakfast.
Vegetarians welcome.
Beach charges not included.
Supplements per person per night:Single room (on request) £3.95.
Water-fun
Villa Greta set against the cliffs
Hotel La Campanella ∗∗
Reached by flights of steps and through the terraced garden, La Campanella is a fascinating small property in an elevated position above the main road in the centre of Taormina town.
This truly pleasant pensione is personally supervised by the resident owner, Professor Triscari, and boasts many antiques and interesting collectors' items.
It was built on the site of a Roman villa and parts of a floor mosaic can still be seen in the garden.
The property takes its name from a small Roman bell which is there to be seen.
Coffee, tea and snacks are available throughout the day.
Price includes bed and breakfast.
Beach charges not included.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £5.75.
Stunning Mount Etna
Citalia VALUE
All Citalia customers have entrance included to the Sicilian Carousel exhibition.
See p 48.
Honeymoon and silver anniversary couples staying at all hotels receive a bottle of sparkling wine and flowers or fruit.
La Campanella A complimentary bottle of wine on arrival for all guests.
Isabella 30,000 Lire credit at the beach restaurant for all guests staying in August for 7 nights or more.
Monte Tauro £40 reduction for all guests staying 14 nights arriving on 27 June and 17 Oct.
Sirius All stays 7 nights or more receive an excursion to Mount Etna.
Villa Sirina ∗∗∗
Once a private villa owned by an English family, this property has now been carefully converted into a modern hotel with a homely atmosphere.
Tastefully furnished with large spacious public rooms and restaurant, the hotel has several terraces and a swimming pool.
It is surrounded by beautiful gardens and many fruit trees and is set 500 metres from the sea and just over a mile down hill from Taormina.
A mini-bus operates to and from the town three times a day although car hire is recommended for the less energetic.
All the bedrooms have air-conditioning, telephone.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges not included.
Supplements per person per night:Single room (on request) £9.50.
The inviting Villa Sirina
Villa Sirina — new for 1992
Hotel Sirius ∗∗∗
This attractive hotel is poised on the cliffside about 300 yards from the cable-car to the beach.
The Sirius is situated in a peaceful area with an attractive garden terrace at the front.
The town centre is within easy reach — approximately a six minute walk away.
A swimming pool is available throughout the season.
Inside, the Sirius is bright and spacious, with a profusion of plants adorning the public rooms.
Both the restaurant and bar have terraces with beautiful views of the Sicilian coastline below.
The hotel bedrooms are comfortably furnished and all have a telephone.
Some twin bedrooms have a side sea view and balcony and are available at a supplement.
The price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges are not included.
Supplements per person per night:Single room (on request) £14.50; Side sea view and balcony £2.50.
Citalia EARLY BOOKINGS FOR GREAT VALUE AND SPECIAL SAVINGS
Hotel Sirius is bright and spacious
Hotel Sirius's elegant interior
Hotel Isabella ∗∗∗
This friendly hotel stands on the bustling main street of traffic-free Taormina.
A complimentary mini-bus service runs from the bottom of the cable-car to the hotel's beach club (1 June to 30 Sept) where there is a restaurant, snack bar, garden and watersports.
There is a roof-top terrace, small bar, cosy lounge and restaurant.
There is a weekly candle-lit dinner (April–Oct) and weekly barbecue (May–Sept).
Twins have balcony or terrace and  side view.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges incl. (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room (on request) £13.50.
The ideally located Isabella
Hotel Monte Tauro ∗∗∗∗
Five minutes walk from the main street of Taormina and situated beside public gardens, this hotel is ingeniously constructed into the side of the cliff.
Amidst a luxurious display of plants and flowers, the hotel is reached by a flight of steps (no hand rail).
There is a large sun terrace and pool (with hydro-massage) where complimentary towels and sun-loungers are provided.
There is an attractive panoramic restaurant, bar and two lifts.
All the bedrooms (price A) are light and comfortably furnished with colour TV, mini-bar, hair dryer, air-conditioning, balcony and sea view.
Junior suites for 3 people are available (price B) and consist of a double bedroom and convertible sitting-room (with third bed) air-conditioning, balcony and sea view.
The price includes dinner, bed and buffet breakfast.
Beach charges not included.
Supplements per person per night:Double for sole occupancy (on request) £19.50; Suite 2 pers £6.95.
The striking Monte Tauro
Breathtaking view from the Monte Tauro
Hotel Villa Paradiso ∗∗∗∗
This small, inviting hotel overlooks Mount Etna and the bay.
There is a bar, a top-floor sunbathing terrace and a panoramic roof-top restaurant.
From 1 June to 24 October the hotel's ‘Paradise Beach Club’ situated at Letojanni offers a sea water pool with hydro-massage set in beautiful gardens, a solarium, watersports, private beach, changing facilities and snack bar.
A complimentary shuttle-bus service operates to and from the beach.
Bedrooms all have air-conditioning, hair dryer, small balcony and side sea view.
The price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges included (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:For departures 4–30 April supplements available on request: Single room with side sea view £6.40.
The Villa Paradiso
A place in the sun!
Excelsior Palace's spectacular setting
The Excelsior Palace's clifftop position
Famous pastries
Fantastic views from the Villa Paradiso
Hotel Jolly Diodoro ∗∗∗∗
Set amidst pretty gardens, this modern hotel enjoys splendid views of Mount Etna and the bay of Taormina.
Reached by a steep walkway down hill from the road, the hotel has a large swimming pool and an attractive terraced sunbathing area.
The restaurant offers a sumptuous buffet-style breakfast each morning and a wide choice of dishes at dinner.
During high season, lunch snacks are available by the swimming pool.
The hotel's amenities include a lift, hairdresser and sauna, and nearby there are public tennis courts.
The bedrooms are spacious and well-furnished and all have TV, a mini-bar and telephone.
Some twin bedrooms with balcony and sea view are available at a supplement.
This hotel is not suitable for infants.
Price includes dinner (or lunch), bed and breakfast.
Beach charges are not included.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £21.75; Front sea view and balcony £6.50.
Fantastic views from the Villa Paradiso
Hotel Miramare ∗∗∗∗
Set in the hillside just below the resort's town centre, the Hotel Miramare looks out over the sea and the lovely bay of Mazzaro Beach.
The hotel is being immaculately restored to ensure all its public rooms are spacious and decorated to give a generally elegant, relaxed ambience throughout.
Pretty gardens will surround the Hotel Miramare and numerous steps will lead to the pleasant swimming pool and tennis courts for the energetic.
It is only a five minute walk to Taormina's historic town centre and the cable-car which runs down to the beach below.
The bedrooms are all to be equipped with TV, radio and telephone.
Some twin bedrooms which will have a balcony and sea view are available at a supplement.
The hotel will have a lift to all floors.
The price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges are not included.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £12.80; Front sea view and balcony £4.95.
Hotel Excelsior Palace ∗∗∗∗
The Hotel Excelsior Palace is conveniently located only a minute's walk from the main street of Taormina.
This is a traditional, well-established hotel and is ideal for those who wish to be close to the town's many amenities — shops, restaurants and sights — and yet seek the peace and tranquillity which can be found in the hotel's beautiful gardens.
Flights of steps lead from the hotel, down a promontory through the extensive gardens, to the swimming pool area, from where there are truly marvellous, panoramic views of the Sicilian coastline and Mount Etna.
There is a poolside bar and indoor amenities include a bar, restaurant, lounge and TV/card room.
The wellappointed bedrooms all have telephone, colour TV and airconditioning from 1100 to 2400 hours.
Some, with side views of Etna and the sea, overlook the main route to Catania but are double glazed.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges not included.
Supplements per person per night:Single room (on request) £12.50; Front sea view and balcony £4.95.
Excelsior Palace — tranquil gardens
GOLDEN CHOICE
Hotel San Domenico Palace ∗∗∗∗∗
Built as a Dominican monastery in the 14th century, this is now a majestic hotel of world renown in a setting of rare appeal.
The original cloisters are now a charming, shady walkway around an inner courtyard, the monks' cells now luxurious bedrooms.
The hotel is 650 feet above the sea, set in lush gardens of flowers, palms and orange trees.
There is an elegant restaurant and a piano bar.
The air-conditioned bedrooms have TV, mini-bar, and front sea view.
Price includes dinner (or lunch), bed and breakfast.
The hotel is unsuitable for children.
Beach charges not included.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £22.40; Double for sole occupancy £63.90; Full board £26.95.
GOLD PLUS
Private transfers to and from your hotel are available for up to four Golden Choice customers at £127 per car.
Please indicate your request on the booking form.
A breathtaking backdrop to the San Domenico
The elegant San Domenico Palace
Citalia VALUE
All Citalia customers have entrance included to the Sicilian Carousel exhibition.
See p 48.
Honeymoon and silver anniversary couples  staying at the Villa Paradiso, Excelsior Palace and the Miramare receive a bottle of sparkling wine and flowers or fruit, those staying at the Jolly Diodoro receive fruit on arrival.
Villa Paradiso £25 reduction for all guests staying 14 nights.
All guests are entitled to 45 minutes free tennis per day.
Lipari
‘A tiny dot in the clear Tyrrhenian Sea, blessed with deliciously warm bathing’
Lipari, largest of the Aeolian Islands, is a tiny dot in the limpid Mediterranean.
It has an interesting history revealed in the medieval walls which encircle the town and in the 16th century castle with archaeological museum.
It was formed by a number of volcanic eruptions, the last of which was around the 18th century BC, and its hot-headed volcanic formations warm the local waters to delicious bathing temperatures.
Scuba diving courses are popular and even snorkelers will see a wide range of unusual creatures, such as flying fish, sea-horses, sword and hammer fish in these deep blue waters.
Hotel Villa Augustus ∗∗
This bright, family-run hotel is a convenient choice for exploring the town of Lipari and within easy walking distance of the sea.
Although it is close to the restaurants and bars of Lipari, guests often prefer to linger with a drink under the palm tree in the hotel's own inner courtyard which is bedecked with flowers and shrubs.
There is a terrace, and inside the hotel is well-kept and pretty, with a breakfast room, TV room and lounge.
All bedrooms have a terrace or balcony.
Price includes bed and breakfast.
Beach charges not included.
Single room (on request) £10.25 not available 10 June–3 Sept.
Citalia VALUE
Carasco
Honeymoon and silver anniversary couples receive a bottle of sparkling wine and flowers or fruit, together with a £17 reduction for 7 night holidays and £34 for 14 nights for all departures (excluding 18 July–29 August departure).
No single room supplement in Jun.
Il Faraglione — Lipari
Hotel Augustus — inner courtyard of colour
Hotel Carasco
Hotel Augustus — centrally located
Hotel Carasco ∗∗∗
This popular hotel, is personally run by the del Bono family.
It has a spectacular position on the coast and a 10 minutes walk down a steep drive and across a pebble beach will bring you to the town centre of Lipari.
A courtesy bus operates between the two several times a day.
There is a large salt-water pool, with poolside bar and vistas of the port and castle, and a relaxed, sheltered rocky bathing area reached by steps.
The restaurant has a spacious terrace where buffet-style breakfast, lunch and dinner are served.
Other amenities include a large garden, table tennis, TV room and two lifts.
Bedrooms, furnished in cool Mediterranean style, some have a balcony and twin rooms have a side sea view.
Price includes dinner (or lunch), bed and breakfast.
Beach charges are included.
Supplements per person per night:Single room 1 Jul–2 Oct £6.25, other dates no supplement; Full board £9.25.
Carasco — spectacularly set overlooking the sea
Streets to explore — Taormina
2-CENTRE HOLIDAY
LIPARI — TAORMINA
Citalia offers you the opportunity to combine your stay in Sicily with a week on the Aeolian island of Lipari, one of the seven fascinating volcanic islands off Sicily's north eastern coast.
The first week of your holiday will be spent in Lipari at the Hotel Carasco or Augustus, reached by coach and hydrofoil from Catania.
Among the island's attractions are pretty fishing villages, sand and pebble beaches, superb snorkelling and the picturesque town of Lipari itself.
For the second week Citalia has selected the world-famous beauty spot of Taormina in Sicily with a choice of three and four star hotels in the centre of town or by the beach.
For full details of Taormina hotels, please see pages 50–56.
YOUR ITINERARY
Saturday departure from Gatwick by Citalia Special Flight to Catania.
Transfer to Lipari (approx 3 hrs).
7 nights in Lipari
Saturday departure from hotel in Lipari to hotel in Taormina or Taormina beach (approx 2 hrs).
7 nights in Taormina or Taormina beach.
Saturday departure from hotel.
Transfer to Catania airport (approx 2 hrs) for return flight to Gatwick.
IMPORTANT
Please note that there is a limited ferry service to Lipari.
In the event of flight delay or adverse weather conditions, customers will be overnighted on Sicily on arrival.
A shimmering shoreline of sapphire seas and olive trees
TUSCANY COAST
Art, history and landscape all combine to make Tuscany a region of unending delight to the informed, inquisitive and view lover alike.
For seaside holidays, Tuscany offers small, elegant resorts in the northern area of Versilia where a strip of wide sandy beaches nestles between the gently shelving Tyrrhenian Sea and the dramatic peaks of the Apuan Alps.
Here there are well-equipped fishing centres and thriving towns set over Viareggio, and more leisurely sophisticated resorts such as Forte dei Marmi or those on Elba.
In minutes you can leave the sea for chestnut trees and olive groves.
Impressive quarries will remind you that it was here Michelangelo chose the marble for his famous sculptures.
Tuscan Treasures
Tuscany is full of superb sight-seeing temptations.
On the coast or on the island of Elba, you will find plenty to do.
You can cycle between the Tuscan coastal resorts, or take a bus to discover such delights as the composer Puccini's home at Torre del Lago.
If you want, take to the water with a sunny trip by boat to view the coastline in a more leisurely fashion, or go across to the romantic island of Elba.
This pretty island is only an hour away by ferry so you will have plenty of time to get a real feel for the island and begin to enjoy its special magic before it is time to leave.
Visit other towns too, for instance Lucca — a peaceful artistic centre full of palaces, churches and a charming character, and picturesque Pistoia.
Finally, and perhaps above all others, head for the famed town of towers San Gimignano and stroll amidst its beautiful narrow streets.
A Culinary Leader
Tuscany is where Italian cooking was born — at the court of the ruling Medici family.
Savour a ‘Fiorentina’, a huge T-bone steak, washed down with ruby-red Chianti.
The best Chianti has a black rooster on the label.
Other famous wines include Brunello di Montalcino and Vernaccia di S. Gimignano.
On the coast try ‘Cacciucco’ the fish stew of Livorno, or wild game from the Maremma marshlands.
On Elba try seafood and the sweet Moscato wine.
Chic Shops
Generally smart and unusual fashion shops are fast taking the place of traditional handicrafts, but you will find alabaster and marble ornaments on the coast, a range of local pottery throughout the region and straw and leather-work specialities in Florence.
Be sure to visit the Ponte Vecchio famed for its gold and silversmiths.
Part of Elba's breathtaking coastline
An easy way to explore
Stroll along Viareggio
The feast of Corpus Christi
‘Art, history and a rolling landscape beyond compare.
This is a region of endless delight for the informed, the inquisitive and the lover of culture.’
TUSCANY COAST
Forte dei Marmi
‘Refined and genteel, one of the oldest and most fashionable resorts of the Tuscan coast — a sophisticated classic.’
One of the oldest and most fashionable resorts on the Tuscany Coast, Forte dei Marmi still maintains the atmosphere of a sophisticated, residential community.
Landscaped with elegant villas dating from the turn of the century, the resort is set between the startling beauty of the Apuan Alps and the gently shelving Tyrrhenian Sea.
Set around a fort there are fashionable shops and, every Wednesday, a colourful market.
Along the coastline and inland, there is plenty of scope for leisurely walks and bicycle rides past lush parks and gardens.
The past remains
Villa Sandra Self Catering
Set in its own quiet garden in the heart of the resort, half a mile from the beach, this villa has a living-room, kitchen and shower downstairs, double room with balcony, twin room and bathroom upstairs.
Linen and cleaning are provided.
A refundable 250,000 Lire deposit is payable on arrival.
Price is for four sharing.
Supplements per person per night:2 May–10 July and 29 Aug–11 Sept 3 pers £5.25, 2 pers £15.50; All other times 3 pers £8.75, 2 pers £26.25.
Reductions per person per night:For 5 pers £1.95.
Time to spare at Villa Sandra
Villa Isabella Self Catering
Set in a quiet cul-de-sac 800 yards from the resort centre and the beach, this is a semi-detached bungalow with garden.
There is a lounge, fitted kitchen/diner, one double room, one twin and a shared bathroom.
Linen is provided and the villa is cleaned twice a week.
A refundable 250,000 Lire deposit is payable on arrival.
Price is for four sharing.
Supplements per person per night:2 May–10 Jul and 29 Aug–11 Sept 3 pers £5.95; 2 pers £17.25; All other times 3 pers £9.95, 2 pers £28.50.
Reductions per person per night:For 5 pers £2.25.
The Villa Isabella is close to the beach
Villa Franchi Self Catering
Situated in a tranquil area to the north of Forte dei Marmi, the spacious Villa Franchi is surrounded by well-maintained gardens with wide lawns for sunbathing and a verandah.
All accommodation is on one floor with a kitchen, a dining area in the handsomely furnished lounge, one twin and one double bedroom and a bathroom.
Parking is available.
Linen and cleaning are provided.
A 250,000 Lire refundable deposit is payable  on arrival.
Price based on four sharing.
Supplements per person per night:2 May–10 Jul and 29 Aug–11 Sep 3 pers £5.95; 2 pers £17.25; All other times for 3 pers £9.95, 2 pers £28.50.
Reductions per person per night:For 5 pers £2.25.
The tranquil Villa Franchi
Villa Carla Self Catering
The Villa Carla is a two-storey villa in a quiet, spacious garden about half a mile from the centre of Forte dei Marmi.
On the ground floor there is a newly-equipped kitchen/dining room, lounge with comfortable furniture, one single bedroom and bathroom, and on the first floor there is a double and a twin bedroom and a bathroom.
Linen is changed weekly and the villa is cleaned twice a week.
A 250,000 Lire returnable deposit is payable on arrival.
The price is based on five people sharing.
Supplements per person per night:2 May–10 July and 29 Aug–11 Sep, 4 pers £3.95; 3 pers £9.95; All other times 4 pers £6.50; 3 pers £16.95.
Reductions per person per night:For 6 pers £1.50.
Colourful stalls in Forte dei Marmi
Villa Carla — ideally located
Iced delights
Forte dei Marmi
Villa Ornella Self Catering
This is a generously-sized villa with a garden situated in a quiet part of Forte dei Marmi, about a mile from the sea.
There are two twin bedrooms, one double, two bathrooms, a kitchenette and a lounge/dining room on two floors.
All rooms are pleasantly furnished to provide for a relaxed and comfortable stay.
The villa is cleaned twice a week and linen is changed weekly.
A 250,000 Lire refundable deposit is payable on arrival.
Price is based on six people sharing.
Supplements per person per night:2 May–10 Jul and 29 Aug–11 Sep, 5 pers £3.25; 4 pers £6.95; 3 pers £14.50; All other times 5 pers £4.75, 4 pers £11.95; 3 pers £23.95.
Reductions per person per night:For 7 pers £1.75.
Villa Ornella — set in an attractive garden
Forte dei Marmi
Hotel Marsiliana ∗∗∗
It is hotels such as the Marsiliana, built in traditional style and set in its own courtyard garden, which give Forte dei Marmi that peaceful and elegant quality for which it is famous.
Featured by Citalia since 1981 it is about 400 yards from the beach and the resort's centre.
There is a spacious lounge and an inviting bar, and a good choice of menu in the restaurant which overlooks the garden.
The comfortable bedrooms have a telephone.
Attractively priced suites, comprise either two twin rooms, or one twin and one single, with shared bathroom.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges not included.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £3.95; No supplements for suites.
Fashionable Forte dei Marmi
The traditional courtyard of Hotel Marsiliana
Forte dei Marmi's lapping shores
Hotel Paradiso Al Mare ∗∗∗
Situated right at the heart of the bustling seafront at Forte dei Marmi, this hotel is a good choice for those who enjoy a lively convivial holiday.
The resort's elegant boutiques, restaurants and amusements are just a few steps away along the promenade and the sandy beach is across the main road.
Surrounded by gardens, the hotel has its own large pool flanked by an abundance of tables and chairs shaded by colourful awnings and served by the bar.
The several spacious public rooms include a lounge, a bar and restaurant, as well as a TV room and a lift.
Bedrooms are individually furnished and have telephone.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges not included.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £5.95; Full board £3.50.
The generous pool and lavish gardens at Paradiso Al Mare
Citalia VALUE
Honeymoon and silver anniversary couples receive a bottle of sparkling wine at the Marsiliana and Paradiso.
At the Hermitage and Augustus they receive a bottle of sparkling wine and fruit.
Paradiso Al Mare
A complimentary half day excursion for all guests staying 2 May–12 Jun and 5–26 Sept.
Hermitage & Augustus
No single supplement all season.
Complimentary bowl of fruit in every room.
Hotel Hermitage ∗∗∗∗
This lovely hotel set in colourful gardens.
It has a pool with bar and shares a beach with Hotel Augustus.
A complimentary minibus runs to the beach.
Public rooms include an attractive restaurant.
Bedrooms have air-conditioning.
Suites of either two twins sharing a bathroom or one twin, one single sharing a bathroom are available.
Price includes dinner (or lunch), bed and breakfast.
Beach charges included (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:No single room supplements;
Reductions per person per night:Suite £8.95.
The enchanting Hermitage
Lush lawns and the pool at the Hermitage
Sweet scented Forte dei Marmi
Hotel Augustus ∗∗∗∗∗
This hotel has an elegant and relaxed atmosphere and gardens with large pool.
The wide beach of fine sand offers beach huts, umbrellas and boats for hire and from mid-June to mid-Sept, there is a club house, snack-bar and piano bar, and buffet served in the beach garden for a local charge.
There are lounges, restaurant and a bar which opens onto a terrace.
Bedrooms have air-conditioning, balcony and park view.
Suites of one twin, one single (or twin) and bathroom are also available.
Price includes dinner (or lunch), bed and breakfast.
Beach charges included (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:No single room supplement; Full board £21.95.
Reductions per person per night:Suite £7.75.
TUSCANY COAST
Marina di Pietrasanta
‘Scented pine woods, tree-lined avenues and the Apuan foothills provide a varied backdrop to three miles of golden sand.’
Separated from Forte dei Marmi by the small Fiumetto channel, Marina di Pietrasanta stretches along one of the most exceptional beaches on the Tuscany coast — three miles of golden sand, up to 200 yards wide in places — simply perfect for relaxing, lazy days in the sun.
Against a backdrop of the Apuan foothills and scented pine woods, tree-lined avenues and peaceful squares frame the hotels and villas in attractive garden settings, while bars and restaurants line the pleasant beachside promenade.
The pretty Versiliana park offers a vast pine wood and Pietrasanta has some of the loveliest monuments in Versilia — a medieval cathedral, a church with three blind arches and an elegant gothic loggia, and ruins of a fortress.
The busy resort of Marina di Pietrasanta bustles with activity and Forte dei Marmi and Viareggio are within easy reach.
Villa Sylvia Self Catering
Separated from its neighbours and set in its own small garden, shared only by the owner who occupies another villa, Villa Sylvia is about 20 minutes walk from the sea and the resort's centre.
It has a cosy living-room, kitchen and bathroom and, on the first floor, one double and one twin bedroom.
An additional bed is available at a supplement.
Linen is changed weekly and the villa is cleaned twice a week.
A 250,000 Lire refundable deposit is payable on arrival.
Price is based on four sharing.
Supplements per person per night:2 May–10 Jul and 29 Aug–11 Sep 3 pers £4.75; 2 pers £14.25; All other times 3 pers £8.25; 2 pers £24.25.
Reductions per person per night:5 pers £1.75.
Pietrasanta
Candlelit dinner
Taste of Chianti
Villa Sylvia — free and easy holiday style
Villa Barbara Self Catering
Graceful arches of traditional Tuscan architecture frame the entrance to the Villa Barbara yet this bungalow-style villa is quite modern in all its amenities.
It is surrounded by gravelled courtyards, trees and a pretty tub-garden.
The resort centre is 15 minutes walk away.
There is a spacious kitchen, living and dining area, bathroom, one twin bedroom and one double bedroom.
Linen is changed weekly.
A 250,000 Lire refundable deposit is payable on arrival.
Price is based on four sharing.
Supplements per person per night:2 May–10 July and 29 Aug–11 Sept, 3 pers £5.50; 2 pers £16.50; All other times 3 pers £9.25, 2 pers £28.50 Reductions per person per night:For 5 pers £2.25.
Tuscan architecture at Villa Barbara
Citalia VALUE
Happy Hotel
£10 reduction for all guests staying 14 nights 1–12 June.
No single room supplement 1–12 June.
Reduction on Florida Beach charges.
Happy Hotel ∗∗∗
Situated on the main seafront promenade and across from pretty flower-filled gardens opposite the golden sandy beach, this is a modern, new hotel.
It is near both Marina di Pietrasanta and Forte dei Marmi, and excellently placed for exploring the many local restaurants, shops and nightlife.
Lazy days relaxing on the beach can be contrasted with days of sightseeing.
Bedrooms are modern with telephone.
Price includes bed and breakfast.
Beach charges are not included.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £4.25.
Happy Hotel — proud to please
Villa Diva Self Catering
Villa Diva is in a quiet area, just over half a mile from the sea and a 15 minute walk from the resort centre.
There is a garden, a twin and a double room, kitchenette, living-room, dining area and bathroom on two floors.
Linen and cleaning are provided.
A 250,000 Lire refundable deposit is payable on arrival.
Price based on four sharing.
Supplements per person per night:2 May–10 Jul and 29 Aug–11 Sep, 3 pers £5.50; 2 pers £16.50; All other times 3 pers £9.25; 2 pers £28.50 Reductions per person per night:5 pers £2.25.
Villa Diva — set in gardens
Pedal at your own pace
Villa Bresciani Self Catering
A 15 minute walk from the beach, this villa has a pretty garden and covered patio, three bedrooms, large lounge, kitchen and two bathrooms.
Linen and cleaning are provided.
A 250,000 Lire refundable deposit is payable on arrival.
Price based on six sharing.
Supplements per person per night:2 May–10 Jul, 29 Aug–11 Sep 5 pers £2.50; 4 pers £5.90; 3 pers £11.75.
All other times 5 pers £3.90, 4 pers £9.90, 3 pers £19.90.
Reductions per person per night:7 pers £1.25.
Villa Bresciani
A relaxing drink
Lido di Camaiore & Viareggio
‘Resorts filled with energy and life with a distinctly Italian flavour in the heart of Tuscany's most fashionable area.’
Lido di Camaiore lies at the northern end of Viareggio, next to Marina di Pietrasanta, in the most fashionable part of the Tuscan coast.
Close to smart and lively Viareggio, the resort has a distinctly Italian flavour.
The beach is accessed via an elevated terrace adorned with palms and flowerbeds.
One ‘must’ is an excursion to Camaiore, nestling in the foothills of the Apuan Alps.
Romanesque and medieval features abound in the beautiful Collegiata, in the Badia dei Benedettini and in the Pieve of Saint John and Saint Stephen.
In the downtown area there is everything a visitor could want including a park for children.
Inland travel is best from Viareggio.
Ice cream — a holiday must
Hotel Panoramic LIDO DI CAMAIORE ∗∗∗
This hotel is set in a garden across the road from a sandy beach.
It has a pool, pleasant lounge, bar and attractive restaurant with terrace, offering home-cooking.
The resort is a short bus ride away and shops and cafés are nearby.
Front rooms are larger.
Rear rooms have mountain view.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges not included.
Supplements per person per night:Single room (on request) £3.25; Front sea view and balcony £2.25.
The Panoramic
Hotel Colombo LIDO DI CAMAIORE ∗∗∗∗
This is a modern, tastefully refurbished hotel just 50 yards from the broad, sandy beach and right in the centre of the resort.
It is situated in a large garden with garden furniture, and has its own sauna, a tennis court and table tennis facilities.
The hotel restaurant serves an excellent choice at dinner.
The bedrooms have a telephone and colour TV.
There are some suites available which would suit a family, or friends in groups of three or four, and represent very good value.
The price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges are not included.
Supplements per person per night:Single room (on request) £10.25;Reductions per person per night:Suite for 3 pers £2.50; 4 pers £4.95.
The Colombo is a truly attractive hotel
Residence Caravelle LIDO DI CAMAIORE Self Catering
Residence Caravelle offers fresh and well-equipped apartments close to the resort, pine woods and a fine sandy beach.
Citalia has chosen apartments suitable for up to 4 persons.
They have a double bedroom, a room with bunk beds, living room with kitchenette and a bathroom.
This complex and the Hotel Colombo are under joint management and guests can use all hotel facilities.
Supplements per person per night:3 pers 1–21 Aug, £10.75; All other times £5.50.
Residence Caravelle — new for 1992
Hotel Liberty VIAREGGIO ∗∗∗
Situated right on the main promenade of Viareggio, the Hotel Liberty will best suit the more independently minded as it is offered on a bed and breakfast only basis, leaving guests free to set their own meal times.
For those choosing this option — happy to explore and sample the local specialities — there is certainly no shortage of restaurants, cafés, trattorie and bars nearby.
From here too visitors are ideally placed to discover the wealth of exclusive boutiques and designer names displayed all along the promenade.
The bedrooms, although fairly basic, are adequately furnished and have a telephone.
The Liberty has a lounge and bar serving soft, cold drinks, and a lift to the penultimate floor.
Beach charges are not included.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £4.95.
Colourful Lido di Camaiore
Night time Viareggio
Hotel Liberty on the main promenade
Relax at the Liberty
Hotel Stella D'Italia VIAREGGIO ∗∗∗
The Hotel Stella d'Italia in Viareggio is a delightful hotel which has been popular with Citalia customers for over 15 years.
The manager Signor Baccioli offers a personal, friendly service and speaks excellent English.
The hotel is just a few minutes from the pleasant sandy beach and close to the bustling central market.
It has a lounge, decorated in pretty floral designs, a bar with typically Italian pavement tables, and a restaurant which offers a good choice of cuisine.
The price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges are not included.
Supplements per person per night:Single room (6 Jun–4 Sep) £3.25, all other times no single supplements; Full board £6.25.
The friendly Stella d'Italia
Citalia VALUE
At all hotels honeymoon and silver anniversary couples receive a bottle of sparkling wine.
Colombo
Complimentary use of tennis courts.
Stella d'Italia
No single supplement 2 May–5 Jun and 5–26 Sep.
Liberty
Guests staying 14 nights in a twin room receive a £10 reduction, those in a single room pay no supplement 2 May–12 Jun, 5–26 Sep.
Viareggio
Grand Hotel & Royal ∗∗∗∗
Once Viareggio's leading hotel, this property boasts an imposing facade and most prominent setting.
A sure sign of its quality, many Citalia guests return here year after year, praising the warm welcome and the excellent service they receive.
Original marble floors and high arched ceilings remain and a spacious restaurant offers a choice of meals which can also be served on the covered terrace, overlooking the gardens.
Set on the promenade, opposite the beach, the hotel has its own freshwater swimming pool with poolside bar.
The bedrooms are all modestly furnished and have a telephone but some superior rooms, which are newly refurbished and boast a sea view, balcony, a colour TV and a mini-bar are also available at a supplement quoted below.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges included (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £3.50; Superior room £6.75; Front sea view and balcony £4.50; Side sea view £2.95; Full board £7.75.
Fresh water pool, Hotel Royal
The imposing Hotel Royal
Hotel Garden ∗∗∗
This charming hotel enjoys a corner position on one of Viareggio's main avenues.
A well-established property, it has won commendations from Citalia customers for its friendly, welcoming atmosphere.
It is situated close to the resort's centre and the colourful bustling market, yet only 150 yards from the beach.
There is an elaborate stucco exterior, canopied entrance and charming pavement café surrounded by tubs of flowers and shrubs and shaded by umbrellas.
Guests often spend as much time here as in the well-appointed lounges or at the friendly bar, before dining in the attractive restaurant which offers a choice of menu.
All the bedrooms benefit from colour TV and telephone.
The price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges not included.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £6.50; Full board £4.95.
Charming Hotel Garden
Cool refreshments
Grand Hotel Excelsior
A leading hotel in a leading resort, the majestic Grand Hotel Excelsior is located in an imposing square on the seafront promenade.
A fine, traditional establishment, with marble staircases and floors, and intricately carved ceilings, the hotel has recently been renovated to provide the best of modern comforts in an elegant, graceful setting.
The management prides itself on offering excellent service at all levels, with a strong emphasis placed on giving guests individual, personal attention.
The two lounges are comfortably furnished in traditional style and the restaurant offers an excellent choice of dishes.
The attractive bedrooms are fresh and refined and have telephone, mini-bar and TV.
Price includes dinner (or lunch), bed and breakfast.
Beach charges included (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £6.25; Sea view £1.95; Full board £6.25.
Attractive Viareggio
Hotel Principe di Piemonte ∗∗∗∗
The Hotel Principe di Piemonte is a well-known hotel situated at the heart of Viareggio — the capital town of the Versilia coastal district.
The hotel enjoys a prominent position on a bustling grandiose square and from here commands the most splendid views of the sea side promenade and the beach beyond.
Situated about 20 minutes walk from the centre of the highly popular Viareggio, the resort's numerous bars, its café and restaurants surrounded by tropical plants and flowers, its fashionable shops and other amenities are also close by.
Guests can visit the beautiful public park and lakeside beauty spots or the fragrant pinewoods close by, which makes an alternative change from the beach.
Citalia customers are increasingly attracted to the imposing character of the hotel and to its tasteful decor.
The public rooms include a spacious lounge and a ballroom elegantly decorated with corniced ceilings and stylish furnishings.
The restaurant, resplendent with glass chandeliers and mirrors, prides itself on offering high quality meals, impeccably served by professional staff and with a good choice of menu.
Breakfast is served each morning in a smaller restaurant or, in warm weather, outside on the terrace.
The Principe di Piemonte has an attractive indoor swimming pool, with a gymnasium and a sauna available at a charge payable locally.
Citalia customers can also use a salt-water swimming pool (open from June to September) across the busy road on the beach in front of the hotel.
Upstairs, the hotel bedrooms are all comfortably furnished and have a telephone.
The price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges are not included.
Supplements per person per night:Single room with bath £3.95; Sea view £2.95; Sea view and balcony £4.95.
Citalia Value
Honeymoon and silver anniversary couples receive a bottle of sparkling wine at all hotels and at the Grand Hotel & Royal a complimentary bottle of sparkling wine for all guests.
Grand Hotel Excelsior
Complimentary wine tasting for all guests.
The renowned Principe di Piemonte
The resplendent restaurant
The indoor pool at the Piemonte
San Vincenzo & Elba
‘Lush landscapes of greenery gently slope toward inviting bays of sand and sea.’
San Vincenzo is a lovely resort of clear soft sands interrupted only by a few emerging reefs.
A well-equipped seaside town, with a pretty marina, it offers water-skiing, windsurfing and sailing, walks in fragrant pine woods or the lovely park, plenty of shops, bars and restaurants.
Elba is the largest island off the Tuscan coast but is still small enough to explore with ease.
The main centre is Portoferraio with a marina, a renaissance fortress, a picturesque old town and Napoleon's town house.
On the west coast is the pretty port of Porto Azzurro, and on the south, Marina di Campo, popular for its beaches.
Porto Azzurro, Elba
Shoreside San Vincenzo
Garden Club San Vincenzo ∗∗∗∗
The Garden Club is a brand , exciting holiday complex due to open in May 1992 in the midst of sea-fronted woodlands.Simply ideal for families it has direct access on to the beach and offers a wide range of holiday activities for children.
From its earliest planning stages it has been carefully designed to meet all family holiday needs and the plans include three good value restaurants, four bars, boutiques, sporting facilities, a discotheque and an amphitheatre where a programme of regular evening entertainment is stage.
Offering a quite unique complex for Tuscany, the management prides itself on its attention to detail and its demands for high quality food and accommodation.
Archery, sauna, table tennis, Italian bowls, basket and volley ball are all to be available at no additional charge and tennis courts, swimming lessons, wind-surfing boards, sailing boats and bicycles will be available for a supplement.
Each of the bedrooms has been designed with its own balcony or terrace equipped with garden chairs, and the walls have been sound-proofed for added privacy.
The price includes dinner (or lunch), bed and breakfast with drinks and a wide choice included at meals.
Beach charges are included (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £16.95; Full board £6.25.
Tennis at the Garden Club
Comfortable rooms at the Garden Club
San Vincenzo's beach
An architect's model of the Garden Club
Hotel Barracuda ELBA ∗∗∗
This hotel is set in the beautiful bay of Marina di Campo, about five minutes walk from the resort centre, and the same distance from the fine beaches.
There is a lovely pool in its garden and a TV lounge, two bars (one serving the pool area) and a good restaurant.
Bedrooms are modern with telephone.
A few are by the main road, but most are quiet.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges not included.
Supplements per person per night:Single room (on request) £6.25.
Hotel Barracuda, close to the fine beaches
Family-run Barracuda
Hotel Antares ELBA ∗∗∗
Surrounded by wooded gardens, the Hotel Antares is just a small flight of steps away from a private sandy beach.
Here guests can hire wind-surf boards, pedal boats and dinghies, and use a pool planned for 1992.
The restaurant offers a choice at dinner, and a lunch buffet is served on the terrace or from the bar.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges included (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room (on request) £15.50.
The Antares is right on the beach
Hotel del Golfo ELBA ∗∗∗∗
This is a complex of six buildings in extensive grounds between scented pine woods and a beautiful bay.
The hotel has its own sandy beach with a large sea-water pool, tennis courts, windsurfing, pedaloes and sailing boats, a bar and pizzeria grill.
The hotel's central building, overlooking the garden and road, houses the public rooms and club house, a piano bar, TV room and superior bedrooms.
Bedrooms in the detached villas have telephone, TV and mini-bar.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges included (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £9.25; Room with sea view £12.50.
Hotel del Golfo has its own sandy beach
Hotel Lacona ELBA ∗∗∗
The Lacona is set in a tranquil garden which rolls down towards a sheltered sandy beach just a few minutes walk away.
Within the grounds there is a pool, tennis courts, solarium and pine wood used for barbecues.
Meals are buffet-style and special evenings are held on the roof terrace.
Bedrooms are spacious and modern.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges not included.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £13.75.
Citalia VALUE
Honeymoon and silver anniversary couples receive a bottle of sparkling wine at all hotels and at the Garden Club they also receive flowers or fruit.
Barracuda
20% discount on beach charges for all guests.
The elegant Lacona
Lacona — set in tranquil gardens
Enchanting and elegant — a lush profusion of colour
ITALIAN RIVIERA
Liguria is a dramatic region of mountains and hills, with a narrow, irregular crescent-shaped coastline — the famous Italian Riviera — stretching some 200 miles.
It divides into two quite different but equally fascinating areas.
There is the luxuriant Riviera del Ponente, to the west — an almost continuous chain of relaxed resorts, such as Alassio, Spotorno and Diano Marina, beside long strands of fine sandy beach.
To the East, the rugged Riviera del Levante — wilder and dotted with sharp promontories and little sheltered coves, natural habitats for charming fishing ports and yacht-laden marinas.
Poets from Dante to Byron have celebrated the romance and the drama of this coastline's azure seas, green mountains and weathered villages.
Everywhere there is a profusion of colour and elegance.
Varied Sights
Genoa, lively port and city of irrepressible energy, is an exciting town squeezed between sea and mountain and rises dramatically from the pungent port to the elegant palazzi.
There are excursions to Albenga, a walled medieval town founded by the Romans and, further west, to San Remo which still glories in its Edwardian heyday.
Towards the French border lies Ventimiglia, with a fine medieval quarter, and over the border awaits Nice and Monaco.
There is the enchanting port of Portofino, the fairytale village of Porto Venere and the Cinque Terre, five once inaccessible villages perched on the cliff edge.
A good bus service exists but an organised trip is best for more distant attractions.
Regional Flavour
In Liguria strong flavours mix with frugal foods for the specialities and hearty fish dishes play a big part — try ‘buridda’, a tasty fish soup.
‘Pasta al pesto’ is the best known dish served with ‘trenette’or ‘lasagne’and ‘brasato di manzo alla genovese’— braised beef with vegetables and mushrooms in red wine — is another favourite.
The best wines include ‘Sciacchetrà’, ‘Vermentino’ and ‘Pigato’from the Cinque Terre vineyards.
Shops and stalls
Every town along the Italian Riviera holds its own market — and here you will get the chance to stroll among the colourful stalls and find souvenirs, presents, local handicrafts, clothes and a cornucopia of fruit, vegetables and flowers.
Elegant boutiques are best established in cities such as Genoa.
It is worth bringing home olive oil which is produced in profusion here, and perhaps a dessert wine from the incredible terraced slopes which cling to the hillside of the Cinque Terre.
Monterosso
Diano Marina — set in olive groves
Alassio has beautiful public gardens
A Ligurian favourite
BORDIGHERA & SAN REMO
San Remo was once the favoured playground of royals and literati.
Opulent villas, lavish gardens, designer shops and the famous casino await you.
Bordighera, close to the French border has a mile long promenade of beautiful shops, bars and restaurants.
Short walks into the countryside lead into tranquil surroundings.
DIANO MARINA
The oldest resort on the coast, set in olive groves.
Orange trees line the avenues and palm trees flank its promenade.
There are narrow, golden beaches and beautiful countryside for the day and cafés and restaurants and some discotheques for the night.
ALASSIO
Long a favourite for many illustrious visitors.
Here the narrow main street is filled with bars, ice-cream parlours, boutiques, and, on Saturdays, a very large market.
There is a pier, a busy soft sand beach and some beautiful public gardens.
LAIGUEGLIA
This is a delightful resort built around an attractive old medieval fishing village with much character and charm.
There is a wide choice of bars, cafés and discotheques, and the gently shelving, soft sand beach makes it ideal for families.
SESTRI LEVANTE
A beach of fine shingle and a wooded promontory dividing two spectacular bays all combine to create a truly admirable setting for this resort.
This is a small historical town of narrow winding streets set amidst some of the most picturesque scenery.
SPOTORNO
The charm of this resort lies in its quiet, friendly atmosphere which will appeal most to those who like to avoid the larger resorts.
There is a wonderful beach of fine shingle and the narrow streets of the old town for shops and cafés.
SANTA MARGHERITA LIGURE
Once a fishing village, this is now a friendly, lively international resort with a yacht marina.
There is an enchanting harbour, little piazzas, waterfront walkways, basilica and a sheltered bay, and Portofino is just 15 minutes walk away.
MONTEROSSO AL MARE
This is the first and largest of the famed Cinque Terre towns wonderfully perched in the hills above its beaches.
It retains much of its old-world charms but a newer half of town offers all modern amenities.
Lively Santa Margherita
Bordighera & San Remo
‘Swaying palms and lovely parklands, orange trees and olive groves.
Two stunning resorts set around a glimmering bay.’
In the 19th century the rich and famous came to San Remo and insisted on the very best.
Today their lovely parklands and orange trees remain, a medieval quarter adds charm and the modern seafront surrounds the glimmering bay.
Bordighera has a splendid promenade and bathing beaches of rock and pebble.
From the sunbaked shore it is just a short walk into the tranquil rural hillside.
Seabathing in San Remo
Hotel Des Etrangers SAN REMO ∗∗∗∗
The Hotel Des Etrangers is centrally located about 250 yards from the Piazzo Colombo and a few minutes walk from the Via Matteotti.
One of the hotel's most appealing features is a treelined terrace — delightful for sunbathing or a relaxing cool drink.
There is a pleasant pool (open from mid-May) and a pool bar set in a small but pretty garden.
There is a second bar inside and a lounge, TV room and air-conditioned restaurant offering a choice of dinner and lunch time snacks.
The hotel is modern and comfortably furnished.
The bedrooms are equipped with TV, telephone, mini-bar and double glazing.
Air-conditioning is available at a supplement payable locally.
The price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges are not included.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £11.95.
The central Hotel Des Etrangers
Citalia VALUE
Honeymoon and silver anniversary couples staying at the Ampelio and Des Etrangers receive a bottle of sparkling wine and flowers or fruit.
Cap Ampelio
No single room supplement.
Des Etrangers
A complimentary bottle of Spumante for all guests staying 14 nights.
Res.
Orchidea & Res.
Meridiana
Guests staying 14 nights, arriving on 23 May and 12 Sept for 14 nights are entitled to a reduction of £85 per person.
Special offer at the Meridiana available to motorists arriving 25 Apr. 2, 9 and 16 May and 26 Sept. 3, 10 and 17 Oct see p. 12–13.
Night falls — San Remo
Hotel Cap Ampelio BORDIGHERA ∗∗∗∗
Overlooking the town of Bordighera and the sea, this elegant hotel stands on the hillside among lush gardens.
The walk through the town down to the beach takes about 15 minutes.
There is a pool (open 1 June) set in attractive gardens with sun-beds and deck-chairs.
Comfortable public rooms include a bar, restaurant, lounge and beauty salon.
Air-conditioning operates during the day from 31 July when necessary.
There is a lift and all twin rooms have a side sea view and balcony.
Singles have a balcony.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges not included.
Supplements per person per night:No single room supplement.
The elegant Cap Ampelio
Diano Marina
‘Pine woods, olive groves, lush shrubs and everywhere unexpected vistas of the bay.’
Inhabited since the Stone Age, this has been a resort since Roman times.
Set amidst lush shrubs and pine woods, everywhere you turn you find unexpected vistas of the shimmering bay.
Residence Orchidea Self Catering
Stay at the Residence Orchidea and you stay at a friendly family-run complex of apartments in a quiet, residential area of Diano Marina.
Set less than 600 yards from the sea and a short walk from the town centre, the residence offers a small swimming pool with bar and a tennis court (charge payable locally).
Apartments have one bedroom — for up to 5 people.
Each is furnished in a modern style with private facilities and at least one balcony.
There is a double divan bed and single wardrobe bed in the living-room.
Parking is available.
Beach charges are not included.
A 100,000 Lire returnable deposit is payable on arrival.
Supplements per person per night:4 pers £2.95, 3 pers (27 Jun–28 Aug) £7.75; 3 pers All other times £4.50.
A pleasant dip at the Orchidea
Welcoming Residence Orchidea
Residence Meridiana Self Catering
Designed in the style of a Ligurian fishing village, this is an attractive modern complex set in gardens about 900 yards from the sea.
There is a pool where deck-chairs can be hired, paddling pool, playground and restaurant.
Type A (up to 3 people) studios have a double and a single bed.
Type B (up to 4 people) apartments have a twin room and lounge with two divan beds.
Both have shower, kitchenette and patio.
A refundable 100,000 Lire deposit is payable on arrival.
Supplements per person per night:Type A:(27 Jun–28 Aug) 2 pers £7.75; All other times £5.75.
Type B:(27 Jun–28 Aug) 3 pers £5.75; 2 pers £17.25; All other times 3 pers £3.75; 2 pers £9.50.
The pool at Residence Meridiana
The modern Meridiana
Hotel Delle Mimose ∗∗∗
Set in a residential area, 10 minutes walk from the beach and the resort centre, this hotel has a friendly and relaxed atmosphere nurtured by its owners, the Guisto family.
In the gardens there is a pool and patio served by a poolside bar which offers light snacks at lunch time.
Each morning, breakfast is served in the large ground-floor restaurant which offers a choice of menu at dinner.
The hotel has a lounge, TV room, two bars and lift.
All the bedrooms are simply but comfortably furnished with a direct-dial telephone, and a safety deposit box, and both single and twin bedrooms have a balcony.
The price includes dinner (or lunch), bed and breakfast.
Beach charges are not included.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £2.50; Full board £4.50.
A relaxed atmosphere at the Delle Mimose
Hotel Bergamo ∗∗∗
A friendly, family-run hotel in the popular resort of San Bartolomeo al Mare, the Bergamo stands on the main road close to the sea and within walking distance of the picturesque, hill-top village of Cervo.
The centre of Diano Marina is about one and a half miles away.
There is a pool bordered by split-level sun terraces with deck-chairs and sun umbrellas and a small garden.
Public rooms include a spacious lounge, bar and restaurant.
A lift serves bedrooms with telephone, colour TV and a balcony.
Garage facilities are available at 5,000 Lire payable locally.
Price includes dinner, bed and buffet breakfast.
Beach charges not included.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £5.90.
The private pool at the Bergamo
A place in the sun, Diano Marina beach
Citalia VALUE
Honeymoon and silver anniversary couples staying at the Hotel Mayola, Hotel Bergamo and Hotel Moresco, receive a bottle of sparkling wine and flowers or fruit, those at the Hotel Palace receive a bottle of sparkling wine.
Hotel Mayola ∗∗∗
Right on the tree-lined promenade in the San Bartolomeo district, less than a mile from Diano Marina's centre, the Hotel Mayola overlooks the sea and has its own sea water swimming pool unusually situated on a private beach.
Managed by its owners, the hotel has a spacious lounge and TV room, a restaurant offering well-prepared food and a promenade bar on a covered terrace.
A sun terrace with deck-chairs and umbrellas surrounds the swimming pool.
Bedrooms are simply but tastefully furnished.
Some twin rooms have a balcony.
The price includes bed and breakfast.
Beach charges are included (see p. 225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £2.25; Balcony £1.95.
A leisurely pace at the Mayola
Hotel Moresco ∗∗∗
The Moresco is a modern hotel attractively landscaped into a hillside dotted with cypress trees.
Just 50 yards from the sea (via an underpass), its attractive design combines a cool white facade with picturesque wrought iron balconies.
There is a comfortable bar, a lounge and a panoramic restaurant, and outside, a sea water swimming pool is set in a large sun terrace and surrounded by overhanging trees.
There is a private beach 300 yards away and for those keen to learn a new sport — there is a water-skiing school nearby (charges payable locally).
All the simple bedrooms have telephone and twin bedrooms have a balcony.
Parking is available.
The coastal railway runs close by.
There is no lift.
The price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges included (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £4.95.
Time to relax at the Moresco
Hotel Palace ∗∗∗
Set on the beachside promenade, close to the resort's centre, this hotel is opposite a sandy beach where guests can swim, fish and wind-surf or use complimentary bicycles.
Run by the owner, Signor Scalambrin, and his wife this hotel sees its guests return year after year thanks largely to their warm welcome and efficient staff.
There is a pleasant terrace bar, a wellappointed lounge, small fitness centre and a popular restaurant, supervised by the owner himself, which has good sea views and offers an excellent choice.
Bedrooms all have TV, and some twins have a balcony with a sea view.
Price includes dinner (or lunch), bed and a breakfast.
Beach charges are not included.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £3.75; Front sea view and Balcony £2.95.
Tasty tagliatelli pesto
Set on the beautiful promenade — Hotel Palace
The sweeping bay at Diano Marina
Alassio, Laigueglia & Sestri Levante
‘Resorts of ancient history steeped in charm and each with a story to tell.’
Alassio has long been a favourite, and its ‘little wall’— The Muretto of the Café Roma — boasts hundreds of tiles bearing the signatures of its past illustrious guests.
It is a wellequipped resort, whose 15th century charm remains.
The pleasant, largely pedestrianised resort of Laigueglia is an old fishing village with quaint cobbled streets leading under arches to the sandy beach.
A promenade links it with Alassio.
Sestri Levante is an historic town of charm.
Lord Byron and Wagner are among those who found it irresistible and Hans Christian Anderson named its bay the ‘Bay of Fairy Tales’.
Alassio — a long time favourite
Hotel Pesce d'Oro ALASSIO ∗∗∗
Just 20 steps away from the sea, in a traffic-free zone of Alassio's historical centre, the Hotel Pesce d'Oro is a warm traditional property.
It's position means cases must be carried 400 yards through the pedestrianised area, but the hotel is popular with families and couples alike and its facilities include a bar, pleasant summer verandah, dining room and garden.
The owners pride themselves on offering comfortable accommodation, on giving personal service with attention to detail and on providing a choice of good food.
All the fresh, simple bedrooms are served by two lifts and have colour TV and telephone.
The price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges are not included.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £4.50.
Pesce d'Oro — just steps from the sea
Europa e Concordia ALASSIO ∗∗∗∗
Citalia is pleased to reintroduce this well-run hotel into our programme for 1992.
The property is set only 50 yards from the beach at Alassio and is efficiently managed by the welcoming Signor Masutti and his wife.
The Europa e Concordia has proved a popular place to stay with many guests who appreciate its well-appointed style.
It has delightfully bright, comfortable public rooms designed to ensure guests have everything needed for a relaxed and leisurely stay.
The hotel is situated in an enviable position across from the beach.
The bedrooms are pleasant and have a telephone.
The price includes dinner (or lunch), bed and breakfast.
Beach charges are included (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £3.75; Side sea view and balcony £5.50.
Overlooking the shore — Europa e Concordia
Hotel Splendid LAIGUEGLIA ∗∗∗
A Citalia favourite for over 30 years, the Hotel Splendid retains the majestic structure of its 14th century monastic origins.
Its past is most apparent in the bar and hall, which have vaulted ceilings and antique-style furniture, and in the restaurant, where a small well is a delightful reminder of days gone by.
Set on the main coast road, the hotel is just 10 yards from its own private sandy beach, with bar and waiter service, and has a wonderful shady patio garden looking out onto the pedestrianised heart of the historical centre of Laigueglia.
The stylish restaurant serves good cuisine and overlooks the small, adult swimming pool and a terraced garden.
The traditional public rooms include a TV room and a typically Italian pavement café.
The hotel bedrooms all have safety deposit box and telephone.
The prices includes dinner (or lunch), bed and breakfast.
Beach charges included (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £4.95; Full board £4.95; Front sea view £3.75.
The majestic Hotel Splendid
Traffic-free Alassio
Grand Hotel Villa Balbi SESTRI LEVANTE ∗∗∗∗
This beautiful hotel, situated across a busy road from the fine shingle beach, retains the atmosphere and style of its origins as a 17th century summer residence.
The opulent lounge, with monumental wooden fireplace, the bar, with tasteful vaulted ceiling, and the luminous dining-room are housed in the old mansion which is connected to a larger, modern building which houses the bedrooms.
The pool, heated until 1 June, is set in the hotel's mature garden.
Breakfast is served on the garden terrace, and the restaurant offers varied cuisine.
Parking is available for 10,000 Lire a night.
Bedrooms have mini-bar, TV, telephone and park view.
The modern wing has a lift.
Price includes dinner (or lunch), bed and breakfast.
Beach charges (1 June to 3 July and 22 August to 30 September) included (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £6.25.
Balbi's pool amid its garden
Delightful Laigueglia
The imposing Villa Balbi
Sestri Levante — a truly admirable setting
Citalia VALUE
At all hotels honeymoon and silver anniversary couples receive a bottle of sparkling wine and flowers or fruit.
Europa e Concordia
A complimentary excursion for all guests staying 7 nights or more arriving on 23 May, 12 and 19 Sept.
Pesce d'Oro
Complimentary use of bicycles.
Splendid
£24 reduction for all guests staying 14 nights arriving on 23 and 30 May, 5 and 12 Sept and for guests staying 12 nights arriving on 24 and 31 May, 6 and 13 Sept.
Complimentary use of bicycles all season.
Spotorno & Santa Margherita
‘Two friendly and welcoming resorts.
The first small and quiet, its neighbour energetic and alive.’
Peaceful and pretty, Spotorno is a relaxing, away-from-it all resort.
Colourful parasols dot its fine shingle beach and, inland, rolling rural landscapes await those who like to explore.
It is a quiet resort of winding narrow streets lined with cafés and shops.
Adorned with orange blossom, Santa Margherita Ligure is a resort with a colourful marina, enchanting harbour, piazzas and waterfront walkways.
Bustling with things to do, it is an international resort with style.
From here visitors can take a boat trip along the coast to Portofino — or visit the Cinque Terre.
Hotel Tripodoro SPOTORNO ∗∗∗
Situated on the border between Spotorno and its neighbour Noli, this hotel provides comfortable, friendly accommodation in a pleasant setting.
The Tripodoro is set back from the road about 750 yards from the centre of quiet, easy-going Sportorno.
Among the hotel's facilities, there is a bar, a TV room, a comfortable lounge, and an excellent restaurant offering a wide range of good food.
The family owners are particularly proud of this restaurant and the great praise it inspires, and the chef's fish dishes are his speciality.
The full board option, offered at a small supplement, is very good value.
There is a private beach club with a bar, set on the sandy beach 300 yards away, across the main road.
The hotel's bedrooms are equipped with telephone and hair dryer.
The price includes dinner (or lunch), bed and breakfast.
Beach charges included (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £4.50; Full board £3.25.
Beautiful vistas of Santa Margherita
Holiday relaxation
Colour at the Tripodoro
Hotel Royal SPOTORNO ∗∗∗∗
A popular hotel on the seafront the Royal has a garden, swimming pool and private underpass to the beach opposite.
The owner, Signor Bertolio and his staff offer warm and friendly service and the restaurant offers many Italian specialities.
There is a lounge, bar and lift.
Twin rooms have a balcony and side sea view.
Single rooms over a road at the back of the hotel, have double glazing.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges included (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £9.25; Front sea view £4.95.
Citalia VALUE
Honeymoon and silver anniversary couples staying at the Royal, Mediterraneo, Helios and Miramare receive a bottle of sparkling wine and flowers or fruit.
Royal and Mediterraneo
All guests staying 14 nights arriving on 23 and 30 May, 5 and 12 Sept receive a £20 reduction at the Royal and an £18 reduction at the Mediterraneo.
Helios
£35 reduction for all honeymoon couples staying 7 nights.
£70 reduction for all guests staying 14 nights.
A cooling swim at the Royal
Sea, shore and the Hotel Royal
Grand Hotel Miramare S. MARGHERITA ∗∗∗∗
This is a majestic hotel which commands some most beautiful views out across the water of the Gulf of Portofino and the Bay of Santa Margherita.
Here the management offers classic style combined with the best in Italian gracious living.
The management prides itself on offering comfortable accommodation in elegant surroundings, and puts an emphasis on providing excellent service.
There is a lush tropical garden, swimming pool and a small private beach.
The bedrooms are furnished in a traditional style and have air-conditioning.
Price includes dinner (or lunch), bed and breakfast.
Beach charges are included but services cannot be pre-booked (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £20.95; Side sea view and balcony £2.95.
The majestic Miramare
Hotel Mediterraneo S.MARGHERITA ∗∗∗
The Mediterraneo retains the graceful charm of a private summer residence.
The elegant proportions of the building, the elaborate stucco work around the windows, discreet shutters and occasional small, stone balcony give it an air of elegance and tranquillity.
Just 200 yards from the centre of town, it is a cool oasis set in a beautiful, mature garden with deckchairs.
Inside, modern comforts and period features combine.
The lounge boasts an ornate arched ceiling and there is a bar, TV room and restaurant which serves a varied menu.
Bedrooms vary — some modern, some traditional, but all have TV and telephone.
The price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges are not included.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £4.95.
The Mediterraneo
Graceful charm at the Mediterraneo
Hotel Helios S.MARGHERITA ∗∗∗∗
The Hotel Helios has an enviable position on the seafront in the Bay of Santa Margherita, just alongside a small harbour.
A thoroughly charming and well-run hotel, it was recently refurbished and is well-furnished throughout.
Both the bar and restaurant, which are open to the public, are superbly located — overlooking the harbour and the bay with its parade of small boats and luxury yachts.
All the bedrooms have ceiling fan, colour TV, hair dryer, telephone, safety deposit box and double glazing.
Rear bedrooms overlook the road but have their own umbrella and two deck-chairs reserved on the quayside from 1 June to 30 September.
The price includes dinner (or lunch), bed and breakfast.
Beach charges are not included.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £12.50; Front sea view and terrace £9.25.
Monterosso in the Cinque Terre
‘Overhung with Bougainvillea and steeped in a fairytale atmosphere.’
The five little villages of the Cinque Terre are visually, simply stunning.
Laboriously carved out of rock and earth, their buildings are built in incredible terraces, one above the other, hanging on to the cliffs or nestled below them.
Steeped in a fairytale atmosphere, the fishing villages of Monterosso, Vernazza, Corniglia, Manarola and Riomaggiore have been known as the Cinque Terre or ‘Five lands’ since medieval times and are laced together by an intricate coastal path.
Until relatively recently they could only be reached by sea or on foot, and even now that they are more accessible, they still retain much of their charm and unique character.
Their houses are coloured in weathered pastels and ochres set amidst silvery olive trees.
Blessed with a fine, mild climate almost vertical vineyards produce the region's finest, most fragrant wines.
The first of the five villages of the Cinque Terre, Monterosso al Mare is the largest and the most accessible of them all and has the finest hotels and restaurants.
Originally a Roman colony, legend has it that it takes its name from the first lord of its castle Rufus, Marquis of Obertenghi, who had thick red hair, or, perhaps more romantically, that it is named after the sunset hues which turn the mountain here from a gentle rose to red each evening.
The original village, first made an appearance in the public records in 1056 when it donated land for a monastery, but it was actually first formed in the foot hills in 641 by mountain folk escaping an invasion by the Rotaris.
Today, most modern amenities are in a new quarter, Fegina, which is separated from the old quarter by a hill crowned with the 1622 Convento dei Cappuccini and a medieval tower.
At the 18th century Sanctuary of Soviore, a music festival is hosted each summer.
At the water's edge there are pleasant beaches and boats bob hypnotically ready for hire to those who want a personal tour of this wonderful coast.
From Monterosso al Mare the other Cinque Terre towns are within easy reach.
Vernazza is nearest — a short train ride or lovely hour-and-a-half walk away — appearing like an unexpected vision as you approach.
Corniglia is the hardest to reach as it, unlike all the others, is high up on the cliffs rather than by the sea.
The scenery on route to Manarola is stunning, and from there it is a 20 minute walk to Riomaggiore — which is probably the prettiest of the five villages.
Discover the old world charm
Monterosso
Citalia VALUE
Honeymoon and silver anniversary couples staying at the Porto Roca and Jolie receive a bottle of sparkling wine and flowers or fruit, those at the Degli Amici receive flowers.
Hotel Porto Roca ∗∗∗∗
A well run property with breathtaking views this hotel, 200 yards from the beach, wins many repeat visitors.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges are included.
Supplements per person per night:Partial sea view and balcony £9.25.
Breathtaking views from Porta Roca
Hotel Degli Amici ∗∗∗
This is a friendly, unpretentious pensione serving excellent cuisine.
Single rooms share a bathroom.
Price includes dinner (or lunch) bed and breakfast.
Beach charges not included.
Supplements per person per night:No single room supp; Full board £6.25.
Simplicity at the Degli Amici
Hotel Jolie ∗∗∗∗
Set in a beautiful garden, this was once a private villa and retains a homely atmosphere.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges are included (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £6.25.
Jolie set in pretty gardens
Hotel Cinque Terre ∗∗∗
Here, the manageress Giovanna has been welcoming guests for 30 years and prides herself on offering a simple, comfortable hotel and a good choice of menu.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges not included.
Cinque Terre — close to the beach
A golden arc of sand set against Venice's waterways
VENETIAN RIVIERA
The enchanting Venetian lagoon, with Venice at its centre, provides an unparalleled chance to combine a relaxed beach holiday with some of the best sightseeing in Italy.
A golden arc stretches on either side of Venice with wide beaches, cool pinewoods dotted with hotels and villas, and a lovely climate of hot, sunny days tempered by a light breeze.
To the east of Venice lies Lido di Jesolo and Caorle, with miles of golden sand lapped by the warm waters of the Adriatic.
To the west, Chioggia looks inward across the lagoon and Sottomarina looks out to the Adriatic sea.
Few will tire of the vast range of activities and attractions offered by these resorts, but for a change, the incomparable beauty of Venice — Italy's unique waterways city of stunning mirror image landscapes — attracts like a magnet few will resist, and further afield, Veneto unfolds a host of other magical towns and monuments waiting to be explored.
Local Attractions
You won't need to go far to fulfil your dream of a relaxed and fun-filled holiday.
The resorts of the Venetian coastline have a long-established reputation for pleasing and you will find wide avenues and inviting squares, sweeping promenades and carefully tended parks.
A wealth of shops, bars, cafés and restaurants have sprung up to tempt the visitor, and you can dine in elegant surroundings or ‘al fresco’, perhaps under a sheltering canopy of vines.
You will eat tasty, oven-fresh pizzas or elaborate gastronomic delights, then work it all off with a leisurely long walk into the evening.
The Venetian coastline is popular with Italians too — a sure sign of its undoubted success.
Freshest Flavours
Venetian cuisine is based on fish, seafood and rice.
Try ‘risi e bisi’ rice and peas, or risotto with asparagus.
Visit the wonderful fish market in Chioggia to see the full choice.
Fritto misto (mixed fried fish and seafood) is a must and then there is the tasty local ‘granscole’, sea spiders cooked in olive oil and lemon juice and served cold.
Try them with Soave or Pinot wines or if you prefer a red Valpolicella or Bardolino.
Shopping Secrets
Wherever you stay you will find the Venetian glass and lace industries still thrive.
The resorts have many enticingly openfronted shops, and you will also find beautiful intricate lacework and carnival masks.
Venice itself has everything from a ‘Bellini cocktail’ at Harry's bar, to fruit and vegetables at the Rialto market; exclusive designer wear can be found in the boutiques along the Mercerie.
The spectacular lagoon
Sailing on the Venetian Riviera
Chioggia — Venice in miniature
Enjoy the beach at Lido di Jesolo
Browse at your leisure
CAORLE
This resort has developed on either side of an old fishing town, along two stretches of gently shelving beach.
There is plenty to do on the beautifully wide soft sandy beach and in the historic old town.
The small port supports a picturesque fishing fleet.
SOTTOMARINA
Sottomarina is now a thriving resort with four miles of sandy beach edged by picturesque harbours and attractive shops.
A short stroll away, Chioggia, known as ‘Little Venice’ unfolds and Venice is a 45 minute drive or pleasant boat ride away.
LIDO DI JESOLO
This is the best-known resort on the Venetian Coastline.
It is ten miles of golden sands backed by pinewoods.
It is a lively, fun resort with broad avenues, bustling squares and many sporting facilities, including a huge Aquafun water park.
Lazy days on the beach
Caorle & Sottomarina
‘Where fishermen once set out to sea, now travellers stop to soak up the sun which bakes the sandy shores.’
These two thriving resorts boast some of the very best beaches on the Adriatic.
Where fishermen once set out to sea, now travellers stop to soak up the sun which bakes the sandy shores.
These are resorts with a long-established reputation for pleasing, where visitors find a wealth of things to see and do on land and on the water, and can be easily lured to a typically Venetian feast by the tempting aromas of the many fish restaurants.
Sottomarina is linked by a long bridge, across the lagoon, to the town of Chioggia, ‘Little Venice’, made up of narrow-straight canals and streets, hump-back bridges and colourful houses — it is one of the great wonders of Italy.
Hotel Ritz CAORLE ∗∗
The Hotel Ritz welcomes guests to a lovely position on the Venetian Arc, near the interesting old town of Caorle and only about 200 yards from a splendid, wide beach which is particularly suitable for families with children.
This intimate family hotel offers a warm welcome to a homely atmosphere and the management prides itself on offering a choice of good local cooking in its dining-room.
Other public rooms here include a comfortable lounge-bar, with TV, where guests can relax and which leads out onto a pleasant verandah.
All the bedrooms at the Hotel Ritz are simply and comfortably furnished and have the benefit of a balcony.
Single rooms have private facilities accessed via the balcony.
For those customers looking for a real Italian holiday atmosphere in an Italian family hotel, the Hotel Ritz is an ideal choice.
The price includes full board.
Beach charges are included (see p.225.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £2.50.
The welcoming Ritz
Chicken Risotto — a Venetian speciality
Hotel Bristol SOTTOMARINA ∗∗∗∗
The Bristol is a friendly hotel set across the road from the beach.
There is an attractive pool and children's pool set within landscaped gardens and surrounded by a sun terrace with sunloungers.
The bright bar leads out onto a large terrace at the front of the hotel.
The first-floor restaurant has lovely sea views and serves a choice of Italian cooking.
Twin rooms have a terrace with side sea view.
Single rooms have a bathroom across the corridor.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges included (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £3.95; Full board £6.50.
The Bristol is just by the beach
Hotel Ritz SOTTOMARINA ∗∗∗∗
This is a modern, family hotel, set close to the seafront and with a private beach.
Within, there are several lounges, a bar and restaurant.
Outside, there is a garden, sun terrace, pool and children's pool.
All the 90 bedrooms are served by a lift and have telephone.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges included (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £4.95; Side sea view £2.50; Side sea view and balcony £2.95; Full board £6.25.
Hotel Ritz — Sottomarina
Hotel Monaco CAORLE ∗∗∗
This is a friendly hotel, set on the main seafront opposite the beach.
It has a large terrace, a bar overlooking the sea, and a fourth-floor roof terrace.
Among the public rooms there is a spacious lounge, with TV, a lift and a well-run restaurant offering a good choice.
Price includes full board.
Beach charges included (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £2.75; Side sea view £1.95.
The friendly Monaco
Citalia VALUE
Honeymoon and silver anniversary couples staying at the Ritz and San Giorgio in Caorle and the Ritz in Sottomarina receive a bottle of sparkling wine and fruit.
Ritz — Caorle
£22 reduction for all guests staying 14 nights arriving on 9, 16, 23 and 30 May, 6 and 13 June.
San Giorgio
£84 reduction for all guests staying 14 nights arriving on 23 and 30 May, 29 Aug and 5 Sept.
Ritz — Sottomarina
A complimentary dinner at a restaurant in Venice for all 14 night guests staying (transport not incl.).
Bristol
Welcome drink on arrival.
A complimentary excursion to Venice for guests staying 14 nights.
Monaco
£30 reduction for guests staying 14 nights arriving 16, 23, 30 May and 5, 12 Sep.
Grand Hotel San Giorgio CAORLE ∗∗∗∗
Close to the port, with its large yacht harbour, and just over a mile from the attractive centre of Caorle, this modern hotel complex overlooks its own private beach from a lovely garden setting.
Between the hotel and the beach are two swimming pools (one for children) and the hotel's tennis courts (charge payable locally) surrounded by pine trees.
There are facilities for table tennis, football and bowls and, for a lively evening's entertainment, there is a discotheque close by.
More leisurely guests can relax at the bar or around the pool, play a quiet game of cards on the large verandah, or just rest in the attractive lounge.
Breakfast and evening meals are served in the panoramic restaurant.
Bedrooms have balcony with side sea view.
Price includes dinner (or lunch), bed and breakfast.
Beach charges included (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £6.25; Full board £3.25.
Lazy days at the San Giorgio
Grand Hotel San Giorgio close to the port
The sandy beaches of Caorle
Lido di Jesolo
‘Behind the once semi-wild sand dunes, pine woods provide a leafy setting for broad avenues, bustling squares and welcoming hotels.’
Probably the best-known resort on the Venetian coastline, Lido di Jesolo is 10 miles of golden sands and refreshing, fragrant pine woods.
A lively, fun resort it really offers something to suit everyone and it makes an ideal base for exploring Veneto's many other attractions.
Venice is only around 30 miles away, and Vicenza and Verona are both within reach.
Lido di Jesolo — 10 miles of sand
Strolling along Lido di Jesolo
Hotel Bolivar ∗∗∗
Set in one of the most pleasant parts of the resort, this hotel is just 100 yards from its own private beach.
There is a spacious lounge with TV, a large dining-room and a bar which serves snacks.
Outside, there is a pool and children's play area.
The main shopping and entertainments area is right on your doorstep.
Bedrooms, served by a lift, have telephone and safety deposit box.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges included (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £3.25.
Bolivar — new for 1992
Citalia VALUE
Honeymoon and silver anniversary couples staying at the Jalisco, Europa, Cambridge and Majestic Toscanelli receive a bottle of sparkling wine and flowers or fruit.
Majestic Toscanelli
A complimentary bottle of wine per room on arrival for all guests.
50,000 Lire credit for snacks or drinks at the bar for all guests staying 14 nights arriving on 16 and 23 May, 5 Sept.
Hotel Europa ∗∗∗∗
This is a most beautiful, modern hotel, just 20 yards from the beach.
Air-conditioned and tastefully furnished with marble floors and plush, contemporary furniture, there is a lounge, large dining-room, bar and weekly live entertainment.
Outside, there is a sun terrace, small pool, children's pool and whirlpool with sea views.
Bedrooms are served by two lifts and have TV, safety deposit box, fridge, telephone, double glazing and balcony.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges included (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £6.25.
Europa — located close to the beach
Hotel Jalisco ∗∗
The Hotel Jalisco is an excellent value hotel at the heart of lively Lido Jesolo.
It is surrounded by bustling shops, bars and entertainment, and close to the well-equipped sandy beach.
A popular hotel, run by the Scarfo family, it is surrounded by a terrace overlooking a swimming pool with children's area and a complimentary whirlpool bath where guests can relax.
The attractively furnished lounge, bar and dining-room are all fully air-conditioned.
There is a choice of well-prepared menu for all meals, and once a week there is a pizza party and a Happy Hour when guests can socialise in a real holiday atmosphere.
The bedrooms all have safety deposit box.
The price includes full board.
Beach charges are included (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £2.95.
The centrally located Jalisco
Jalisco — dining room
Hotel Cambridge ∗∗∗∗
The Cambridge has an ideal location beside its own reserved section of sandy beach, close to the lively centre of Lido di Jesolo.
There is a lovely pool bordered by terraces with deckchairs and parasols.
Inside, there is a spacious lounge and bar, traditionally furnished with cool marble floors.
There is a restaurant for lunch and dinner, but breakfast is generally served out on the terrace overlooking the sea.
The bedrooms have the benefit of a balcony with side sea view.
The price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges are included (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room (on request) £8.95; Full board £7.75.
Cooling comforts at the Cambridge
Hotel Majestic Toscanelli ∗∗∗∗
A fine, family-run hotel, the Majestic has been a favourite with Citalia customers for over 25 years, enjoying a privileged position close to the centre of the resort on its own sandy beach.
It has a delightful garden, a large verandah and an attractive swimming pool with a children's section around which sun-beds can be hired.
Table tennis is also available.
Tastefully decorated throughout, the hotel has a lift, a spacious lounge (with TV) leading out to the garden, a bar and a poolside snackbar which offers a good choice of menu and attentive service.
When weather permits, à la carte lunches are served on the poolside terrace facing the sea, and buffet breakfasts are also served outside.
All the twin bedrooms have recently been refurbished and have telephone, side sea view and balcony, and most have safety deposit box.
The price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges are included (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £4.75.
Majestic — a Citalia favourite for 25 years
Welcoming resorts along a coast of golden sands
Adriatic Riviera
ROMAGNA
Romagna is one of Italy's most popular holiday regions with wide, golden beaches stretching virtually the whole length of the coast.
The atmosphere is warm and welcoming, the cuisine among the most outstanding in the country.
In addition there is plenty of scope to combine both family entertainment and a little historic sightseeing.
There are theme parks and water slides which the children love, horse riding and tennis, plus a beach which shelves gently and safely into the azure sea.
If you are keen to explore, the cities of Ravenna and Urbino — an elegant town in the mountains, are close by and everyone, young and old, loves to go to the world famous San Marino, the oldest and smallest republic in the world, set on the slopes of Monte Titano.
Perfect pasta
Favourite pasta dishes include little stuffed pasta dumplings —‘tortellini’, ‘ravioli’ and ‘tagliatelle’.
Parma ham, parmesan cheese and bolognese sauce are all specialities of the region.
Along the coast look for ‘capesante’— similar to scallops — and ‘pesce — azzurro’— the Adriatic's tasty blue fish.
Youngsters will, without a doubt, simply adore the terrific range of Italian water-ices.
Local crafts
Pottery is among the most popular crafts in the Romagna region and the famous ceramic workshops of Faenza offer pretty blue and yellow faience ware.
Other traditional specialities include a wide range of handwoven rugs made at the school in Forli and wrought-iron work, basketwork and mosaics from nearby Ravenna.
Postage stamps from the famed, tiny republic of San Marino are very often bought as souvenirs or gifts.
Central to sights
Visit Ravenna and discover the capital city of the Roman Emperor Honorius and the gothic King Theodoric of Western Byzantium.
Among its treasures are the finest byzantine mosaics in the east, surpassing even the golden domes in St. Mark's Square.
Rosy-walled Urbino and the fairytale Castle of Gradara beckon from just over the border in Marche.
Both Venice and Florence are an easy day trip away.
Rimini — plenty to do
A day trip to San Marino
Cattolica's lively harbour
The latest fashions
Sit by the fountain in Cattolica
Milano Marittima
‘Six miles of golden sands, lined by pinewoods which once inspired great poets such as Dante and Byron.’
Six miles of golden sands lined for many miles by the ageold pine woods which inspired poets such as Dante and Byron.
riding, tennis, sailing and spa treatments are all available here, and visitors can dine on fresh regional seafoods served in classic style.
Hotel Doge ∗∗∗∗
Set in a lovely, well-kept garden, the Hotel Doge has two heated swimming pools — one Olympic-sized and one for children with slide.
Through the cool and shady pine trees, there is a private beach with bar.
Public rooms include a lounge, two bars, and restaurant offering a wide choice of carefully prepared food.
The quiet bedrooms are bright and spacious.
Twin rooms have side sea view and balcony.
Suites have two twins, sitting-room and bathroom.
The price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges are not included.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £6.50; Suite for 4 pers — No Supplement; Full board £7.50.
Citalia VALUE
Honeymoon and silver anniversary couples receive a bottle of sparkling wine.
The cheerful Doge
The Doge has two pools
Hotel Aurelia ∗∗∗∗
The Aurelia is set on a private sandy beach.
There is a large, lovely pool, restaurant and bar.
The hotel has a tennis court with coach available, a games room, lounge and car park.
The fresh decor of the public rooms continues in the hotel bedrooms, all of which are equipped with a telephone, a balcony and some have sea view.
Suites have two twin rooms and bathroom.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges are not included.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £6.50; Suite for 4 pers — No Supplement; Full board £6.50.
Enough for everyone!
Aurelia — right on the beach
Rimini
‘Sparkling beaches beside a charming old town.’
Once a Roman colony, Rimini's history stretches back as far as 268 BC.
The charm of its old town is still at its heart — a treasury of ancient monuments, important archaeological finds and fine, venerable buildings but today the main focus is the resort's shoreline of sparkling beaches stretching for more than 10 miles.
Now the past happily co-exists with the modern glamour of a lively seafront famed for its fine hotels, excellent watersports and bright nightspots.
Inland lie the Republic of San Marino and lovely hill top villages such as Verucchio and Montefiore Conca.
Café life
Hotel de France ∗∗∗
The Hotel de France is situated between the two resorts of Rimini and Riccione and is the only three-star hotel in Rimini featured by Citalia which stands right on the beach, but also has its own private swimming pool.
Set on a main road, the amenities here include a lounge-bar for relaxing in, a TV room, a sheltered terrace overlooking the swimming pool, two lifts, a covered car park and a good, air-conditioned restaurant.
There is a generous buffet served to guests each morning at breakfast and offering a wide choice with evening dinner.
There is also a pleasant beach restaurant, at ground level, which is open during the day for the purchase of snacks or a light lunch when guests are ready for a break from sunbathing.
All the hotel twin bedrooms are pleasantly furnished and have the benefit of a balcony, and all bedrooms have a telephone.
The Hotel de France also has a range of suites available for families, or for those looking for accommodation with a little extra space and comfort.
The price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges are not included.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £4.95; Partial sea view £2.75; Suite for 4 pers £12.50.
Hotel de France, right on the beach
Hotel Miramare ∗∗∗
Set on a busy shaded, tree-lined street, the Miramare is only 150 yards from the beach.
There is an elegantly refurbished reception area, stylish bar and TV lounge and a broad sun terrace which is the setting for occasional musical evenings.
The simple restaurant also leads off this terrace.
The bedrooms are bright, served by a lift and all have telephone and balcony.
Full board is very good value.
The price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges not included.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £12.95; Full board £12.50.
The sunny Miramare terrace
Hotel Fabius ∗∗∗
The Fabius is a well-known hotel, in the lively Rivazzurra district of Rimini.
It has a large swimming pool (open from 25 May weather permitting), a sun terrace with sun-beds and umbrellas, and a shaded patio where cool drinks can be served.
The beach is an 80 yard stroll away.
The restaurant serves a buffet breakfast and dinner with a choice of menu.
This is a family-run hotel with a relaxed atmosphere.
There are two lounges, one with TV, a lift, car parking and reception with safety deposit boxes.
Bedrooms have telephone and twin rooms have a balcony.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges not included.
Supplements per person per night:Single room (on request) £4.25.
Pool pleasures, Hotel Fabius
The family-run Hotel Fabius
Diplomat Palace ∗∗∗∗
Situated on the sea front, this is a welcoming hotel recently beautifully renovated with stunning marble floors and lavish use of stained glass.
Here guests find a swimming pool and small children's pool, a restaurant serving a choice of menu, a piano bar with music twice a week and an American bar.
The bedrooms have TV, hair dryer, safety deposit box, telephone, mini-bar, radio, air-conditioning, balcony and side sea view.
Price includes dinner, bed and buffet breakfast.
Beach charges not included.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £9.25; Full board £3.25.
Poolside at the Diplomat
GOLDEN CHOICE
Grand Hotel Rimini ∗∗∗∗∗L
Set in extensive gardens, only yards from the shore, this is an elegant, sumptuous hotel offering high calibre service.
There is an exclusive beach club, pool, tennis courts, restaurant, piano bar, nightclub, and beauty centre.
Once a week a gala dinner is held.
Bedrooms are air-conditioned with satellite TV, hair dryer and mini-bar.
Prices are for economy twins with no sea view.
Other grades: Medium Room — small with side sea view; Maximum Room large with side sea view; Suites — two twins with shared bathroom and no sea view.
Price includes full board and beach charges included (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £23.25; Medium room £9.25; Maximum room £22.95.
Reductions per person per night:Half board £10.25.
The elegant Grand Hotel Rimini
Hotel Residence ∗∗∗∗∗L
Overlooking the gardens of the Grand Hotel, the Residence Grand hotel Rimini consists of 50 bedrooms equipped with satellite TV and mini-bar.
Residence guests are invited to use the hotel's restaurants, bar, swimming pool terraces, beach and tennis facilities, and are entitled to all the special offers described for the hotel.
The price includes full board.
Beach charges are included (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £12.95;
Reductions per person per night:Half board £10.50.
GOLD PLUS
Private transfers to and from your hotel are available for up to three Golden Choice customers at £34 per car.
Please indicate your requests on the booking form.
Citalia VALUE
Honeymoon and silver anniversary couples receive a bottle of sparkling wine at all hotels.
Grand Hotel Rimini and Residence
Complimentary coach trip once a week to Rimini's street market.
Gala dinner with orchestra and dancing once a week for all guests.
Free swimming lessons for children in the pool.
Complimentary high tea at 4pm daily.
Complimentary basket of fruit in room on arrival.
Free fruit on the beach at 11am on weekends.
Complimentary orange juice with lunch and dinner.
De France
Complimentary shopping excursion to San Marino for all guests staying 7 nights or more.
Riccione
‘Smaller, quieter and more exclusive than many other resorts — surrounded by much to explore.’
This is the place for a two-in-one kind of a holiday.
It is a versatile resort offering everything needed for a relaxing sun and sea holiday, but it is also surrounded by much waiting to be explored.
Within easy reach are pretty hill towns such as Urbino, or the tiny republic of San Marino — the oldest republic in the world, left from the middle ages and set 2000 feet above Riccione's beach.
A smaller, quieter resort than many, within walking distance of lively Rimini, Riccione is without doubt a wonderful summer playground for all.
Residence Portoverde Self Catering
The Porteverde Holiday Village is a complex of Mediterranean-style and apartment block buildings built around a yacht marina a mile from the centre of town.
It has three private beaches, windsurfing, four pools set in lush gardens, two tennis courts, and, just outside, a riding stable.
There are shops, restaurants, piano bar, pubs and disco.
Type A for up to four people has a twin bedroom, living room with kitchenette and double divan bed, and bathroom.
Type B , for up to six, is as A but with an extra divan bed and additional room with twin or bunk beds.
Both have balcony, verandah or patio.
100,000 Lire returnable deposit is payable.
Supplements per person per night:Type A (4 Jul–28 Aug) 3 pers £6.50, 2 pers £18.75; At other times 3 pers £4.25, 2 pers £11.50.
Type B (4 Jul–28 Aug) 5 pers £3.50, 4 pers £7.90, 3 pers £15.50; At other times 5 pers £2.25, 4 pers £5.25, 3 pers £9.95.
Portoverde and its marina
Hotel Bel Air ∗∗∗
A stylish and modern hotel, personally supervised by Signora Renata Barogi and her daughter, the Hotel Bel Air has become something of a Citalia favourite.
It has an excellent situation, only 60 yards from the sandy beaches and close to shops and restaurants.
It is about two minutes from the bus service running in to Rimini, and is in front of the meeting point for local excursions.
Rich wood and grey marble accent the comfortable lounge, with TV, and the attractive bar.
Breakfast is served, each morning, on the shaded terrace in mild weather and there is an elegant dining-room for dinner.
A lift serves most floors.
The bedrooms are simply furnished and have a balcony.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges are not included.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £3.25; Full board £2.50.
The comfortable Bel Air
Waterside Riccione
Citalia VALUE
Honeymoon and silver anniversary couples receive a bottle of sparkling wine at hotels only, those at the Vienna Touring and the Mediterraneo also receive flowers or fruit.
Vienna Touring
Complimentary gala evenings on 23 June, 21 July and 15 Aug. £18 reduction on 14 night holidays and £9 reduction on 7 night holidays for all honeymoon couples.
Hotel Vienna Touring ∗∗∗∗
This handsome, well-run hotel is a long established Citalia favourite, situated in an excellent central setting which offers an ideal holiday base.
The Vienna Touring is framed prettily by lush gardens and it is about 100 yards from the beach, where changing cabins are provided and shady sun umbrellas are available at an extra charge payable locally.
It is within walking distance of the centre of Riccione and the hotel facilities include a large heated swimming pool with children's section, a gymnasium, a tennis court and a sauna.
Breakfast is served on the terrace and in the ‘conservatory’ and there is a good restaurant for lunch and dinner.
Twice a week, a piano bar provides entertainment for guests in the evening.
All the bedrooms are equipped with mini-bar and direct-dial telephone.
There is a lift to serve all floors.
The price includes dinner (or lunch), bed and breakfast.
Beach charges are not included.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £9.50; Twin with bath £1.25; Twin with bath and balcony £2.95; Twin with bath, side sea view and balcony £5.25; Full board £7.25.
The Vienna Touring's pleasant pool
Riccione shores
Hotel Mediterraneo ∗∗∗∗
This elegant, modern hotel is centrally situated right on the busy promenade, across the road from a wide sandy beach.
Airconditioned throughout, it has several lounges, TV and piano bar.
The bar serves a vast first-floor sun terrace and pool where a pool side buffet lunch is available for a fixed price each day.
The handsome restaurant offers ample buffet breakfasts and elaborate evening meals.
The twin bedrooms are all spacious and have front sea view, carpeted balcony, telephone, mini-bar and colour TV.
Some comfortable suites are also available on request for those looking for a little extra comfort.
The price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges are included (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Double room for sole use £15.95; Suite (on request) £11.75.
Mediterraneo pool
Mediterraneo — close to the beach
Cattolica
‘Superbly equipped and  thoroughly up-to-date resort.’
Sheltered by the promontory of Gabicce, Cattolica is linked to Gabicce by a bridge over the Tavollo river.
It is a lively superbly well-equipped resort where there is always plenty to do — from horse-riding to go-karting, tennis to mini-golf.
Here seafood specialities abound around the fishing harbour and a high-season traffic ban operates each evening to add to the pleasant holiday atmosphere as visitors dine al fresco or take an evening stroll.
Hotel Gambrinus ∗∗∗
This small, family-run hotel is close to the sandy beach and near several shops, cafés and bars.
It has a pleasant main lounge, with TV and bar leading to a sunny verandah.
All meals are served in the tastefully decorated dining-room, where the choice of menu includes many Italian specialities.
The hotel bedrooms are reached by a lift and are comfortable and spotlessly kept.
All are equipped with telephone and a balcony.
The full board arrangement offered at a small supplement represents very good value.
The price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges are not included.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £3.50; Full board £2.50.
The pleasant Hotel Gambrinus
Hotel Park ∗∗∗∗
The Park is one of the newest hotels in Cattolica, with a stylish modern design, set on the promenade road facing its own sandy beach.
There is an attractive bar, a swimming pool, two elegant lounges and a first-floor dining-room with a choice of menu, and sea views.
The hotel is air-conditioned and has a private garage available at a supplement payable locally.
Bedrooms have a telephone, mini-bar, safety deposit box, TV and radio.
The price includes dinner, bed and buffet breakfast.
Beach charges are not included.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £6.25.
Hotel Park — on the promenade
The stylish and modern Hotel Park
Hotel Tiffany's ∗∗∗
The Pazzaglini family are the friendly hosts at the Hotel Tiffany which stands in one of the quietest, greenest parts of Cattolica.
There is a pool, a large garden, a restaurant offering a choice of menu, an elegant lounge with verandah, a tavernetta with TV and bar, a roof-top solarium and a lift.
The beach is 200 yards away and there are shops and bars nearby.
Bedrooms are simply furnished with telephone and safety deposit box.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges are not included.
Supplements per person per night:Single room (on request) £3.25; Full board £3.25.
The family-run Tiffany's
Citalia VALUE
Honeymoon and silver anniversary couples receive a bottle of sparkling wine at all hotels.
A rich mix of modern resorts and old world towns
MARCHE
Marche is blessed with an abundance of golden beaches and resorts packed with up-to-the-minute facilities and entertainment.
Some, like Pesaro and Senigallia, have grown up around medieval towns and still retain old-world charm.
Others like San Benedetto del Tronto are busy fishing ports.
The beaches await but even if you consider yourself more of a sun worshipper than a sightseeing buff, you may be tempted to venture further afield, out to explore the rolling hills and picturesque cornfields which stretch across this region's landscapes and conjure up images of some rich renaissance tapestry.
The sight of towns like Urbino or the Castle of Gradara seem to recall illustrations straight out of a favourite old fairytale book.
Much to explore
The lovely town of Urbino is pure magic.
One of the greatest centres of renaissance art, Raphael and Brumante were born here and it is surrounded by massive ramparts, set amid rolling hills and dominated by the superb 15th century Palazzo Ducale.
Or, you can also visit San Marino, the smallest republic in the world, set on the slopes of Monte Titano, and make day trips to the artistic sights of Florence, historic Ravenna or unique Venice.
Seafood specials
‘Brodetto’ is a traditional fish soup concocted from up to a dozen different kinds of fish with their flavours enriched with generous use of olive oil, onion, herbs and garlic.
It is just one of a hundred different types of delicious seafood  dishes to be found on this coast.
Succulent spit-roasted lamb and chicken are also among the most popular regional meals, and inland, white truffles —‘al tartufo’— are something of a great delicacy when they come into season.
Lively markets
The open-air markets, held weekly in most major towns, are lively social gatherings at which you may be lucky enough to strike an excellent holiday bargain.
Leather shoes and bags, although not cheap, are good value for their quality.
Straw baskets, beaten copperware and wickerwork are among the more traditional handicrafts of the region and you will find plenty to admire as you browse the stalls.
Gabicce — popular with families
Marche's velvet sand
A relaxing aperitif
Pesaro market
Pesaro — an attractive resort
Gabicce
‘Well-kept sandy beaches dotted with colourful umbrellas.’
In the sea off Gabicce are the vestiges of the ancient city of Valbruna which testify to the existence of a seaside civilisation here more than 3,000 years ago.
Today, its appeal is still strong — well-kept sandy beaches, dotted with sunbeds and colourful umbrellas; brightly painted fishing boats providing the freshest of feasts; tree-lined streets, and a range of special events at the Tourist Palace.
There are restaurants, trattorie, friendly shops and an open-air market, and day trips can include Gradara, Urbino, the tiny republic of San Marino, Venice and Florence.
Sandy beaches
Hotel Capitol ∗∗∗
This comfortable hotel is situated only 30 yards from the seafront and is a long-time favourite with Citalia guests.
Friendly service provides a warm welcome at the front desk and continues in the air-conditioned dining-room, where a good standard of meals includes a buffet breakfast and choice at lunch and dinner.
There is a small taverna in the hotel and a choice of several bars and cafés nearby.
The 23 bedrooms are simply but attractively furnished with telephone and air-conditioning.
Twin-bedded rooms have a balcony.
There is a lift and a roof-top sun terrace.
The full board arrangement is very good value.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges are not included.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £2.75; Full board £2.75.
Hotel Capitol — A long time favourite
Hotel International ∗∗∗
Beach lovers rarely fault the International as it backs directly, down a few steps, onto the sands and sea.
Inside, the small terraced front entrance leads into a large, marble-floored lounge-bar and other public rooms include a ground floor restaurant which has wide windows and doors giving access right onto the beach.
This is a bright room, serving tasty Italian meals personally supervised with care by the proprietors.
Early suppers can be arranged for children.
A lift serves all floors to spacious bedrooms.
Twin rooms have a balcony and side sea view.
The full board arrangement is very good value.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges are not included.
Supplements per person per night:Single room 20 June–29 Aug £3.50; other times no supplement; Full board £3.50.
The International — backing onto the beach
Hotel Losanna ∗∗∗∗
The Losanna is one of the newest and best hotels in Gabicce.
Its blue and white facade is separated from the sandy beach by only 50 yards of lush public gardens.
In the other direction are the boutiques, cafés and bars of Gabicce.
The hotel offers a good culinary standard at the buffet breakfast, lunch and dinner, and meals are often served outside on the terrace.
Swimmers are well catered for with a heated main pool, a whirlpool bath and a shallow children's pool all set within the grounds.
There is an air-conditioned TV lounge.
Bedrooms have mini-bar and safety deposit box.
All floors are served by a lift.
The full board arrangement is very good value.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges not included.
Supplements per person per night:Full board £3.50; single room No supplement.
Hotel Losanna — one of the newest and best
The Losanna's pool
Rural landscapes within reach
The well-kept beach of Gabicce
Citalia VALUE
Honeymoon and silver anniversary couples receive a bottle of sparkling wine, those at the Losanna also receive fruit.
Losanna
No single supplement all season.
International
No single supplement 16 May–19 June and 29 Aug–18 Sep.
Pesaro
‘An interesting town with a beach of golden sands.’
Surrounded by hills and set at the mouth of the lush Foglia Valley, this is an attractive resort and an interesting town in its own right.
Its most famous son is Rossini who founded the town's Institute of Music set alongside the renaissance palace, twisting narrow streets and fortress of the historic town centre.
Along the esplanade, countless cafés, and tempting ice-cream parlours vie for attention.
Along the shore, two and a half miles of golden sands slip slowly into a warm, blue sea where visitors can swim, sail and wind-surf.
Visit San Marino
Market colour
Hotel Sporting ∗∗∗
The cheerful decor of the Hotel Sporting is reflected in the bright and colourful beach umbrellas which are to be found right outside its doors.
Well positioned, the hotel is situated directly on the seafront road, about 15 minutes walk from the old centre of Pesaro.
Closer to hand are a choice of cafés, tempting ice-cream parlours, bars with music and discotheques for the evenings.
A family-run hotel, the Sporting features many amenities which will particularly suit families on holiday.
These amenities include a swimming pool with ample sun terraces for relaxing and sunbathing on and bar service.
There is a cool and comfortable lounge and bar inside, and a first-floor dining-room where there are sea views and the attentive service is excellent and the well-prepared cuisine a delight.
The hotel's bedrooms are served by a lift and all twin-bedded rooms have the benefit of a balcony with side sea views.
The price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges are not included.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £2.50; Full board £4.75.
The well-positioned Hotel Sporting
Hotel Clipper ∗∗∗
Citalia guests have long given the Hotel Clipper high marks for its friendly, family atmosphere and its good position.
Boasting easy access to the hinterland for those who wish to explore, about ten minutes walk from the centre of the city itself and around 50 yards from the sea and sand of the beach, it is set on a corner location.
The spacious lounge has a bar for a relaxing drink and leads out onto a surrounding, shaded terrace.
The hotel also provides a TV and writing room, and a card room with a range of indoor games.
The hotel's spacious restaurant looks out across the broad sun terrace and offers well-supervised cuisine with a choice of both typical local specialities and international cooking.
A lift serves the roomy bedrooms which are furnished in a simple, modern style with balcony.
Shops for immediate holiday needs are close by.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges included (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £5.25; Full board £6.25.
The friendly Hotel Clipper
Hotel Royal ∗∗∗
Set back from the main road, the Hotel Royal is located in a shady avenue about five minutes walk from a private sandy beach.
Here changing cabins and amenities are available to ensure a comfortable day of swimming and sunbathing.
This is a family-run hotel and the management prides itself on the fact that Citalia guests have always received a warm welcome.
Step up the stairway into the Hotel Royal and you step up to a modestly furnished property, decorated in a modern style.
It has a range of public rooms all of which are designed to be light and airy.
There is a welcoming bar, a spacious lounge for guests to relax in and a TV area which opens out onto a wide, covered terrace.
For meal times, the pleasant dining-room's design is particularly spacious and in the kitchens the hotel chefs pride themselves on offering good, typically Italian style cooking at dinner and an ample breakfast each morning.
The bedrooms at the Hotel Royal are all served by a lift and equipped with a shower room and a telephone.
They all have the benefit of a balcony.
The price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges are included (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £3.25.
The family-run Royal
Hotel Astoria ∗∗∗
From the breezy loggia of the Astoria, the lounge doors lead right onto the beach.
Amenities here include a small swimming pool and sun terrace with umbrellas and sun-loungers, complimentary use of bicycles, a bar, games room and TV lounge.
The town centre is half a mile away but there are shops and cafés on the main road close by.
Standards are high in the hotel's air-conditioned sea view restaurant which offers an á la carte choice of meal.
Lifts serve the taller of the hotel's two wings.
The price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges are included (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:No supplement in single rooms without private facilities; Single room with private facilities £3.50; Side sea view and balcony £1.75; Front sea view and balcony £3.25; Full board £3.50.
Poolside Astoria
Classic Pesaro
The beachside Astoria
Senigallia
‘Rich in history and a stunning coast.’
Founded by the Gauls, colonised by the Romans and later the Papal stronghold, Senigallia is rich in history.
All around the resort are the remains of ancient Roman settlements, historic churches, hill towns, castles and the impressive Frasassi Caves set within limestone gorges.
Here visitors find a stunning coast of soft pale sands, considered by many to be among the most beautiful of the Adriatic Riviera.
Inland there are lovely areas of tranquil rural life well worth exploring.
Streets of history
Hotel Massi ∗∗∗
A warm family atmosphere has made the Massi popular for many years.
The resident proprietor has worked hard at maintaining an excellent reputation for service and comfort.
The hotel stands in its own tree-shaded grounds, about 60 yards from the beach, with shops and bars nearby.
There is a bar and TV in a lounge which opens onto a terrace which wraps around the building and is often the venue for breakfast.
The full board option offered at a supplement is very good value.
The price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges included (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £1.25, Balcony £1.25; Balcony with side sea view £1.75; Full board £3.50.
The popular Hotel Massi
Ritz ∗∗∗∗
A fine contemporary hotel, guests at the Ritz have only to step across the main promenade to reach the soft private beach.
Set in the hotel's garden, across a small road immediately at the rear of the hotel, is the Ritz Club with a splendid sea water pool and children's pool.
The Club has barbecue facilities, children's games and a tennis court.
There is a large lounge, TV room and piano bar.
Meals are served in the restaurant or guests can take lunch at the beach restaurant.
Bedrooms have balcony and side sea view, radio and telephone.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges included (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £6.50; Full board £6.25.
Relaxation at the Ritz
Hotel Bamby ∗∗
The Hotel Bamby is splendidly placed for easy access to what has been described as the most beautiful of the gentle Adriatic beaches.
A particularly friendly, informal atmosphere prevails here and has kept this small hotel popular with Citalia guests over many years.
A family-style welcome is extended to all visitors by Signor and Signora Vecchi who personally supervise the hotel and ensure friendly service is assured.
The nearby wide beach makes it ideal for families with young children and a wide variety of shops, bars and cafés are also all within easy walking distance of the hotel's main road site.
The Hotel Bamby has its own bar and a newly refurbished, cosy, rustic Italian dining-room where meals are served.
There is a lift to all floors where the bedrooms have a balcony.
Price includes full board.
Beach charges are included (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £2.50; Front sea view and balcony £1.25.
The splendidly positioned Hotel Bamby
San Benedetto
‘Beautiful soft sand neighbouring inland areas of tranquil rural life.’
This resort has something for everyone.
Six miles of soft sands well-equipped for watersports and safe bathing, playgrounds for children, sports and discotheques for young people, a thriving market and an interesting old quarter.
The opera season opens here in July and August and, for those with a penchant for history, the old Roman settlement of Ascoli Piceno nearby offers many folklore events and a grand-costumed tournament in August which dates back to the 1300s.
Grand Hotel Excelsior Des Bains ∗∗∗∗
The Excelsior Des Bains is a grand, imposing hotel on the seafront of the southern part of San Benedetto.
The newly-built swimming pool is situated in lush gardens and deep palm groves which are part of the charm of this resort.
Guests have only to step across the main promenade to reach the beach.
Furnished throughout with classic, traditional-style furniture, the attractive interior reflects the hotel's exterior.
There is a reception/lounge, a lounge bar which opens onto a terrace and a TV room.
A pleasant restaurant overlooks the garden.
Bedrooms are spacious and comfortable.
The hotel is a five minute's drive from the town centre, connected by a good bus service.
During early and late season the hotel hosts wedding banquets.
Price includes dinner (or lunch), bed and breakfast.
Beach charges included (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £3.75; Front sea view £1.50; Full board £3.25.
Classic style at the Excelsior
The imposing Excelsior des Bains
Citalia VALUE
Honeymoon and silver anniversary couples receive a bottle of sparkling wine, those at the Massi also receive fruit.
Massi
No single supplement 16 May–24 July and 22 Aug–26 Sep.
Central and serene, full of stories and striking beauty
ABRUZZO
The majestic mountains of Abruzzo soar to nearly 10,000 feet in this rugged, central region of Italy, and it is here that natural unspoilt habitats ensure bears, eagles and chamois still roam wild.
The scenery is strikingly beautiful, even by high Italian standards, with cool, green forests sweeping down the hillsides to meet an inviting gentle coast of wide, golden sands.
Leave the beaches and there is more beyond.
From the coastal area, you can be in broom-covered hills and forests within 30 minutes.
This is a region which proudly boasts its own distinct culture.
Ancient tradition remains powerful, and stories of witches and snake charmers are still whispered high in the remote mountain villages.
By contrast the coast has an easy, happy-go-lucky relaxed attitude, and makes a simply perfect setting for a family beach holiday.
Scenic Splendour
Leaving the beaches behind, the Abruzzo National Park is a mountainous area of forests, spectacular gorges and wildlife which includes brown bears, lynxes, boars, wolves and many unusual birds.
Gran Sasso to the north is the highest peak in the Apennine range, and a cable-car runs up to Campo Imperatore.
There are many hill towns to explore including Abruzzo's capital ‘L’ Aquila, where you may visit the great Spanish castle and a national museum.
Delicacies Galore
Specialities are varied and choice abundant.
‘Maccheroni alla chitarra’, served with tomatoes and pecorino cheese, is a popular pasta dish; lobster, crab and sea bass are the favoured delicacies of the coast; and lamb is popular inland.
‘Parozzo’ is a rich, traditional chocolate cake, and wines include Trebbiano and Montepulciano.
Market Colour
There are many local markets to explore, usually held weekly or sometimes even daily.
There you will find a wide range of leather goods, wood carvings, cane and lace work.
Castelli produces pretty ceramics and majolica ware.
Scanno offers fine embroidery and Sulmona, multi-coloured sugared almonds.
The choice is yours!
Peaceful and quiet
Seafront café
Strolling along the promenade
A local vineyard
Alba Adriatica
Alba Adriatica has a long beach of fine, golden sand where holiday life is taken at a relaxed unhurried pace.
Here, wonderfully fresh fish and produce are served at every meal and a promenade stroll is the evening ritual.
Silvi Marina
At Silvi Marina the beach is three miles long.
There is a treelined promenade and a pretty avenue of shops.
Set amidst masses of trees and flowers, the resort is guarded by the medieval hilltop town of Silvi Alta.
Giulianova
Giulianova is an excellent choice for family holidays.
It is a thriving fishing port, well-equipped with inexpensive pizzerias, ice-cream parlours and playgrounds, and has a very popular weekly market.
The inviting sands of Alba Adriatica
Giulianova
ABRUZZO
Alba Adriatica, Silvi Marina & Giulianova
‘Three neighbouring resorts of fine, golden beaches, resorts where life assumes a relaxed and an unhurried pace.’
Alba Adriatica, Silvi Marina and Giulianova are three well established holiday resorts set along beaches of fine, golden sand.
Life is leisurely here — with the only worry, whether to stroll the pretty promenade or laze longer by the sea.
A long, fine beach at Alba Adriatica
Giulianova
The ultra-modern Meripol
Hotel Riccione ALBA ADRIATICA ∗∗∗
A careful programme of improvements and refurbishment has made the Riccione — always a Citalia favourite — an excellent value choice, boasting an appealing and truly Italian atmosphere.
The hotel enjoys a central position in Alba Adriatica at the end of the promenade and is therefore convenient for the small shopping area, only a few minutes walk from the sandy beach with changing cabins.
Hotel facilities include a pool, tennis court and a bar.
The restaurant offers a buffet breakfast, excellent service and appetizing food all personally supervised by the resident proprietor.
Twin bedrooms have telephone, balcony and are served by a lift.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges included (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £3.75; Full board £3.75.
A true Italian feel at the Riccione
Refreshing pool at the Riccione
Meripol Hotel ALBA ADRIATICA ∗∗∗
The Meripol is a fine, ultra-modern hotel secluded from the road by a small garden.
There is a private beach, beautiful pool with a children's section and a bar, and a basement bar and disco during high season.
The hotel is air-conditioned in high season and twin bedrooms have a balcony, telephone, colour TV, mini-bar and safety deposit box.
Price includes dinner (or lunch), bed and breakfast.
Beach charges included (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £3.95; Full board £4.95.
A sumptuous spread at the Meripol
The ultra-modern Meripol
Grand Hotel Don Juan GIULIANOVA ∗∗∗∗
This hotel has an excellent setting.
The splendid gardens boast a large pool and children's play area.
Inside, there is a piano bar, sound-proofed disco, lounges and card room, lift, boutique, hairdresser, beautician, bar, beach snack-bar and delightful restaurant.
Breakfast is served on the large terrace, weather permitting, and a lunch time grill is sometimes held by the pool.
On the hotel's private beach, wind-surfing can be arranged, and there are tennis courts.
Bedrooms are modern with colour TV, mini-bar, radio, hair dryer and telephone.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges included (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room (on request) no supplement.
Gently shelving sea at the Don Juan
Pool amidst Don Juan's gardens
Citalia VALUE
At all hotels honeymoon and silver anniversary couples receive a bottle of sparkling wine.
Don Juan
£20 reduction for honeymoon couples and guests aged over 65 staying 14 nights arriving on or between 23 May–20 Jun and 5–20 Sep.
Abruzzo Marina SILVI MARINA ∗∗∗
This hotel enjoys wonderful views and is close to both Silvi Alta and Silvi Marina.
Convenient for the local bus service, shops and bars.
No roads, just a pool, separate it from the sea making it ideal for families.
There are spacious public rooms opening onto terraces and a small garden, a popular bar, pizzeria, á la carte restaurant, lounges, TV room and two lifts.
A piano bar operates several times a week in high season.
Twin bedrooms have telephone, air-conditioning and balcony, TVs are available at a charge payable locally.
A railway runs behind the hotel.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges included (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £3.25; Front sea view £4.95; Side sea view £3.50; Full board £3.75.
The spacious Abruzzo Marina
Wonderful views from the Abruzzo Marina
White sandy beaches and seas of deepest sapphire
APULIA
Apulia is part of Italy's deepest south, an area rich in rustic traditions and superbly scenic.
Framed by the clear, blue waters of Adriatic and Ionian Seas, it forms the famed heel and spur of southern Italy — well known to even the most lazy geography pupil.
Its fantastic white sands and clear seas of deepest sapphire attract regular visitors, yet this region's beaches remain remarkably uncrowded most of the time.
Inland the scenery is mostly flat or of gently rolling hills covered with silvery olive groves and dotted with ancient castles and the unique ‘Trulli’ houses of stone.
The region boasts many ancient towns of interest and historic cities whose architecture reveals the splendours of the past.
Yet, in sharp contrast, village life here moves little faster than at a slow donkey's pace and has a simple, rustic feel which gives it a special charm.
Towns to Tour
The picturesque town of Alberobello offers a stunning day out because it is made up of over 1000 whitewashed ‘trulli’ houses, quaintly set in hilly, winding streets which are still regularly crossed by pony traps and carts.
Martina Franca is one of the south's loveliest towns, standing on the hillside overlooking the Itrian Valley and offering superb views of the region below.
There is a ducal palace, reputedly designed by Bernini, and several baroque churches among the neat network of elegant, streets.
For those keen to travel around, the wonderfully mountainous region of Calabria is close by and most easily explored by hired car.
For those who love nature the National Park there is marvellous for wildlife and alpine scenery.
Simple Fare
Apulian cuisine is simple and rustic, focusing on abundant use of crisp fresh vegetables, cooked and seasoned with locally produced olive oil.
The locals often plant their vegetables out among the olive groves and vineyards and find all flourish happily together in the rich volcanic soil.
Tomatoes, aubergines and red peppers are served in dozens of different ways often with pasta and pizza.
On the coast tuna and swordfish are among the most popular of local dishes.
Rustic buys
The remote little town of Grottaglie is famed for rustic pottery and the craftsmen welcome on-lookers.
Almonds, olive oil and herbs are all good buys, and wines from Apulia's ancient vineyards are well worth a try.
Wicker baskets, wrought-iron work and embroidered tablecloths are some of the other traditional crafts.
Selva di Fasona
The Apulian coastline
Past remains
Cisternino
‘A small, inland town which still evokes a timeless quality and feeling of seclusion’
A good family resort, Cisternino was once the domain of monks and bishops and for a time came under the rule of the Venetian doges.
This small, inland town still evokes a timeless quality and a feeling of quiet seclusion.
It stands 1100 feet above the Itria Valley and is a superb base for touring the region.
A 15–20 minute drive by car (included in the price) leads to quiet beaches and, a further five minutes up or down the coast, are a stretch of interesting small resorts from Bari to Brindisi.
Hotel Villa Cenci ∗∗∗
Set in the gardens of a private estate in Cisternino, the Villa Cenci is a large, 350-year old farmhouse with dining-room, TV room and bar.
Within the gardens there is a small swimming pool for relaxing days in the sun and when you are ready to venture further afield, the nearest shops are about a mile away and Torre Canne beach is an eight mile drive away.
The hotel's twin bedrooms are in the main farmhouse building, and suites, for those seeking greater space and comfort, are in old ‘Trulli’ houses nearby.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Supplements per person per night:Full board £9.95; ‘Trulli’ £4.95.
Villa Cenci's gardens
Residence Cenci Self Catering
Also in the gardens are some simply furnished self-catering apartments:Type A — up to 3 people — one twin bedroom, living-room with single divan bed, porch, kitchenette, private facilities.
Type B — up to four people one twin bedroom, living-room with double divan bed, verandah, kitchenette, private facilities.
Supplements per person per night:Type A for 2 pers £8.40;Type B for 3 pers £4.75.
Local colour
All the time in the world!
Villa Cenci's gardens
Tents of Stone — Villa Cenci
Browsing in Cisternino
Torre Canne & Selva di Fasano
‘A duo of quiet carefree towns in the heart of Apulia's Trulli country.’
The old fishing village and resort of Torre Canne basks beside a splendid wide sandy beach.
Life is quiet, carefree and relaxed and Apulia's renowned ‘Trulli’ country is nearby.
Alberobello is the most famous of these villages of old conical residences.
The spectacular Castellana Grottoes, and several lovely hill towns are also within reach.
From the pretty fishing village of Savelletri, the road snakes inland to Selva di Fasano, over 1,000 feet high, and boasting marvellous views.
Selva di Fasano itself boasts a number of fascinating, ancient ‘Trulli’ houses alongside the more modern villas and hotels.
Hotel Eden Torre Canne ∗∗∗∗
The Eden enjoys a charming location in a residential area between two roads in the centre of Torre Canne, close to a beautiful sandy beach.
It is full air-conditioned (at the management's discretion) and its public rooms are spacious and tastefully furnished in typical Italian style.
There is an elegant lounge-bar, piano bar and a TV room and in high season there is occasional evening entertainment, sometimes in the panoramic roof garden bar.
There is a roof-top pool and sun terrace, and the restaurant offers a good choice.
Twin rooms have mini-bar and small balcony and some have a side sea view.
TVs can be hired.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges included (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room (on request) £6.95; Full board £4.50.
Where the road snakes inland
Relax at the Eden
Enjoy an aperitif at the Eden
Taking it easy on the beach
Hotel Eden in Torre Canne
Hotel Del Levante Torre Canne ∗∗∗∗
The Del Levante in Torre Canne has been popular with Citalia customers for over 10 years.
Located beside the sandy beach, it stands in spacious gardens which include a fresh-water pool, children's pool and tennis court.
Deck-chairs, sun-loungers and umbrellas are provided and a pool bar serves snacks at lunch time.
In high season pedaloes, canoes and wind-surf boards can be hired in the village which is a 25 minute walk away by busy road or along the beach.
The bar opens on to a terrace and, during the high season, music is provided by a pianist or trio.
On Saturday evenings guests are entertained in the garden, weather permitting.
The hotel is fully air-conditioned (June to Sept) with a large lounge, games room and hairdresser.
Bedrooms have a telephone and TVs can be hired.
Price includes dinner (or lunch), bed and breakfast.
Beach charges included (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £6.50; Front sea view £3.25; Front sea view and balcony £4.95; Full board £4.50.
The Del Levante's terrace and pool
Hotel Del Levante by the beach in Torre Canne
Hotel Sierra Silvana SELVA DI FASANO ∗∗∗∗
The Sierra Silvana in Selva di Fasano is a beautifully appointed hotel, high in the pine-wooded hills above the coast, and provides an enviable position for peaceful relaxation.
The 120 attractively furnished bedrooms, with balcony, are divided among five small buildings, and in the gardens you will find a number of characteristic ‘Trulli’ houses.
The public rooms are in the stylish main building and include a card room, TV lounge and piano bar which entertains guests each evening and offers the opportunity of a little dancing (in high season).
The hotel is particularly proud of its large gazebo, and its fine restaurant has been consistently praised by Citalia customers for its excellent Italian cuisine.
A courtesy bus runs to the Hotel Del Levante, at Torre Canne beach, eight miles away, where facilities are complimentary.
The hotel is air-conditioned in high season.
In July and August large groups of children stay in the hotel.
The price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges are included.
Supplements per person per night:Single room (on request) £6.50; Full board £4.75.
Sierra Silvana's pool and gardens
Citalia VALUE
Honeymoon and silver anniversary couples staying at all hotels receive a bottle of sparkling wine and flowers and fruit.
The clear blue waters of Apulia
Calabria and Basilicata
‘A wild remote region of tradition and great beauty, where life assumes a relaxed and unhurried pace.’
A holiday in Calabria and Basilicata is a chance for adventure.
Italians in the know come here for the beaches, yet the area is barely known to foreign visitors.
Italians call it the ‘Silent South’ for this is a region of real peace and tranquility, where life is relaxed and full of simple pleasures.
Thick with mountains, forests and lakes, it is an area of truly spectacular scenery and with your included car you can really get to know the whole region, discover its traditions, its unspoilt beauty and its easy, unhurried pace.
Captivating Calabria
South of Naples, Italy becomes an explorer's kingdom.
A 200 mile drive down the spectacular Autostrade del Sole brings you straight into the heart of one of the most historic, most wildly mountainous yet least visited regions of Italy.
Calabria is the ‘travellers’ destination, just waiting to be discovered.
Although history dates it to the Golden Age of Magna Graecia, some of the region's most glorious monuments date from the time of Byzantium and Norman rule.
Making little detours off the motorway, you will quickly discover such fascinating towns as Altomonto with its unusual 14th century gothic church with big rose window, and Montalto Uffugo whose castle perches precariously on a steep hillside above a graceful, romanesque cathedral.
Most of northern Calabria is mountainous and thickly wooded with pine, silver fir and maple.
Wolves and deer haunt the gorges and lake shores of the great Sila Massif with its quaint Alpine towns like San Giovanni in Fiore.
If you have time, pay a visit to Rossano which boasts an exquisite byzantine church straight out of the Arabian Nights or drive south towards Tropea a pretty fishing town with superb, golden beaches.
Beautiful Basilicata
The mountainous region of Basilicata is one of Italy's most secret corners; a primitive land which at times has a stark, unworldly beauty.
For centuries this was one of the poorest parts of the south.
Yet 2,500 years ago Basilicata flourished with towns and trading posts founded by Greek colonists.
Metaponto, bordered by golden sandy beaches, is such an ancient town where, according to legend, they may have built the famed and historic Trojan Horse.
Beside the Bradano River you will see the Tavole Palatine ruins of a Doric temple and in the museum, many intriguing antiquities from the period.
Another important site from Magna Graecia is at Policoro where there are the ruins of ancient Eraclea.
Matera, the provincial capital, is an extraordinary town immortalised in Levi's famous novel, ‘Christ Stopped at Eboli’.
A labyrinth of caves known as the ‘Sassi’ or ‘rocks’, is hewn in tiers out of the flanks of a deep ravine and linked by a warren of stairways and alleys.
Dating since prehistoric times people still lived here until the 1960s.
Basilicata is in fact the smallest region of Italy — the ‘instep’ of the famous boot — but within its borders is a wealth of interest and intrigue.
Calabrian Seas
Hilltop Maratea
All in one go!
Castella-ruins of old
Festivities
CALABRIA
Links with tradition and superstition are strong here and weddings, often still arranged marriages, are particularly impressive in the Albanian villages of the Sila.
In Cosenza in May there is a colourful Italo-Albanese feast.
BASILICATA
In Matera they stage an art and music festival in June reaching its peak with a procession of the Madonna accompanied by men dressed as medieval warriors.
During September a festival of Southern Italian Wines is held in the ‘Sassi’ in Matera.
Local Flavours
CALABRIA
For ‘antipasti’, here you will find locally made salami and aubergines marinated with oil, garlic and herbs.
Then to follow, superb seafood — especially swordfish and tuna along the coast, a wide use of fresh vegetables and many dishes flavoured with hot red peppers.
Calabria produces an abundance of red and white wines — top name among them is Ciro.
BASILICATA
Dining is generally a simple affair except perhaps in more developed coastal resorts like Maratea where you can sample excellent lobster, scampi and other freshly caught delights.
A spicy sausage, often called ‘lucania’, red hot ‘peperoncini’ and smoked hams are particularly popular.
The wines to look out for include the ruby-red Agilanico del Vulture.
Citalia VALUE
Honeymoon and silver anniversary couples staying at San Domenico, San Michele and Pianeta receive a bottle of sparkling wine, those staying at the San Michele and Pianeta also receive flowers or fruit.
Ferretti
Afternoon tea served daily 2 May–26 June, 22 Aug–25 Sep.
Excursion for guests staying 14 nights arriving on or between 2 May–10 July, 22 Aug–11 Sep.
San Domenico
Welcome drink on arrival.
Excursion included to Cattolica di Stilo or Gerace for guests staying 7 nights or more arriving on or between 11 May–8 June.
San Michele
Complimentary farm preserves for guests staying 7 nights arriving on or between 1 Jun–8 July and 19 Aug–13 Sep.
CAR INCLUDED IN ALL HOLIDAYS ON THIS PAGE (See pages 218–219)
The splendid beaches await you in Maratea
Maratea
Grand Hotel San Michele ∗∗∗∗∗
An elegant hotel of traditional charm, the San Michele perches high above the sea at Cetraro .
The views are exceptional and the hotel's 120 acres of garden and vineyard enhance the setting.
The hotel has a pool, sun terrace, tennis court, golf course, pebbly beach peak season piano bar.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges not included.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £24.95; Full board £6.25.
The Grand Hotel San Michele in Cetraro
Grand Hotel Pianeta ∗∗∗∗
Beautifully situated high above the beach and little harbour of Maratea , this hotel is part of an exciting, modern holiday complex.
There is a private beach, children's water park, watersports, evening entertainments, shops, sauna, bar and restaurant.
The bedrooms have TV, mini-bar, hair dryer and sea view balcony.
Price includes dinner (or lunch), bed and breakfast.
Beach charges not included.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £34.25; Full board £11.95.
Grand Hotel Pianeta — Maratea
Grand Hotel San Domenico ∗∗∗
Set overlooking the private beach, less than 200 yards from the town centre of Soverato , this hotel is ideal for families.
Tastefully furnished, there is a large dining-room serving Italian cuisine, a roof garden, but no lift.
All bedrooms are air-conditioned and have a balcony.
Price includes dinner (or lunch), bed and breakfast.
Beach charges included (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room (on request) £18.95; Front sea view £6.25; Full board £3.25.
Hotel Ferretti ∗∗∗∗
This hotel is set on a beautiful bay about half a mile from Diamante .
The beach is only yards away, across the road, or through the underpass.
There is a fresh water pool, tennis court, peak season beach restaurant and sound proofed discotheque.
The Ferretti family have a reputation for providing good food and friendly service.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Beach charges included (see p.225).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £12.40; Full board £7.50.
A change of pace amidst peaceful peaks and reflective waters
LAKES, MOUNTAINS & HILLS
Imagine yourself drifting on a tranquil lake one warm summer evening while the setting sun bathes an Alpine meadow; imagine walking leisurely among scented pine woods and looking up wonderously at jagged peaks; imagine simply strolling through a picturesque medieval town, admiring lovely gardens and sampling a range of regional gastronomic treats.
These are the delights that await — from the majestic Alps and Dolomites to the wild, remote beauty of the Apennines, Citalia offers you the best of Italy's lakes and mountains.
This is a stunning world of peace and tranquility, an assortment of panoramic spectacles, where every sight is awesome, and all are on the grandest of scales.
Lakeside Sights
Many of the resorts Citalia is pleased to offer are within an easy day's outing of some of Italy's great cities and their host of cultural achievements and attractions.
From Lake Garda you might choose to visit Verona, city famed as the home of Shakespeare's Romeo and Juliet, with its Roman Arena and beautiful Piazza delle Erbe.
Or, perhaps you might care to travel slightly further afield to the wonderful, unique waterways city of Venice.
Nearer to hand there are inviting lake or valley towns like Riva, gateway to the Dolomites; Como, with its 16th century marble cathedral, or Merano, a pretty spa town full of Tyrolean charm.
You can also cross the Brenner Pass and visit Austria or from the western Alps, venture into Switzerland at the foot of the famous Matterhorn.
One popular excursion enjoyed by Citalia guests, is an old-fashioned steamer ride around the lakes.
One such trip on Lake Maggiore takes you out to the tiny, but exquisite Borromean islands.
Shoppers Choice
Typical souvenirs include pottery, straw hats and pretty glass necklaces adorned with coloured fruits and leaves.
In Alpine shops look for wooden cooking utensils, walking sticks and Loden capes.
Famous Cuisine
This regions food is both fresh and inviting.
Try the porcini mushrooms, spicy sausages and goulash, or ice cream with hot raspberry sauce.
‘Polenta’, a staple made from maize flour is often served with game or braised mushrooms, and fresh lake trout is superb.
Piedmont and Alto-Adige produce some of the greatest wines in Italy.
Spectacular views from Mt.
Baldo
Take a relaxing lake cruise on Lake Garda
Isola Madre gardens, Lake Maggiore
‘There is no rush everything is so civilised.
If you're not careful you end up going for those long healthy walks you always said you hated.’
Colour afloat
Italy's breathtaking lakes and mountains
LAKE MAGGIORE
Stressa
‘The largest lakeside town and one of the loveliest — bursting with flowers and dotted with fine villas.
A piece of living history.’
Commanding one of the most scenic parts of the Lake Maggiore area, Stresa has been one of Europe's most exclusive holiday resorts for 100 years.
The largest lakeside town and among the loveliest, bursting with flowers and dotted with fine old villas.
A piece of living history, it is also the most relaxing of centres for shopping, eating and even a little golf.
From the last week of August through September, Stresa plays host to a highly acclaimed series of music weeks, ‘Settimane Musicali di Stresa’, hosting orchestras from around the world.
For those keen to explore, this is an ideal base from which to visit the lake's jewel-like Borromean islands — delightful miniature attractions created in the 17th century and complete with summer palaces, art treasures and beautiful gardens.
Bathing is not recommended in Lake Maggiore.
Tastes of Italy
Scenic Stresa
Villa Aminta
Hotel Du Parc and Villa Pineta ∗∗∗
This charming, medium-sized, family-run hotel is situated in a slightly elevated position overlooking lovely landscaped gardens which are ideal for relaxing and sunbathing.
Only 350 yards from the lively and bustling centre of the resort, the furnishings in this hotel are pleasing and comfort is the keynote.
The attentive service offered by the management is most obvious in the dining-room where the meals served are appetizing and varied.
The hotel's facilities include a bar and a lift serves the pleasant bedrooms.
A railway line runs near the hotel.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Supplements per person per night:Single room (Du Parc) £3.75.
The annexe at the Hotel Du Parc is called the Villa Pineta and is set within the hotel's lovely grounds approximately 20 yards from the main building.
Guests at the Pineta share the landscaped gardens and benefit equally from the excellent service and comforts enjoyed by those staying in the main building.
They share all the facilities and pleasant public rooms.
The Pineta is a two storey building and all the bedrooms are served by a lift.
The family-run Du Parc
Villa Pineta
Villa Aminta ∗∗∗
This is an impressive modern hotel half way between Stresa and Baveno with spectacular lake views.
There is a highly-recommended restaurant and good service throughout.
Divided from the lake by the main road, the hotel has a pool and lakeside tennis court (charge payable locally).
There is a lounge and bar.
Stresa is under two miles away accessible by mini-bus four times a day.
Twins have lake view and balcony.
The railway runs through a tunnel behind the hotel but noise is slight.
The price includes dinner (or lunch), bed and breakfast.
Supplements per person per night:Single room (on request) £9.95.
Pool set in gardens at Villa Aminta
Hotel Astoria ∗∗∗∗
Set opposite the lakeside promenade, close to the steamer landing stage, the Hotel Astoria is a large and airy, friendly property offering a host of facilities.
Lunch time snacks are available around the swimming pool, and there are lounges, bar, gymnasium, restaurant and roof garden.
The dining-room overlooks gardens and the beautiful lake, and a weekly buffet is arranged.
Occasionally there is a barbecue and ‘Happy Hour’ held by the swimming pool.
The bedrooms all have a balcony and a front view of the lake.
The price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £4.95; Full board £12.50.
Citalia VALUE
At all Stresa hotels, honeymoon and silver anniversary couples receive a bottle of sparkling wine and flowers or fruit.
Du Parc and Villa Pineta
All guests are served complimentary afternoon tea.
Villa Aminta
Guests staying 7 nights or more arriving on or between 9 May–23 May and 19–30 Sep are entitled to 5 hours of tennis per week.
Regina Palace
Guests staying 7 nights or more arriving on or between 4 Jul–22 Aug are entitled to 3 hours of tennis or squash per week.
Breakfast may be served in bedroom at no extra charge (must be ordered daily).
The friendly Astoria
Hotel Regina Palace ∗∗∗∗
This is an elegant first class hotel situated across the road from Stresa's lake shore.
It is an imposing hotel, set in extensive gardens and overlooking the lake and the Borromean islands.
There is a swimming pool with a wide sun patio, and a creperie and bar in the garden.
For the health conscious there is a fitness centre with a gymnasium and squash courts, tennis courts, a whirlpool bath and a sauna available for a small charge payable locally.
Bedrooms all have TV and telephone and a minibar is available at a supplement of 2,000 Lire per night, payable locally.
Front bedrooms are sited over a main road but have a lake view, rear rooms are quieter.
Suites are available with a balcony and lake view.
The price includes dinner (or lunch), bed and breakfast.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £19.75; Full board £9.50; Front lake view and balcony £3.75; Suite £29.95.
The elegant Regina Palace
Pallanza & Baveno
‘Quiet and friendly, a village-like town stretching along a lakeside promenade and nestling in a wealth of scenic loveliness.’
Lake Maggiore is perhaps the most brilliant of all the lakes adorning Italy's north.
It is best described as a two-mile wide ribbon of beauty connecting the plains of Lombardy with the Alps of Switzerland.
The scenery along its forty mile length is so superb, so varied, that it must rank among the most breathtaking in Italy.
Pallanza lies in the centre of its west bank — a busy, friendly, village-like town stretched along a lakeside promenade and nestled in among a mass of scenic loveliness.
It is set back from the main road, has a small shopping centre and typically Italian lakeside cafés, and is linked to the other lake resorts by steamers.
Baveno lies opposite Pallanza across the water.
It can number Winston Churchill and Queen Victoria among its past guests, and is, today, a bustling resort of wonderfully panoramic lakeside cafés, promenade and pretty harbour.
The freshest choice, Baveno
Pallanza
Lakeside fun
Tranquil Pallanza
Hotel Lido Palace BAVENO ∗∗∗∗
Stay here and you follow in the footsteps of Queen Victoria and Winston Churchill.
This is an old-world hotel of character and charm where careful refurbishment has ensured past elegance and comfort remain.
Personally run by the D'Amico family, the hotel, separated from the lake by a road, is set in beautiful gardens and has a pool, tennis court, bar and panoramic restaurant.
Bedrooms are served by a lift.
Price includes dinner (or lunch), bed and breakfast.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £12.50; Full board £12.50; Front lake view £1.25; Front lake view and balcony £3.25.
Beautiful views at the Lido Palace
Lido Palace
Hotel Majestic PALLANZA ∗∗∗∗
The setting for the Hotel Majestic combines both the picturesque and the historic.
The hotel stands on the water's edge just outside the village-like town of Pallanza, in front of the tiny island of San Giovanni which is famed as the place where the great conductor Toscanini once lived.
The hotel's restaurant serves a buffet breakfast and a substantial and well-prepared choice of meals at other times.
As an alternative, guests can buy snacks and full meals in the hotel's own taverna.
For day time relaxation there is a covered, heated swimming pool for a refreshing dip, a tennis court (charge payable locally), three comfortable lounges, two well-stocked bars, a TV room and a card room.
There is wind-surfing equipment available on the adjoining beach in high season (charge payable locally).
For golfers, the Premeno golf course (own clubs required) is within easy reach and horse riding is also available nearby.
The Hotel Majestic was originally built in 1870 and considerable thought and care has gone into the interior decor and the furnishings, to create an attractive, relaxing environment quite ideal for the holidaying guests.
All the hotel's pleasant bedrooms are positioned to give a view of the lake.
The price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £6.95; Full Board £7.50.
Historic and picturesque — Hotel Majestic
Hotel Belvedere PALLANZA ∗∗∗
One of three hotels under the same management, the Hotel Belvedere is an elegant period building situated opposite Lake Maggiore's lakeside promenade, close to the boat pier and within easy reach of the Pallanza town centre and its attractions.
The position of the Belvedere ensures this hotel most certainly lives up to its name, affording some quite beautiful views of brilliant Lake Maggiore and the enchanting Borromean islands sitting in its centre.
Public rooms at the hotel include a comfortable lounge with TV viewing area, a pleasant bar and a restaurant which extends onto a long covered terrace running the entire length of the hotel and facing out across the promenade and the road, to the lovely lake.
All the bedrooms have a telephone.
The price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £5.95; Front lake view £3.50.
Peace and serenity at Pallanza, Lake Maggiore
The elegant Belvedere
Citalia VALUE
At all Pallanza hotels, honeymoon and silver anniversary couples receive a bottle of sparkling wine and flowers or fruit, those at the Lido Palace receive a bottle of sparkling wine.
Hotel Majestic
An evening excursion by boat to the islands (weather permitting) for all guests staying 14 nights arriving on or between 6 Jun–12 Sep.
Full board for the price of half board for all guests staying 7 nights departing 9–16 May and 19 Sep.
Lido Palace
Complimentary use of tennis court for all Citalia guests.
LAKE COMO
Varenna, Menaggio & Tremezzo
‘This is one of the world's most beautiful lakes, where relaxation is a way of life.’
Originally a characterful fishing village and today one of the most charming areas on Lake Como, Varenna is the principal resort on the eastern shore.
It offers magnificent views and many old and interesting churches, lavish villas and gardens and an impressive waterfall.
Menaggio nestles beneath protective hills, and is a lush and hospitable resort.
There is water-skiing, wind-surfing, sailing and many excursion options by day, and a myriad of lively cafés and restaurants for the evenings.
With Tremezzo almost all find it is love at first sight.
Here unhurried relaxation is a way of life.
The hotels are among the finest on Lake Como and even the most demanding gourmets adore the restaurants.
There are quiet lanes and mountain paths, sunny terraces and beaches.
Charming Varenna
Lake view café
Colourful Tremezzo
Menaggio golfing
Hotel Royal Victoria Varenna ∗∗∗∗
Originally a lakeside mansion, this stately residence took its name to honour a past guest.
Separated from the lake only by a large terrace and garden, a tree-lined stepway leads to a small  stony beach.
There are two lounges, bar, card, billiard and TV rooms and restaurant.
An adjoining pizzeria and restaurant under the same management offer indoor or al fresco dining.
Bedrooms have mini-bar, TV and telephone.
Those with lake views and balcony are quieter.
Price includes dinner (or lunch), bed and breakfast.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £11.95; Front lake view & balcony £6.75; Full board £8.95.
A former lakeside mansion — Royal Victoria
Citalia VALUE
At all hotels honeymoon and silver anniversary couples receive a bottle of sparkling wine and flowers or fruit.
Royal
£64 reduction for all guests staying 14 nights.
Complimentary tea is served daily.
Tremezzo Palace
£67 reduction and 2 hours of  complimentary tennis per week for all guests staying 14 nights.
Bellevista
No single room supplement all season.
Grand Hotel Tremezzo Palace Tremezzo ∗∗∗∗
From here guests can look out over Lake Como.
Just five minutes along the main road from Cadenabbia, to the rear, the hotel has pretty gardens with a pool and bar.
There is a billiards room, tennis court (equipment required), indoor and terrace restaurant and a lake view dining-room offering à la carte meals at a supplement.
A new terrace bar overlooks the lake.
Bedrooms have mini-bar and satellite TV with English channel.
Lake facing rooms have stunning views but garden rooms are quieter.
Price includes dinner (or lunch), bed and breakfast.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £11.25; Front lake view and balcony £6.50.
Traditional Tremezzo Palace
Tremezzo, set in ample gardens
Hotel Bellavista Menaggio ∗∗∗
The Hotel Bellavista is an unpretentious property on the shores of Lake Como.
The Faggi family management has welcomed British guests for many years.
There is a pool, lakeside terrace, bar, lounge, dining-room and lift.
An attractive verandah restaurant, open to the public, offers romantic à la carte dining.
A short stroll leads to Menaggio's ferry landing stage.
Twin rooms are at the front with lake view, singles overlook the main road.
The price includes dinner (or lunch), bed and breakfast.
Supplements per person per night:No single room supplement.
The Bellavista's attractive pool
The unpretentious Bellavista
Menaggio's pretty harbour
Grand Hotel Victoria Menaggio ∗∗∗∗
Traditional, elegant and utterly exclusive, this hotel is fronted by lawned gardens and separated from the lake shore by only a small road.
Well-established, it is a hotel of style and quality service.
There is an excellent restaurant and, weather permitting, meals can be served al fresco on the terrace.
Bedrooms have mini-bar and TV.
There is a pool with deck-chairs and bar service, and tennis courts nearby (own equipment needed).
Lake bathing, wind-surfing and water-skiing are all available (charge payable locally), and there is a golf course a short drive away.
Price includes dinner (or lunch), bed and breakfast.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £10.95; Front lake view £1.95.
Grand Hotel Victoria — magnificently set in extensive gardens
Bellagio
‘Ancient and dignified — a town of simple charms and colourful history.
Known, quite justifiably, as The Pearl of the Lake.’
The ancient and dignified town of Bellagio, with its historic silk industry, sits on the headland where Lake Como forks.
Known, quite justifably, as ‘The Pearl of the Lake’ this resort is increasingly popular with visitors, but still enjoys a life of its own.
It is a town of simple charms and colourful history, where winding narrow streets and alleyways present surprises at every turn.
Artists and poets have never tired of its historic buildings and artisan shops, richly wooded hills and lovely views.
Figures from history have strolled here — Napoleon, Mark Twain and Franz Liszt to name but a few.
Bellagio offers relaxing walks, a remarkable church, many fine villas and gardens.
It is ideal for exploring by steamer, bathing and water-skiing.
Delicious ices
Fascinating Bellagio
Sights to explore
Hotel Belvedere ∗∗∗
The Belvedere, run by the family Martinelli, is informal, relaxed and modern — the perfect balance of activities and relaxation.
Renowned for its authentic Italian cooking, it comprises three buildings set in beautiful gardens with breathtaking lake views.
The characteristic, bustling centre of Bellagio is just five minutes downhill walk away.
There is a pool, open from 1 May, and a sun terrace.
Bathing and waterskiing are available a few minutes walk away.
The quieter bedrooms are the garden side lake view rooms, although road side rooms do have double glazing.
The breakfast is served buffet style and lunch is normally served outside on the balustraded terrace.
The price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £4.75; Front lake view £4.75.
The informal Belvedere
Hotel Belvedere's pool
Hotel Metropole ∗∗∗
The Hotel Metropole is prettily set on the water's edge of Lake Como and its dining-room and terrace are specifically designed to take full advantage of this position, and give enchanting views across the lake.
All guests taking the à la carte menu can dine on a lake front terrace.
All the bedrooms are simply furnished but have side lake views.
Front lake view rooms with balcony are quieter, but can be hotter.
For sunbathing guests can use a small beach 10 minutes walk away.
A mini apartment of a double, a single and bathroom is also available.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Supplements per person per night:Single room (on request) £10.25; Front lake view and balcony £2.75;Reductions per person per night:3 pers. sharing mini apartment £2.25.
Enchanting views from the Metropole
Hotel Du Lac ∗∗∗
A Citalia favourite for over 30 years, this hotel sits in a square close to the lake's landing stage.
Boats and hydrofoils operate from directly in front of the hotel which owes much of its charm to the owners, who offer a personal service and excellent home-cooking.
The lake views are outstanding, especially from the first-floor restaurant and attractive roof garden with sun-beds.
The lively café-bar under the porticoes on the ground floor serves snacks all day.
A short walk leads to the lakeside for bathing and water-skiing.
All the hotel bedrooms are comfortably furnished and have a telephone.
Those which do not have a lake view overlook local side streets.
The price includes bed and breakfast.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £4.95 (not available 1–29 Aug); Front lake view £5.95; Half board £10.50.
Hotel Du Lac
Hotel Excelsior Splendide ∗∗∗
This is a traditional hotel of character and charm.
Set just yards from the water's edge and enjoying excellent views, there is a pleasant lakeside terrace and bar, and a weekly dance (high season, weather permitting).
Behind the hotel is a small pool set in gardens.
Bedrooms have a telephone.
Rear rooms overlook the quiet gardens, front rooms overlook the lake and lively waterside cafés.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Supplements per person per night:Double for sole occupancy (on request) £13.50; Full board £6.20; Front lake view £3.75.
Hotel Excelsior — overlooking Lake Como
Charming Bellagio
Citalia VALUE
At the Belvedere and Du Lac, honeymoon and silver anniversary couples receive a bottle of sparkling wine and flowers or fruit.
Metropole
Complimentary afternoon tea served to all Citalia guests staying 9 May–12 June and 12–26 Sep.
LAKE LUGANO
San Mamete
‘Idyllic and picturesque, nestling neatly between the lush foothills and the glistening water's edge.’
The location of San Mamete is idyllic and picturesque, just 10 minutes from the Swiss border and six miles from Lugano.
San Mamete is a tiny village nestling prettily amidst unspoilt countryside — between lush foothills and the glistening lake.
View of Lugano
Lake view dining
Tasty treats
Lakeside bathing
Hotel Stella d'Italia ∗∗∗
A characteristic hotel now in its third generation of the Ortelli family, the Stella d'Italia is a real gem of a hotel.
This was a private villa up until 1910, and was first opened as a small hotel by the current owner's grandfather.
Now it is celebrating its 18th year with Citalia and over that time it has consistently been a most popular resort hotel.
Set on the shores of Lake Lugano, the hotel's public rooms include an elegant lounge for relaxing in, a bar, an open-air garden terrace, with restaurant, and a second indoor restaurant offering a wide variety of local specialities on the menu.
The hotel boasts a bathing platform beside the lake and watersports facilities are available just over a mile away.
Bedrooms have a lake view, and twins have a balcony.
The price includes dinner (or lunch), bed and breakfast.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £3.50; Full board £10.95.
Citalia VALUE
Stella d'Italia
Honeymoon and silver anniversary couples receive a bottle of sparkling wine and flowers or fruit.
Parc Hotel Flora
Honeymoon and silver anniversary couples receive a bottle of sparkling wine and flowers or fruit.
Stella d'Italia on the shores of Lake Lugano
The delights of Italy
LAKE GARDA
Riva
‘A welcoming town with a colourful history.’
The charming old town of Riva nestles snugly in a tranquil position where a splendid curtain of mountains forms the backdrop.
Riva is a welcoming town with a colourful history revealed in its sombre 12th century fortress — surrounded by moats now used for boat moorings.
In the old town by the harbour you find Piazza III Novembre, dominated by the 13th century Apponale Tower, and the cable-car up to the round Venetian watchtower which offers wonderful views.
Parc Hotel Flora ∗∗∗
Originally a private villa, this is now a refined and elegant hotel of subtle decor, run in a professional and truly friendly manner.
Situated about half a mile from the centre of Riva, the Parc Hotel Flora is set back from the main road, next to a highly popular ice-cream parlour under the same management.
Within its lush gardens just 100 yards from the beach, is a superb new swimming pool.
The breakfast served each morning is buffet-style and there is good choice of menu in the elegant restaurant which has a charming terrace overlooking the garden.
All the pretty bedrooms are air-conditioned and benefit from double glazing.
Each has a telephone, a safety deposit box and colour TV.
The twin bedrooms have a balcony.
The price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Supplements per person per night:Single room (on request) £6.25.
Parc Flora pool in lush gardens
The refined Parc Flora
Tempting stalls
Riva
Hotel Sole ∗∗∗∗
This hotel has an enviable position on the main square, just a stone's throw from the lake and the resort's bell tower, and offers an excellent standard of accommodation.
Completely refurbished and upgraded there is a lounge.
American bar, roof garden and terraced café which runs along the lake promenade.
In the evenings, the restaurant offers a glittering panoramic view of the lake.
The bar opens until midnight, and from the open-air bar, guests can often enjoy a typical Italian café concert during the peak season.
All the bedrooms have telephone, radio and colour satellite TV, and some are available with a balcony and lake view.
The price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Supplements per person per night:Single room (on request) £9.50; Front lake view and balcony £4.50.
VERONA OPERA
Customers staying in Riva, Torbole and Malcesine can generally book excursions to the Arena in Verona in resort.
The 1992 opera season offers performances of Don Carlos, La Boheme and Aida throughout July and August.
Please see your Citalia Representative for details.
Time to relax
The traditional Hotel Sole
Stunning views of Lake Riva
Hotel Europa ∗∗∗
Situated on the lakeside, this extremely popular hotel is prettily set against a backdrop of the spectacular green mountainside, and overlooks Riva's main square, harbour and steamer landing stage.
Complete refurbishment has added airconditioning and modern, fresh furnishings.
Bedrooms have luxurious marble bathrooms, telephone, radio, satellite TV and room service.
The delightful restaurant overlooks the harbour and offers many Italian specialities.
There is a roof garden/sun terrace, a bar and three lifts and behind the hotel is a discotheque.
The price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £4.95; Front lake view £2.75.
Citalia VALUE
At all hotels honeymoon and silver anniversary couples receive a bottle of sparkling wine and flowers or fruit.
Sole
A complimentary excursion to the Dolomites for all guests staying 12 or 14 nights arriving on or between 8–23 May and 11–13 Sep.
Boats come and go at the waterfront
The Hotel Europa
A warm welcoming to the Europa
Spectacular lakeside, Riva
The Lido's pool in a stunning setting
Hotel Du Lac et Du Parc ∗∗∗∗
Without doubt one of the top hotels on Lake Garda, this is a stunning building set in its own beautiful park.
Within the park there is a large swimming pool, a separate children's pool, and  an indoor pool.
A private path through the park leads to the beach and the lakeside promenade.
Tennis courts, a fitness room, sauna, massage and beauty parlour are all available at a charge payable locally.
The public rooms include a wonderful restaurant and bar with music most evenings.
Bedrooms are well-appointed and twins have a balcony overlooking the park.
Single rooms have no balcony and overlook the car park.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £6.25; Full board £12.50.
The elegant Du Lac et Du Parc
Tranquil Du Lac
A place in the sun by the Du Lac pool
Hotel Lido Palace ∗∗∗∗
This is an impressive hotel with an intimate and peaceful atmosphere.
Set in a beautifully landscaped park, it is just 100 yards from the lakeside.
The Lido Palace facilities include comfortable lounges, a breakfast room, a spacious dining-room and a well-stocked bar.
All the hotel's public rooms are well decorated and pleasantly furnished and the dining-room has large picture windows which offer simply superb views.
There is a pool, set in secluded gardens, sheltered by pine trees and palms, and with its own bar open in good weather.
There are tennis courts nearby, and a popular discotheque 400 yards away.
Bedrooms have TV.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Supplements per person per night:Single room (on request) £6.50; Front lake view and balcony £2.50.
The impressive Lido Palace
Hotel Villa Nicolli ∗∗∗
Relaxed and tranquil, the Villa Nicolli is set in a quiet residential area, just a short walk from the centre of Riva.
It is this property's style and comfort which have made it a favourite with Citalia customers for over 10 years.
A complete refurbishment programme carried out by the family owners has produced a particularly good standard of accommodation for a hotel of this class.
Guests staying in either the main building or the annexe, just 15 yards away, can expect a comfortable bedroom with telephone and, for a small extra fee, satellite TV can be installed.
There is a bar and TV lounge, a large, treelined garden, a sizeable sun terrace which is served by a garden bar for when you want a cool refreshing drink, a swimming pool, a restaurant and, during the summer months, a lunch time garden grill is held (weather permitting).
The price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £3.50.
The highly popular Villa Nicolli
Sirmione & Garda
‘A delightful duo full of picturesque old houses and villas — packed with interest and local colour.’
Set amidst silvery olive groves, Sirmione is a town of terracotta roofs huddled prettily around a castle and the lake.
Here, the peninsula road to the Grottoes of Catullus and, in high season, a little train take visitors to the grottoes where they can visit Roman ruins, relax on a shingle beach or admire the lake.
Sirmione itself is full of smart shops, cafés and restaurants.
Garda is one of the lake's most picturesque resorts.
As sailing boats bob beside the quay, visitors take their places at open-air cafés set out beneath the shade of cool chestnut trees.
The older villas are gorgeous shades of pink and ochre and on the hillside, beneath the towering peak of Monte Baldo, are the distinctive battlements of a Scaliger tower.
Many of Garda's narrow cobbled streets are pleasantly traffic-free.
Lake Garda's tranquil setting
Sirmione's castle
Sirmione
Browsing in Sirmione
Hotel Olivi SIRMIONE ∗∗∗∗
Set back in a quiet spot off the beaten track, the Hotel Olivi is close to the Grottoes of Catullus which are a must for visitors to this region.
It is also only a pleasant ten minutes walk from the resort centre of Sirmione.
The hotel is proud to boast the most wonderful views of Lake Garda from the sun terrace, and a garden surrounds the refreshing swimming pool.
A whirlpool bath and relaxing sun-beds are available for hire.
The hotel is pleasantly decorated throughout with a smart new breakfast room and a lovely restaurant for dinner.
Upstairs, the bedrooms are all tastefully furnished and all have telephone, radio and colour TV.
Twin bedrooms with lake view and balcony are available at a supplement.
The price includes dinner, bed and breakfast or guests can take the full board option offered at a supplement.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £3.25; Front lake view and balcony £3.25; Full board £5.25.
Hotel Olivi off the beaten track
Gardens surround the Olivi's pool
Hotel Gabbiano GARDA ∗∗∗
Set back from the main road, the Hotel Gabbiano is personally run with pride by the Mirandola family.
Just a 10 minute road, beach and lakeside walk from the resort's centre, the hotel offers a comfortable lounge area with TV, a restaurant offering simple, Italian dishes, a small pool and pretty garden.
Guests stay in either the main building (with lift), where bedrooms are traditionally furnished and have a balcony, or in the newly renovated, more modern, villa annexe (nearer the road).
Children under four not accepted.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Supplements per person per night:Single room (on request) £5.50.
Citalia VALUE
Grand Hotel Terme
All guests receive spumante and flowers on arrival.
Gabbiano
Honeymoon and silver anniversary couples receive a bottle of sparkling wine and flowers or fruit.
The Gabbiano — run with pride
Delightful old town Garda
GOLDEN CHOICE
Grand Hotel Terme SIRMIONE ∗∗∗∗∗L
The Grand Hotel Terme is set in its own garden, on the water's edge, next to the fortress castle and a short stroll from cafés and shop.
The gardens shelter a heated swimming pool and a private sun deck with panoramic views.
The bar and lounges are furnished in a refined and contemporary style and the charming restaurant spills out onto the terrace under a canopy of trees.
Many guests spend the whole day here, relaxing by the pool or sitting in the shade.
Snacks can be ordered from the bar throughout the day and a piano is played to add to the relaxed atmosphere three evenings a week.
Annexed to the Grand Hotel Terme is a thermal centre which can provide a range of therapeutic treatments (charges payable locally) and there is an indoor swimming pool with thermal water.
The comfortable bedrooms are all equipped with mini-bar, telephone and TV.
The price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Supplements per person per night:Single room (on request) £22.75; Single room with lake view (on request) £34.95; Lake view £12.50.
GOLD PLUS
Return private transfers are available for up to four Golden Choice customers at £109 per car.
Please indicate your request on the booking form.
The refined Grand Hotel Terme
Delightful old town Garda
Malcesine
‘The loveliest town on the romantic eastern shore, beautifully scented by fragrant olive and lemon groves.’
Without doubt one of the loveliest towns on the romantic eastern shore of Lake Garda, Malcesine has enchanted and inspired writers and artists ever since the days of the Romans.
Beautifully scented by fragrant olive and lemon groves, slender cypress and exotic palm trees, for many it seems to represent the exact dream they have of Italy.
The town has grown up around the magnificent 13th century Scaliger castle which towers above the water from a sheer rock and offers the most fantastic views.
Equally impressive scenery is enjoyed by all those who ride the cable-car up to the top of Monte Baldo.
Around the main harbour are the resort's bars, restaurants and shops which spill out onto promenades, but perhaps more magnetic is medieval Malcesine.
Here cobbled streets, narrow archways and the old buildings are simply bewitching.
Azure waters
Bursting with colour
Pretty streets
Hotel Italia ∗∗∗
It is probably fair to say that very few hotels in all of Italy can pride themselves on such an enviable position as the Hotel Italia.
This property was built right on the water's edge in the pretty harbour of Malcesine, just 10 minutes walk from the cablecar station for the ride up Monte Baldo for the most stunning views.
From this superb site, the hotel overlooks both Lake Garda and the colourful shops, restaurants, bars and boats dotted all around the shore line of the lake and in the harbour.
The hotel is typically Italian in design, and among its facilities offers a side dining-room, restaurant (this is also open to the public), large first-floor sun terrace for relaxing on, a small outside bar for lunch time snacks, TV lounge and a lift to all floors.
The delights of Malcesine are all within easy reach — and chief among the treasures, guests here should not miss the ancient Venetian Palazzo dei Capitani del Lago now the City Hall.
The more energetic visitors, may be inclined to take a dip in the cooling waters of the lake itself and for this, or for leisurely days in the sun, the hotel provides a private lakeside sun terrace with sun-loungers.
The bedrooms have a full or side view of the lake, although in some cases this may be somewhat impeded by the trees.
Price includes dinner (or lunch), bed and breakfast.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £2.75.
Italia on the water's edge
Citalia VALUE
At both hotels honeymoon and silver anniversary couples receive a bottle of sparkling wine and flowers or fruit.
Villa Smeralda
A complimentary excursion to the medieval village of Canale and to Lake Tenno for all guests staying 7 nights or more arriving on or between 8–29 May and 11–25 Sep.
Hotel Villa Smeralda ∗∗
Situated in an elevated position in a peaceful area along a panoramic road, this pensione is only 800 yards from the shops and cafés of Malcesine's town centre but offers beautiful views of the lake.
The hotel was completely renewed in 1990 and is personally run with great pride by Signor Sama.
There is a family atmosphere, a good choice of authentic Italian cooking and an evening salad buffet.
Bedrooms are comfortable and simply furnished and have front lake view.
There is a delightful bar terrace, a swimming pool, a solarium terrace, a lift, a bar, a TV room, table tennis and limited parking facilities.
The price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Supplements per person per night:Single room (on request) £3.95.
The family-run Villa Smeralda
Local transport
The friendly Villa Smeralda
Streets to explore
Palace of the Captains
Malcesine
Hotel Excelsior Bay ∗∗∗
Set between the main road and the lake front promenade, the hotel is about five minutes walk from Malcesine's centre.
Views, especially from the front and the pool terrace above the lake are splendid.
Drinks are served here and umbrellas and chairs provided.
Dinner is served in the lakeside restaurant and lunch snacks are available from a pizzeria.
There is live music on the terrace in high season.
There is a TV lounge, lift and parking.
Bedrooms are simply furnished and have telephone.
Twins have a balcony and some have side view.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £4.95; Front lake view £1.50.
Bay views at the Excelsior Bay
Delicious pasta dishes
Sit and relax at the Bellevue San Lorenzo
Keeping cool at the Excelsior
Hotel Bellevue San Lorenzo ∗∗∗
This beautiful villa of three buildings, is situated in a beautiful panoramic location above a busy main road amongst olive groves and gardens.
Popular with Citalia customers for its unique style, there is an attractive lounge, a panoramic reading/TV room, parking and a bar which opens onto a large garden terrace.
Snacks are available at lunch and at dinner the restaurant serves Italian dishes.
A piano bar is open once a week and in front of the hotel is a pool and sun terrace.
A 20 minute walk down a path and steps leads to the town and lake.
Twin rooms have side lake view.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £3.50; Side lake view and balcony £1.50.
Malcesine's town
The beautiful Bellevue San Lorenzo, set in olive groves
Citalia VALUE
Bellevue San Lorenzo
Honeymoon and silver anniversary couples receive a bottle of sparkling wine and flowers or fruit.
A complimentary excursion to the Dolomites for all guests staying 14 nights arriving 8, 15 May or 4, 11 Sep.
Rely Apartments
Special reductions for self-drive customers staying 14 nights arriving 10, 17 Apr or 2, 9, 16 Oct see pages 12–13.
Excelsior Bay
Honeymoon and silver anniversary couples receive a bottle of sparkling wine and flowers or fruit.
Hotel Rely
Honeymoon and silver anniversary couples receive a bottle of sparkling wine and flowers or fruit.
Rely Apartments Self Catering
Set in the beautiful grounds behind the Hotel Rely, the Rely apartments accommodate up to 5 pers .
They are attractively furnished, with living-room, kitchen or kitchen/dining-room, a double bedroom, bathroom with shower, balcony or terrace.
The living-room includes three single divan beds.
In some, the kitchen is on the ground floor and accessed by open stair and has three picture windows on three sides.
Each apartment has a superb balcony or terrace area, ideal for al fresco dining on warmer evenings.
Guests here are offered special rates in the hotel's restaurant and can share the hotel facilities.
A good public bus service operates from nearby to Malcesine although car hire is recommended and parking is available.
A 100,000 Lire returnable deposit is payable on arrival.
Supplements per person per night:4 Jul–21 Aug 4 pers £3.50, 3 pers £9.25, 2 pers £20.75; All other times 4 pers £2.75, 3 pers £6.75, 2 pers £15.50.
Brenzone
‘A pleasant village with a relaxed pace of life’
Brenzone is a pleasant village with an easy, relaxed pace of life, an ideal base for those wishing to take trips on the lake or explore the lakeside towns.
It has a couple of shops, bars and cafés but Malcesine is less than eight miles away, easily reached by local bus.
Time for a cappuccino
Hotel Rely ∗∗∗
This is a well-run, friendly hotel, owned and tastefully improved by the Giglio family.
The hotel has wonderful gardens full of olive trees and is set back from the main lakeside road, about 700 yards from Brenzone.
There is an inviting restaurant and a comfortable, bright lounge and bar with lovely views.
There is a lovely swimming pool and terrace cleverly landscaped in amongst trees.
Malcesine, less than five miles away, is easily accessed by regular local bus which stops just 200 yards away, or by the daily boat service from the jetty in Brenzone.
The bedrooms are comfortably furnished.
The price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £2.50.
Hotel Rely's bar
Take a stroll in Brenzone
Torbole
‘Blessed by perfect winds for sailing and windsurfing, surrounded by miles of lakeside.’
Set at the north eastern edge of Lake Garda, Torbole is a pretty village full of both character and charm.
Its beaches and terraces nestle in the arm of the spectacular Dolomite mountain range and are blessed by perfect wind conditions for both sailing and wind-surfing.
It is a popular place for watersports and seems to host colourful regattas on the water almost every week.
Visitors are often tempted to spend more hours on the water than off it, its appeal here is so magnetic.
But, for those happy to amble away from the beaches, Torbole is also surrounded by miles of peaceful lakeside trails and paths leading to waterfalls and mountain villages.
Local buses run regularly to and from nearby Riva, five minutes away, or to Malcesine, 15 minutes away.
Relax by the lake
Torbole's promenade
Hotel Holiday Surf ∗∗∗
This is a modern hotel set in a peaceful residential area, about 300 yards from the lake and the centre of Torbole.
There is a swimming pool with terrace set amidst the sunny garden.
This is an ideal base for those attracted to Torbole for its windsurfing, or for those wishing to visit nearby Riva.
There is a public tennis court opposite the hotel (charge payable locally).
Bedrooms overlook the gardens.
The price includes dinner, bed and buffet breakfast.
Supplements per person per night:Single room (on request) £9.50.
Holiday Surf's pool
Hotel Piccolo Mondo ∗∗∗∗
This hotel stands in gardens on the main road two miles from Riva and 300 yards from Torbole centre.
Buses run regularly from nearby.
There is a pool (opens 20 May with a snack-bar in high season), tennis court, health centre, table tennis and pool table.
There are large terraces, bar, TV room, lounge and lift.
The Chiesa family pride itself on serving good Italian cooking.
Bedrooms have a balcony.
Price includes dinner (or lunch), bed and breakfast.
Supplements per person per night:Single room (on request) £13.50.
Torbole — welcome to the Piccolo Mondo
Piccolo Mondo has an inviting pool
Merano
‘Scenic and relaxed, blessed by the sun and protected by the mountains.’
A sunny, spa town famed for its health-giving qualities, Merano is blessed by the sun and protected by stunningly scenic mountains from the fierce northern winds.
This is one of the most beautiful summer mountain retreats, where you will find serene medieval arcades, sleepy sun-filled streets and spectacular, gentle walks.
Grand Hotel Bristol ∗∗∗∗
Situated just two minutes walk from the lively main Piazza of Merano, the Grand Hotel Bristol boasts a splendid roof-top swimming pool with sunbathing area.
This is an elegantly furnished hotel with a spacious lounge for relaxing in, a TV room and a cosy games room for chess, cards and other table games.
For evening entertainment there is a piano bar and, for the more energetic, a sound-proofed discotheque operates in the basement.
Breakfast is buffet-style served in the large, bright restaurant and guests can order snacks around the swimming pool in July and August.
The bedrooms are spacious and airy in design and all have telephone, radio, colour TV and a balcony.
Merano is an important spa resort.
The Romans were taking the Merano Cure from as early as the 4th century and its spring waters are said to be among the best in the world.
The Bristol can offer health and beauty treatments in its well-equipped health centre.
The centre includes a sauna and offers a whole variety of therapeutic cures (charge payable locally).
The price includes dinner (or lunch), bed and breakfast.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £5.25.
The Bristol's roof-top swimming pool
Defying gravity on the cliffs
Citalia VALUE
At all hotels honeymoon and silver anniversary couples receive a bottle of sparkling wine and flowers or fruit.
Holiday Surf
A complimentary excursion for guests staying 7 nights or more arriving in May or September.
Grand Hotel Bristol
£50 reduction for all guests staying 14 nights arriving 29 May–3 July.
HILLS
Arcevia & Acquaviva Picena
‘Unspoilt, rural landscapes stretch for miles — just waiting to be explored.’
Marche is for the traveller who wants to turn off the tourist trail, to give the show places a miss, and get to know the green heartland of Italy, the not so self-conscious Italy.
Arcevia, overlooking woodlands and hills, is in the midst of these unspoilt rural landscapes with vistas which stretch for miles, just waiting to be explored.
Delightful hill towns such as ducal Urbino, miraculous Loreto and the independent little republic of San Marino are all within reach, and coastal resorts such as Senigallia are only 20 miles away.
Here the mountains rise 3000–8000 feet, creating a spectacular backdrop for the most leisurely of Italian rural holidays.
Acquaviva Picena
Basket weaving
Hotel O'Viv ACQUAVIVA ∗∗∗
This hotel, tucked away in a quiet alleyway next to the clock tower in Acquaviva, is actually a small 14th century palace.
It offers just 12 simple but charmingly furnished rooms and an excellent restaurant which takes pride in its regional cuisine and use of abundant local produce.
The hotel is run by a young Italian and his English wife who offer attentive service.
A shuttle bus operates to and from the beach of San Benedetto, however a car has been included in the price to enable customers to explore the region with ease.
Bedrooms have countryside or village views.
There is a pool 800 yards away.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £3.50; Terrace £3.50.
Views from the O'Viv
The charming O'Viv
O'Viv a former 14th century palace
Hotel Alle Terrazze ARCEVIA ∗∗∗
Perched on a mountain top near Arcevia, with spectacular panoramic views, the Alle Terrazze is one of the finest hotels in the area.
Facilities popular with local students and available to guests include tennis courts and basketball room, tabletennis, billiards, a large, covered pool and a solarium.
Bedrooms have telephone and, to help ensure Citalia customers make the most of their stay, the price includes dinner, bed and breakfast and the cost of a hire car with unlimited mileage.
Guests can spend time by the sea — the sandy beaches of Senigallia are only 20 miles away — or explore the major Umbrian cities, like Gubbio and Assisi, which are all within an hour's drive of the hotel.
The famous Frasassi Caves are 10 miles away.
Pool charges are included.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £3.25; Full board £3.25.
The Alle Terrazze's commanding position
Ovindoli
‘Set in a region of awesome gorges and spectacular peaks.’
Set in the heart of the country, mid way between Pescara and Rome, Ovindoli remains relatively undiscovered and completely unspoilt.
Highly recommended for visitors who enjoy mountain and country walks, this area boasts magnificent gorges and also, by way of contrast, the stunning romanesque and renaissance monuments of L'Aquila.
Ovindoli is also within excursion distance of the Gran Sasso d'Italia which, at 9000 feet, is the highest peak in the spectacular Apennines.
Public transport is poor — with buses only adequate for local use — and there is no rail service.
Hotel Park ∗∗∗
This is a pleasant modern hotel, situated about one and a half miles from the old village of Ovindoli.
It has been highly commended by Citalia guests for its hospitality and good, varied cuisine.
The hotel is ideal for mountain and country walking, situated some 5200 feet up and we recommend guests bring strong walking shoes and something warm for the cooler evenings.
Whether guests come to walk to relax, all find a distinctive Italian atmosphere at this hotel.
There is a comfortable lounge and bar and the bedrooms have views over the village and valley.
Price includes dinner (or lunch), bed and breakfast.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £3.25; Full board £3.25.
The peaceful Hotel Park is Ovindoli
Colourful Ovindoli
Citalia VALUE
At all hotels honeymoon and silver anniversary couples receive a bottle of sparkling wine and flowers or fruit.
Alle Terrazze
Complimentary use of tennis courts.
O'Viv
A complimentary evening excursion to a local wine cellar and wine tasting.
Park
A complimentary full-day excursion to the National Park of Abruzzo.
A full-day excursion to Gole di Celano.
Assistance of alpine guide throughout your stay.
Complimentary afternoon tea.
Rome, Venice, Florence and Verona — Italy's unrivalled city style
Cities
Certain cities cast a bewitching spell on people — no matter how fond you may be of country life or seaside resorts, Italy's cities are just the type to enchant.
The concentration of artistic architectural masterworks, the variety of restaurants, even the energetic bustle of the crowds contribute to an irresistible energy.
Italy has been blessed with more great cities than any other European country — they are home to some of the most famous landmarks of the continent, they are unique and they are truly special.
Citalia take a special pride in bringing you the best and for 1992 offers the four most popular holiday centres — Rome, Venice, Florence and Verona.
Flexible choice
Our flexibility, specialist knowledge and contacts mean we can tailor make the exact holiday you want.
Just call, or ask your travel agent to call our Tailor-Made Holiday Dept. 081 688 9989.
More city durations
For the ultimate in flexibility with Citalia you can now leave on any day you like, stay between 2 and 7 nights with a long stay option of 14 nights and return on the day you choose.
Each has its unmistakable focal point — the vast Colosseum in Rome, magical St. Mark's Square in Venice, the breathtaking cathedral of Florence and the Roman Arena of Verona.
These are the magnets which draw the crowds but around these swirl a fascinating kaleidoscope of experiences.
From festivals to fashion, from delicious foods and wines to lively and welcoming people, these places offer you a wealth of wonders and are rich in boundless contrasts.
Sophisticated shops
Italy is famous the world over for its fashion and its style.
In its cities such style is everywhere in sophisticated shops, full of designer names and class.
Here even window shopping is a pleasure if you can't afford to treat yourself, or you can hunt out a less extravagant purchase amongst the cities' colourful markets and larger department stores.
Each city has its own specialities — Rome has the longest shopping street in Europe.
Florence has the Ponte Vecchio, leather and jewellery.
Venice has carnival masks and glassware and Verona has a style all its own.
World famous sights
The cities of Italy are home to many of the most famous, most evocative landmarks in the world.
Few buildings can be as symbolic of the Roman Empire as the mighty Colosseum in Rome, few sights as good a record of renaissance ingenuity as the cathedral in Florence.
Italy's cities have been at the heart of world history, art and culture, and everywhere tributes remain to great masters like Leonardo Da Vinci.
Michelangelo, Botticelli and more.
Choose Verona and you choose one of Italy's most elegant cities.
Best remembered as the setting for Shakespeare's Romeo and Juliet and The Gentlemen of Verona, it offers the chance to live with history — by attending productions still staged in its 1st century Roman Arena.
Visit Venice and you visit a unique and breathtaking city of timeless charm (also see Citalia's Midsummer Spectacle tour on pages 206–207).
Spectacular sunset in Venice
Stunning views
Pisa's leaning tower
Stylish shopping
‘Bewitching cities where famous sights swirl around you in a kaleidoscope’
Verona
Rome
‘A magnificent city — alive with an indefatigable passion.’
Rome is one of the world's most magnificent cities with a quite awe-inspiring history and a simply unrivalled beauty.
Here ancient history and visions of great splendour stand all around you wherever you turn — all set alongside the modern vibrance and colour of the 1990s.
This is a city which lives for today while surrounded by its past.
It is a city alive with an indefatigable passion for life in all its splendour — bustling with cafés, shops and restaurants.
Be it your first visit or an annual pilgrimage you will always find new excitements and attractions to relish in the Eternal City.
Hotel Amenities
All Citalia hotels in Rome have been specially selected for their central location, good service and value.
All are within 20–25 minutes walk of the central Piazza Venezia or Piazza della Republica and convenient for the Colosseum.
Buses in the city are frequent and inexpensive.
Styles vary but to help you make your choice please note:
Bedrooms in 3-star hotels have:
private facilities
telephone
television
Bedrooms in 4-star hotels have:
private facilities
telephone
television
mini-bar
lift
air-conditioning
Bedrooms in 5-star hotels have:
private facilities
telephone
television
mini-bar
safety deposit box
hair dryer
lift
room service
air-conditioning
We offer this information as general guidance only with any exceptions stated in the individual hotel descriptions.
Rome's Via Veneto
Hotel San Remo ∗∗∗
Friendly and efficient staff have helped make the Hotel San Remo a favourite with Citalia guests for many years.
A smallish property close to the Piazza della Repubblica, this hotel has recently benefited from an extensive refurbishment programme and has a new and modern feel.
There is a new reception area and TV lounge adjoining a small bar.
A marble staircase leads to wide corridors of bedrooms, which are comfortably furnished and equipped with modern bathrooms.
Only some have TVs but all are served by a lift.
Room service is available for a relaxed breakfast in bed.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £8.90.
Local colour, near the Trevi Fountain
The friendly San Remo
Hotel Patria ∗∗∗
This is a fresh and modern hotel with a restful atmosphere.
Set in the heart of Rome, there is a summery breakfast room and a small lounge-bar.
In the bedrooms fabric wallcoverings combine with cream wood furniture, and benefit from new marble bathrooms with a hair dryer.
Rooms are double glazed and have double security locks.
TV is available at a supplement payable locally.
There is a lift.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £16.95.
The congenial Hotel Patria
Hotel Ponte Sisto ∗∗∗
Sit in the tranquil garden of the Hotel Ponte Sisto and it is easy to envisage times when this property was a monastery.
Where monks sat in quiet contemplation, guests now seek sanctuary from the city's bustle amid lush palms and ivy.
Within, the cool public rooms boast arched windows and ceilings and include a lounge, TV room, restaurant and coffee shop.
There is a lift.
Bedrooms do not have TV.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £12.25.
Elegant dining at the Ponte Sisto
Hotel Villa Delle Rose ∗∗∗
Set in a paved courtyard, the Hotel Villa Delle Rose is a small, friendly property of traditional character.
Once a patrician villa, a small terrace in the gardens provides a lush, flower-bedecked retreat after a hectic day's sightseeing and, within, marble pillars, frescoes and high, painted ceilings remain from former times in the public rooms.
This property is personally run by Signor Frank and additional facilities offered include a lift up to the simple bedrooms, and room service.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £9.25.
The charming Villa Delle Rose
Hotel Napoleon ∗∗∗∗
This is a traditional-style, character hotel where a building with a courtyard has been  cleverly converted to provide warm and friendly accommodation and large, airy public rooms.
A pianist plays twice a week in the small, genteel bar and the large lounge.
Meals are served in the intimate restaurant and include a sumptuous buffet breakfast.
The Colosseum is just a 10 minute walk and nearby is the underground station.
Bedrooms are simply furnished and generally quiet as they face inwards away from the square, and room service is available.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £9.75.
The Hotel Napoleon's genteel bar
Citalia VALUE
At all hotels honeymoon and silver anniversary couples receive a bottle of sparkling wine.
At the Delle Rose honeymoon and silver anniversary couples also receive flowers and, at the Ponte Sisto and San Remo they also receive flowers or fruit.
Napoleon
Special price à la carte menu at 24,000 Lire for all guests.
Hotel Regency ∗∗∗∗
The building which houses the Hotel Regency has just undergone complete renovation and refurbishment.
Thus accommodation here is fresh and modern, and the management now prides itself on offering the most comfortable of stylish, up-to-date amenities.
Among the public rooms there is now a restful lounge and a bar where guests can relax after sightseeing.
This is a very central hotel just 300 yards from the Via Veneto.
The bedrooms are all spacious, and comfortably furnished.
Supplements per person per night:Single room 1 Jul–31 Aug £12.95, All other times £21.75.
The Regency hotel
Hotel Bolivar ∗∗∗
Step across a small cobbled square, just minutes from the Piazza Venezia, and you reach the simple but welcoming Hotel Bolivar.
Tucked away in a generally quiet, residential area, this is a peaceful base within a bustling city, very close to the tempting shops of the Via Nazionale and the city sights.
Personally run by the Ludovici family, here there are just 30 rooms so it is easy to provide guests with an individual and attentive service.
Furnished in a modern style the hotel is airconditioned and has a lift.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £11.25.
The peaceful Bolivar
Hotel Claridge ∗∗∗∗
Set in an exclusive residential area of Rome, 1¼ miles from the Spanish Steps, the Hotel Claridge is a purpose-built, modern, international hotel.
Recently refurbished, it offers the most upto-date facilities combined with staff who pride themselves on offering traditional good service and friendly welcomes.
There is a lounge and sunny new coffee shop.
Bedrooms have video player and safety deposit box, bathrooms with hair dryer.
Supplements per person per night:Single room 4 Jul–28 Aug £17.95.
All other times £20.95.
Hotel Claridge — new for 1992
The historic Forum
Central meeting point — the famed Spanish Steps
Taking a break, Rome
Hotel Amenities
Please refer to page 140 for a guide to the bedroom amenities and public facilities of the hotels featured here.
HOW YOU TRAVEL
Please refer to page 140 for details of your travel arrangements.
Hotel Savoy ∗∗∗∗
Grand chandeliers and marble floors, gilt mirrors and woven wall-hangings greet you as you enter the airy Hotel Savoy and these set the tone for a traditional hotel of classic style.
Off from the imposing lobby is a more intimate bar where guests can relax in comfort, and the fresh breakfast room is furnished with a cool terracotta tiled floor and summery wicker furniture.
There is an à la carte restaurant for formal dining and a good value self-service restaurant which opens for lunches each week day.
The Via Veneto, Villa Borghese and Piazza di Spagna are all close by.
The bedrooms are comfortable and traditional.
Supplements per person per night:Single room 4 July–28 Aug £35.75, All other times £30.25.
The smart Hotel Savoy
Explore Rome — the old fashioned way!
Hotel Eliseo ∗∗∗∗
Take breakfast at the Hotel Eliseo and you can look out over some really magnificent summer views, out across the sunny Villa Borghese gardens — a lush and picturesque refuge in the midst of the city.
This is a first class hotel of distinction which is very centrally situated close to the bustling Via Veneto and the famed Spanish Steps.
A well run property, the management prides itself on offering good service.
It is furnished in a distinctive baroque style and public rooms include several sitting rooms and a lobby-bar.
Bedrooms are delightfully furnished.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £11.95.
The welcoming Hotel Eliseo
Pavement café, Piazza Navona
Citalia VALUE
At the Claridge, Eliseo, Savoy and Regency honeymoon and silver anniversary couples receive a bottle of sparkling wine and flowers or fruit.
Regency
Complimentary tea is served on arrival.
£30 reduction for guests staying 7 nights in July and August.
A complimentary ticket (subject to availability) for the Caracalla open air theatre for all guests staying 5 nights or more in August.
Savoy
20% discount on the à la carte menu at the hotel restaurant.
Hotel Quirinale ∗∗∗
For fine, old tradition and imposing character the Hotel Quirinale is hard to beat.
A high-arched entrance leads onto a vast grand salon impressively furnished with velvet drapes, fine paintings and classic furniture.
Smaller arches lead to more intimate sitting rooms, a writing room and bar.
Meals can be served on the terrace or in the restaurant where marble, mirrors and chandeliers maintain the traditional feel, with large picture windows overlooking the delightful garden — where strains can often be heard from the nearby Opera House.
Most bedrooms have safety deposit box, all have hair dryer and room service.
The lavish Quirinale
Hotel Traiano ∗∗∗∗
The Hotel Traiano carries the name of one of Rome's great emperors and within, an understated elegance and classy feel makes it worthy of such association.
Here a discreet entrance boasts cool marble floors and imposing columns which combine with fine wood and soft lighting for an impressive welcome.
There is a comfy lounge, a bar and a stylish TV room and the traditional style dining-room boasts an amazing rococo fantasy of cherubs and angels looking down from the building's original ceiling.
Built in 1896, the property has been largely refurbished and the bedrooms are double glazed.
Limited room service is available and a hair dryer is provided in all the bathrooms.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £12.50.
The warm and stylish Traiano
Citalia VALUE
At the Quirinale and Aldrovandi Palace and San Marco honeymoon and silver anniversary couples receive a bottle of sparkling wine and flowers or fruit.
All other customers at the Quirinale receive a bottle of sparkling wine.
Quirinale
10% discount on all meals over 50,000 Lire.
San Marco
£35 reduction for all guests staying 7 nights 1 May–26 June and 29 Aug–31 Oct.
A complimentary dinner in a typical Verona restaurant for all guests staying 7 nights or more arriving 4 July–22 Aug.
Mastino
£30 reduction for all guests staying 7 nights arriving 30 May, 6, 13 and 20 June.
GOLDEN CHOICE
Hotel Excelsior ∗∗∗∗∗L
This is quite simply one of the most distinguished hotels in Italy.
Rich and imposing, here the features are grand, and the fine, traditional style impressive.
Pull up at the sweep-through drive and you enter a sophisticated property of airy, high arch ceilings and chandeliers, carefully carved mouldings of gold and classic furnishings of style.
Built in 1904, there is an intimate, galleried restaurant and elegant lounges where a pianist plays each evening.
The spacious bedrooms, set around huge floor lobbies, are of an imperial style, warmed by rich fabric wallcoverings and dotted through with Murano glass fittings.
The bedrooms do not have a safety deposit box.
Supplements per person per night:Single room 1–30 June and 1 Sep–31 Oct £53.50, All other times £40.00.
GOLD PLUS
Private car transfer to and from your hotel are available for up to three Golden Choice customers at £95 per car.
Please indicate your request on your booking form.
The distinguished Excelsior
Hotel Aldrovandi Palace ∗∗∗∗∗L
The Aldrovandi Palace is a pleasant hotel set in one of the quietest areas of Rome with all the necessary facilities for a relaxed and comfortable stay in the city.
It is situated facing the lush and attractive Borghese Gardens where guests can take a leisurely stroll away from the bustle of the city.
The Aldrovandi Palace is a distinctive hotel of style, a characteristic reflected in the fact that it is a member of prestigious Leading Hotels of the World group.
Here guests will find spacious and imposing public rooms and warm comfortable bedrooms.
There is a piano bar for evening entertainment, two fine restaurants offering a choice of menu, a swimming pool and pretty gardens.
The hotel is well placed for those keen on sightseeing — with the Via Veneto and the famed Spanish Steps both an easy walk away.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £36.25; Half board £36.25.
The imposing Aldrovandi Palace
HOW YOU TRAVEL
Please refer to page 140 for details of your travel arrangements.
Hotel Amenities
Please refer to page 140 for a guide to the bedroom amenities and public facilities of the hotels featured here.
The Vatican and St. Peter's
Hotel Mastino ∗∗∗
The Mastino is just 100 yards from the Piazza Brà and the Roman Arena in the centre of Verona and particularly convenient for visitors to the famous Opera Festival (an early booking is recommended).
A traditional building, completely refurbished, the hotel is modern and comfortable under the same family ownership as the San Marco.
It boasts a friendly and welcoming atmosphere and prides itself on offering a high standard of service.
A buffet breakfast is offered each morning and there are plenty of restaurants and cafés nearby.
There is a lift, airconditioning, a lounge and bar.
Bedrooms have telephone, TV and mini-bar.
Price includes bed and breakfast.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £18.50.
The convenient Mastino
Verona
‘A city of elegance and grace, rose tinted by buildings of distinctive pink marble.’
The delights of Verona are built almost entirely in distinctive pink marble on the banks of the River Adige.
It has been described as one of the most elegant cities in Italy and impressive reminders of the past are everywhere.
Hotel San Marco ∗∗∗∗
The San Marco is an up-to-date family-run hotel with style.
Opened in 1987, it is located just outside the old city walls, a short bus ride or 20 minute walk from the Roman Arena at the heart of Verona.
One of its greatest distinctions is a heated indoor swimming pool with sauna.
There is a bar and attractive garden patio where, weather permitting, a generous buffet breakfast is served.
There are many sights of interest nearby.
The rooms are well furnished and bedrooms have telephone, radio and mini-bar.
There is a lift and full air-conditioning.
Price includes bed and breakfast.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £18.50; Double room with whirlpool bath £6.50.
The San Marco's welcoming bar
The famed Roman arena, Verona
Venice & Venice Lido
‘Stunning city sights and leisurely relaxing beaches.’
Venice is quite simply inspirational.
It has inspired artists, poets and great composers for generations, and to this day few fail to leave enchanted.
This is the city of waterways.
Magisterial palaces and impressive churches sit alongside simple, scenic quaysides and straw-hatted gondoliers.
Soak up the serenity of St Mark's Square or step behind the scenes to a world of narrow alleys and canals — everywhere you will find images rich and complex.
Hotel Amenities
All Citalia hotels have been specially selected for their ideal location, good service and value.
All are within an easy 10–15 minute walk of St Mark's, except the Amadeus which is conveniently situated by the railway station and just 15  minute walk from the Rialto Bridge.
All have easy access to Venice's waterbus network.
Styles and designs vary greatly but to help you make your choice please note:
Bedrooms in 2-star hotels have:
private facilities
telephone
room service
no lift
Bedrooms in 3-star hotels have:
private facilities
telephone
television
mini-bar
lift
Bedrooms in 4-star hotels have:
private facilities
telephone
television
mini-bar
safety deposit box
room service
lift
Bedrooms in 5-star hotels have:
private facilities
telephone
television
mini-bar
safety deposit box
hair dryer
room service
lift
We offer this information as general guidance only with any exceptions stated in the individual hotel descriptions.
Take a break in Venice
Hotel Gallini ∗∗
Turn back through the pages of ancient history books on Venice and as far back as the year 1740 you will find tell of a friendly hostelry providing a refuge to weary travellers on this hotel's site.
Then, the little bridge beside the hotel was even named after the inn and, although the bridge's name has now changed, today the welcome is equally as warm.
Two friendly, hospitable brothers own and run the Hotel Gallini and regard both the hotel and their guests with great affection.
Citalia customers have been coming here for over 30 years and find simple accommodation and furnishings — fresh and spotlessly kept.
The hotel is both convenient for St. Mark's Square and close to the  Venice Theatre.
New this year is the addition of a modern television room.
Waterbus Stop 9 (Saint' Angelo).
Supplements per person per night:Single room (1 Jul–31 Aug) £4.25,(all other times) £5.50.
Gallini
Venice Lido
Hotel Firenze ∗∗∗
Situated near the church of San Moise, a programme of major refurbishment allows this comfortable hotel to now offer a true Venetian style — from the Murano glass chandeliers to the reproduction furniture.
Most bedrooms boast a large arched window, and past renovations have left a blended style of marble and iron.
A roof-top terrace affords enchanting views.
There is a lift.
Waterbus Stop 15 (San Marco)
Supplements per person per night:Single room (on request) £5.95.
Hotel Firenze
Hotel Bisanzio ∗∗∗
Tucked away on a quiet, sunny square just 50 yards from the lagoon, this is a fresh, modern hotel adorned with many original paintings by the owner's wife.
There is a lounge-bar, a small sitting-room and a public courtyard with a well.
The accommodation is cool and spotless and staff pride themselves on offering a warm welcome.
There is no lift but room service is available.
Waterbus Stop 16 (Zaccaria)
Supplements per person per night:Single room £6.50.
The friendly Bisanzio
Hotel Nuovo Teson ∗∗
This is a small, traditional hotel situated just 20 yards from the famous lagoon of Venice.
Decorated in Venetian style it is close to all the major city sights — St. Mark's Square — but also neighbours the less frequented old quarter of Venice full of picturesque ancient houses, tiny bridges and canals.
The staff pride themselves on offering a friendly welcome and helpful service.
Among the hotel facilities there is a small bar and sitting room where guests can relax after a busy days sightseeing.
Room service is available to guests but the hotel has no lift.
Waterbus Stop 17 (Arsenale)
Supplements per person per night:Single room (on request) £5.95.
18th Century Nuovo Teson
Hotel Ala ∗∗∗
Created from two 17th century buildings, the Ala was once a Venetian palace and today offers simple, typically Venetian accommodation popular with Citalia customers for almost 30 years.
A modern art and antique arms collection are housed here.
Bedrooms have a safety deposit box and double glazing.
Some have TV and there is a TV lounge.
Waterbus Stop 13 (Santa Maria del Giglio)
Supplements per person per night:Single room £6.25.
The Alba — set on a square
Citalia VALUE
At the Firenze, Bisanzio, Nuovo Teson and Ala honeymoon and silver anniversary couples receive a bottle of sparkling wine; at the Firenze, Bisanzio and Ala they also receive flowers or fruit.
Hotel Firenze
A complimentary afternoon tea is served to all guests.
Hotel Panada ∗∗∗
Less than 100 paces from St Mark's — this is a hotel proud to be Venetian.
Typical Venetian decor — chandeliers, hand-painted furniture, ornate mirrors and marble floors — adorn the hotel and the local character of the welcoming Al Speci bar attracts locals and guests alike for a cool relaxing drink.
There is a small lounge and a light modern breakfast room.
Most of the bedrooms have TV and safety deposit box but no mini-bar.
All are double glazed.
Waterbus Stop 15 (San Marco).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £12.50.
Hotel Panada
Citalia VALUE
At the Panada, Do Pozzi, San Moise, Marconi and the American, honeymoon and silver anniversary couples receive a bottle of sparkling wine and flowers or fruit.
San Moise
Honeymoon and silver and gold anniversary couples staying 5 nights or more receive a complimentary gondola ride, dinner and Spumante.
American
Half bottle of Spumante and a guide book per room for all guests.
Marconi
Honeymoon and silver anniversary couples staying 5 nights receive dinner on arrival and a gondola ride.
All guests are served afternoon tea.
Hotel Marconi ∗∗∗
Few hotels enjoy so enviable a position near the Rialto Bridge as this.
Built in 1500 it has been beautifully restored to offer character accommodation of quality.
Original features and antique furniture enhance its style.
Well-furnished bedrooms have a safety deposit box and a hair dryer.
There is no lift.
Waterbus Stop (8).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £11.25.
Marconi — on the waterfront
Hotel Do Pozzi ∗∗∗
Here the lush and peaceful courtyard with two ancient wells in an oasis of serenity amidst the bustling city.
Within, the hotel is simple and friendly with a small lounge and a breakfast room.
Room service is available and bedrooms are air-conditioned from 10 June to 30 Sept.
Waterbus Stop 13 (Santa Maria del Giglio).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £6.25.
Flower-bedecked courtyard — Do Pozzi
Hotel Bucintoro ∗∗
Open the shutters at the Bucintoro and you open up to some of the very best views of Venice.
Its position ensures every room has a view across the lagoon.
This is a simple pensione where old fashioned virtues of friendly service and warm hospitality have not been forgotten.
It is offered on a half board basis and the management prides itself on  its reputation for the good quality home-cooking.
Outside there is a delightful pavement terrace.
We regret children under three are not accepted.
Waterbus Stop 17 (Arsenale).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £4.90.
Excellent views from the Bucintoro
Hotel San Moise ∗∗∗
Originally a 17th century patrician house, this is a lovely unpretentious hotel with the comforts and atmosphere of a private home.
With just 16 rooms the management can extend a friendly, personal welcome, and offer relaxed, warm accommodation.
The hotel is set in a quiet back street with its own landing stage and a tiny pavement terrace.
The bedrooms are beautifully decorated with fabric wallcoverings and rich drapes.
The hotel has no lift.
Waterbus Stop 15 (San Marco).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £12.25.
The homely San Moise
HOW YOU TRAVEL
Please refer to page 146 for details of your travel arrangements.
Hotel Amenities
Please refer to page 146 for a guide to the bedroom amenities and public facilities of the hotels featured here.
Graceful views
Hotel Gabrielli Sandwirth ∗∗∗∗
In bygone days the Gabrielli family made its fortune as taxcollectors and used its profits to build this splendid palazzo on the Grand Canal.
The spacious, airy rooms, built around a lush garden and two tranquil courtyards, now provide a restaurant and traditional accommodation run by the Perkhofers since 1845.
There is a superb panoramic roof terrace.
Waterbus Stop 17 (Arsenale).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £18.75; Front lagoon view £18.75; Half board £21.25.
The Graceful Gabrielli
Roof terrace splendour at the Gabrielli
Time to sit and reflect
Hotel American ∗∗∗
American by name, but far from American by nature, this hotel is quietly situated on the picturesque canal of San Vio.
This is a wonderful hotel created from two historic buildings.
Marble floors and hand-painted Venetian style furniture give the property a traditional feel, and welcoming staff add to the warmth.
The hotel has room service but no lift.
Bedrooms are airconditioned from June to September.
Waterbus Stop 12 (Accademia).
Supplements per person per night:Single room (on request) £6.75.
The quiet American
Brunello Apartments Self Catering
Push open the imposing wood door of the Brunello apartments and you enter a home from home of traditional Venetian style.
Close to the Grand Canal and offering some splendid views, the apartment is reached by several flights of stairs.
The accommodation is simple but spacious and includes two double bedrooms, one single, a bathroom, a laundry, a living-room and a kitchen.
It is a property to suit up to five people.
A returnable 150,000 Lire deposit is payable on arrival but a welcome hamper is included in the price.
Waterbus Stop 16 (Zaccaria).
Supplements per person per night:4 pers £2.95; 3 pers £5.25; 2 pers £15.25.
The traditional Brunello Apartments
Gigi Apartments Self Catering
The ancient beams of the original building remain but these are fresh, modern apartments newly converted and offering spotless, well-furnished accommodation set on a square close to St Mark's.
Suitable for up to four people, each apartment has one twin bedroom, a bathroom and a living-room with TV and two divan beds.
There is a kitchen and a shared washing machine (situated outside of the apartment) is available for use.
A refundable 200,000 Lire deposit is payable on arrival but a welcome hamper has been included in the price.
Waterbus Stop 16 (San Zaccheria).
Supplements per person per night:3 pers £2.75; 2 pers £6.50.
Home comforts at the Gigi Apartments
Hotel Concordia ∗∗∗∗
Take breakfast at the Hotel Concordia and you look out on unrivalled views of Venice.
This is the only hotel in Venice to back onto St Mark's Square and gives unbeatable views of the basilica.
The position is excellent and the three manageresses show dedication to the smallest detail which makes the hotel sparkle.
The Venetian style bedrooms include a hair dryer in the bathrooms.
The lift operates from the first floor.
Waterbus Stop 16 (San Zaccaria).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £18.50; Side view of St Mark's Square £7.95.
The Concordia (in the foreground) looking out to St. Mark's
Hotel Ateneo ∗∗∗
Once a noble Venetian family's home, the Hotel Ateneo is today run with the emphasis on personal service.
There are just 18 bedrooms so attention to detail and individual need is a speciality and a warm and friendly welcome from efficient staff is assured.
The hotel has been completely renovated in a Venetian style and there is a charming, typically Venetian courtyard.
The hotel has a generally relaxed and sophisticated atmosphere and the bedrooms have all been comfortably furnished.
They are decorated with stylish rich fabric wallcoverings.
A hair dryer is provided in the bathrooms.
The hotel has no lift.
Waterbus Stop 15 (San Marco).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £11.25.
The traditional Ateneo
Hotel Monaco and Grand Canal ∗∗∗∗
Housed in a late 18th century palace, this hotel boasts splendid views in every direction.
Set right on the Grand Canal this hotel is at the heart of Venice.
Sit for a relaxing drink in its comfortable bar and you look out through picture windows which frame gondolas alive with colour and Venetian style.
In the superb ‘Grand Canal’ restaurant you dine in style on local specialities which have won the chef great acclaim.
The hotel has a lush, little inner courtyard which offers a tranquil haven of peace and serenity, away from the bustle of the city.
This quality hotel has a piano bar, and the bedrooms are tastefully appointed.
Waterbus Stop 15 (San Marco).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £15.25.
Shop in style
18th century splendour — the Monaco
Peaceful square
Venice in Peril
Think of Venice and the image is of waterways — bridges and boats, stunning reflections and gallant gondoliers.
A unique city — whose very construction is a marvel — it is linked in every way to the canals and lagoons that are its foundation.
But below the mirror images of arts and architecture lurks the threat of extinction — Venice is in Peril.
Environmental changes, pollution and neglect have conspired to threaten this great city.
Venice is in peril, but it is not yet doomed.
Voluntary groups are working hard to restore its treasures and to help, Citalia is donating £2 for every holiday booked in the city.
By giving back a little in exchange for the pleasures which are Venice, we hope to preserve the city.
HOW YOU TRAVEL
Please refer to page 146 for details of your travel arrangements.
Hotel Amenities
Please refer to page 146 for a guide to the bedroom amenities and public facilities of the hotels featured here.
Hotel Metropole ∗∗∗∗
Formerly part of a monastery, the Metropole was once a favoured playground for a young Vivaldi.
The composer came here from the nearby orphanage where he was raised, and today visitors find it a similarly welcoming refuge.
Dotted with antiques and fine paintings this hotel has the feel of a private home.
Waterbus stop 16 (Zaccaria).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £26.50; Lagoon view (on request) £17.95.
Canalside Metropole
Hotel Cavalletto ∗∗∗∗
From the Hotel Cavalletto you look out on the most typical of Venetian scenes, as here the public rooms are bordered by a narrow waterfront where gondoliers come and go with their passengers.
The lounge, of marble and mirrors, and the light, airy restaurant both afford canal views.
The simple bedrooms are traditionally furnished.
Waterbus Stop 15 (San Marco).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £17.75.
Cavalletto by the water's edge
Citalia VALUE
At the Concordia, Amadeus, Ateneo and Metropole honeymoon and silver anniversary couples receive a bottle of sparkling wine and flowers or fruit; at the Cavalletto they receive sparkling wine and fruit.
Concordia
20,000 Lire voucher given to all guests for use in the light meals restaurant.
Cavalletto
Complimentary bowl of fruit for all guests staying 5 nights or more May–August.
Amadeus
All guests staying 5 nights or more receive return rail tickets to Padua with lunch included.
Ateneo
Honeymoon and silver anniversary couples staying 5 nights or more receive dinner on arrival and a complimentary gondola ride.
Monaco
£60 reduction for all honeymoon couples staying 5 nights arriving on or between 1 July and 27 Aug.
Metropole
Complimentary dinner in the Zodiac bar for all guests arriving on Sunday staying 5 nights or more.
Complimentary tickets to a Vivaldi concert or similar in the nearby church for guests arriving on Sunday staying 7 nights or more.
All guests receive complimentary entrance to the casino.
Hotel Amadeus ∗∗∗∗
This is a property full of Italian character and charm.
From the beautiful, cool marble of the entrance, flanked by fountains, to its pretty private garden, the emphasis is on graceful Venetian style.
Situated close to the Santa Lucia railway station, the hotel is particularly convenient for those who wish to venture out to explore the local area.
It is just five yards from the Grand Canal and a picturesque 20-minute boat ride from St Mark's.
Public rooms include attractive lounge areas, a bar and two good restaurants.
The bedrooms echo the classical Venetian style and all have radio, telephone and hair dryer in the bathroom.
Waterbus stop 2 (Ferrovia).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £11.95.
The stylish Amadeus
Venice's unique Grand Canal
GOLDEN CHOICE
Hotel Cipriani ∗∗∗∗∗L
One of the most famous hotels in the world, the Cipriani is quite simply for people who expect the very best.
Set on Giudecca Island, it has the luxury of the only swimming pool and tennis court in central Venice, beautiful gardens, a fully-equipped health centre and well-appointed junior suites.
There is full air-conditioning and room service.
Bedrooms all have telephone, colour TV, radio and mini-bar.
A private launch takes guests  direct to St Mark's square.
Waterbus Stop 15 (San Marco).
Supplements per person per night:Single room (on request) £90.50; Half Board £63.50.
The sumptuous Cipriani
Hotel Danieli ∗∗∗∗∗L
This is a simply stunning hotel where you step back in time.
Once a Doge's palace, ornate stairways, gothic arches and balustrades remain.
Carved ceilings and beams, stained-glass and rich drapes adorn the public rooms and the fifth floor terrace restaurant has quite breathtaking views — views Hemingway said were the best in Europe.
A complimentary boat service operates to the hotels Excelsior and Des Bains, on the Lido, for complimentary use of their pools.
Waterbus Stop 16 (Zaccaria).
Supplements per person per night:Single room (1 Jul–31 Aug) £42.50, All other times £48.50; Lagoon view (on request) £59.95.
Unique grandeur at the Danieli
Luna Hotel Baglioni ∗∗∗∗
Truly a hotel of distinction, the Luna Baglioni now emerges from extensive refurbishment to rank among Venice's top hotels.
Adorned with marble, mirrors and chandeliers, sweeping staircases and rich silks it is lavish, opulent and elegant.
Nestled neatly between the Grand Canal and St. Mark's Square it is one of the oldest hotels in Venice — housed in a 15th century building.
Its à la carte restaurant offers dining by a delightful canal.
Waterbus Stop 15 (San Marco).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £19.50.
The imposing Baglioni
GOLD PLUS
Private transfers are available for Golden Choice customers at £99 per person.
Please indicate your request on the booking form.
Hotel Bauer Grunwald ∗∗∗∗∗∗L
A classic luxury hotel on the Grand Canal this property combines modern international standards with the character and charm of its 100 year old building.
Sumptuous public rooms, marble floors and rugs give it a style of its own, and the restaurant opens onto a splendid waterfront terrace.
The bedrooms are reached through long open corridors of marble.
They are comfortably furnished and most have a hair dryer.
Waterbus Stop 15 (San Marco).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £33.50; Side view of canal (on request) £33.75.
Bauer Grunwald on the Grand Canal
Hotel Amenities
Please refer to page 146 for a guide to the bedroom amenities and public facilities of the hotels featured here.
YOUR TRAVEL CHOICE
Please refer to page 146 for a guide to your travel arrangements.
Hotel Villa Ada ∗∗∗
Two elegant villas house the beautiful public rooms, terrace, bar and restaurant here, and Villa Ada (20 yards away) houses the bedrooms.
Rooms have private facilities, telephone, TV, hair dryer and radio.
There is a lift and complimentary use of bicycles.
Price includes dinner (or lunch), bed and breakfast.
Beach charges are not included.
Waterbus stop 20 (Lido).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £13.25.
Elegant Villa Ada
Hotel Villa Mabapa ∗∗∗∗
The Villa Mabapa has been popular with Citalia guests for over 20 years.
Set in pretty, tranquil gardens it is close to the beach and 10 minutes from the waterbus to St Mark's.
There is a restaurant and bar, and bedrooms have radio, colour TV and telephone.
Some are available with air-conditioning on request.
Price includes bed and breakfast.
Beach charges included (see p.225).
Waterbus stop 20 (Lido).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £12.95; Half board £17.95.
A warm welcome at Villa Mabapa
Music in St. Mark's Square
Venice Lido
‘Relaxing beaches near city sights.’
For the ultimate combination of Venice's unique city sights and a leisurely lie on the beach, the relaxed atmosphere of Venice Lido awaits.
Citalia VALUE
At the Cipriani, Danieli, Luna, V. Pannonia, V. Mabapa and V. Ada honeymoon and silver anniversary couples receive a bottle of sparkling wine and flowers or fruit.
Hotel Cipriani
30% reduction at the bar and San Giorgio restaurant for 7 night guests.
Villa Mabapa
50,000 Lire credit at the bar or restaurant for 7 night guests.
Complimentary ‘Carta Venezia’ for all guests staying 7 nights or more which can be used to obtain up to a 60% reduction on public waterboats (2 passport photos required).
Hotel Villa Pannonia ∗∗
A friendly, good value, family-run pensione, 10 minutes walk from the beach and waterbus stop to St Mark's Square.
Among the public rooms there is a bar, lounge and garden with steps to the dining-room.
Bedrooms are spotlessly kept and room service is available.
Price includes dinner (or lunch), bed and breakfast.
Beach charges incl. (see p.225).
Waterbus stop 20 (Lido).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £5.95.
Family-run Pannonia
Breakfast at the Villa Ada
Hotel Des Bains ∗∗∗∗
This is one of Italy's great hotels.
Divided from a private sandy beach by only the road, the beautiful gardens enclose two tennis courts and a large pool.
There is  an air of opulent grandeur in the several elegant lounges, a pretty terrace and restaurant offering a good choice.
The hotel is air-conditioned and has room service, a beauty salon, sauna and a lift.
All the bedrooms have TV, telephone and mini-bar.
A complimentary boat service  runs regularly to St. Mark's Square, taking 15 minutes.
Beach charges included (see p.225).
Waterbus stop 20 (Lido).
Supplements per person per night:Single room £28.50.
Grand Hotel Des Bains
Florence
‘The renaissance city for discovery and reflection.’
Florence is a city of contrasts.
Italy's intellectual and creative centre, it has always taken both sides of any argument and its contradictions are everywhere reflected in its art and in its culture.
Florence is for discovery and reflection, crammed with powerful images and great lessons from the past.
This was the birthplace of the Renaissance and its streets revel in artistic beauty.
Topped with terracotta, this is a city of true Tuscan colours.
Set amidst green and fertile hills its skyline is stunning and its landscapes inspire a long and dreamy gaze.
Its vistas leave a warm and timeless imprint on even the most jaded memory.
The dazzling cathedral
Hotel Amenities
All Citalia hotels in Florence have been carefully selected for quality and value and are all within a 15–20 minute walk of the city's famous cathedral and the Ponte Vecchio.
Styles and designs vary but to help you make your choice, please note:
Bedrooms in 3-star hotels have:
private facilities
telephone
mini-bar
lift
air-conditioning
Bedrooms in 4-star and 5-star hotels have:
private facilities
telephone
television
mini-bar
lift
room service
air-conditioning
We offer this information as general guidance only with any exceptions stated in the individual hotel descriptions.
Hotel Ariele ∗∗∗
This is a warm and homely property run by a mother and her two sons.
Away from the greatest bustle of the city, this is a quiet hotel of character.
There is a small but pretty garden, from where guests may often hear the strains of operatic melody from the Opera House nearby, and a small bar with TV.
Bedrooms are spacious and traditional although bathrooms are small, with hip baths or shower.
There is room service but bedrooms have no minibar or air-conditioning.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £6.50.
Hotel Ariele's pretty garden
Citalia VALUE
At all hotels honeymoon and silver anniversary couples receive a bottle of sparkling wine, at the Aprile and Machiavelli they also receive flowers or fruit.
Aprile
Complimentary pack of 2 bottles of Chianti for all guests arriving 11 July–28 August.
Alba
All guests receive a welcome drink.
Hotel Machiavelli Palace ∗∗∗
Some 400 years old, this is in fact the oldest building in the bustling market area of the Via Nazionale and the decor and ambience reflect that history.
What was once a convent is now a comfortable, welcoming hotel.
Fresh terracotta tiled doors, white walls and wooden ceilings provide the basis for traditional, character furnishings, and a roof terrace affords spectacular views of the city's famed cupolas and terracotta roof-tops.
Staff pride themselves on offering a warm welcome and the friendly, English speaking manager, Signor Zucconi will deal personally with any queries.
The bedrooms have TV and double glazing.
Supplements per person per night:Single room (on request) 11 Jul–28 Aug £11.95,(all other times) £15.75.
Hotel Aprile ∗∗∗
Once a Medici palace, this hotel is housed in a lovingly restored 15th century building.
High vaulted ceilings and historic frescoes have inspired the Fine Arts Commission to designate it an historic monument and guests feel they are living with history.
The character bedrooms are not air-conditioned but those at the front are double glazed.
There is a small, garden courtyard.
Supplements per person per night:Single room 11 Jul–28 Aug £7.95, All other times £9.95.
The lovingly restored Aprile
Hotel Alba ∗∗∗
At the Hotel Alba the staff are impressively helpful and genuinely warm.
The demanding owner, Signora Caridi, insists on high standards and has drawn around her a team of staff dedicated to providing simple, spotless accommodation and friendly service.
Cool marble floors lead to a modern bar and a lounge.
The bedrooms are double glazed and a TV can be installed on request.
Room service is available.
The hotel is air-conditioned from mid-June to mid-September.
Supplements per person per night:Single room (on request) £10.95.
The friendly Alba
A café in the sun — Piazza della Signoria
Hotel Kraft ∗∗∗∗
Take the lift to the top of this hotel and prepare to be impressed.
This hotel's crowning glory is a simply stunning, panoramic roof garden with potted lemon trees and a small, openair swimming pool (open during summer weather permitting) and fabulous views.
The restaurant shares this lovely look-out and throughout there is a light, airy atmosphere.
The hotel is close to the River Arno in a residential area.
A hair dryer is provided in the bathrooms.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £18.95.
The ever-popular hotel
Kraft's roof-top retreat
Hotel Brunelleschi ∗∗∗∗
This is a really special hotel set in a traffic-free courtyard just minutes from the Piazza Duomo.
It has been beautifully built around one of the oldest buildings in the city — a 6th century byzantine tower — a medieval church and adjoining renaissance buildings.
Once owned by a noble Florentine family, this is a unique hotel where fine antique style combines with modern facilities which include comfortable bedrooms, an elegant restaurant, a bar and museum.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £15.25.
The unique Brunelleschi
Hotel Amenities
Please refer to page 154 for a guide to the bedroom amenities and public facilities of the hotels featured here.
Hotel Atlantic Palace ∗∗∗∗
Once this building was a monastery.
Then, in the 17th century, it was a Florentine palace.
Today, it is a warm and friendly hotel where original features add character and style.
Wooden beams and stone archways are now incorporated into a fresh decor of white walls and terracotta tiles.
There is a lounge and small bar, and nearby is the lively San Lorenzo market.
The bedrooms are furnished in a traditional style and have double glazing.
Some overlook the inner well of the building adorned with hanging baskets.
Breakfast in bed is available at a supplement payable locally.
Supplements per person per night:Single room on request 11 Jul–28 Aug £15.25, All other times £19.95.
The Atlantic's welcoming bar
A wealth of arts
HOW YOU TRAVEL
Please refer to page 154 for details of your travel arrangements.
Hotel Monna Lisa ∗∗∗∗
Step into the Hotel Monna Lisa and you step back in time.
An entrance of arched windows and doors, with a ceiling of wood and inlaid paintings leads to a wonderful character property of charm and distinction.
Set in a narrow medieval street, the building dates from the 14th century and is dotted with authentic 14th and 15th century furniture, fine antiques and art treasures, original pillars and sweeping stone staircases.
Outside there is a delightful garden — an oasis of serenity just 10 minutes from the cathedral and main sights.
There is no lift.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £13.95.
Transport with a difference
The stunning Ponte Vecchio
Hotel Rivoli ∗∗∗∗
First Franciscan monks lived here, then Canossiane nuns ran it as a convent school.
Today it emerges from two years careful renovation, as a modern hotel where original wooden ceilings, vaults and archways, a 13th century fountain and frescoes remain.
All are set around a pretty inner courtyard, once the monks' cloister, and a small Italian garden.
Many of the fresh bedrooms overlook this.
Front bedrooms are double glazed.
There is a sauna and whirlpool.
Supplements per person per night:Single room 11 Jul–4 Sep £9.75, All other times £13.25.
Rivoli Apartments Self Catering
Apartments Type A (2 people) have a twin, bathroom and kitchenette,Type B (up to 3) add a lounge with single divan.
Price includes a hamper.
Supplements per person per night:Type B for 2 pers £4.95.
Citalia VALUE
Honeymoon and silver anniversary couples staying at the Rivoli receive a bottle of sparkling wine.
Honeymoon and silver anniversary couples staying at the Brunelleschi receive flowers or fruit, those staying at the Kraft, Ambasciatori, Monna Lisa and the Atlantic Palace receive a bottle of sparkling wine and flowers or fruit.
Rivoli
All guests receive a welcome drink.
Kraft
All guests receive a basket of fruit.
Hotel Ambasciatori ∗∗∗
Set in the very heart of Florence the Hotel Ambasciatori offers everything a visitor needs for a serene and pleasant stay in Florence.
Neighbouring the railway station the hotel is minutes from all the main sights — the cathedral, Ponte Vecchio and galleries.
The hotel is proud to boast a highly professional team of staff and is well-equipped with all modern amenities.
The pleasant bedrooms are comfortably furnished, well-equipped and have the benefit of colour satellite TV.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £11.95.
Enjoy a drink at the Ambasciatori's bar
Fountains of style, Piazza della Signoria
Hotel De La Ville ∗∗∗∗
Few hotels are closer to the designer names than the Hotel de la Ville.
Set in Piazza Antinori, this property neighbours the Via Tornabuoni lined with the shops of Gucci, Valentino, Ferragamo, Versace and the like.
Here you are in the heart of the city's historical centre and close to many of its famous sights and street cafes.
There is a bar, snack-bar, laundry and garage and business facilities are available.
Sound-proofing ensures the bedrooms are quiet, and tasteful furnishings create a variety of styles.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £19.75.
A warm welcome at the De La Ville
Hotel Baglioni ∗∗∗∗
Built in the 18th century, this building was once the residence of Prince Carrega Bertolini.
Today it is the fabulous panoramic restaurant and Terrazza Brunelleschi roof garden which are the crowning glory, boasting superb views of the city, and providing a fine setting for dinner or a refreshing aperitif.
Below, the public rooms are large and imposing with arch after arch leading to alcoves furnished with comfy settees and adorned with carved wood and ornate or beamed ceilings.
Wide corridors of heavy wood doors open to tasteful bedrooms furnished in a classic dark wood style.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £19.25.
A magnificent roof garden at the Baglioni
Citalia VALUE
Honeymoon and silver anniversary couples staying at the Plaza Lucchesi and De La Ville receive a bottle of sparkling wine and fruit, those staying at the Baglioni receive flowers and those staying at the Savoy receive a bottle of sparkling wine, flowers or fruit.
Plaza Lucchesi
A room upgrade from a twin to a duplex suite is offered to all guests staying 7 nights or more (subject to availability).
Baglioni
20% reduction on all meals at the roof garden restaurant.
Hotel Plaza Lucchesi ∗∗∗∗
Built in 1860 on the banks of the timeless River Arno, this is a pleasant, stylish property situated behind the church of Santa Croce.
The public rooms are graceful, fresh and elegant and by night a pianist adds to the relaxed atmosphere.
The walls are of marble and mirror, the floors of parquet, and the restaurant is said to be among the best in Florence.
In the double glazed bedrooms the dark wood furnishings are modern and stylish, with a hair dryer provided in the bathrooms.
Duplex rooms have a lounge with galleried sleeping area.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £22.50; Duplex suite (on request) £20.
Fine cuisine at the Lucchesi's restaurant
Stylish shopping
Plaza Lucchesi, overlooking the river
HOW YOU TRAVEL
Please refer to page 154 for details of your travel arrangements.
Hotel Amenities
Please refer to page 154 for a guide to the bedroom amenities and public facilities of the hotels featured here.
Renaissance Florence, from the Pitti Palace
GOLDEN CHOICE
Hotel Savoy ∗∗∗∗∗L
Set on the Piazza della Repubblica, between the cathedral and the Ponte Vecchio, the Savoy is the most central of our hotels, just 150 yards from the Piazza della Signoria and the Uffizi Gallery.
Its site neighbours many of the most fashionable, openair cafés of Florence and opposite the hotel there is a colourful weekly flower market which fills the air with fresh and fragrant smells.
The world famous Via Tornabuoni with its exclusive designer shops is just 300 yards away.
A traditional, classic hotel, inside The Savoy is adorned with high, inlaid ceilings, long mirrors and rich fabrics.
Among the public rooms, the bar deserves special acclaim for its beautiful wall frescoes.
There is a smart à la carte restaurant for dinner and light lunches are served in the bar.
Imposing double doors lead grandly into spacious, comfortable bedrooms.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £26.95; Pitti Fashion Show (25–28 Jun/8–10 Jul) £8.25.
GOLD PLUS
Private transfers from the airport to your hotel and vice versa are available for up to three Golden Choice customers at £364 per car from Pisa and £89 per car from Florence.
Please indicate your request on the booking form.
The impressive Savoy
Hotel Villa Medici ∗∗∗∗∗∗L
As its name implies, this 18th century building was once a private residence of the famed Medici family.
Today it is a luxury hotel about 15 minutes walk from the centre of Florence.
Unusually for a city hotel, it is set around a lovely, lush private garden where sun-loungers are set out around the wonderfully secluded swimming pool.
The public rooms are large and lavish, adorned with marble pillars and tapestries, fine paintings, rich wood panelling and grand chandeliers.
There is a fine restaurant offering a wide choice of menu, or, weather permitting, guests can dine outside on the pretty verandah, overlooking the gardens.
The grand style is echoed in the hotel's 108 bedrooms which are traditional but have large modern bathrooms.
There is also a boutique, sauna and hairdresser.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £36.25.
The Villa Medici's garden oasis
The luxurious Villa Medici
A taste of it all — countryside, lakes, city sights and sun traps
2 & 3 Centres
There is always something new to discover under the Italian sun, and the Citalia range of Two and Three Centre Holidays is no exception.
A chance to mix and match the very best of Italy's treasures.
Combine the great cities of Rome, Florence and Venice with each other, or with a resort on the Neapolitan Riviera or the rolling rural countryside of Tuscany and Umbria.
For 1992 Citalia has introduced five new two and three centres.
On the Neapolitan Riviera, you may spend a week in Sorrento visiting the famous sights of Pompeii, Herculaneum and Vesuvius, then spend a week relaxing on the captivating island of Capri.
The renaissance city of Florence may be combined with a stay in Forte dei Marmi or Elba.
In the Lakes a new three centre holiday enables you to visit the cities of Venice or Verona before spending a week in Bellagio on Lake Como.
Finally, Citalia has devised a holiday in which you spend seven nights in the ancient city of Rome then drive to Ovindoli in Abruzzo, ideally placed to explore the spectacular landscape of the Abruzzo National Park.
The range of possibilities is endless and with Citalia you have plenty of options of when you go and how long you stay.
In addition, there is a tremendous choice of hotels available, from those in the modest, two-star category to famous five-star deluxe hotels such as the Cipriani or Bauer Grunwald in Venice.
Most holidays use scheduled services with Alitalia or Citalia Special Flights and offer the flexibility of flying into one airport, out from another with travel between cities by First Class rail.
Popular though our holidays may be those detailed here are by no means the only ones we organise.
Our Tailor Made Department has the skill and knowledge to put together any combination.
There is no limit on your choice — if it is in Italy and it's available, Citalia can arrange your holiday there.
Just contact your travel agent or the Citalia Tailor Made Department direct on 081–686 9989 .
Malcesine
Acquaviva Picena
Florence
‘A range of endless possibilities, combining the best of everything.
A chance to mix and match your favourites and take a perfect journey of discovery.’
Elba
Assisi
Venetian skyline
Sorrento
Vesuvius
Rome
Lipari — Taormina see p.57
Meandering hills of classic beauty and crowd-free towns
Tuscany and Umbria
Tuscany and Umbria are regions much beloved by artists, writers and those seeking to escape into peaceful surroundings.
The landscape is one of great beauty and charm, of silvery olives and meandering hills.
The villas and hotels are a part of that landscape, often lovingly converted from monasteries, castles or classical villas.
Everywhere a sense of timeless tranquillity prevails.
Welcome Hamper
What to expect in your villa:
All villas are supplied with bed linen, bath towels and all necessary basic kitchen equipment (not necessarily ovens, kettles or teapots!)
Villas are not supplied with cleaning items such as polish, cloths etc.
Fresh linen is normally provided weekly.
The voltage is usually 220v and we recommend you take a universal plug adapter for electrical appliances.
Maid service can normally be arranged locally at a supplement.
Please note that villas must be vacated by 10.00 hrs on the day of departure.
No persons other than those stated on the booking form may occupy the property.
TUSCANY
Nothing could surpass the exquisite beauty of the countryside of Tuscany.
At any time of the year, if you meander into the hilltowns, your senses will be rewarded.
Almost every hill is crowned with a picture-perfect little walled village.
Vineyardlaced fields are brilliant and vibrant in promise and delivery; dusky grey-green olive groves dress the hillsides and pines and cypresses appear to point out the landscape.
But this alone is not what we offer you.
This area has within her villages and retreats some of the finest pensiones and most lovely villas in the world.
Florence and Siena are there of course, but there are many other towns to discover such as Greve and Lucca.
Still not enough to tempt you from the tourist route?
Then be reminded that the food and wines of Tuscany are quite superb.
Childrens Reductions
Country Villas: Infants under 2 go free if a cot is used as an extra bed in the parents' room.
Children between the ages of 2 and 16 inclusive receive a £27 reduction.
1.
Infants under 2 are not entitled to an aircraft seat or baggage allowance.
2.
To qualify for the free infant place in villa, the infant may not be counted as one of the ‘persons sharing’ as defined in the price panel.
3.
There must be at least one full fare-paying passenger for each child reduction.
Country Hotels:Child reductions as described on page 13 apply.
Important Notes:
UMBRIA
Even in Italy, where regions which are rich in artistic inheritance are the rule and not the exception.
Umbria remains quite outstanding.
Almost every town contains treasures from this region's rich and noble past — perhaps a lovely della Robbia plaque, some outstanding fresco or painting or a fine piece of sculpture.
The briefest visit will quickly show over 2000 years chronicled in the stone and brick of its towns and villages — records of the passing of the Etruscans, Romans, their medieval successors and renaissance descendants.
Since the majority of Umbrian towns are placed up on a slope or are like a crown on top of a hill, there are invariably magnificent panoramas.
And, when you have had your fill of beautiful cities, works of art and breathtaking vistas, still the wonders of Umbria's culinary delights and superb local wines await your attention.
This is a region steeped in a calm sense of continuity, where a land and its people live together in perfect harmony.
Local crafts in Gubbio
The glories of Umbria
Rural Policiano
Glorious rolling landscapes of great beauty and charm, where charming properties of character await — secluded, historic and serene.’
Cultural events
Stunning Siena
Greve in Chianti
South of Florence lies the enchanting region of Chianti.
Greve in Chianti is some 18 miles from the city — a town where the houses smile out at you above colourful balconies brimming with geranium pots.
Here you can sit in an arch-lined square, shop for the region's wonderful food and wine, wander the Saturday market, or perhaps walk up to the medieval hilltop castle and village of Montefioralle where the views stretch forever.
Vistas of the Melazzano
Enchanting Greve
Castello di Vicchiomaggio Self Catering
Follow the road from Florence, and just about two and a half miles before you reach the town of Greve, high on ups, stands a crenellated renaissance castle.
This is the Castello di Vicchiomaggio, the origins of which go way, way back to 957 A.D., when it was built by the Longobards.
Somewhat later came the present owner, John Matta, who now takes great pleasure in greeting Citalia guests and welcomes them on arrival with a gift of the wonderful Chianti Classico from his excellent cellars and offers them a typical Tuscan dinner at a reasonable price, which is taken most weeks in the castle's impressive banqueting hall.
All the self-contained apartments for Citalia guests are within the historic castle building.
Each has its own separate entrance, off the central courtyard and although all have modern amenities, the original architecture and atmosphere has been maintained to ensure this property remains one of great character and unique charm.
It offers an ideal base for a relaxed and leisurely holiday in the heart of the Tuscan countryside.
Vicchiomaggio is surrounded by the vineyards and rolling hills of the region.
The crenellated castle of Vicchiomaggio
Arch-lined square of Greve
Renaissance Vicchiomaggio
Beautiful natural landscapes
Much to explore
Melazzano Estate Self Catering
Situated on the crest of a hill dominating the Greve Valley the Melazzano Estate has been owned by the Anichini family for 300 years.
It is a mile above Greve and the apartments were created with love to retain the original farmhouse character and decor.
There are outside seating areas and a pool with raised-sides (open 15 May to 15 Sept).
Leisurely gardens
Poolside relaxation
On the crest of a hill — Melazzano Estate
Castelfiorentino
Some 25 miles, south-west of Florence, the small town of Castelfiorentino, is two towns in one.
The old medieval part is perched on a hilltop, the modern quarters, below.
About five miles further south is Certaldo, so similar it could be a ‘sister-town’, but claiming greater glory thanks to close links with renaissance literary great, Boccaccio.
San Gimignano is 9 miles away, Siena about 28 miles away.
The sloping terrain of Tuscany
Castello di Oliveto Self Catering
The castle of Oliveto, about 10 minutes by car from Castelfiorentino, has led a full and varied life since it was built in the 15th century.
Its first owners were a noble Florentine family — the Pucci family — who through the generations, owned it, lost it and repossessed it on several occasions.
Its Guelf battlements and towers have witnessed many conflicts between Florentine and Sienese rivals first, and then  between the Medici family and Florentine Republic later.
Over the years its portals have opened to many illustrious guests ranging from revered and holy Popes to the US General, Mark Clark.
Now, it is owned by the Borgioli family, specialists in producing good wines, especially crisp, white, sparkling ones.
Visitors to the castle are often intrigued by the engravings and paintings to be seen above fireplaces and doorways.
They show an African head and the story behind these is that during a battle in the 15th century, when all the Pucci adults were killed, an African slave hid a baby of the family under her garments and fled via an underground passage, thus saving the Pucci line and earning herself a place in the family's heraldry.
Eight of the properties Citalia has secured are in an old farmhouse on the estate about two miles away from the castle.
It is called the San Romano and has been completely restored to offer all modern comforts.
The ‘Leopardi’ apartment is just outside the castle walls, whilst the ‘Carducci’and ‘Fucini’apartments are next to the excellent swimming pool and tennis courts which may be used by Citalia guests.
All apartments are simply but adequately furnished and each have their own entrance.
This makes an ideal base for those wishing to combine a stay in the Tuscan countryside with a visit to Renaissance Florence.
The pool is close to the castle
The Castello di Oliveto apartments
Policiano
To find Policiano, first find Arezzo — birthplace of Francesco Petrarca, Italy's greatest lyric poet and of famed musician Guido Monaco, and home of Piero della Francesca's beautiful frescoes.
Policiano is about 6 miles south of this and just beyond it is Cortona, one of Italy's oldest and most charming towns.
Six miles further is Lake Trasimeno, gateway to the glories of Umbria.
Villa Burali — a handsome residence
Relax outdoors…
…or indoors
Villa Burali Self Catering
Coming southwards on the main Arezzo — Lake Trasimeno road, just before Policiano, a sign points left and a straight avenue leads to this handsome country residence surrounded by cypresses, palm trees, bamboo cane, conifers and much tranquillity.
Within the 18th century former patrician villa there is exquisite little Baroque chapel and individually styled apartments on the second and third floors (no lift).
Some are on split levels, all are comfortable, full of atmosphere, and boasting an abundance of beautiful furniture and rafted ceilings.
Kitchenettes have a single hob ring.
A refundable deposit of approx. 100,000 Lire is payable  on arrival.
Tuscany is awash with colour
Sovicille
The road from Colle Val d'Elsa to Grosseto, is flanked by some of the most attractive Tuscan scenery.
Some 14 miles down this road, a road to the left climbs amidst woods for about two miles, past the village of Tonni, to Borgo Pretale.
Six miles or so further on is the town of Sovicille which offers shops for everyday needs and, for more extensive shopping and other amenities.
Historic Cetinale village
Rustic Tuscany
Cetinale Estate
Residence Cetinale Self Catering
One of the farmhouses that were part of the Cetinale Estate has been  skilfully converted into residences whilst maintaining its many original architectural features.
It is surrounded by extensive grounds with a swimming pool and enjoys maximum tranquillity and beautiful views of the surrounding woods and countryside.
Sovicille for shops is less than three miles away.
Siena is 10 miles and San Gimignano just over 20 miles away.
There are three types of apartment available each with separate entrance.
The Cetinale makes a relaxed and comfortable base for a country holiday in the heart of Tuscany.
All around there are countless opportunities to explore landscapes of olive groves and vineyards, dotted with sleepy hamlets full of custom and tradition.
Cetinale apartments within extensive grounds
Cetinale set in the countryside
Residence comforts
Residence Borgo Pretale Self Catering
In ancient times, about the 12th century, on these wooded slopes there used to be a watchtower, which later developed into a kind of fortified residence.
Around this grew a small village of woodcutters and stonemasons' cottages and the hamlet led its isolated existence for centuries until it was eventually abandoned.
It was, however, rescued and converted with great taste, mastery and exacting standards into the most comfortable of residences.
The hotel bedrooms and self-catering apartments, are distributed between the former tower, which also houses the reception, bar and restaurant, and the surrounding houses.
The decor is a harmonious blend of traditional and modern.
Guests on self-catering arrangements are entitled, indeed very welcome, to use all the hotel's facilities which includes swimming pool with snack service, restaurant and bar.
Tennis courts, Italian bowling, archery and mountain bikes can be made available for a charge payable locally.
In 1992 Citalia guests will have the choice of accommodation either in the beautifully-appointed hotel bedrooms with breakfast included, or in the following selfcatering apartments which, as befits the location, are named after plants and trees.
Citalia VALUE
Hotel and Residence Borgo Pretale
Honeymoon and silver anniversary couples receive a bottle of sparkling wine and fruit.
30% discount off 4 course meals on the à la carte menu for all guests staying at the hotel.
Borgo Pretale's pretty pool
Pretale bar within ancient walls
Beautiful rolling landscapes around Borgo Pretale
Tavarnelle
About 15 miles south of Florence and 22 miles north of Siena, lies the Tavarnelle Val di Pesa, one of the nine boroughs which make up the Chianti Classico wine producing region.
A sizeable centre with ancient agricultural traditions, it is a typical example of the resourceful toils of the region.
It offers shops for everyday needs and is ideal for visits to the famed sights of Tuscany.
Among the various available routes from Florence to Siena, the quickest is undoubtedly the motorway link.
If you leave this at the exit of ‘San Donato’ and turn right towards Tavernelle, after less than half a mile — along a turning on the right — you will come to the 16th century Villa Fillinelle.
The villa is impossible to miss — it stands in its own grounds in a really dominating position.
Once the summer residence of landed gentry, it has now been restructured and renovated, with a good deal of taste and great respect for the original building's style, ambience and decor.
The discerning occupants of the six pleasant apartments will find themselves accommodated in rooms of character, some of them with unusually high-rafted, boxed ceilings and items of period furniture.
The private grounds surrounding the villa offer relaxation either by the swimming pool, which is equipped with deck-chairs and umbrellas, or in the shade of centuries old trees where a meandering spectacle of olive groves, vineyards, fields and hills stretches out as far as the eye can see.
Less than two and a half miles away is the small town of San Donato in Poggio, with some shops and one of the several beautiful 12th/13th century romanesque churches in this area.
Tavarnelle is about two and a half miles in the opposite direction.
Apartments No.3 and No.4 detailed below have access from the main hall of the villa now transformed into a games room with billiard and card tables.
Entrance to the remaining four is from a loggia at the back of the villa.
The 16th century Villa Fillinelle
Visit historic Lucca
Shoppers delight
Well-equipped apartments
Explore Siena
Villa Filinelle — typically Tuscan
Strove
Strove is but a tiny group of houses, a mere dot on the map, but it is close to many Tuscan treasures.
Four miles north is the picturesque, medieval hilltop town of Colle Val d'Elsa now famed for its crystal and glass production.
Closer still are the circular walls and turrets of Monteriggioni.
Siena is about nine miles south east and Florence less than an hour drive.
San Luigi Residence Self Catering & San Luigi Hotel ∗∗∗∗
Amidst the vineyards and olive groves that surround Strove, this 17th century state has been restored to its original splendour and now far surpasses it in comfort.
Surrounded by extensive and enclosed grounds it is perfect for children who can play in complete freedom while their elders relax on the lawns that gently slope down to an attractive swimming pool.
When you feel like being a little more energetic, activities available here include tennis, cycling, volleyball, Italian bowls, table tennis and horse-riding (nearby).
Local specialities and the best of Tuscan wines are available in the graceful restaurant by the swimming pool.
The apartments are slightly more uniform than in some more rustic properties but all are traditionally decorated and furnished.
Each has a dishwasher, telephone and radio, and guests can hire a safety deposit box for 10,000 Lire a day.
Most are on the ground floor and look onto the garden with deck-chairs and tables outside.
Those in the villa which houses the reception are on upper floors and therefore do not have an outside seating area.
These apartments provide a wonderful base for an Italian country holiday and give all the freedom and flexibility for a perfect carefree break.
Here you are surrounded by the natural attractions of the region and have your own fully-equipped home from home.
Those who prefer a hotel to an apartment can take a room in the hotel; where the price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
The restored San Luigi
Gardens at the Residence
Lovely pools at the residence
Relax at the Residence
Breathtaking Tuscan landscapes
Strada in Chianti
The most scenic route from Florence to Siena is without doubt the Via Chiantigiana.
Follow it through Grassina and the road starts to climb the Chianti hills.
Pass the attractive golf course of Ugolino and, about seven miles from Florence, is Strada — just inside the ‘Classico’ wine producing area.
Terracotta abounds, produced four miles away at Impruneta, and Siena and San Gimignano are within easy reach.
Castel Ruggero Self Catering
A little way off to the east of route SS222, between Grassina and Strada, is the Castel Ruggero estate.
History tells us that as far back as the 12th century, there used to be a fortified castle here.
In the 15th century it was transformed into a landowner's residence, then vineyards were planted all around it and a cellar created.
In more recent times, the present owners turned the old peasants' houses, which are scattered all over the estate, into pleasant apartments.
Bathrooms and modern amenities were added to them all but great care was taken to ensure the original character of the buildings was retained, and in fact the original ambience has been left so intact as to produce a veritable living museum of simple, rustic life as it used to be.
Stay here and, within a very short time, it is easy to sit back and imagine the life and traditional ways of the peasants who once toiled here and in the hills all around.
For day time relaxation at the castle, there is a swimming pool which is open from 1 June onwards, but, given the great size of the estate, the occupants of all but apartments Dottore, Giannina and Casa Nuova will need their hire car to reach it.
The estate's extensive grounds offer excellent opportunities for many pleasant walks and include a small lake where guests are permitted to try their hand at a little fishing.
The nearest town to the estate is Strada — said to have received its name from an old Roman road — but Grassina is easier to reach and has a better range of shops.
The list of sightseeing opportunities from here is long and lavish.
The arts and culture of Renaissance Florence, are undoubtedly the region's chief attractions, and the city is less than 10 miles away, but all around, the rolling countryside is quite superb, offering some wonderful rural drives amidst olive groves and vineyards.
Beautiful, medieval Siena and the picturesque towers of San Gimignano are both within reach, and numerous other Tuscan treasures — from impressive villa estates offering wine tastings, to some of the region's best-preserved castles are nestled among the surrounding hills.
Just four miles away is Impruneta noted for its terracotta tiles (including those on Brunelleschi's dome) and for its pottery.
Castel Ruggero — a real find
Ruggero — rustic charm
Castel Ruggero — a living museum
Scenic Strada
The relaxed Ruggero
Ponte Agli Stolli
A mere dot on the map of Tuscany, the greatest asset of Ponte Agli Stolli is its position on the edge of two of Tuscany's most renowned areas Chianti and Valdarno.
It is located on the road which links the two.
Visitors can reach treasures of both Tuscany and Umbria and should not miss Greve And Figline whose central squares are among the most attractive of Tuscany's less celebrated squares.
Villa Venturini Self Catering
We were immediately attracted to this property.
It is a handsome villa on the edge of Ponte agli Stolli, and has been well renovated to form a most desirable residence.
The spacious rooms, most with rafted, painted ceilings and original old fireplaces, are enhanced by many characteristic items of period furniture.
An attractive large verandah provides two of the apartments with what, in summer time, amounts to an extra room.
Set amidst a backdrop of greenery there is a small raised-sides swimming pool.
Handsome Villa Venturini
Spacious Venturini
Lush setting for Villa Venturini
C. Berardenga San Gimignano
In 1220, Castelnuovo Berardenga, was at the heart of one of the bloodiest of battles between Siena and Florence — one said to have coloured the ‘River Arbia in red’.
Today the only red liquid to be seen is the excellent ‘Chianti Classico’.
San Gimignano is known as ‘the city of towers’.
In the 14th century there were no less than 72, today only 15 remain.
Originally erected for private defence and as status symbols, today they form part of Italy's best-preserved medieval town — rich in history and culture.
The towers of San Gimignano
San Gimignano
Residence Curina C.BERARDENGA Self Catering
About four miles or so west of Castelnuovo is the estate of Curina with a 17th century villa and rural outhouses which have been tastefully restored.
They are now comfortable and attractive residences where the original character and style of the buildings has been retained.
All are comfortably appointed with TV, telephone and some items of period furniture.
There is a swimming pool, tennis court, billiard room, occasional piano bar, and there is the possibility of arranging half or full board locally.
The attractive Residence Curina
Villa San Paolo SAN GIMIGNANO ∗∗∗∗
It would be somewhat difficult to pick the best of the Villa San Paolo's many attractions, but, if we were pushed to it, we would go for the stupendous view from the swimming pool.
Imagine a vista of rolling Tuscan hills with the outline of San Gimignano's towers on the crest of the last of them!
But then it requires a fair amount of imagination to picture this place without seeing it.
It was converted from a nobleman's residence situated about two and a half miles north-east of San Gimignano on the way to Certaldo, is surrounded by its own gardens and is tastefully appointed in every aspect.
The house is not very large — there are only 13 bedrooms in all — and this, together with the friendly, attentive service, combine to give guests the impression that they are staying in a graceful home rather than a hotel.
There is a very pretty sitting-room and the bedrooms are furnished in traditional style in three delicate pastel shades — one for each floor.
All have air-conditioning, telephone, TV and mini-bar.
The poolside bar can provide light meals at lunchtime and just over one mile away there is the restaurant Leonetto at the Hotel Renaie under the same management.
Price includes bed and breakfast, however evening meals may be taken at the Leonetto for a supplement.
Supplements per person per night:Single room (on request) £16.50; Half Board £18.25.
Villa San Paolo
Hotel Le Renaie ∗∗∗
Just a couple of miles from San Gimignano on the road to Certaldo, a turning on the left leads on amidst fields, olive groves and vineyards for a further mile and a half or so to the tiny hamlet of Pancole.
On approaching, from some distance off, the first greeting is given by the elegant shape of a belfry emerging from the surrounding greenery; it belongs to the 17th century church of Santa Maria graced by the renowned painting of the Virgin by Pier Francesco Fiorentino.
Sharing the beauty and tranquillity of this location with a few other houses, a former farm building was initially converted into a restaurant in about 1970 and rapidly acquired local fame thanks to the good cooking and the able management of the owner who gave it his own name ‘Leonetto’.
(The restaurant is closed on Tuesdays when guests are invited to dine at a restaurant in San Gimignano.)
Some ten years and several tasteful additions later, the present hotel was launched and it is with pleasure that we include it in our programme.
Under the same management as the Villa San Paolo down the road, it shows the same ability albeit in a different category, to combine taste and comfort in providing hospitality.
The eye catching verandah alongside the building accommodates tables for outdoor eating in summer and on the ground floor there is also a lounge and bar.
On the floors above, sorry no lift, there are 26 bedrooms appointed in crisp country style in cool, pale shades of white, pink and green.
All have telephone, most with views over the enchanting surroundings and a very few also have terrace or balcony.
There is a garden with a small swimming pool.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £13.75; Balcony (on request) £6.25.
The elegant Le Renaie
Poolside at La Renaie
Hotel Leon Bianco ∗∗∗
One of the several things we would advise any visitor to San Gimignano to do is to be in its main square, Piazza della Cisterna, towards evening when the light of the setting sun tinges the buildings with delicate colours.
On the north side of this square, and just across from the famous 13th century well, is the Hotel Leon Bianco which we picked for Citalia guests three years ago and which immediately found favour amongst them.
Owned and managed by Paolo Galgani the hotel has characteristic public rooms, an inner courtyard with its own well and a delightful terrace on the second floor when an Italian style buffet breakfast is sometimes served.
Most rooms, have interesting views either of the square or hills and vineyards that produce the local ‘Vernaccia’.
Everywhere, solid wooden furniture, original doors and iron bedsteads are in evidence.
One particular bedroom is so spacious it can accommodate up to four people and full of atmosphere, with an unusual brick vaulted ceiling.
Given the nature of San Gimignano's medieval town plan, traffic is severely restricted within the walls.
Guests staying in hotels in the centre, like the Leon Bianco, are however, allowed to drive in to off-load and re-load luggage.
At all other times, cars are parked just outside the walls where there is some free as well as fee paying parking available.
Price includes bed and breakfast.
Supplements per person per night:Single room (on request) £10.50.
The Leon Bianco by the old well
Leon Bianco's hall
Citalia VALUE
Honeymoon and silver anniversary couples staying at Le Renaie and Leon Bianco receive a bottle of sparkling wine, those staying at Villa San Paolo also receive fruit.
San Sano & San Felice
Once at the heart of battles between Florence and Siena, San Sano is a mere hamlet about 13 miles north of Siena.
The warriors have long gone but the castles, churches and hill towns remain, set in hills which produce the Chianti wines.
The little hamlet of San Felice lies virtually at the gates of Siena.
A tranquil, idyllic spot, the village produces some of Chianti's finest wines.
The famed Castello di Brolio and many other renowned castles and cellars are nearby.
Hotel Residence San Sano SAN SANO ∗∗∗
One or two of the few houses that make up the hamlet of San Sano were acquired and transformed by the owner with great mastery into the attractive Hotel Residence San Sano, Signor Matarazzo's taste runs to what could be called a ‘glorification of simplicity’.
Space and existing features of the old houses have been cleverly used in the transformation work, achieving a result which is remarkably uncluttered and harmonious.
This is particularly evident in the bedrooms which have private facilities, brick-tiled floors and windows onto marvellous views.
Signor Matarazzo personally looks after the comfort of his guests, and, if you decide to sample his restaurant, you can be certain that whatever is on the menu of the day will be well worth eating and reasonably priced.
The bountiful buffet breakfast served each morning sets just the right note to start the day by the fresh-water swimming pool.
The price includes bed and breakfast.
Supplements per person per night:Single room (on request) £9.25.
Cleverly converted Hotel Residence San Sano
GOLDEN CHOICE
Hotel Borgo San Felice SAN FELICE ∗∗∗∗
We are delighted to have found this beautiful establishment which is not really a hotel, in the conventional sense, rather a whole village turned into a hotel — with the exception of one or two buildings which house the wine production.
The transformation has been achieved with great taste and a total respect for the original character of the buildings.
One building accommodates the reception, bar and main lounge, plus 13 of the 53 bedrooms, with the remainder, 20 of which are suites, distributed amongst the other houses, each with a lounge.
The restaurant has a loggia alongside for summer dining, and there is an attractive swimming pool around which guests can spend a relaxed and leisurely day, soaking up the sunshine and looking out to the rolling countryside all around.
This is a quality establishment and the decor and furnishing has been chosen to be in keeping with the traditional style of the original building.
Bedrooms and suites all have immaculate bathrooms (most with shower not bath), TV and mini-bar.
Price includes bed and breakfast.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £37.25; Suite £21.75.
Poolside at the Borgo San Felice
Rustic Hotel Borgo San Felice
Siena Souvenirs
San Leonino & Siena
Siena is the ultimate delight.
The ancient enemy of Florence, the redoubtable champion of Tuscan Ghibellines, the irrepressible defender of popular freedom — today the most beautiful, graceful and serene of cities.
In medieval times, this part of the wine growing area was called the ‘League of Chianti’.
Deep in this territory, about eight miles from Siena and only five miles from Castellina, lies tiny San Leonino — six old, old houses, and a minute church.
Medieval Siena
Hotel Belvedere SAN LEONINO ∗∗∗
Admirably converted from one of the centuries old farmsteads that make up San Leonino, the Hotel Belvedere combines original ambience with modern comforts.
There is a restaurant offering simple cuisine, and a garden and pool with stunning views.
The bedrooms are all beautifully appointed in period style.
The setting is scenically very beautiful but also provides a very convenient base for those who are keen to explore this region as a whole — the ‘League of Chianti’ is all around and we can most particularly recommend Radda, the League's ancient capital, which is within easy reach.
The price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Lazy days at the Belvedere
Beautiful Belvedere — San Leonino
Casa Colibri SIENA
This is a small, really delightful residence situated in one of Siena's most central medieval streets.
Here, you are at the very heart of this beautiful city, staying in not so much a conventional hotel, as a comfortable home from home where your welcoming hosts are Signor and Signora Farnetani.
There are just seven simple bedrooms, a book-lined lounge and cleverly designed bar for relaxing in, and lovely little breakfast loft.
Everything here speaks of the owners' attentive care and good taste.
It lives up to its name — small and pretty.
There is no lift.
The price 
Delightful Casa Colibri
Citalia VALUE
Honeymoon and silver anniversary couples staying at Borgo San Felice receive a bottle of sparkling wine and fruit, those staying at San Sano, Casa Colibri and Belvedere receive a bottle of sparkling wine.
Panzano & Lucignano
A little after Greve and about 21 miles from Florence is the hilltop town of Panzano, a well known Chianti centre with many shops.
Just beyond is the church and cloister of San Leolino — simple and enchantingly memorable.
Lucignano has many little treasures, the town is particularly proud of an artifact called ‘Albero di Lucignano’.
It was made in the 15th century and meant to keep holy relics but, at its feet, newly married couples used to promise each other eternal love and fidelity.
Picturesque Lucignano
Plenty of shops to visit
Villa Le Barone
Villa Le Barone PANZANO ∗∗∗
This is an exquisite small hotel which perfectly complements the charm of the locality.
A lovely villa, set in beautiful gardens amidst vineyards it was once the home of the della Robbias, the family of renaissance artists, famous for their glazed ‘terracotta’ work, and whose masterpieces are to be admired all over Florence's churches and galleries — most notably the lovely cherubs which grace the foundling hospital in Piazza della Santissima Annunziata.
Still owned by Franca Vivani della Robbia, the villa is now managed by Signora Caterina Buonamici of the same family.
From the elegant small lounges to the beautifully appointed bedrooms located in the villa (or in the neighbouring annexe residence at a reduction), and the former stables now turned into a charming restaurant, everything here speaks of innate good taste.
Amongst the many lovely views, the most glorious is from the swimming pool, across the olive groves to the Church of San Leolino with a semi-circle of Chianti hills as a backdrop.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Supplements per person per night:Annexe rooms £12.25.
Le Barone's garden
Relax by Le Barone's pool
Tuscan tranquillity
Hotel Da Toto LUCIGNANO ∗∗∗
Enter Lucignano and one of the first things to immediately impress the first-time visitor is the peace and quiet of the town's narrow streets and alleyways.
Enter through the Porta San Giusto, one of the two gates into the town, head towards the ‘Cassero’, the old fortress, past the ‘Collegiata’, the town's main church and on to the town hall and you will find the Hotel Da Toto.
A sign above the door proclaims it to be an ‘Albergo-Osteria’, a hostelry or inn and within you find accommodation which perfectly suits that description being bohemian in both appearance and atmosphere.
The Da Toto is best known locally for the local dishes served in its good restaurant and Citalia guests will dine on three or four courses each evening of rustic, Tuscan specialities, with the added attraction of unlimited wine and mineral water included in the price.
The bedrooms at the Da Toto are simply furnished and have a telephone.
The price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £6.25.
Welcoming Da Toto
Lucca Area
Lucca is one of Italy's most beautiful cities, largely untouched by most Tuscan tourists.
The famous walls and ramparts of the city, now surround lush lawns and leafy trees.
Lucca has a long and brave history and its rigid grid of streets still betray its Roman origins.
It has survived many a crisis and witnessed many turbulent conflicts but today revels in simple pleasures and peaceful serenity.
Historic Lucca
Hotel Villa San Michele ∗∗∗∗ and Villa Claudia Self Catering
A little over a mile from Lucca, a turning leads to a vast park of age old oak, cork and bay trees surrounding the Villa San Michele, jealously guarding its serenity.
The former home of an ecclesiastical dignitary, the villa was built in the 14th century.
It was restored in the 17th century and further refurbished more recently with all work retaining the original style and atmosphere.
Beautiful and interesting items adorn the hotel, from the entrance hall to the spacious, airy bedrooms all of which have air-conditioning, telephone, colour TV and minibar.
The price for hotel includes bed and breakfast, or guests can stay, just over a mile away in the estate's self-catering annexe — the Villa Claudia.
Here there are just two apartments, with a returnable 250,000 Lire deposit payable on arrival.
Michele amid the olives
Friendly Residence Claudia
Relaxing Villa San Michele
Citalia VALUE
Honeymoon and silver anniversary couples staying at Villa San Michele, Le Barone and Da Toto receive a bottle of sparkling wine, those staying at the Villa San Michele also receive fruit, those staying at La Barone also receive flowers.
Villa San Michele
A complimentary dinner in a typical restaurant for all honeymoon couples.
Villa Claudia
Welcome drink at the Villa San Michele and a bottle of wine in apartment on arrival.
UMBRIA
Gubbio
Gubbio is one of the most fascinating places in Umbria.
Its hillside position is exceptional and its views of the surrounding countryside entrancing, but it is best known among Italians as the place gentle Saint Francis is said to have tamed a mean, ferocious wolf which had been terrorising locals.
Visitors do not find any wolves today, instead — alluring shops, restaurants and much local produce.
Residence Castelnovo Self Catering
This former 16th century abbey with large farmhouse is approximately four miles from Gubbio, set high amidst glorious woodland, in a locality called San Martino in Colle.
Five apartments are in the old abbey, one in the adjoining outbuilding and five in the farmhouse next to the nearby swimming pool.
The swimming pool is floodlit at night and there is a covered barbecue area with al fresco dining facilities for your use.
The Castelnovo offers a choice from eleven self-catering apartments.
All the apartments boast beautiful views of nearby Gubbio and the surrounding countryside and are suitably equipped with a  serviceable kitchenette corner area.
The Castelnovo is well managed as is its sister residence La Panoramica, all of the apartments at the Castelnovo are named after trees and detailed below.
Castelnovo
Rolling landscapes
Castelnovo a 16th century retreat
Residence Castelnovo — modern comfort
Local souvenirs
Villa La Panoramica Self Catering
Hotel La Panoramica is literally a ‘sister’ residence of the Residence Castelnovo since the respective owners are brother and sister.
They are situated on practically adjoining hills and are more or less the same distance away from Gubbio.
Here too is an attractive swimming pool, and as a bonus it is possible, on arrival, to make direct arrangements with the caretaker to have someone cook for you each day (subject to availability).
A former large farmhouse, La Panoramica is now five attractive apartments all romantically named after flowers.
Each of the apartments has outside tables and chairs for al fresco meals.
The pleasant pool at the Panoramica
Comfortable apartments
The peaceful Panoramica
Vistas of Gubbio from the Panoramica
Cable car to Saint Ubaldo
Castel Cortevecchio Self Catering
About six miles from Gubbio en route to Umbertide, a turning on the right points to Pietralunga.
We strongly recommend you follow this road and if you do, in less than two miles you will reach the Castel Cortevecchio.
The history of this property dates way back to the 13th century, but it was in the 19th century, that a nobleman came here and, for his wife, rebuilt the castle on the 13th century ruins.
The present owners have worked further on the property converting the castle itself and the surrounding stone farm buildings into comfortable residences.
They have taken care to combine their excellent tastes with good quality materials to ensure  a pleasing outcome.
Peace and tranquillity reign in the well-kept grounds, which offer numerous tables and chairs in pleasant shady corners, for guests to relax in.
Four of the residences — Pozzo, Fonte, Sorgente and Ruscello have their own seating areas and are away from the main building.
There is a swimming pool with bar and on the ground floor of the castle, a small intimate restaurant, for residents only, which serves local specialities.
Tennis courts and riding stables are planned for summer 1992.
All apartments have TV and telephone.
A refundable 200,000 Lire deposit is payable on arrival.
All are within easy reach of Gubbio which is among the best restored medieval towns in Umbria.
On at least one trip to the town visitors must be sure to take the cable-car up to Saint Ubaldo's basilica where the saint's remains are housed and from where the views of Gubbio are simply spectacular.
On a more light-hearted note, Gubbio is also known as the ‘paese dei malti’— the town of the mad people — and to qualify as mad you have simply to run three times around the Bargello Fountain.
This done you can obtain your certificate of madness, as a fun souvenir of Gubbio, from the nearby shop!
Umbria is a wonderful region where life is simple and the people are unpretentious country folk.
It is the ideal place to forget the worries of the 20th century and step back in time, and the apartments offered at the Castel Cortevecchio all provide a relaxed and comfortable holiday base in the heart of this unspoilt, unhurried countryside.
A fairytale world from the 13th century
Gubbio — Roman remains
The swimming pool is near the castle
A place in the sun overshadowed by history
Montemaggiore
The main road from Perugia to Gubbio is curiously known as ‘pigeon road’.
Just why is unclear but follow it and, four miles before Gubbio, a road branches off to the beautiful region of Monte Maggiore.
Here, there is no village just marvellous countryside and stunning views.
The nearest village is Ponte d'Assi just over a mile away.
Residence Elena Self Catering
We discovered the beautiful scenery is not the only attraction of Monte Maggiore, and when we found the Residence Elena we felt, at once, that we just had to add it to our selection.
The buildings of the farmhouse date back to the 17th century and are occupied, in part, by the present owner, the English speaking Signora Elena Mancini.
It is Signora Mancini who has turned these buildings into an attractive residence, and it is the lady's exceptional talents and great love of country life which have found  a true expression in the transformation of Residence Elena into a lovely property of character and charm.
This is a property still small and smiling enough to be called a ‘home’ rather than a hotel, with an intimate and friendly atmosphere.
Signora Mancini's guests find staying here, they are really able to see the wonders of the Italian countryside at close range.
They can obtain fresh produce such as eggs and milk from the estate, even request a selection of fresh vegetables from the surrounding fields.
There are just two comfortable and well-appointed apartments available at the Residence Elena and outside the building there are plenty of sitting areas — all around and under the mulberry trees where chicken and ducks cluck and quack away contentedly.
Residence Elena has a small lake where guests might like to take a swim, except on Thursdays, Saturdays and Sundays when they are invited to use the lake for a little fishing.
There is an additional 10,000 Lire a day charge for heating, if used (payable locally).
A returnable 150,000 Lire deposit is payable on arrival.
Residence Elena — a home in the country
Local colour
Spectacular views from Residence Elena
Montelovesco
Almost 12 miles from Gubbio, a left turn leads over a little bridge and up a secondary road to Montelovesco.
Just after bridge and before the three mile climb to Palazzo del Castaldo, stop and you'll find the 11th century stone Abbey of Camporeggiano dated 1060.
Built before the Battle of Hastings, it is a place where thoughts of infinite peace irrepressibly come to mind.
Palazzo del Castaldo Self Catering
This is a most beautiful residence created with great love and care by the owners, the Vaiani family, who now offer a very warm welcome and generous hospitality.
An ancient fortified residence, the Palazzo del Castaldo has been converted with the emphasis on supreme taste throughout and a masterly use of fine antiques and many lovely features.
The palazzo now offers five lovely apartments all of which are furnished to a high standard some with antiques — and of individual character and charm.
There is a wonderfully positioned swimming pool with relaxing sunloungers, surrounded by well-kept gardens and a lovely loggia.
Under the portico there is a table tennis table guests can use and an outdoor oven with large al fresco eating area for summery lunches or evening meals on warmer nights.
The palazzo is built around a courtyard with a truncated tower at its base.
It overlooks the tiny village of Montelovesco and offers some really lovely views of the hills of Umbria.
A refundable 200,000 Lire deposit is payable on arrival.
An extra charge of 20,000 Lire a day is charged if heating is used.
The fortified Castaldo
The rustic tower and courtyard
Apartments by the pool
Character comforts at the Castaldo
Scenic views surround the pool
A charming bedroom
San Arcangelo
San Arcangelo del Lago is situated on the southern shore of Lake Trasimeno — a lake which fires the imagination and delights the eye.
Legend has it that the lake was formed by the tears of a love torn nymph, and at the end of a luminous day, when the sun turns everything to delicate hues, even the sceptical are ready to admit they have seen the Trasimeno nymph — adding to the water level with a few tears more.
Borgo Cenaioli Self Catering
A group of pilgrims once received, as a gift from the Popes, a plot of land on the southern shore of the Lake Trasimeno.
Here they held a big dinner or ‘cena’, hence Borgo Cenaioli.
The tiny hamlet, carefully restored, has kept its appearance and much of the original spirit thanks to the young couple, Giovanni and Chiara, who own most of it and run things from their little ‘taverna’.
Chiara dishes up tasty food, changing the simple menu every evening and afterwards there is communal chatter and laughter under the herb hung rafters.
Once a week or so accordion music sounds will make feet itch under a canopy of stars in the tiny village square.
For daytime activities there is a small swimming pool with a view of Lake Trasimeno which is three quarters of a mile away.
Shopping for food is easy as there are shops  less than a mile away.
There are three apartments available, appointed in simple style with a sprinkling of original Umbrian peasant furniture.
Borgo Cenaioli — a tiny hamlet
Visit Perugia close by
Lake Trasimeno and surrounding views
Cenerente, Città della Pieve & Ficulle
Ficulle is a small town with ancient origins, which still retains some of its medieval walls and watchtowers dating back to the 13th century.
Forty miles south of Perugia it is now an agricultural centre.
Cenerente is a small village about three miles from Perugia which is silhouetted against the skyline on a hilltop 1000 feet above the Tiber plains.
Reached through winding landscapes bathed in delicate hues reminiscent of a Perugino painting, Città della Pieve was Perugino's birthplace and has hardly changed since renaissance times.
Villa Oscano CENERENTE ∗∗∗∗
Villa Oscano stands in parkland, famed for its flora and fauna and adjoining woodlands.
Originally built in 1600, the first building on this site was a fortified lookout tower.
It was then transformed into a castle by Countess Telfener at the turn of the century and became a great meeting place of the cultured and famous of the area, and a venue for duels.
It is now a beautiful period residence, restored with great care and until recently kept as a private home.
Everything here speaks of aristocratic good taste from the comfortable sitting and drawing rooms to the book-lined walls of the library.
An imposing wooden staircase and gallery leads up to the suites which have a bedroom and a sitting area or sitting room, a bathroom, TV and telephone.
Most bedrooms also have gorgeous views of the surrounding hills.
Twin rooms are available at La Foresteria next to the villa at a reduction.
The price includes dinner bed and breakfast.
Supplements per person per night:Half Board £21.25;Reductions per person per night:La Foresteria £25.00.
The romantic Villa Oscano
Historic staircase — Villa Oscano
Villa Oscano — upstairs and downstairs
Interesting souvenirs
La Casella Country Village FICULLE ∗∗∗
This was a working farm up until a few years ago and, the country atmosphere and customs have been preserved.
Meals, for example, are eaten communally at long tables and comprise simple but excellent fare, created almost entirely from estate produce.
This is a veritable paradise for all those who love walking, swimming and above all, horse riding.
There is a superb riding centre with courses for beginners and miles and miles of signposted tracks over the countryside, through woods and across streams.
There are two tennis courts, a pool to laze by and a bar.
The bedrooms, located in various former farmhouses, are tastefully appointed in rustic style, have private facilities and are wonderfully cool.
Those we have chosen are in the ‘Noci’ farmhouse and most have lovely old brick floors, rafted ceilings and scenes of idyllic peace from their windows.
The price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Supplements per person per night:Full board £6.50.
La Casella — ideal for walking and swimming
Mariano Estate CITTA DELLA PIEVE Self Catering
When a genial Belgian couple, came to Italy looking for a home, they discovered the Mariano Estate and fell first for its perfect views.
The house was then little more than a pleasant dwelling, but the position was perfect.
With much love and labour, they have transformed it into a beautiful home which they are now pleased to share with their guests.
The house has its own swimming pool (open 15 May), and is three miles from Città della Pieve.
Citalia offers guests three apartments — each named after the fragrant herbs which grow around the house.
Apartments La Malva and Salvia have an outdoor area with table and chairs.
For all, a returnable 200,000 Lire deposit is payable on arrival.
The well situated -Mariano
View of the Mariano Estate
Città della Pieve is a famous art town
Apartment at the Mariano
The Mariano Estate — new for 1992
Citalia VALUE
Honeymoon and silver anniversary couples staying at La Casella receive a bottle of sparkling wine, those staying at the Villa Oscano receive a bottle of sparkling wine and fruit.
Poreta di Spoleto, Panicale & Gubbio
Set atop one of the hills which hug Lake Trasimeno, Panicale is a tranquil little medieval town whose main attraction is  its views — rivalled only by its wines.
Spoleto is famed for art treasures, temples and festivals, and the nearby hamlet of Poreta, is simply the ideal base from which to visit these sights and many more.
Fascinating Gubbio is best known as the place where Saint Francis tamed a ferocious wolf.
Today, Gubbio offers alluring shops, restaurants and fabulous views.
Hotel Le Casaline PORETA DI SPOLETO ∗∗
Going northwards along the Via Flaminia, about five miles or so past Spoleto, a signpost on the right points to Poreta.
Take this turn and after a couple of miles the road narrows incredibly through the hedges and stone houses of the village.
Pass through the village, and off to the right you will find a farmyard with chickens pecking, ducks waddling and a couple of horses grazing peacefully.
This is Le Casaline — a collection of low and ancient farm buildings which now form a truly rural retreat.
Take a breath and you find the air is filled with the fresh, intoxicating scent of fields and woodlands, mingled with the aroma of good food being prepared.
First and foremost this rustic establishment is dedicated to good food.
Listed in a publication called: ‘The 365 best restaurants in Italy’, there are just seven original rooms all with red brick flooring and iron bedsteads.
Tranquillity and excellent cooking are not, however, the only attribute, there are also many beautiful sights nearby including the conical shapes of Trevi whose houses and churches cascade down the hillside.
Price includes dinner (or lunch), bed and breakfast.
Supplements per person per night:Twin for sole use (on request) £5.95.
Casaline — in the heart of the country
Gubbio sights
Casaline cuisine
Casaline, dedicated to good food
Rural delights, Casaline
Hotel Torre dei Calzolari GUBBIO ∗∗∗∗
The story goes that this castle was founded by Emperor Frederick Barbarossa, ‘Redbeard’ no less.
Today the obviously ancient framework sits alongside modern additions and reconstructions.
The Latin motto inscribed over the giant fireplace reads: ‘Ego sum qui sum’—‘I am who I am’ or ‘You take me as I am’.
What you find is an extraordinary and striking combination of old and new which houses an elegant restaurant, bar, lounge, banqueting rooms and even a chapel.
There is a pool (from 1 June) in the surrounding park (swimming caps compulsory) and the bedrooms, in a separate building some yards from the castle, are ultra modern with telephone, TV and mini-bar.
From here, guests are ideally placed to visit some of the lesser known eastern Umbria such as Gualdo Tadino, famous for producing unique artistic pottery.
Price includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Supplements per person per night:Single room 16 May–11 Sept £6.50,(all other times) no supplement.
Torre dei Calzolari — serene and majestic with a rich colourful past
Calzolari — pool among the parklands
Villa di Monte Solare PANICALE ∗∗∗
When we first saw the most attractive results of the restoration work effected by a young Roman couple on this old patrician residence, we felt immediately we simply had to introduce it to Citalia customers.
Now, two years on, we are still congratulating ourselves on our choice.
This is a beautiful residence restored to leave as much of the original refined country home as possible.
The villa is furnished throughout with original brick or tile floors, rafted ceilings, elegantly simple and simply elegant antique items, metal bedsteads and even an exquisite little private chapel.
There are just eight bedrooms and two suites so an intimate, friendly atmosphere prevails.
In addition there is in the surrounding parkland, a swimming pool, set in a panoramic position, ideal for a relaxing dip, a tennis court for the energetic and horse riding facilities for those who really want to enjoy one of the region's favourite country  pursuits .
The cooking is traditional, with many of the ingredients produced on the estate.
Prices includes dinner, bed and breakfast.
Supplements per person per night:Suite £19.95.
Assisi — world famous
The Monte Solare has character
Monte Solare
Citalia VALUE
At all hotels honeymoon and silver anniversary couples receive a bottle of sparkling wine on arrival.
La Casaline
All guests receive a bottle of wine on arrival.
Torre Dei Calzolari
No single room supplement 2–15 May.
Assisi
Best known as the birthplace of St Francis, the ancient city of Assisi has a wonderful magical quality.
Standing high on the spur of Mount Subasio, it seems to provoke a feeling of peace, admiration and sheer joy.
St Francis lived here in the 11th century — with such a special relationship with all living things, that even the wild wolf of Gubbio was tamed.
Whether the saint's labours give Assisi its special feel, or the special feel inspired the saint — we'll leave you to decide.
Country House Hotel ∗∗
Signora Silvana Ciammarughi, the owner and creator of this unique establishment, nursed for a long time the dream of acquiring some old house of character, converting it and running it as a hotel.
Having found the right house in the most perfect location less than half a mile from the gates of Assisi, she set about transforming it.
As she looked for things to furnish the house with, Signora Silvana, with her innate good taste and love of beautiful things, developed another interest — collecting antiques — and the result is the Country House Hotel.
Have you ever wondered what it would be like to live in an antique shop?
You will wonder no more if you stay here and, if you take a fancy to the bed you sleep in, Signora Silvana, who speaks excellent English, will sell it to you!
It is perfectly true — for this hotel is also an antique shop.
We loved it when we first saw it and we have no doubt that you will too.
Price includes bed and breakfast.
Supplements per person per night:Twin for sole use (on request) £12.25.
Shades of summer
The Country House Hotel
Il Maniero ∗∗∗
This is a medieval castle with the feel of a welcoming home.
It stands on a hill, about two miles from Assisi, surrounded by parklands.
The decor is a fascinating mix of antique and modern and the bedrooms look out to the countryside.
There is a sun terrace, and a pool due for completion by 1 June 1992.
Price includes dinner (or lunch) bed and breakfast.
Supplements per person per night:Single room £6.50; Suite (on request) £7.50.
Il Maniero
Siena
The Basilica, Assisi
Citalia VALUE
Honeymoon and silver anniversary couples receive flowers at the Country House Hotel, a bottle of sparkling wine at Il Maniero.
Il Maniero
Complimentary lunch on day of arrival or day of departure for all guests staying 7 nights or more.
Touring
Touring is a marvellous, carefree way to get to know Italy and in 1992, the Citalia choice is greater than ever.
Five tours ranging from the ever popular Sicilian Carousel tour of the classical Greek ruins of Sicily, to a new Secrets of Abruzzo tour into one of Italy's most untouched and scenically stunning regions.
The new Flavours of the North tour takes you to Verona, Cortina and Venice, and such centres as Siena, Florence and Rome are explored on the Inspirational Italy tour.
For something really special, the unique Midsummer Spectacle offers excursions to Asolo and Marostica and stays in Bassano, Sirmione and Venice Lido, plus seats at the opening night of the Verona Opera Season.
Whichever you choose, travel is by air-conditioned coach and all tours are escorted by a knowledgeable guide and, as group size is limited to about 25 people, a friendly atmosphere prevails.
Midsummer Spectacle
This is a very special 14-night tour which has only one departure on 19 June — perfectly timed to give a limited number of our customers a chance to attend the opening night of the Verona Opera Season: Verdi's Don Carlo, performed in the 20,000 seat Roman Arena amphitheatre dating back to the 1st century.
You will have a choice of Poltroncine and Poltrone seats which are near to the front and available at a supplement.
You will be accompanied by our expert guide Mario Baiocchi who will introduce you to the history, sights and culture of the regions you visit.
ITINERARY:
FRIDAY — Depart from Gatwick to Verona and transfer to Bassano del Grappa, famed for its heady local brandy, for two nights at the Hotel Belvedere.