

1
Themes and Anticipations
Introduction
The ostensible subject matter of this book is violence and disorder.
Our settings are classrooms and the terraces of football grounds.
Our dramatis personae are the people who inhabit these places and the people who speak about them in various public ways.
Many people believe that there are schoolrooms and football grounds where civilized order is forever on the verge of breaking down.
How have they come to believe this?
Certainly not by direct experience, for few who ‘know’ about schoolroom or football violence have been present at its manifestations.
Newspaper, radio and television reports are intimately involved in the formation of our images of the places beyond our immediate experience, and the pictures we form of the places featured in our study are no exception.
Such reports suggest, often in the choice of vocabulary as much as in overt statement, that classrooms and football grounds are the settings for scenes of anarchy and disorder.
But more than that they imply a specific theory about the genesis of social violence.
It is the theory that in these special places gaps widen out in the texture of order and without that order uncontrollable impulses lead to meaningless and violent behaviour.
Set against this picture and parallel to the theory that accompanies and supports it is the idea of the possibility of order as a creation of social instruments ordained for that very task, namely teachers, police, social workers, and perhaps, in the last resort, parents.
As we will show, almost nothing of this popular conception survives a thorough examination of the day-to-day practices and the explanations that are vouchsafed for them in vogue among the folk who inhabit these notorious places.
Life, as it is lived in classrooms  and on the terraces, has almost none of the characteristics of anarchy and impulsiveness that are often attributed to it.
As Paul Corrigan shows (Corrigan, forthcoming), even the street corner, as a social place, is not what it seems from a passing vehicle.
Not only do we reveal a different interpretation of what is happening but we propose a very different psychological basis for this activity.
We have come to see it through the eyes of the people who take part in it.
They see their social life as a struggle for personal dignity in a general social framework that daily denies them this dignity.
Far from valuing disorder, they are engaged in the genesis of significance for their lives and an order in their actions that is their own.
The struggle begins when they see many of the things that seem routine to the rest of us as ways of devaluing them.
The official forms of order can seem anomic to those who are systematically treated as non-persons, since, as they pursue their lives, they have no stake in the society for whose maintenance that order exists.
If they are to have any significance, their lives must be self-constructed and made significant with the use of homemade materials.
Apprenticeship to Sociality
In what company do people acquire their sense of and competence in the social?
The immediate family and the experiences of family living must play a considerable role.
But it is certainly not the only locale nor the only company in which competence in and knowledge of the social world is acquired.
Talcott Parsons has proposed the very influential theory that of all other available institutions it is the classroom that above all converts an incomplete person into a member of the kind of society Parsons takes for granted as natural, that is, a kind of society where to be social is to be interested in achievement.
At the basis of Parsons's theory is a contrast between family life and school life.
School life is lived in a society that is constituted in the course of lessons.
The form it takes is very much in accordance with structuring principles imposed by the teacher.
In the family, as in the classroom, there is a dominant role player, usually the mother.
The central person is revealed by identifying the sources of rewards and privileges.
At home rewards are ‘ascriptive’, depending on who one is rather than on what one does.
What is given as a satisfying offering from the dominant person is roughly related to needs.
In the classroom, on the other hand, getting and giving is more nearly related to achievement.
Effort is the source of good things, if only one can get one's efforts recognized by the dominant person in the  situation.
In these ways, despite differences, schoolroom and home are continuously related to one another as social places.
But since there are much larger numbers in relation to the dominant person in the schoolroom than there are at home a distinct psychological break is experienced in the transition from one to the other.
Parsons believes that in the schoolroom the children acquire their attachment to the larger social order of adult society which is reflected in the methods of giving and getting encouraged in school.
As schooling goes on there is a progressive revelation of the selective role of the school vis-a-vis the labour market, bringing children into an asymptotic relation to ‘real life’, for which it provides the apprenticeship.
According to Parsons, criminality arises in the feral life of the playground.
We would turn this picture upside down.
The social structure of the society of the classroom seems to us as well adapted to be the nursery of crime as it is of ‘good’ behaviour.
The distinction between real and apparent achievement, if only it can be concealed from the teacher, and suitably managed by a child, provides the opportunity for rewards to be received just as well for cheating as for genuine achievement.
The possibility of achieving the semblance of virtue by working at standing high in the teacher's estimation, seems to us a perfect nursery for the acquisition of the criminal or exploitative view of the social world.
Parsons has socialized the official theory of the school and schooling without enquiry into its legitimacy or exclusiveness as a social theory of school.
But if the commonsense understanding of schooling is bracketed and belief suspended, another reality emerges, the life of the playground.
There, we believe, are constructed fragments of society the reality of which is unquestioned by the children who are its constructors and who know how to maintain it.
It is a world of compacts and bargains, of the control of present and future by ritual, a world dominated by the absolute power of words once spoken to bring order to the world of actions and social relations, an order which needs other words to dispel.
Here, if anywhere, lies true sociality, and the place of apprenticeship, for here oaths are really binding and rules need no sanction for their consent.
Here there can be no crime for it is a world built by all for all.
Deviation is managed and progressively denied by continual renegotiation of the social reality against which it is set off.
In the chapters to come, contrast if you will the demanding world of the schoolroom, as our participants see it, with the world of ritual and formal genesis of a respected self in the putting on the regalia of the club that reigns on the terraces.
Attributions: The Multiplicity of Rhetorics
A complex society usually includes a number of microsocieties whose ways of assigning meaning to their actions are not universally nor even very widely shared in the community.
In such a situation the possibility exists for attributions of meaning to be made to the deeds of members of the microsociety which bear little resemblance to the meanings attributed by the members themselves.
An intuition that this is indeed so may be very difficult to substantiate if the attributions made by members of the dominant society are very loud and very visible, and those of the members of the microsociety hard to come by, perhaps because those members are not easy to contact.
There are many examples of this situation in contemporary Britain, such as the case of some schoolchildren, many gypsies and almost all football fans.
We shall distinguish attributions as external when made by members of the dominant society to the deeds of members of the microsociety, and as internal when attributions are made by members to deeds of their own or of other members of the microsociety to which they belong.
External attributions may take two forms:
That there is no meaning to be attached to the members' actions.
An article in the Oxford Times of 18 May 1976 describes an encounter between a householder and a group of rather tiresome young people who had chosen his street frontage as a meeting place.
Trouble grew between the family whose house was beleaguered each night and the unwelcome street visitors.
We shall be drawing upon this case further, but for the moment we want to draw attention only to the way in which the reporter, by a particular choice of descriptive vocabulary, conveyed the impression that the actions of the group were meaningless.
They were described as ‘shouting and screaming’.
While one may reasonably ask what someone shouted, it hardly makes sense to ask what it was they screamed.
So the conjunction of these two words effectively prevents the raising of the question as to what it was that they were saying.
Their vocalizations are consigned to the category of mere noise.
2 That the activities of some young people, particularly adolescents, are not to be explained in terms of the ordinary, rational rule-following upon which we pride ourselves, but as springing from primitive, almost animal-like impulses and drives.
In this mode of attribution young people are not spoken of as having tragic love affairs, rather it is said that ‘they can't cope with physical sexual experiences’.
On the following page is a newspaper report as an illustration of this mode of attribution.
Girl who dies ‘could not cope with sex’
A girl pupil at Millfield School began having sex at 14, an inquest was told yesterday.
But early maturity led to her killing herself.
Mr. Daniel Williams, the coroner at the inquest at Honiton, said Joanna Burrell, aged 15, could not cope with her physical sexual experiences ‘divorced from any continuing permanent affection’.
She had lain on her bed at her farmhouse home on January 2 and put a double-barrelled shotgun to her head.
Recording a verdict that she killed herself, Mr. Williams said: ‘She was an affectionate girl, and a girl who needed affection.
She was a young and sensitive girl growing up, and she found things too much for her.’
The sentence ‘Early maturity led to her killing herself’ suggests an organic disorder, rather than a human tragedy.
Had we had her account available our guess is that it would have been expressed in such a way as to suggest a quite different kind of story, where personal rather than biological matters were at issue.
The same sort of attribution, of urges out of control, is a recurring theme in the reporting of school violence.
Here we can turn to a report by Tim Devlin in The Times of 6 May 1975.
A teacher is reported as speaking in the following way: ‘Two huge girls were fighting.
I was really frightened they would hurt each other.
I could not stop them, so I rather let them get on with it…
’ This could be read equally as ‘Two huge bears were…’and the picture would not be essentially different.
No sense of a sharing in the social meaning of what was going on emerges, and we daresay the unfortunate teacher, with whose plight we do indeed sympathize, did not have the faintest idea what was afoot.
But what was afoot was not an encounter between natural forces, or even animals, but people .
The same rhetoric appears with great frequency in the description of the football scene.
Here are some examples:
Soccer Hooligans Run Riot Violence erupted at the…
Public House…the landlord said ‘It was terrifying’.
Fence Them In British soccer's first spiked steel fence will form an impenetrable barrier to unruly…fans next season.
Where Were the Tartan Terrors?
The loudly heralded Tartan Terror on the road to Wembley failed to show up yesterday.
Londoners discovered that despite the dire  predictions, the Scots might look a bit terrifying, but they were more interested in the goings-on at Wembley.
Smash These Thugs Rees pledge after soccer terror trip.
Clobber Boys on the Rampage
However, some reporting is more sophisticated.
Under the heading ‘Wild Ones of the Terraces’, a typical piece of the standard rhetoric, a fan was allowed to speak for himself.
‘We fight for the pride of our ends’ he explained.
‘What's so marvellous, is that these kids who are doing bum jobs, and are said to be idiots, can get themselves organized like this, and set up a fabulous military strategy that goes into battle.’
We shall show that, contrary to popular opinion, the ‘kids’ are knowledgeable about their situation and the meaning of their actions, and are capable of deploying a high standard of theorizing about their activities.
They show considerable linguistic and conceptual sophistication.
In short, they have an explanatory rhetoric at their command.
But it is different from that of the media.
The latter both reflects and influences the speech forms and the conceptual resources of those who describe what are essentially alien lives from the outside.
The existence of two rhetorics, of two different systems of understanding and explanation at such odds with one another, leads to a situation in which the lives and aspirations, wishes and needs of each company become more and more opaque to each other .
A contrary point of view has been maintained in a very popular socio-linguistic theory which has had considerable recent currency.
This is Bernstein's theory of restricted and elaborated codes (Bernstein, 1971).
Roughly, the theory claims that ‘working-class’ children, those with whom we have been speaking in preparing this study, are suffering from a linguistic and cognitive defect vis-a-vis their ‘middle-class’counterparts.
According to Bernstein, the very conditions of their upbringing lead to their being linguistically crippled.
Their language is a restricted code, so they will not be able to formulate and hence will not be able to understand many of the things which middle-class children can formulate and understand.
Mental horizons will be restricted because linguistic resources are restricted.
The distinction between a restricted and an elaborated code is based on language studies carried out by middle-class investigators who entered the social world of ‘working-class’ children from the outside and without credentials valid in that world.
Not surprisingly, communication was simplified and rudimentary forms dominated the interactions, as those imposed upon adopted the time-old tactic of retreating into inarticulateness to conceal what goes on within their life-world.
This social tactic leads to the idea that linguistic deficit has been established empirically.
The theory was rounded off by the idea that the structure and content of the curriculum as practised in any school whatever, formal or free-form was to the advantage of those capable of indefinite linguistic and conceptual elaboration.
It will become clear in the course of our exposition that our studies do not support this theory.
There is no evidence of linguistic deficit.
Everything depends upon the situation in which talk and theorizing takes place, and between whom it is created, and what it is about.
There are, however, great differences in linguistic style between academically and non-academically oriented children.
We are forced to conclude that each microsociety has its own elaborated code, capable of indefinite extension, but that it presents an opaque front to the confrontation surfaces of other microsocieties.
Opacity is a social creation, a device of resistance, achieved by the closing down of speech till it has all the appearances of a restricted code.
In the rudimentary forms of communication which are the only survivors of the closing-down process, very few issues indeed can be addressed.
A striking example of the growth of opacity is to be found in the story we have already referred to, as reported in the Oxford Mail.
The episode as reported, involved a confrontation between a family, let us call them the Joneses, and a number of young people.
These young people, much like a flock of birds, settled along the Joneses' street frontage.
The newspaper reports the affair wholly within the rhetoric of the Joneses.
We have no record in the newspaper of an account from the point of view of the ‘kids’.
Their rhetoric is not represented.
Our interpretation of the predicament of the Joneses is simple.
Each side generates a discourse that is powerless and almost meaningless in the linguistic world of the other.
Mr Jones's attempts to control the situation by speech, his speech forms being in all probability m the mode of command, are reported as leading amazingly rapidly to the offer of violence.
Can this have been the opening phases of the interaction?
Hardly.
Mr Jones's reported ‘telling-them-to-go’ belongs in a mode of speech instantly recognizable by the folk of the flock as part of the rhetoric of the very world they are closed to.
No doubt there was speech addressed from them to him speech he now glosses as ‘greeting with abuse and swearing’.
How could this situation fail to develop if he ‘failed to stop the nuisance by appealing to the parents of the young people’?
It is just their dignity as selves that is at issue, and Mr Jones has chosen the most  powerful humiliation of all, that is treating them as within the social control of their parents.
At this stage nothing remains but that each should present an opaque front to the other.
Mr Jones issues orders — the kids offer simplified abuse.
Each has achieved opacity by progressive restriction of their modes of communication.
The kids see Mr Jones as incapable of anything but command, Mr Jones sees the kids as incapable of anything but abuse.
The newspaper reporter fails both sides to the dispute by adopting the rhetoric of only one of them, that of Mr Jones.
But then Mr Jones has access to the reporter and to the apparatus of public statement in a way that the kids manifestly do not.
We are not suggesting that it was a good thing that a flock of kids roosted on Mr Jones's garden fence.
They must have been a bloody nuisance.
But the situation was not as the newspaper led its readers to believe, that is the articulate Mr Jones and the feral flock of savages locked in primitive combat.
Two cultures confronted one another, each, as we shall show, capable of elaboration within.
Sometimes a theory is forcibly ‘shared’, either by reason of the rhetorical power of its promoters, or more rarely by exacting physical penalties from those who demur.
Outside the imaginations of well-meaning social scientists and novelists that sort of situation is rare.
Mostly master and slave share a theory.
And the reverberations of that shared theory may last for a very long time, long after the institution which was its natural concomitant in day-to-day social practices has gone.
A striking example of this is the passive ‘loser’ social style of many American black people, the style that black militants have tried with some desperation and success to redress.
It reflects a conception of themselves inherited from the theory of their nature and place in a slave society, a theory they shared with the slave owners, and from whom they learned it.
Depersonalization rituals, including the conditions on the voyage from Africa and the ritual humiliations of their inauguration to the plantation society have been carefully detailed in modern historical studies of the institution.
In our case too, pupils and teachers share the theory that the pupils are ‘written off’.
We do not know how this shared theory came to be acquired.
Labelling theory has revealed something of the genesis of individual theories of the self in society, but we know little about the mechanisms and occasions of large-scale learning of such things.
Moral Panic
Neither the use of different rhetorical systems nor the genesis of  mutual opacity to understand can explain the force and indeed the extravagant character of the attributions imposed upon disenchanted and rebellious schoolchildren and rumbustious football fans.
To explain this we introduce Stan Cohen's concept of ‘moral panic’.
Societies appear subject, every now and then, to periods of moral panic.
A condition, episode, person or group of persons emerges to become defined as a threat to societal values and interests; its nature is presented in a stylised and stereotypical fashion by the media; the moral barricades are manned by editors, bishops politicians and other right-thinking people; socially accredited experts pronounce their diagnoses and solutions; ways of coping are evolved or (more often) resorted to; the condition then disappears, submerges or deteriorates and becomes more visible.
Sometimes the object of the panic is quite novel and at other times it is something which has been in existence long enough, but suddenly appears in the limelight.
Sometimes the panic passes over and is forgotten, except in folklore and collective memory; at other times it has more serious and long-lasting repercussions and might produce such changes as those in legal and social policy or even in the way that society conceives itself (S. Cohen, 1972).
Since the war, a succession of moral panics have spread through our society, each with its characteristic ‘object’.
These objects have ranged historically from Teddy Boys through to Mods and Rockers and Skinheads.
The most recent are the football hooligans, who for many people, and not least the feature writers of our Sunday newspapers, have come to represent all that is most senseless and destructive in our society.
Anyone doubting such a claim should simply scan, as we have done, headlines of the more popular newspapers from about 1968 onwards and note the frequency with which terms such as‘mindless’, ‘evil’, ‘thuggery’, ‘mad’, ‘violent’, ‘wanton destruction’, etc., crop up in reports concerning football supporters.
From reading such reports one might be forgiven for thinking that the football terraces ran deep with blood each Saturday and that fans of Manchester United, like Protestants in parts of rural Spain, really do have horns on their heads.
From a transactional sociological viewpoint, the function of Folk Devils is quite clear.
In setting up certain members as visible examples of what is proscribed, by attributing forbidden characteristics to them, they serve as images of disorder and evil.
Having created
Since the completion of this text, Punks have joined hooligans as a focus of moral panic (see Marsh, 1977).
these images, our society is more able to ascribe to the majority of its members — the right-thinking corpus — a comforting sense of order and social propriety.
This is not a new message, but in trying to develop a more sensitive account of what contemporary Folk Devils are actually doing,we are obliged to consider how and why others in society have come to think of them as doing something quite different.
Whilst this is not a strong issue when discussing the allegedly anarchic wrecking of school classrooms (since we have yet to reach the stage where we cast the entire school population as outsiders) it is a crucial one in the discussion of the genesis of the football hooligan.
It is against a background of near hysteria that we set out to propose an alternative account of what is happening on the football terraces — an account based not on the second-hand rhetoric of myth-creating media men but on our faith in people's ability to render their own social action intelligible and meaningful.
The driving force behind the transactional approach with which we undertake a study of the fans is, of course, Howard Becker, and although this is not the place to enter into a long discussion of his contribution to a more radical sociology, some brief attention must be given to his work (Becker, 1963).
We hope it will be sufficient to point out that we draw from Becker, via Pollner and others, the useful contrast between ‘inside’ and ‘outside’models.
The outside model of Becker is the one which has become popular under the title of ‘labelling theory’ and which has seriously challenged the traditional approaches to the study of so-called deviance.
According to this model, deviance is a property which is created and sustained by a community's response to an act as deviant.
The deviance lies not in the act itself but is a consequence of the application by ‘moral entrepreneurs’ of rules and sanctions to the offender.
The obvious correctness of this argument can easily be demonstrated by near-to-hand examples.
Vandalism, for example, might be thought of as a collection of clearly identifiable acts requiring sanction for the simple reason that they offend against the property, both individual and collective, of members in society.
But contrast the reaction to football fans who run through a town creating damage as they go with the reaction to university students during rag week creating similar damage.
The former damage will be viewed as the result of ‘destructive hooliganism’ and dealt with accordingly, whilst the latter will be seen as arising from an excess of good-natured high spirits and over-enthusiasm.
Although the damaging acts are very similar, football fans are ‘deviants’ whilst students, for reasons not made explicit, are somehow excused.
We might also note that what constitutes an offence in legal terms also changes over time.
Acts such as those involving homosexuality or  abortion would, only a few years ago, have been held up as examples of ‘hardcore’ deviance.
And yet those same acts today escape formal sanction.
Clearly the relativistic approach of Becker is self evidently required in one form or another in any sociology of deviance, and it is perhaps a rather miserable reflection on the state of the discipline that such an elementary argument is ignored by those who see it as clashing with their struggle for admission to the club of natural science.
On its own, this outside model is insufficient for our purposes.
Whilst it rightly steers us away from naive and simplistic causal theories of deviance, it can hardly provide an approach which is substantially more fruitful.
But implicit in what Becker has to say is the ‘inside’ model, and it is in the juxtaposition of inside and outside models that more realistic explanations are to be found.
Becker hints at the inside model when he concludes, not without generating some confusion, that ‘whether a given act is deviant or not depends in part on the nature of the act (that is, whether or not it violates some rule) and in part on what other people do about it’.
We see here a move away from the view that deviance is simply what people so label, to the notion that it might also have something to do with the acts that ‘deviants’ engage in.
The problem, however, is that Becker fails to reconcile to any acceptable degree what appear to be two mutually antagonistic themes.
Pollner, on the other hand, by adding some flesh to the skeletal possibilities implied by Becker, provides us with a working summary of an approach which yields both sociological and social-psychological perspectives:
Seen from the ‘inside’ of an already symbolic universe, ‘deviance’presents itself as a property inhering in the acts so characterised.
Yet when viewed from the ‘outside’, the ‘deviance’ that such acts are deemed to possess is assured only by virtue of a community's orientation to them as wrong, immoral, evil, etc.
From within, deviance is an objective property of the act, whereas from without deviance is brought into the world by the communal response (Pollner, 1974).
Following this, it is clear that an understanding of any ‘deviant’ phenomena will require two avenues of investigation.
The first involves a sociological theory of societal creation of deviance and the processes by which this is achieved.
The second requires a social psychology of the symbolic universe in which acts are endowed with meaning and the commonsense accounts which are offered within such a universe to render the imposed concept of deviance intelligible.
The task for us is the second of these — the presentation of the ‘inside’ social world of the football fan and uncontrollable  schoolchild.
But our task is made relevant only in the context of an adequate sociological model which provides for an account, from ‘without’, of the processes by which football fans come to be viewed as deviant, and how fans come to be portrayed as disordered and devilish.
Such a model, we suggest, might well be found in deviancy amplification theory.
Deviancy amplification is achieved by means of a relatively simple positive feedback loop.
In its basic form, as proposed by Leslie Wilkins (1964), societal reactions to initial, and often minor, acts of alleged deviance, have the effect of producing some degree of isolation and alienation among those who commit such acts.
This in turn leads to a reaction on the part of the deviants which usually involves an increase in the frequency or intensity of the deviant acts.
Societal reactions increase as a result and from then on the system feeds on itself.
A specialized version of this is the cycles of retribution we have identified in school.
Such a model, in this bare form, is too mechanistic to be of real value.
Deviants cannot be viewed as billiard balls inescapably moved by the social forces that surround them.
Jock Young (1971), however, following Matza, points out that no such mechanistic assumptions are required for the model.
He sees the deviant group as creating its own circumstances to the extent that it makes meaningful the societal reactions to it, or better generates meaning for itself in a world whose societal reactions deny them the full status of persons.
Within society the agencies of law and order, and those in a position to sustain the hegemonic ideology, constitute ‘controllers’.
Both the controllers and the deviant group construct tacit theories in order to explain each other, and such theories are put to the test in interactions between them but never by both groups together.
Each tests its own theory.
Occasions for such testing occur, for example, during police v. football fan conflicts in and around soccer grounds, in the editorial comments of the media, on the streets and in the classrooms where, whatever teachers may intend, their actions are interpreted as contempt.
According to the feedback model, the hypotheses of the controllers about football fans, and of the football fans about the mentality of the controllers, will determine the direction and intensity of the amplification process.
Inevitably, however, through selective perceptions of action and reaction, the two sets of hypotheses will often receive verification and confirmation.
The resultant hardening of attitudes and images is the stuff from which myths and stereotypes are made.
The main elements of the deviancy amplification process are shown schematically in Figure 1.
Positive feedback systems such as the one outlined, can serve as very useful explanatory devices in social science, and we shall have  recourse to another such system later.
At the moment we have some idea of the motives for casting certain groups in society as ‘outsiders’.
We also have some idea of how casting might be achieved.
Such ideas we take to form the basis for an adequate sociological model, alongside which we seek to propose our inside account.
It should be noted, however, that we will not be concerned with an explanation of why football fans and ‘non-academic pupils’ as opposed to other groups of boys and girls have come to be cast in this way.
It may very well be that the socio-political theory of Ian Taylor, who suggests that soccer hooliganism results from fans being alienated from their football clubs, provides for a correct analysis.
As football has become a big-business enterprise in this country, and since the players, who once were seen as members of  the same working-class community as the fans themselves, have become rich superstars, the close identity between fans and their team has been eroded.
Contemporary ‘problems’ on the terraces can thus be seen, in this historical context, as a coherent resistance of change and as an attempt by fans to reclaim their soccer heritage.
The origins of deviant groups will clearly have a distinct socio-historical context, and analysis of such a context may very well be of considerable explanatory value.
But in general, we feel that such explanations need not be particularly powerful.
Having accepted that deviance can become amplified through a positive feedback mechanism, and that the initial acts of deviance on which the system feeds are often quite minor, only a relatively weak explanation of the original deviance is called for.
We might even go so far as to say that amplification of deviance among one group rather than among another could simply be due to chance.
An analogy can be drawn with the notion of mutations in genetics.
Here a few chance changes in genetic structure, often quite minor in themselves, can result in a dramatic change in the phylogeny of a given species.
Similarly, what we might call a ‘social accident’, can result in radical alterations of relations within society.
Most importantly, even though such ‘accidents’ may be shown to have had some precipitating social factors in the past, there is no need to suggest that such factors are present today.
Once such factors have done their work, the feedback system takes over and itself constitutes an adequate explanation, as an ‘outside’ model.
In presenting an inside account of social order on the terraces and in the classroom attention is given to an elaboration of the social structures existing among young fans and trouble-makers and the role positions available to members.
The data for this elaboration come mainly from a participant observation study at Oxford United and from conversations at a local youth club, but data from other grounds are included to show that Oxford United is far from being an isolated case.
Rather, it will be suggested that many of the structures described are more or less ‘universal’ within the football culture as a whole.
Life in other schools is described in another volume of this series.
In Paul Corrigan's study Doing Nothing he suggests that ‘trouble in school’ is more or less the same elsewhere.
Actions, Acts and Social Knowledge
The studies to be reported here are based upon a quite specific theory about the relation between social action and individual knowledge of the social world.
A person's social life is seen as  involving two kinds of performances.
There are the actions he or she contributes to the total social process, and there are the accounts in which action is interpreted, criticized and justified.
The fundamental ethogenic hypothesis that links acting and accounting is the idea that an individual's ability to do either depends upon his stock of social knowledge.
Such knowledge forms a single system in each individual person so that his actions and his accounts are performances drawing only upon one corpus of knowledge.
This knowledge is revealed in different ways of acting and in accounting since each is directed to a different end.
Actions are the means by which we accomplish social acts, while accounts serve to make what we do intelligible and justified.
Our studies are aimed at revealing this knowledge and exploring its structure.
The organized system of social knowledge each individual possesses for social performances corresponds to the competence linguists attribute to speakers of a language.
The concept of ‘competence’ as it is used in linguistics corresponds to our idea of individual social knowledge and belief.
Our work is aimed primarily at discovering the content and organization of the social knowledge and belief an individual member has to have, to be able to perform reasonably adequately in the social life of his group.
We are not proposing a theory of how a typical member generates his performance on the basis of this knowledge.
There will be occasional hints at a theory of performance but they should be taken very hypothetically.
To develop a theory of the production of action we would have to introduce the concept of intention explicitly at the level of action.
This we do not propose to do.
Our participants intend the ends, that is to humiliate a teacher, a social act they accomplish singly or together.
We do not know enough to claim that they as consciously intend the means, the specific actions and speeches they produce to accomplish such a social act.
In talking of rules we are not offering a psychological theory of performance.
At best the idea of action as produced by the following of a rule is an icon or model of the process by which actions are really generated.
Of course such a stage is an essential preliminary to the formulation of a theory of the performance of action.
Theories in the traditional natural sciences are usually based upon icons of generative processes rather than knowledge of the generative processes themselves, and we are not unhappy to be in that company.
Like chemist and physicist we hope one day to be able to find out whether our icons are truly representative of reality.
Rules do really appear in accounts concerning the interpretation and justification of action.
But in generalizing the concept to the context of the control of action, ‘rule-following’ must be treated as a metaphor.
Rules of Interpretation and Rules of Action
The concept of rule as an explanatory device has gained wide currency in the social sciences.
There remains, however, considerable debate concerning how a rule might be precisely defined and how such a construct can be properly applied to the study of social behaviour.
(For a full consideration of this topic see the collection of essays in Collett (1977)).
Whilst we recognize the conceptual problems associated with rules and their application, the approach in the ethogenic study of the football and classroom cultures has been a pragmatic one.
To assert that conduct is orderly is, from our point of view, to imply that it is directed by a sense of social propriety — that not only is it non-random but that it is both generated and limited by prescriptions and the possibility of sanction, in particular the sanction of expressed disapproval.
For example, someone who accepts the official theory of life in the classroom and ‘wants to learn’ can be heavily sanctioned with abusive appellations from the same stock as are applied to the opposition on the terraces (cf.
Chapter 3).
The concept of ‘rule’ is used here in a ‘strong’sense — that is, as something held (although often tacitly) by all members of a group or community as representations of legitimacy and acceptability.
Implicit in the holding of such rules are notions of ought and should.
Such rules are not mere statistical abstractions but are directly discoverable, as we will attempt to show, in the accounts which football fans and schoolroom ‘trouble makers’ offer in explaining what they do and why they do it.
Following this, it is clear that a strong distinction can be made between rule on the one hand and normative regularity on the other.
Whilst the straightforward observation of overt activity on the football terraces and of cycles of retribution in school will provide evidence of certain invariant sequences and patterns of behaviour, it remains an empirical question as to whether such regularities are the product of rule following.
In general, two kinds of rule will be considered — first, rules of interpretation and second, prescriptive rules.
The distinction is in line with the Kantian contrast between constitutive and regulative rules.
Rules of interpretation are thought to be effective in the orderly ascription of meaning to objects and events.
They are involved in the way things are defined and made sense of.
Prescriptive rules, on the other hand, are seen as directions for action.
They are the rules which enable members to choose between possible modes of conduct available to them and to maintain a sense of propriety and social legitimacy.
Put simply, rules of interpretation  are to be found in answers to questions such as‘What is going on?’ or ‘What does this mean?’, whilst prescriptive rules are to be found through asking ‘What should one do?’
These two kinds of rule are not, of course, independent of each other .
Indeed, before one can decide what action is appropriate one requires an understanding of the social context in which one is acting and an interpretation of the actions occurring in that context.
Rules of interpretation, in attaching meaning to situations and their constituents, determine which prescriptive rules are applicable.
Action on the basis of such prescription, however, can subsequently lead to changing definitions of the situation which in turn will alter the directions of conduct.
Prescriptions presuppose interpretations, but actions on the basis of such prescriptions become themselves the subject of interpretation.
The strongest test for the existence of a rule is the ability of a member of a group to articulate the rule.
A person may, in giving an account of his actions, appeal to the existence of a rule in justifying what he did.
He might say that there was a convention relating to such actions or that he did something because it was expected of him.
He may even suggest, as many football fans do, that there is an ‘unwritten law’ which either impelled or restricted actions — certain things were either ‘done’or ‘not done’, and everybody in the group knew it.
Where a person offers a rule in this manner, it is reasonable to assume that the rule constitutes a reason for his actions, and in trying to make sense of the world of the football fan it is reasons, rather than causes, which we are seeking.
In many instances, however, it would be unreasonable to expect people to be readily able to articulate the rules which guide their behaviour.
Many of the routine social situations we find ourselves in are clearly rule-governed, but it is often extremely difficult to specify exactly what the rules are or what are the potential breaches of the rules.
We can, however, instantly recognize the actual instances where rules are broken.
In everyday language we used phrases such as‘he behaved inappropriately’ or ‘she should know that she can't wear trousers here’, or even ‘it's not cricket!’
When unequivocal recognition of an impropriety can be interpreted as the perception of an action as a breaching of a rule, we have a further sufficient condition for asserting that actions are rule-governed.
In addition to the above criteria of articulation and recognition of breaches, a further necessary condition must be satisfied: actions can only be said to be rule-governed when some other alternative actions are possible.
In other words, action which is predetermined by some external constraints cannot be seen in the same light as action which accords with some convention, though, on occasion, constrained action may be glossed as rule-governed in an associated account, particularly where the agency of a person is in doubt.
Certain actions of football fans, for example, are quite clearly directed by factors extrinsic to their group.
One would not want to suggest that attending football games on Saturdays, as opposed to any other day, was rule-governed if matches are only ever played on Saturdays.
Rules are arbitrary in character and are to do with the manner in which people choose between alternative modes of conduct.
As we are using the notion rules are to be seen as having all-or-none character — if a rule governs a kind of action such action is always governed by rule.
We are reluctant to accept that rules can be formulated as probabilistic statements.
That a rule can take the form of a statement ‘Given P, then Q on 75 per cent of occasions’, as is sometimes seriously suggested, is to use the concept of rule in a very dangerous and misleading way.
Furthermore, rules are not necessarily predictive of behaviour in any straightforward manner.
Their primary role is explanatory.
A person's actions can be explained in terms of his following of tacit conventions, but our knowledge of the rules will not allow us to predict what he will do at any given time.
Even if one thought that the pursuit of such predictions was useful, a great deal more information would be required, including a knowledge of the extent to which the rules were broken.
Indeed, we suspect that a rule which was never broken would not be a rule in our sense at all but rather an inevitability with the logical status of a law.
A consequence of seeing rules in this way is that a very high degree of consensus concerning the rule is to be expected among members cf the group or sub-culture in which the rule applies.
Social conventions would clearly be of little use if only a small proportion of members was aware of them, and the same holds for the interpretative rules which guide the manner in which meanings are attached to objects and situations.
Social order presupposes that members of a group have a common knowledge of rules.
The determination of such a consensus, however, is not without its problems.
We are faced, in the examination of justificatory accounts, with varying degrees of social knowledge and competence and, as we shall demonstrate, accounts themselves often appear to contain grave inconsistencies and internal contradictions.
Happily, such problems are not insoluble and it is towards a stage where we are able to make sense out of sometimes enigmatic statements by fans that a discovery procedure is directed.
Moral Careers
An individual's life in society can be described in a variety of ways, economic, ecological, etc.
For our purposes the most apposite is the  description of a course of life in terms of the growth of reputation or the loss of public standing undergone by an individual as he or she meets this or that social hazard.
A hazard is an occasion on which an individual can gain the respect or risk the contempt of his fellows.
Some people seek out occasions of hazard, others shrink from them.
The character or reputation a person has amongst his fellows is partly a product of his own efforts at self-presentation, partly an ascription to him by others on the basis of their readings of his life performances, partly in situations which can be seen as occasions of hazard.
Goffman has described how institutions offer individuals a framework for a moral career.
In his well-known work on asylums (Goffman, 1961) he shows how progress through the wards of a mental hospital can be looked upon as a progress through a system of hazards in the course of which honour and reputation is risked, gained and lost.
Sometimes a person may have to conceal parts of his past life, or even some of his own present physical characteristics, what Goffman (1963) has called stigmata, in order not to jeopardize his reputation in the eyes of others.
We follow him in treating these aspects of the life course as a moral career, since they are concerned with a person's reputation, a kind of continuous summing up of his life in terms of what sort of person he is supposed by his fellows to be.
Most institutions offer an  official life trajectory in terms of which honour can be acquired and reputation gained.
A school offers a complex, officially recognized and indeed officially defined progress, closely related to the official theory of the school as a place for learning.
There may be a second official moral career based upon prowess at officially recognized games.
There are honour boards, special clothes, badges, privileges and so on, varying from school to school, in which the results of success at the officially sanctioned occasions of hazard are displayed (Bernstein, 1971).
Most institutions also have an underlife, defining other forms of moral career with other occasions of hazard and other ways of rendering honour and marking reputation.
In the underlife official values are denied.
Those who subscribe to them and are honoured by reference to them may be thought of with contempt by those for whom the underlife is the serious basis of social living.
This book is mostly concerned with underlives, with those whose moral careers, for one reason or another, are lived in accordance with an unofficial conception of social progress.
The Method
The Intensive Design
In the traditional natural sciences generality is achieved in two different ways, each based upon a particular choice of the informal inverse relation between the intension and extension of a class.
By supposing that one has a typical member to investigate one can maximize one's knowledge of the properties and structure common to each member of the class by examining that one member in great detail.
If, however, one is uncertain about the typical choice of a typical member one may examine all the members one can reach and then form some kind of average, discovering the type that way.
The certainty that the average is a type is paid for by the relatively few properties which are likely to survive a generalizing procedure over many individuals.
On the other hand, the detail of the knowledge achieved in the use of the intensive design has to be paid for by the ever-present possibility that the case one chose was not typical.
Thus the risk is greater when one adopts the intensive design but the pay-off is correspondingly larger.
The extensive method is sure but shallow, the intensive deep but hazardous.
Some natural sciences, confident of the uniformity of their objects of study, have adopted the intensive design.
In chemistry the initial processes of purification are supposed to ensure that the sample is uncontaminated, and the processes of selection and isolation of materials, that it is typical.
Hence, chemical studies are confidently carried out on one or at most a very few instances of the materials that chemists are analysing and synthesizing.
The possibility of establishing a taxon or class by fiat encourages anatomists to take one or a few specimens and subject them to very detailed dissection.
In the ethogenic approach we follow the example of chemists and anatomists and adopt the intensive design, that is, we undertake a detailed study of a few cases selected as typical.
We are sure of the detailed validity of our analyses of our cases.
We can only hypothesize that they are typical.
Those who would follow the extensive design can be sure that their results are typical, but they must hypothesize as to whether the few properties that survive the working of the inverse ratio between extension and intension have any individuality at all(De Waele and Harre, 1976).
Our football-following participants are from one group of fans, supporters of just one local club.
With few exceptions the participants in our study of talk about classroom violence and its accounting are from one school that is graced by some of the fans.
We are inclined to think they are pretty typical, given our less detailed work at other football grounds and what we know of other groups of schoolchildren.
Interpretation of Actions and the Analysis of Accounts
Our theory is based on the idea that human social life is a product of an interaction between sequences of actions and talk about those actions.
Everything we do can be redone by talk.
In the course of talk our actions can be redefined and in the process are transformed.
Many of the consequences of our acts can be reversed or nullified by redefinition.
The rituals of apology can ameliorate the effects of social accidents.
Things once done can be undone.
Speech is involved both in the genesis and maintenance of the social world in action-sequences and in the correction and interpretation of that world in accounts, the speech in which we discourse about the action.
Acts can be performed by saying something just as well as by doing something.
Sometimes a wave can express gratitude as successfully as saying ‘Thanks’.
Since the basic hypothesis of the ethogenic approach to the understanding of social action is that the very same social knowledge and skill is involved in the genesis of action and of accounts, by recording and analysing each separately, we have two mutually supporting and reciprocally checking ways of discovering the underlying system of social knowledge and belief.
A further corollary which has figured largely in our studies is the idea that the best, though not necessarily the ultimate, authorities as to what the action ‘actually’ is, are the actors themselves.
In their accounts are to be found,prima facie,the best interpretations of what went on, from the standpoint of the problem of the interpretation of action.
This follows almost directly from the fact that the actors were the ones who intended the action in the first place.
But what about the fact that people lie, that they are perfectly capable of remaking the record to appear in a good light?
In particular, what about the point that people like to appear much more rational and in command of affairs than it sometimes seems from an outside viewpoint they really are?
All these points can be acknowledged without serious effect upon the method.
We are not claiming that an account is a verisimilitudinous description of the antecedents of action on each and every occasion.
Ethogenics is not introspection under another name.
Rather we suppose that in both accounts and in actions, the same knowledge of what is socially potent and proper is revealed.
It is only in the long run that a match gradually emerges between what is seen to happen and what is said to happen.
But  however that may be, we take it as axiomatic that unless it can be established to the contrary, the best authorities as to what went on are the actors themselves.
Their meanings and their rules have priority in the scientific analysis of the phenomena.
To say that they have priority is not to say that they have absolute hegemony over all other accounts at all other times, but rather that as a practical technique they are the accounts from which one's initial hypotheses as to what is happening must be taken.
And even in the very last analysis, those participant accounts must not be entirely lost sight of.
The Form and Content of Accounts: Analysis
An account is a discourse generally concerned with some particular social occasion.
It is a commentary upon the action on that occasion, dealing with the problem of how it should be interpreted, speculating on the motives, intentions and characters of those involved, and generally offering some kind of criticism and justification of whatever are taken to be the goings-on.
We believe that accounts, like actions, are manifestations of individual systems of knowledge and belief about the social world and the actions proper to develop and sustain it.
So our schema for representing that knowledge should be reflected in the concepts in accordance with which we analyse actual accounts.
So far as we have been able to see people need to be able to identify those social situations which are distinct in their culture.
To be able to do this they must have tacit knowledge of the characteristics which mark off each type of situation they can identify.
‘Situations’ in this sense, become the prime analytical devices.
Once they have been picked out from an account as recognized as distinct by the participating informants, other material can be sorted into categories with respect to them.
Reference to our theory as outlined in an earlier section of this chapter would suggest that the next most important item to be isolated in an account is the set of rules regarded as operative in each distinct situation.
There will be rules of interpretation and rules of action.
Most individual actors do not rely upon their own judgment of whether they are doing well in the action, but refer to certain members whose real or even fancied reactions are taken as the expression of binding judgments of propriety.
Finally, one must look for some representation in accounts of the personal style deemed appropriate in an encounter in a given type of situation.
The persona a person presents and the character he acquires in the eyes of the others drives primarily, we believe, not so much from what he does, but from how he does it.
Action is spoken of by use of verbs, style by the use of adverbs.
Style may  crystallize into persona and persona be understood as a public presentation of a particular type of social being.
We shall find all these features clearly exemplified in the talk that accounts for the action on the terraces and that makes what happened in school meaningful and right.
How Far Our Studies Fulfil the Methodological Ideal
Our two main fields of study do not fulfil the methodology equally well.
In the study of football fans we have access to the manifestations of action on and around the ground and even a permanent record of some of this action in the form of video and audio recordings.
Complementary to that record we have the accounts given by those fans of those very occasions and others like them.
Such accounts can be renegotiated, and indeed have been the subject of much discussion between the fans and ourselves.
But in the study of occasions of violence in school, only one of our parallel sources can be recorded and studied, namely the accounts, since we were not there when it all happened.
Indeed, we could not be there, since we have neither access to the classrooms where ‘disorder’ rules, nor if we had would social life reconstitute itself as it existed before the camera, tape recorders and people accountable as social scientists were upon the scene.
All we have are accounts, and in that part of the study our contrasting sources are those within the class and its social order, and those without, including, of course, the teacher unfortunate enough to have to tangle with the kids whose daily life-situation that classroom encompasses.
Nor have we been able to reassemble our group of school informants to renegotiate their accounts in the light of other things we know about schoolrooms in particular and young people in general.
Concepts
To bring our participants' social world to life in the kind of detail that is likely to carry conviction we must not just plunge into descriptions of the world of school and football ground, since without the concepts to see it no alternative to the official picture is likely to emerge.
Violence
Concepts, like other natural species, can be threatened with extinction  ‘Violence’ has lately been in danger.
Its meaning has begun to leak away through indiscriminate extensions beyond its original significance, extensions to cases which would normally be distinguished as cases of non-violence.
It has been applied to any influence one person may exert upon another, whether in speech or writing, whether by overt physical interference, whether directly in face-to-face confrontation, or anonymously through the links and influences of an institution.
An extreme example of such extension can be found in the description of teaching as an act of violence.
Sometimes new uses for a well-established term are so strange and mystifying that they refuse to ‘take’.
This seems to be the case with the extended use of ‘violence’.
We shall be using the term in the ordinary sense, without, we hope, any fear of being misunderstood.
For the more general notion of one person working upon another regardless of the medium of action, we shall retain the ordinary use of the term ‘influence’.
For us, then, an act of violence will be an act of physical interference with another, whether or not mediated by the use of a weapon.
The physical interference need not be sufficiently forceful or well-aimed to result in some form of damage or destruction to a proper part of the victim, though we suppose that a violent action would generally be painful to the recipient.
Violence proper can be direct, involving butting, hitting, shoving, squeezing, pulling, bending, biting, scratching, kicking, and so on.
Or it can be mediated by the use of instruments.
The distinction between direct and mediated violence is one of importance, not just because of the mechanical advantage achieved by the mediation of acts of violence through instruments of various sorts, but because an intention to act violently can be indicated by the display of the weapons.
Similarly, mimicry of the expressions, stance and actions of a truly violent encounter can represent an intention or threat.
From there it is an easy step to the setting up of conventions of symbolic violence, in which just the display without the intention to perform the action, can serve a ritual purpose, that is fulfil some other intention than that usually associated with those expressions, stances, shouted insults and so on.
For many fans the wearing of Dr Marten boots, and other ‘hard’ gear, is likely to have that role, that is to be symbolic rather than instrumental.
But violent encounters among human beings are, like other encounters, essentially social.
Physical contact alone, however destructive, does not constitute an act of violence.
The contact becomes an act only if in some way or another it can be provided with a social meaning.
This is of even more moment if, instead of acts of real violence, displays of weapons or aborted action-sequences are produced within a ritual framework.
To effect a ritual purpose a social  interpretation or attribution of meaning must somehow be available.
This point leads us to the concept of meaning.
Meaning
Human behaviour enters social reality in so far as it can be given a meaning.
How are we to understand this obvious truth?
The notion of meaning is exceedingly elusive and complex.
We will be working with a simplified form of a total theory of social meaning.
The basic formulae upon which we depend are:
That actions are interpretations of movements and speeches with respect to what we take to be the intention of the actor in making them.
2 That acts are the social effects of actions.
We can make clear what is meant by saying that the meaning of an action is the social act which the performing of the action brings about, with the help of examples.
We, as members of a culture, interpret a light kiss on the cheek as a greeting.
In Anglo-Saxon society it is usually confined to greetings between men and women who, are socially, but not sexually, intimate.
The act is a greeting, the action is a kiss, that is a brushing of the cheek by the lips as an intended action.
The act is a social entity; the action is a physical contact interpreted with respect to a certain intention, namely to greet.
Thus the intention of the actor is to perform the act, and local knowledge provides him with the means to achieve it.
Kissing in this form, as a proper way to greet someone in a certain relation to oneself, is a social convention.
The very same act may be performed through very different actions in other cultures.
The ‘otherness’ of an alien culture consists, in part, of there being different conventions linking acts with actions.
Hand-shaking, nose-rubbing, and courtly bowing, are among the alternative actions by means of which a greeting can be carried out.
Behind the specific accounts of meaning we offer in this book lies the general theory of Ferdinand de Saussure (1974).
His theory was developed for the purpose of giving an account of the way words have meanings, but it can easily be adapted to the task of representing the meanings of actions.
Saussurean theory is concerned with both the external relations of meaning and the internal structure of the system of meaningful elements in a language.
These he distinguishes as signifié and valeur respectively.
The act accomplished by the performance of a certain action or actions corresponds to the signifié of the meaningful element, the action.
But to be able to distinguish the action as a meaningful element in a system of such elements we must be able to represent its valeur.
This  is achieved with the setting up of a relational structure between the meaningful elements of the symbolic system.
The first step is to separate out the types of social episode in which a particular social action has a place, for example, the action of shaking hands.
The episodes in which that action figures are classified by reference to local conventions as having the force of the performance of this or that social act, such as greeting, betting, leave-taking, and so on.
The first dimension of meaning of the handshake as action is the open set of distinct social action sequences it helps to perform.
But in each ceremony alternative devices could have taken the place of the handshake.
Some alternatives would preserve the original meaning, others would change it.
The presence of a handshake could be thought of as excluding all possible alternatives, that is it excludes kissing, nodding, spitting, etc.
To grasp the meaning of a handshake we must not only see it positively as located in a greeting ceremonial, that is in a sequence of actions identified with respect to the social act they accomplish, but we must also see it negatively, as excluding certain alternatives and possibilities of action.
This theory is not really as complicated as it sounds.
The valeur of a socially meaningful item can be represented by means of a three dimensional grid.
On the X-axis are arranged the episode types in which that action plays a part; on the Y- and Z-axes the meaning-preserving and meaning-altering alternatives which are excluded by the performing of just that action.
Finally, one must be aware of yet another way in which social actions have meaning.
There is the meaning that derives from an association or convention of reference by which an object or an action comes to represent something abstract.
This is the way certain entities come to have meaning as religious symbols.
The actions of the marriage ceremony not only serve for the accomplishment of the social act of wedding, that is joining in matrimony, but are also said to symbolize ‘the mystical union twixt Christ and his Church’.
Sometimes an action or object has a meaning in this dimension that is quite arbitrary.
But some symbols acquire their additional semantic properties from some characteristic they have as actions or things.
A common form of this process is called ‘metonymy’.
In metonymic use an attribute or necessary adjunct of something is used as a symbolic object in place of the thing itself.
We would like to propose that many of the gestural sequences, both those directed towards the state of play on the football pitch and those occurring in the interactional posturing between rival fans, can be understood metonymically.
A clenched fist, a frosty stare or a head-thrust, feet-planted, arms-akimbo posture, being recognizable as proper parts or adjuncts to acts of real violence, can  stand in for the real thing in the ritualized ‘aggression’ to be described in a later chapter of this book.
As we shall show in the later sections, a great deal of the activities of the fans can be understood as symbolic activities in the mode of metonymy.
These are performances of the detached elements of sequences of actions which would, if carried through seriously, lead to the injury or death of their ‘rivals’.
Aggression
Popular, and indeed even professional psychology, has come freely to deploy the concept of aggression in accounts of interactions between human beings.
The term has been used in diverse ways.
It has been used as a collective noun for the action-sequences in which one person or a group of people direct action upon another, for the abstract concept of such types of action, as in the phrase ‘act of aggression’, and for the drive or impulse or intention which animates individual people to interfere with or even physically attack others.
We shall take the term in its third sense, as a property of human beings in virtue of which they are prone to direct action upon others in a typically thrusting and imperious way.
Aggression then is what is predicated of those who act or intend to act aggressively towards others.
But introducing an abstract noun is not the same thing as providing an explanation.
Considerable differences have arisen between those who have tried to show that aggression is a ‘natural’ human attribute, having its origins in genetic endowment, or something equally inaccessible to self-intervention and control.
Ethologists have offered a good deal of cross-cultural evidence, usually in the form of pictures of infants seizing each others' toys and pushing each other about in sandpits, to support the view that the tendency to direct unprovoked action upon another person is at least universal, even though there is nothing in the evidence to suggest a unique origin for the tendency.
Tajfel (1972),in a series of studies conducted within the old ‘experimentalist’ paradigm, examined the tendency of quite accidentally constituted groups to begin to act against each other.
The political character of much of this is not hard to discern.
Given that the biogenic character of aggression is established it does not exculpate other sources of influence, namely social and psychological, from responsibility for the attacks people make upon one another.
Both victim and aggressor would be immune from moral judgment; the former for taking whatever social path it was that made him vulnerable and the latter for unleashing his fury, frustrations or whatever, upon the passive recipient of his cruelty and wrath.
Our position is more complicated.
We do not wish to deny that the tendency to act aggressively may have a biological basis, that is be related to some heritable feature, and explicable from the point of view of evolutionary advantage.
But the social forms that the manifestations of the tendency take are very various and both historically conditioned and culturally determined.
In particular we shall show that there is good reason to distinguish ritual aggressive action, made up of elements of symbolic or metonymic violence, from physical violence directed in an aggressive way towards another human being.
We shall use the generic term ‘aggro’ * for ritual manifestations of aggression in symbolic or metonymic violence.
Order
Public interpretations of the ‘unseemly’ episodes of life in school and on the terraces are readily available in the popular press.
‘Classroom chaos’ and ‘Fans run riot’will do to typify many hundreds of headlines.
Such headlines both raise the issue of order in school and at the ground, and explicitly propose that it does not exist.
Riots and chaos are essentially disorderly.
Their presence contrasts with the order which might have been expected to prevail but which they have somehow displaced.
To understand the force of these interpretations of what has been happening we must be clear as to what the contrasting but implicit concept of order is supposed to comprise.
Order is associated with regularity and uniformity, that is with repetitions of the same or similar elements.
Thus a timetable which represents the week by week similarity of the arrangement of kinds of work in the day is a representation of order.
A non-uniform irregular disposition of work units from one day to the next would be disorderly.
In so far as a timetable can be thought of as functioning like a rule it can be thought of as an instrument of order.
In general in human contexts orderly behaviour has other features than just regularity.
In particular it seems to be required to be quiet, stable and relatively slow.
In an orderly procession, or an orderly leaving of the ground, the initial sequence of people is preserved, there is no passing and repassing, or quickening or slowing of pace.
Similarly, the breaking off from one task, routine or
Etymologically ‘aggro’ is related to ‘aggravation’rather than‘aggression’, but the coincidence is convenient.
project, while it is still uncompleted, and the taking up of another, which is itself broken off, unfinished, to return sometimes to the first task, sometimes to yet another, has all the marks of disorder.
The extreme form of this sort of thing is random or chaotic behaviour when no project is more than half begun before it is abandoned.
Finally, it seems also to be a taken-for-granted principle that in human affairs where there is order there is something corresponding to a rule to be looked for in the background of the actions which appear as orderly.
Rule-following is the typical mode of action by which the structure of the content of the rule is reproduced in the actions of the people, though we may have to explain their aims or the acts they intend, in other ways.
It follows from the association of order with regularity (and rule) that there is a close connection between the perception that a sequence is orderly and the expectation that it will continue to manifest that sequential property.
From a psychological point of view a good test for orderliness is the degree to which the unexpected does not happen, that expectations are fulfilled.
2
Trouble in School
In this chapter we are concerned to explore the interpretation and genesis of disorder and violence in the schoolroom from the point of view of the pupils.
We are concerned with disorder as it is seen by our participants and as it is represented in their accounts.
There is no way of telling how many of the episodes described are elaborations produced to impress, or how far they are accurate descriptions of action sequences on which both teachers and pupils would agree.
Our interest, however, lies in the principles employed by the pupils themselves to fit the actions they describe into a meaningful framework.
‘Trouble in school’ has been characterized by ‘officials’in the situation as meaningless.
As we have seen earlier (p. 5), Tim Devlin's teacher conjured up a disorderly, senseless situation.
Order for her did not exist but was something she wanted to impose on the class.
But as we will see, order of quite another kind does exist in the classroom, and if we want to understand schools and schooling, a comprehensive account must include both sides of the coin.
As we will show, the reality revealed in the pupils' speech is very different from the reality that has often been reported in the media.
It is a central tenet of the ethogenic approach that what seems to be one and only one institution may be embedded in more than one theory, and what may seem to be common and even co-ordinated practices may differ very widely indeed.
School is just such an institution.
The ‘official’ theory of schooling, complete with its own rhetoric and its own implicit social and psychological theories is challenged by an ‘unofficial’counterpart, such as the one which emerges from our participants' accounts.
The unofficial theory is revealed not only in the accounts by pupils of perceived offences against them by teachers, but is also seen in other images of school.
An example of this is shown in what has been called the ‘Colditz Bicycle Game’.
In schools where this game is played, the school staff are called by the names of the officers and guards of the camp, the exits of the school are named after escape routes from Colditz Castle and they are treated as such when the pupils bicycle out of school.
Television series such as‘Colditz’ and ‘Planet of the Apes’, serve as a ready source of knowledge for the conventions of their games and in them we see the deployment of a rhetoric from which the pupils' associated theory of schooling can be inferred.
The Social Context
Schoolrooms are in schools and schools are in communities.
Although the links and influences of one upon the other are far from clear, it is not irrelevant to an understanding of the accounts to know how the pupils represent the character of their community.
Our participants lived on a large 1960s council estate on the outskirts of a county town and the schoolrooms they describe were in the local comprehensive school situated on the estate.
Their community is geographically well defined.
Its social character seems equally so, at least in the talk of our participants.
Here is one boy's interpretation of that character:
‘You learn to scrounge [here].
Anybody's a good scrounger around here.’
’ Why?’
‘Everyone's so down in the dumps and poor.
Other than that they spend their money too quick.
Then they scrounge.
It's generally just a couple of bob here or a cigarette or something like that.’
‘How can you scrounge if everyone else is?’
‘Ah, well, see, it all depends.
They might have something one day and you cadge it off them, and you got something another day and they cadge it off you.
It's just like a big circle.
Or I get it off our old lady.
I scrounged a pound off her tonight.
I'll have to pay it back Friday.’
‘She doesn't give you money when you want?’
‘No.
Have to work for that.
It's hard graft getting it out of her.
I have to promise I'll give it her back.
Takes me about an hour to get it out of her.
She hasn't got enough to go round really.
We only get a certain amount a week off our dad [parents separated]and that's about it — and what I take home.’
‘What about social security?’
‘No, we don't get any social security but we got a rent rebate.
We only pay about 3.00 a week but we get a lot of food, and an electricity bill, and H.P. on certain things like the fridge and the telly.
It all mounts up.’
‘Are there any people who aren't poor around here?’
‘Oh yes.
Our next door neighbour's pretty rich.
He's a photographer.
He's on about 10,000 now.
Not bad for an estate house.
Not all of them are.
I don't know why some are.
They're all drunks around this place.
You go in the pub, you see hundreds of people in there all night.
They spend their money too quick.
Have luxuries they can't afford, like me.’
We were told the area was a pretty dull place.
Typically they said things like:
‘Generally, it's a bore.
There's not much to do around here.’
‘Oh, I'm a bit bored with the area because there's not much to do.
If you haven't got any money it's tough.
Nights when clubs aren't on or discos aren't on you get bored.
If you've got money you don't.
You can go in a pub and have a chat with your mates.’
Boredom featured strongly in their account and even the local youth club, which they went to frequently, was not valued very highly.
As one of them said,
’ See, this place in here, I hate it.
So does everybody in here.
They hate it, but it's like a magnet.
It draws you in.
It's somewhere to go.’
Not surprisingly, given their perception of the adult social world, drinking, whether at home when their parents were out, or illegally in pubs, seemed to make up a large part of their activities.
This often seemed to be taken to excess and getting drunk or ‘blind drunk’ was described as common practice, at least within their world as they revealed it to us.
Our Informants
If we take examination passes or examination aspirations as the measure, the type of person we are talking about here is the nonacademic pupil.
The school is the type that has not adapted itself to alternative, non-academic needs and which, in general, is not sensitive to the fact that pupils are people with as much right as anyone else to be respected.
In the perception of our non-academic pupils, school is represented as a waste of time.
It is not treated as ‘serious’, that is, as a part of their ‘real’ lives.
In other words, they as pupils are not living fully in accordance with the official school rhetoric.
For most of them, officially proposed tasks such as learning seemed to involve highly conventional behaviour fulfilling a ritual, the meaning of which was not apparent to them.
This is not just an arbitrary theory of schooling which they have dreamed up, but derives from their perception that they have been ‘written off’.
They believe that to those who work within the official theory of school they are non-persons.
They had little difficulty in finding abundant evidence for this hypothesis.
As one girl said:
‘The way you were treated by the teachers if you were staying on was a lot different than if you were leaving.
They sort of couldn't care less if you were going to leave at the end of the fourth year.
All their time was spent on the ones that were going to stay on, so ones that were going to leave at the end of the fourth year were never there and nobody sort of worried about them.’
Skiving was not infrequent — the pupils slipping out once the register had been called — and one boy had a job without officially leaving school.
As he said,
‘Well, I thought if I don't get these exams, I won't get a job, because that's what people rubbed into us, and then I thought, well, Christ, if I went down town now and had a look, I bet there's a dozen jobs that'd suit me.
So that's what I did one day and ended up with a job.’
For most of the pupils — of the type now readily labelled ‘ROSLA kids’— school is seen as an unpleasant trap and a deterrent to life.
They do not fit the conventional academic system in which there is seen to be little alternative provision for their needs, so they opt out altogether from involvement in school and wait resentfully for their official release at 16.
A Schools Council report (1970) has emphasized that the problem is not that this sort of pupil leaves school at the earliest opportunity but that as far as school learning goes they ‘leave’ at the age of about 12.
From then on, the school message is clear.
They have become devalued as people in their own right and everything that happens to them subsequently serves to reinforce this impression.
In his discussion of educational failure, Creber (1972) makes the following point, ‘Boredom’ is not the worst enemy, nor ‘relevance’the best answer.
The ultimate inhibitor of learning is that undervaluation of the individual implicit in the traditional tendency for the teacher to notice, above all — and perhaps exclusively — what a child can't do.
Couple this with all the marks of ritual degradation and the undermining of dignity and we have a damaging and possibly irreversible social experience.
Impressions of the world outside school add to their frustrations.
They are prevented from entering what appears to them the more appealing world of work, a world in which they can earn independence and the goods that money can buy.
Lack of formal paper qualifications to obtain good jobs is no deterrent at this stage.
Regrets come later and the trap is confirmed.
’ Messing about’: The Basic Sequence
Trouble in school is conceived by the pupils who take part in it both as a natural reaction to being in a classroom confronted by a teacher, and as a specific response to particular offences on the part of the teacher.
As we will see shortly, there are a number of specific offences and principles of retribution that emerge from our participants' accounts, but there is also a discernible generic category of action-sequences, namely, ‘messing about’, or ‘dossing about’.
This is seen both as a device for testing the seriousness of the teacher and thus his/her attitudes to the pupils themselves, and as a retributive routine for dealing in an orderly fashion with what they construe as insulting or demeaning.
This basic sequence is illustrated in the following extract:
‘I was in this lesson and two or three of my mates were messing about, and I was sat across the other side of the classroom and someone chucked a piece of chalk at the teacher and then started shouting his mouth off.
Straightaway the teacher ‘knew’ who it was [unjust accusation].
He turned round and kicked me out of the classroom for doing it.
So I hit him.’
Any action by the teacher which is deemed an offence is retaliated against without question.
From the pupils' perspective they are not there to accept passively any offensive action on the part of the  teachers merely because they are pupils.
Of course, what it is to ‘be a pupil’ is in some ways just what is at issue all along.
Our participants had the clear perception that they also have powers within the classroom, conceived as a specific social setting, and they act to establish themselves and their powers.
This is done, it seems, not so much to exercise their powers per se , but to counterbalance the perceived affronts to their dignity.
This basic sequence often appears in a more elaborate episode structure in which an element of provocation is added to the sequence of offence-retribution.
So, for example, a teacher who had already manifested an inability to ‘control’ a class, will have this failure taken as an insult by the pupils and this weakness will be played on by further messing around which is designed to explore its extent, ratify the insult and perpetuate the cycle.
The Recognition of Offence
In the previous section we identified a basic sequence from which ‘trouble’ emerges as a cycle of offence and retribution, elaborated in later phases to include a secondary cycle based upon past occasions of offence.
In the secondary cycle the offensive stance or attitude of someone, usually the teacher, has to be reconfirmed, so to speak.
The new sequence begins with a provocation which, if well directed, generates a new offence from the provoked teacher.
The new offence becomes the occasion for another and now legitimized act of retribution.
In an effort to understand the psychological bases of these cycles, we can begin by taking each stage separately.
We begin with a study of the categories of offence.
For all our participants, and undoubtedly for many of this age-group, a central issue that is constantly recurring in their interpretation of the day-to-day practices they encounter in their social lives is the extent to which they are recognized as persons of independent dignity and standing.
They are consequently highly sensitive to any occurrence that might offend against this principle.
We found that many of the school practices were interpreted in this way and an expression of the general basis of this contemptuous type of offence is found in the following comment.
‘We were still treated as kids when we were in the third year, well, we still are.’
But why is this so sensitive an issue at just this point in their lives?
We believe the answer can be found in the idea of a ‘moral career’.
As we defined this in Chapter 1, a moral career is the temporal  trajectory of public reputation and self-esteem, and their opposites.
At about the age of most of our participants the moral career of a child with its childish criteria of worth comes to an end.
Then one's moral career as an adult begins.
The tests and hazards are different, and perhaps have yet to be encountered.
In the world of adults a 15-year-old usually has little or no reputation.
We would suggest that the extreme sensitivity to self that characterizes adolescents is not just a psychological phenomena, but a social one to be understood in terms of moral career.
This is essentially a social concept since it represents the social development of a person, that is of the concept of self in the eyes of others.
Offences of Contempt 
1 Teachers Who Are ‘a Load of Rubbish ’.
Teachers who were arrogant and distant fell into this category and it is easy to see how they offend against the central principle and are deemed contemptuous.
Two typical comments along these lines are as follows:
‘Mostly…they're all straitlaced.
Keep putting us down.’
‘They go on as if they were never young and did the things we do.’
Less obvious is the offence by those teachers who are unable to break out of a strict interpretation of their teaching role, that is, as purveyors of information and nothing else.
As one of them said,
‘There's a few teachers who you can get on with and talk to.
They seem to understand you.
But most of the others, it's a nine-to-four job.
After that, forget it.
[They]Don't pay any attention, just do what you got to do and get out as quick as you can.’
This appears to be interpreted as an offence of contempt from two standpoints.
First, in the classroom the teacher is giving recognition to only a part of themselves, and a failing one at that when he concentrates on schoolwork.
Second, if the teacher dashes off as soon as school is over (s) he cannot care about it and so (s) he cannot care about the pupils who attend the school.
From the good teacher, pleasure and respect is derived.
Such a teacher is marked by the way in which the pupils are treated seriously, no matter how frivolous the content of the interaction.
‘He's old, but he understands people.’
‘He sort of treated you like, well, he didn't treat you like a pupil.
He treated you as one of them.
He'd knock you about and swear at you and everything, but, you know, he makes you feel sort of more at home.’
‘He talked to us, yes, but he wouldn't lecture us.
He'd talk it out with us and get it settled.
For instance, if you were given, say, poetry, and you couldn't get on with it, he wouldn't sort of force you into it, he'd sort of talk it over and find out why you didn't like it, couldn't get on with it, and then he'd put you on to something else you did like…
That's the only teacher I've found that would sort of give you variations of English, different sides to it.
He was like one of us, you know.
I mean, if you'd been talking to him during the lesson he'd say, well, if you want to talk about it, leave it till after the lesson.
I mean, we used to talk about anything to him.
Mostly he always used to take the mickey out of the girls because they always used to talk about their boy-friends and what they were doing on different nights and that, because you see, most of them went out with boys from the same school, see, and he knew them.
He used to sort of let the girls know what they'd been at.
Mind you, he used to tell the boys about the girls as well.
Mostly they're not like him.’
2 Anonymity .
One's sense of oneself as a person is closely bound up with one's name.
A later volume in this series will explore the social psychology of names in greater detail, but for the purpose of this chapter we need to draw only on commonsense understanding of the importance of names.
Not surprisingly, one potent source of offence, interpreted within the framework of practices which depersonalize and are therefore contemptuous, was the failure of the Headteacher to know people's names.
Adults gradually come to recognize and forgive nameaphasia, probably as they come to experience it more and more themselves.
Not so our participants who treat the inability of someone to remember their name as an act of personal contempt.
Couple this with lies about recognition and the offence is great.
As one girl said of her Headmaster,
‘You can go in there and he'll say, ‘Oh yes’ and try to think of your name.
He doesn't know who you are but he'll say he knows you.
He doesn't know any individual apart from the ones that are in there every day.’
3 The ‘Soft’ Teacher .
Each new teacher is put through a period of what we can call social apprenticeship by the pupils in order to ascertain what sort of person and disciplinarian (s) he is going to be.
As one of them said, ‘Because he was new we used to play him up at first, until we found out what he was really like.’
Being a soft teacher was seen to be one of the worst categories of offence.
The pupils are insulted by weakness on the part of those in authority who they expect to be strong and this weakness, once established, provokes more playing up:
‘I remember once we knocked one out, Miss Wright.
Nobody liked her and, well, we used to play on her because we knew she was soft.
She was always crying and storming out of the classroom.
And it was a French lesson, I think.
Nobody liked French, I don't think.
Anyway, she went out to get some text books, so there was a few of us who thought we'd have a bit of a laugh, do something to catch her out.
So we got a pair of football boots and some books and wedged them on the door, thinking that she'd naturally see them.
She walked straight in.
They knocked her clean out…there was a big line of us outside the Headmaster's office.’
Like many matters, this form of offence is based upon a perceived contrast.
‘Softness’ contrasts with expected strength.
As we read our participants' accounts, the severity of retribution is to be understood against a background of the degree to which they feel let down in relation to their expectations of those they feel they should respect.
In the following extract we see that an equally offensive act is one in which a soft teacher tries to assert authority, but when challenged gives in.
The teacher is condemned, not for trying to be strong, but for being unsuccessful in her attempt to reassert authority:
‘She tried kicking me out of the classroom.
I'd been mucking around and none of my mates like that.
They just started getting mad with her and chucking wooden dice that size at her, trying to hit her, and blackboard rubbers, smashing up the lightbulbs and everything, and in the end she just went in the store-cupboard, crying, so we locked her in.’
We will see later on in the chapter that the way in which this offence is perceived is strongly linked with the pupils’ own well-articulated theories about the nature and social value of discipline.
Offences of Unfairness
The pupils reported several different forms of unfairness but the first two to follow are perceived as the most striking in terms of devaluation.
Sibling comparison was considered highly offensive.
This involved a teacher treating a pupil in a manner which suggested that he or she was the same sort of person as an older brother or sister who had either offended in some way or was being offered as a worthy model.
’ I get on well with some teachers.
Other teachers got it in for me because my brother went there before me…
He was a troublemaker and now they're taking it out on me.’
A potential source of an unfair offence stemmed from the pupils' position as ‘pupils’ as opposed to‘teachers’where, by definition, teachers hold the ultimate authority.
As such, pupils often felt themselves ‘put down’ and ‘picked on’.
‘For a start, I bet they did it when they were our age.
I bet they did it worse than us if the truth was known.
I said to Mr Price, ‘Did you skive?’ and he said, ‘Yes, on and off’, so…‘
‘On my report they write that I'm a bit too chatty, that I talk too much to everybody, friends and teachers.
One comment on it said, I talk to the teacher, that is good.
Well, I'm the one who gets everyone else going — it starts the discussion.
And another comment was that I tend to wear the teacher's patience talking.
So I said to them, ‘Well, if I didn't talk you'd say I was withdrawn,’ and they didn't know how to answer that.
It's true.’
‘He said something that made the implication that I'd copied and I was sort of so choked I didn't answer.
If I look back on that [first year], that was one thing that really hurt me.
He meant it.
He almost said it, that I'd copied.’
Moving from the theme of devaluation, the last reported example of unfairness involves unjust punishment.
Within the official school framework there are penalties for inappropriate behaviour and the pupils acknowledge, at least, its theoretical structure.
But what they find intolerable is that penalties unrelated to the ‘offence’ should be  imposed.
This merely adds to their already strong sense of the senseless.
Witness the following extract:
‘The worst teacher I ever knew was the chemistry teacher.
I couldn't stand chemistry anyway, couldn't understand it at all, the atoms and the neutrons and all that.
I was just lost.
And he used to sort of ask you questions you know, sort of sit there and pick on you and if he knew you didn't have the faintest idea what he was going on about he'd ask you all the more, see, and if you couldn't answer it, he used to come up to you, look at you, wouldn't say nothing, give you this funny look and tell you to get in the next room.
He used to shut you in the next room and give you a pile of books and you'd have to take notes from about seven or eight different books.
His favourite was the telephone directory — all the Smiths or all the Joneses.’
‘Oh, not related to chemistry ?’
‘No, you'd do that for about three or four days and then he'd decide to ask you the same question again just to see if you did look it up.’
The Nature and Social Value of Order
To appreciate fully the origin of these offences we must look more closely at the kind of theories held by the pupils.
Where order is concerned, it appears that teachers are disrespected not only for not meting out appropriate punishment when deserved (within the official theory), but also for not exercising discipline within the classroom.
But what does this mean?
If they don't respond to the control which Tim Devlin's type of teacher wished to impose, what do they mean by discipline?
Apparently, this involves two aspects.
First, it concerns creating just the right atmosphere in the classroom for learning to take place at all in a human way.
As described in the following quote, the classical silent classroom is made redundant,
‘Well, if you don't talk, well, it's just like a funeral.
You just sit there, writing.
You got to have a bit of fun, chatter, otherwise it makes school boring.’
A balance between freedom, natural behaviour and complete rigidity in the classroom was seen to be the ideal goal.
As one of them said, ‘You know, you want someone who's pretty strict but who'll let you feel a bit free.’
Unfortunately, in this respect our participants  had little first-hand knowledge of teachers who provided such a balance.
Second, the instrumental aspect of order is valued so that people who want to can ‘get on’.
As one of them said,
‘The people that probably helped me fail my geography, they've left…well, they made a continual noise, stopped progress, you know.
The teacher had to stop to quieten them down.’
Our non-academic pupils however, were not too concerned about this aspect, but as will be seen from a later section, lack of order was a real problem for those people who wanted to get on and pass exams but were in mixed-ability groups.
So far we have been concerned with the expected actions of teachers in the classroom.
But what of the Head?
Instead of finding there a source of order which their theories would lead them to expect, they are shocked and insulted to find yet another example of lack of strength.
‘Yes, Miss Brown.
She caught me once when I was drunk in school.
Oh, quite a long time ago.
It must have been just before I left home in November.
I'd been over the pub at dinnertime.
I'd bought two bottles of cider and I went down my friend's house and I had two neat vodkas and two vodka-and-limes and I got drunk.
And in the first lesson nobody noticed and yet I was really noisy, and in the second lesson nobody noticed.
Then in the third one I had Miss Brown.
It was the last lesson of the day and I couldn't help it, but I come out with a big burp in the middle of the lesson and she goes, ‘Fay, are you feeling all right?’ and I says, ‘Yes Miss, of course I am’, and then she goes to me when I did it again, ‘FAY!’and I goes, ‘It's all right ’, I goes, ‘Pardon me, Miss.
I'll be all right in a minute’, and then she goes, ‘I'll let you off this time’, and then I did it again — a really loud one, and she goes, ‘Fay, you're going to have to go to the Headmistress’, she goes…
[At which point her friend in the interview interjects indignantly, ‘all for burping!’]
And she sent me down to the Headmistress and she says, ‘You've been drinking, haven't you?
What have you been drinking?’
I told her and she goes, ‘Where did you get it?’ and I goes, ‘From the off-licence’.
I wouldn't tell her that I got it from my friend, half of it, anyway.
She said, ‘Well, I hope you have a headache in the morning’, that's all she said, and ‘I'll have to tell your parents’.
So she sent a  letter home and my dad said, ‘Yes, well, you'd better not do it any more’.
I said, ‘All right, fair enough’.
And that was all of it.’
The same girl described another incident of this nature:
‘You can say anything to her [the Headmistress].
She told me once to do some lines and I goes, ‘It's not worth you telling me to do them, because I won't do them’, and she goes, ‘Well, I think you should do them’, and I goes, ‘Well, I'm not going to, so I don't know what you'll have to do with me’.
She goes, ‘Well, I agree with you that you're an awkward child’, and she goes, ‘Go back to your lesson and do your lesson well’.
That was it.’
We might expect to find a source of order and sense of confidence in the home, but for these particular people this was just not so.
Expectations had at one time run high, but a parallel case of offence by weakness emerged from the accounts of the home.
We see the father who fails to meet his expected role as protector and confidant regarded as indifferent and uncaring:
‘I don't like my dad very much.
I gets on all right with him but I don't like him.
He's not like a father as you'd sort of think of a father.
Well, they're supposed to be protective, aren't they?
He's not.
He couldn't care less what I do as long as he knows where I am.
I mean, you know, if I said I was going to an orgy he'd say, ‘Oh, all right, as long as I know where you are’.
He couldn't care less what I got up to.
All he wants to know is where I'm going.
And he won't talk to me about Paul [boyfriend].’
We see a son who is quite taken aback that his father does not exercise the sort of discipline he should do:
‘I must have been 13.
I was coming home from school, smoking, right.
I was walking along with my girl and I see my old man and I was scared, you know, smoking, but at the same time I didn't want to throw it away because my girl was there, you know, and she'd see it, and I just kept on walking and my old man stopped and said to me, ‘Give me a light’, and I give him a light, and he said, ‘I'm away to the shops’, and I was, you know, thinking, I can get away with this.
I was smoking and he didn't say nothing to me, see.’
Finally, we see the expression of contempt when a father tries to re-assert his authority but backs down after a challenge:
‘Well, I had an argument with my father tonight.
He said to me ‘You hardly stay in ever!
You haven't stayed in for about two months’, which is true really.
I'm always going out.
I haven't stayed in for about two months, about eight weeks, not one night, and he goes, ‘I think you should stay in at least one’, and I goes, ‘If you think I'm staying in then you get lost, because I'm not staying in this flaming house’, and he goes, ‘You're staying when I tell you to’, and I goes, ‘I won't’, and I walked out and came back ten minutes later and said, ‘I'm going out, all right?’ and he goes, ‘Okay’, and he give me some money to go out and come up here [to the youth club].
So it's really all right.
He's under my thumb really.’
The parallels between the structure of disappointment, devaluation as persons, and the cycles of offence and retribution in the home and school are very close.
Gradually, through such experiences, these people find there is no official source of order in two of the social worlds they know the best, school and home.
As we are beginning to see, however, these people generate their own rules for ordering their lives, they do not just exist in the middle of chaos.
The classroom gives us one example of this, and as we will reveal, one of the places where some form of serious life can be lived is on the football terraces.
Offences Which Are Recognized as ‘Legitimate’
It appears from the accounts that quite a different reading is given to occasions of physical or verbal reprimand which fall within the acknowledged framework of official penalties.
They are perceived as legitimate, not just because of this, but more importantly because the pupils feel able to respond in the same vein and at the same level.
However unpleasant the offence, it remains within a non-demeaning framework.
As we will see, offences of this kind are dealt with without hesitation on the basis of simple reciprocity.
Principles of Retribution
Offences are not allowed to pass without retribution.
The underlying rule-structure which determines the form that this takes is  dependent on how the offence has been perceived, that is, whether it is taken to be demeaning or non-demeaning.
Where the offence occurs within a legitimate framework, a principle of simple reciprocity frequently applies.
One gives back whatever one has received.
As one girl puts it,
‘And if they turn nasty, well, we can turn nasty too.’
Verbal insult is returned for verbal insult and on being hit one hits back.
In the accounts of classroom confrontation we found no instances of girls resorting to physical abuse, although it was a different matter in the home.
Perhaps in school, no one hit them first.
There is a second form of reciprocity where the reciprocal action does not take the same form as the insult.
The value but not the content of the offence is returned.
This form of reciprocation is used both for legitimate and contemptuous offences.
So, for example, we see the pupils messing around, ‘to get back at the teachers for telling them off and putting them in detention,’ or using physical violence after being unjustly accused of a misdemeanour, or being given a ‘soft’teacher.
Simple return of contempt for contempt is hard to manage.
It is an advanced social skill.
Undoubtedly, this is why our participants often resort to the second form of reciprocation when dealing with offences of a demeaning nature.
However, the accounts do reveal the operation of a different form of response in these instances, expressed in what we have called a principle of equilibration.
What we mean by this is that when the pupils feel themselves put down, treated without ‘seriousness’, they behave in such a way as to restore themselves to the status of mature beings.
Their conception of dignity then defines the form of their response.
In talking about such occasions, our participants describe themselves as making non-demeaning withdrawals into silence.
The teacher whose inability to control the class has been construed as demeaning, is infuriated all the more by tactics such as these.
As we see, from the following quote, this has the further effect of humiliating the teacher and leading to his loss of dignity:
Fay : ‘Mr Potts, he was ever such a laugh: but when he got in a temper he used to really shout and nobody took any notice.’
Rosie : ‘Yes, his face used to go beetroot.
He stood on the table in one lesson and went like this, ‘grrr!’
We just laughed.
He looked so stupid.’
While equilibration can be achieved by positive action, withdrawal  is used to effect a balance at a more profound level.
One way of being dignified is to be above it all, to be silent when provoked.
And one way of negating other people is to treat them as if they are not there.
It is not surprising therefore, to find Tim Devlin quoting the harassed teacher as saying, ‘The worst thing they did was to ignore you completely.’
Looking at it from the point of view revealed in their rhetoric, the pupils were not ignoring their teacher as such.
They were restoring a measure of dignity, conceived to have been taken from them, by withdrawal into injured and strategic silence.
In summary, then, we find the following system at work: offences are of two types, demeaning and non-demeaning.
Demeaning offences fall into two broad categories, those which are treated by our participants as part of the generally resented background of personal devaluation, and those which call for specific retribution according to rule.
Offences in the second category fall into two classes, exhibition of weakness where strength is expected, and manifestations of loss of dignity.
The former are sometimes responded to violently, the latter by a withdrawal into a reciprocal posture, exhibiting a dignity proportional to that lost by the teacher.
Non-demeaning offences are dealt with according to a simple lex talionis .
The Arbitration of Propriety
In analysing social episodes, ethogenics has suggested that we should take four elements as guidelines.
These are (a) the distinct social situation,(b) the persona(s) presented within that situation,(c) the rule structure(s) for the occasion, and (d) the arbiters of correct action within that particular situation.
So far we have considered the first three elements.
Moving on to the last one.
we must ask whose opinions in the classroom setting are crucial in the judgment of what is deemed proper action.
Not unexpectedly for our primary participants, what the teachers seem to think counts for nothing.
Where the pupils referred to in the next section are concerned, their teachers seem to play a larger role in the arbitration of proper action.
This appears to be the case, first, because the pupils like and respect them as a consequence of the way they themselves are treated and, second, because of their instrumental value.
The dramaturgical metaphor would suggest that we look to the audience for the arbitration of the action, and it is perhaps no surprise that the peer group emerged as crucial in this respect.
As one of the boys explained:
‘If someone will start it [trouble]I'll join in willingly.
The situation demands it, I suppose.
You can't very well sit there.
You get a whole class of thirty-five people sat round absolutely mucking about, chucking books, ripping up books, everything like that, and the teacher stood out in front of the classroom writing a load of work down on the blackboard you can't really work.
So you got a choice.
You either stand up and walk out and go to a different class, or you join in.
If you walk out of the class you get called all the names under the sun, ‘cissy’, ‘poof’ and all this crap.
So you just join in.
Anybody that works in a lesson that you doss about in, that you know you're going to doss about in, that's it, you get called ‘ponce’ and everything.’
The range of abusive words quoted here is not without significance.
As we shall point out in describing ritual insults exchanged between groups of football fans, the abusive vocabulary consists of words which can be used to cast doubt upon masculinity.
It seems that those who try to live according to the official theory of schooling are subject to the same range of ritual abuse as the fans of another club.
Perhaps those who live according to another theory of school see their rejection of the official line as contributing a dash of machismo to their public reputation.
They certainly choose their abuse so as to indicate to those who do toe the line that they have lost it.
But additionally, and given the enormous importance attached to the equilibration of dignity, not surprisingly, we find reference to a form of self-arbitration, where what they have said and done is judged by reference to their own conceptions of their integrity and dignity, regardless of ‘popular’ opinion or the arbitration of specific others.
G. H. Mead has suggested that there are two general stages in the development of the self (Mead, 1934).
The first stage involves the organization of individual attitudes towards one's self arising out of various relationships, and the second stage, which Mead considers necessary for the full development of self, is constituted by the organization of the attitudes of the social group as a whole and this Mead has called the generalized other.
What Mead is calling the generalized other and its effects, can be read as nothing more than the process of socialization in which any one culture or social groupings' values and norms are internalized.
It does not necessarily follow that any individual who has not taken on the attitude of the generalized other is any less complete than the person who has and acts accordingly.
It might, of course, mean that that particular person will readily be labelled ‘deviant’, but it is  equally possible that an individual could fully appreciate the attitude(s) of the generalized other and yet choose not to act within its framework.
The accounts in hand would seem to favour this alternative suggestion, whether within the narrower confines of school society and the rejection of school rules, or within the wider context of acting against the laws of British society as a whole.
An Alternative View of School
Messing About
By way of contrast we have accounts of ‘messing about’ from the members of a very different school community.
What little ‘trouble’ there is virtually disappears as the pupils rise up the school, developing a conception of themselves as valued persons within the official framework.
Nevertheless, in a markedly more muted way, softness, where strength was expected, provoked ‘messing about’, just as it did in the cycles of violent retribution described by our other informants.
‘We made a noise and ignored them.
The more meekly they reacted, the more we'd go on.
Well, those that could [stop us]did so in the earlier years, so we never played them up again.
Those that didn't, that was it for them.’
‘I think that if you first come and show that you're the boss, then you're O.K., and the children will turn round and like you for it.
Later on you can start slacking off, but if you come in and you're all weak and everything else like that, then they'll think, oh, we can play this person up, and that's it, you've had it, you know.
You can let children go so far.’
‘Well, I pushed my weight around, mucked about.
Well, I still do actually.
I make fun of them, annoy them, have a joke with them.
We've had five years here and nothing's really been clamped down on us — we must do this and we must do that.
They've asked us, but either we do or we don't.
We just joke with them.
We take the mickey out of Mr Brown quite a lot, actually.
About the most out of him.
I think we're a handful for them actually, a lot of us.
Mr Brown said he really couldn't wish for a more destructive class.
Everybody played him up.
I was amazed he coped, actually.’
Although playing the teacher up was considered part and parcel  of school, the proposition was qualified.
They felt that playing around was ‘worse in the third and fourth forms, not so bad in the fifth year’, and that unruly pupils were ‘not in the O level group’.
As one of them said,
‘Well, you see, the thing is, there are very few people in our class or any group I'm in [O level]that seem to go in for playing up the teachers, but I know that in some other classes there are.
They sort of lock teachers in rooms and things like that, but it never seems to happen in our class.’
‘Messing about’ is still seen as a test, just as our first group of informants saw it.
But for the members of these schoolroom societies it is a test within the framework of the official conception of school.
In short, they see themselves as putting the teachers to an academic more than to a social test.
‘In the younger years there's more than in older years, I think you'll find.
We're more sort of settled down, matured more, I think.
There's playing up the teacher but it's more trying to get the better of him or her.
I suppose it helps both, doesn't it, really, because if you're trying to catch the teacher out, that means you've got to know your lesson pretty well, because otherwise if you try to catch the teacher out and yet you've been proved wrong, you've had it really.
For the teacher it's quite easy just to snap back at you and the teacher's always on his guard, and so I suppose his lessons are more accurate that way.’
For the O level people and those who just wanted to work, mucking around was seen to be unfair both to them because it held them back and to the teachers: here they interpret ‘mucking about’ wholly within the official theory of schooling.
‘They seem to think they're there to punish the people.
They're there to teach.
If you don't want to listen, get out.’
‘One of the teachers did get played up when she first came here.
I think she was a bit soft, you know.
There were some boys that really did play up.
They had been notified for it anyway, you know.
You look at that boy and you think, ‘Well, he plays up,’ that kind of thing, you know.’
‘What sort of person is that?’
‘Well, one of them that caused the trouble, he hasn't got a father, you see, so therefore…and he was mucking about  and she told him to get out and of course he answered her back, which I don't think she could take really.
Well, she went and got the Deputy Head and she was a bit upset about it, and then after that our biology group was chopped right down, more or less cut in half, and most of the boys went somewhere else to do their biology while the rest of us stayed with that teacher and we got on a lot better then, you know.
We got a lot more work done then.’
‘Would you prefer that to be the general way?’
‘Yes, I think so, because in some classes you get the person who thinks, well, I'm not going to try.
I'm not going to bother, but there again you've got a mixed class anyway.
You've got people that want to get on and you've got people that don't want to, you know.
So the ones that don't want to can be left to go somewhere else and let the other ones get on, otherwise they're going to hold the others back.’
No doubt there is an underlife, but it exists independently of the officially sanctioned ‘career trajectories’.
Here pupils and teachers share a version of the official theory in accordance with which the pupils can see themselves as valued persons.
Not only do they share the official theory of schooling but they hold ideas about discipline and order that are markedly more ‘traditional’ than those they believe the staff hold.
Our informants had a well-articulated theory of the relation between ‘work-in-school’ and success in a life career that allowed them to see work-in-school as the first rung of their adult moral careers.
Here lies the sharpest contrast with our other informants, who treated ‘work-in-school’ as irrelevant to the gaining of an adult reputation.
How different a picture is conjured up by this remark:
‘I used to mess about in the third and fourth forms, but now I don't…
I'm leaving school soon and I want to get a fairly good report, you know.’
Our second group believed their families to be highly supportive of their official careers in school.
And they knew that they had acquired their theories of the relation between schooling and life from their parents.
‘I've been brought up to think that schoolwork comes first, you know, if you want to get anywhere.’
In addition, they experienced a school atmosphere close to their expressed ideal.
As one of them said,
‘It's funny — it's not funny, strange.
It's a very happy school, sort of thing.
The teachers have a very good relationship with  the kids, you know.
There's the odd few that don't get on with the teachers.
I seem to get on with most of the teachers in the school, so do most of the other kids.
It's like a big family, sort of thing.
Everybody knows everybody else, and we all get on well.
Some of the organization's a bit nutty.
It doesn't seem to work all the time, but that can't be avoided, you know.
It's the number of kids you've got, and all the less teachers you've got, you know.’
They also had the considered advantage of being the first-year intake in a new school,
‘You got a lot of responsibility.
A lot is expected of you, but I think there's more advantages than disadvantages.
I think it encourages people.
You want to achieve what people expect of you.’
Bad Teachers
It can hardly be said that anything very surprising emerges in the pupils’ criticism of teachers.
But there are some fairly clearcut points that are worth emphasizing.
1 General Failings .
The theme of personal recognition emerges again.
Even a teacher who can at least teach is thoroughly disapproved of in the absence of personal relationships.
‘I think the teachers who just come here to teach are the worst, you know.
They just teach their subject and that's it.
They don't want to know you at any other time…but most of them aren't like that here.
If you're just another person in the classroom then you don't get on half as well.’
Then there are those we can all remember from our own schooldays who just can't teach at all, though we are unable to recall from our own experience any example of the stratagem reported by one of our informants.
‘He knows a lot about chemistry, but he's hopeless teaching.
He just can't put it forward, so you have to get a book and do it yourself, and then I ask for the syllabus so I can make sure
I've done everything.
He said, ‘You're useless, you needn't bother to turn up to the exams’, because he thinks I'm going to fail.
I said, ‘You haven't seen my work for the past year, have you?’
He said, ‘No, because you haven't done any.’
Well, he hasn't actually collected any in and I've been doing a lot of work at home for it, you know, masses.
So I really was confident I was going to pass, and he said, ‘I'll give you a pound if you pass,’ which isn't really that good a way of teaching.
He used to tell me I was going to fail but I did so much work at home it was my best subject.
He's just a useless teacher and he doesn't make me feel really confident.’
‘How did you do?’
‘I did every one.’
2 Specific Failings The feeling that a teacher has no real interest in the people in his care need not derive only from indifference.
It may come from their perception that he does not take their ideas seriously.
‘Some of them got up my nose a bit…right sods the lot of them…there's a collection of them, the Technical Drawing staff.
They're all little gods.
They've all got their ideas, their philosophies of life.
Actually, one bloke…he goes on and on about what life's for.
Every lesson his ideas change.
He just gets carried away.
He's very boring.
There's nothing for him to do, is there?
He just gives us an exercise out of the book, and he just sits…he always seems to be writing something.‘
‘Is it the fact that he rambles on that bores you, or the fact that you don't want to talk about what life's about?’
‘The fact that he goes on and he thinks his ideas are the ideas.
He goes on about his experience of life and how he knows more about it.
I suppose he does, but I wish he wouldn't go on about it.’
Good Teachers
The most striking feature of pupil descriptions of what it is to be a good teacher is the great emphasis placed on interpersonal respect.
This is not to be confused with a condescending adoption of pupil style, which they are quick to read as false (even when it is a genuine identification).
‘Yes, I think the teachers we've got, you know, are very friendly.
A lot of them treat you more as a sort of friend and an equal rather than looking down…there's a few teachers who treat you like a child rather than like themselves, but most of them are very friendly…well, I think it's mainly  because they're younger teachers…and there's not such a great age gap, you know.
There's not such a great gap in our ideas as well, I think.’
‘Wishing to accept us.
There's one teacher, he seems to have had a personal interest in each one of us for five years.
He knows us all by name, of course, and he's interested in each of us, which is something.’
The respect in which the Headmaster of our second school is held again contrasts with the contempt and even hatred felt for the man who headed our first — the man who didn't know their names.
‘He's pretty strict, but quite friendly.
He's quite nice.
He takes an interest in you, which helps.’
The arbitration of right action is again much more open to influence from the world of adults and, in particular, teachers.
They seem to play a larger role in the arbitration of proper action, and this appears to be the case, first, because they like and respect them as a consequence of the way they themselves are treated, and second, because of their instrumental value.
Again, like the others, what they do and say is significantly determined by a form of self-arbitration.
Actions are judged by reference to their own conceptions of dignity and integrity, regardless of other influences.
Associated Theories of Discipline
We have remarked already on the ‘traditional’ case of pupil theories of school discipline.
This comes out very strongly in the discussions of life in their school.
Although they expressed a great liking for the friendly, relaxed atmosphere of their school, they were, nevertheless, critical that it was often too lax.
This viewpoint was reinforced by the observations of those pupils who had attended grammar schools for a while and found the ‘stuffy’ regimes distasteful and unnatural restrictions an impediment to happiness and progress in the classroom.
The difficulty of hitting a balance between total rigidity and disciplined freedom was recognized, but was seen to be an essential aim.
‘You've got to decide whether it's…freer atmosphere and rowdyism or silence and total obedience, because I don't think you…have any feelings towards somebody in schools  where you just have to sit in silence in sort of neat rows…
I don't think that helps, quite honestly.
But there's also the problem that you lose respect if they allow you to get away with too much.’
‘A good teacher is someone who'll take a good joke but will make us work to get the work done.
We had an English teacher like that actually.
He let us muck around but we had to get the work in at the end of the week.’
‘The teachers get cross and they don't do anything.
I mean, they don't seem to have the power of punishment, so it doesn't stop.
There's no discipline.
Well, if there was, people would learn something…a bit more.’
‘Well, if I do an essay I like it to be marked.
Whereas if the teacher just doesn't mark it, just gives a comment, or just ticks it, I tend to get lazy.
But if you can see it written down, you got that for an essay, it's so much better.’
‘I've certainly enjoyed my time here.
I think it could be stricter actually.
It's an unusual thing to say, but I think probably if it was strict, it'd get better results.
They're not so strict doing actual work, and those sort of things, I think.
Probably I could have done quite a bit better if I'd been forced to work, because if I'm not, I'm not so bothered to do the work.
It depends on the teacher, I think, a lot.’
‘They don't tell you what to do too much, especially in the fifth year.
I think that is a good thing.
I think on some points they are a bit too easy with us, with people sort of skiving.
If you don't turn up, that's that, they don't do anything more about it.
I think they should try and do something more positive to curb that sort of thing.’
‘You can even cheek your teachers and some of them just don't do anything, you know.
I don't think you should be able to do that…
I like it (the school) better, but it's not strict…’
‘I think I'd rather stay here because it's fixed now, but I don't really like comprehensive schools that much.
You don't really learn much.
It's so free.
Traditional schools you got everything formal and systematic.
Here you just do nothing really unless you want to, you know.
There's no sort of  tradition to it, is there?
It's just like a matchbox, isn't it?’
‘But it hasn't put you off?’
‘No.
But a lot of other people don't do much work.
You got a lot of people slacking up because there's no real punishment…there's a lot of people in this school what would have worked if they'd been pushed.’
‘It's going down, the atmosphere of the school, as we have more staff of, if you don't mind me saying it, lower calibre.
Because in the first and second and in the third year we had very good staff who took a pride in the school.
You've got the original ones…who still have a caring for the school, but the newer teachers…they've got no caring for it and there's no consistency in the school.’
‘What's a measure of caring?’
‘One which — in some lessons you can get away with blue murder.
I think that should be stopped — blue murder, vandalism and the lot.
Now certain teachers can control it and keep their rooms clean and tidy.
I think it's their attitude because with Mr Price we get away with so much and then he says, no, and we have a real good old time.
While Mr Lamb's far more subtle.
Like when we're doing geography, we don't seem to be working, but when we started revising we ended up in two years with seven books, which is goodness knows how much compared with chemistry or a subject like that.
Subtle control — you get the work done, everybody's happy and you don't realize you're getting the work done.’
‘The teachers, I suppose, are very good actually.
They spend a lot of time and also they're pretty broad-minded.
They're pretty lenient, although there are too many diverse rules.
There ought to be a few strict rules which are obeyed to the letter.’
‘Rules such as?’
‘Hard to say, really, you know.
I suppose commonsense rules more than anything.
You can't go round splashing paint on the walls, things like that really.
The rules ought to be laid down based on common sense, not like one-way systems, things like that.
I think they're silly because they just encourage people to break them.
But if you stick to commonsense rules which you're brought up to believe, or most people are, then I think it would work better, because you're in a sort of rules — in the same environment…
There is a system, or there was a system, I don't know whether there is now, of house representatives and form  representatives which can confer directly to the Headmaster about rules.
The only problem with that is that it's not necessarily going to be accepted.
And unless you're on the council you can't go there and state your case, you've got to go through someone else, who maybe doesn't understand it or doesn't have feeling in it, and so it just doesn't work really.’
‘Do you ever feel frustrated that your opinions aren't being, listened to?’
‘Well, not really, because you realize that it's got to be.
You can't have 1050 dictators.
You've got to have set leaders and I suppose it could be better, but it would mean an awful lot of work, wouldn't it?’
Out of School
What other lives can be lived?
School seems to offer both our groups of informants very little in the way of opportunities alternative to those formulated in the official theory of educational establishments.
A large suburban school is too open an institution for there to be much of an underlife in which to acquire reputation and to develop an alternative moral career.
The underlife must be lived elsewhere.
Various possibilities present themselves to an active lad.
Jock has chosen a life of crime within which to fashion a self.
With the help of defiant stances and some actual fighting, Jock establishes himself in public reputation as the kind of tough lad he enjoys being taken to be.
Here Jock is recounting a moment in his moral career.
Notice how central is his concern for public reputation.
‘They go like that, ‘You're mad, you know.
All you Scotch guys are mad.’
That used to make me feel good, but it don't make me feel good now.
If they said I was mad it used to make me feel good.
Say, like in X-town two weeks ago.
Me and my mates were there.
Me and this little kid of 12.
I was standing with him, you know, and two mates were there with their birds and I couldn't because I was with this wee guy of 12, watching him, and those fourteen guys got round me and wanted to fight with me.
‘You're the big mouth from.’
And I said I didn't want a fight.
And I was walking away, and turned and gave him a great kick, you know, right in his balls, and I said, ‘Come on then’, took a mad fit, you know, and I
was stone cold sober.
I says, ‘Right, come on then.’
And as
soon as everybody down found out, they go like that, ‘Oh, come on then’, you know, started saying it every time they see me, you know.
Saying I was mad and all that.
It used to make me feel good, but it don't any more.’
In Borstal the maintenance of the ‘tough’ style calls for a different presentational technique, a sustained, harsh, abrasive and unyielding confrontation.
‘And I goes in to this guy, and he goes like that, ‘Hello, sit down.’
And I said, ‘No thanks, I prefer to stand’, you know.
That's the way I turned when I went in the jail.
Turned deaf.
If anybody wanted to help me, be nice to me, I didn't accept it.
It was just the officers and the screws, not the boys, the boys was O.K. But it was just I turned as soon as I went in, right, as soon as they wanted to be helpful, right, a copper would go like that, ‘You no got a fag, son?’
‘No.’
They'd say, ‘Do you smoke, son?’
Then they'd go, ‘Do you want a fag?’ and I'd go, ‘Stuff it up your fucking jack’, or something like that, see.’
But Jock has seen that other ‘careers’ are available to someone with a good command of himself.
The career of paranoid psychotic attracts him, particularly as a way of coping with the inevitable consequence of his defiant style of living the criminal life.
His knowledge of the presentational requirements of the public performances demanded of that dramaturgical role is extensive.
He has derived it from his observation of his father.
‘Well, see, he's a paranoid, you know what that is.
Paranoid psychosis.’
‘Paranoid about anything in particular, or doesn't it make any difference?’
‘Well, you know, like he says he was coming up to you — this is the way I look at it — coming up to ask you to lend, say, a lawnmower, right — this is when he's no drunk, ordinary sober, you know — and he'll be walking up to you and thinking about it at the same time.
What if she don't give me a loan of it, what if she tells me, you know, ‘eff off,’ or something, and by the time you come to the door, he'll go like that, ‘Just keep the lawnmower’, you know what I mean.
He thinks too much.
He's in hospital right now.
He'll go in for about four months, they'll give him shock treatment and all that, but as soon as he comes out he starts drinking again.
He don't try!
‘I'm going to tell you what I'm thinking of doing.
I haven't  told anybody, right, so I want to tell somebody to see what they think of it.
Listen to this.
This is a good thing.
See, my old man, he was going off his nut, right.
My mum went to the doctor and says to the doctor.
‘My old man's going off his head, you know.
Fighting and all that.
Doing stupid things like walking round the tables and counting all the time and things like that.’
And the doctor went up to see the old man and got him put in a hospital and that, in a mental hospital, for six weeks, right.
And this is what I'm thinking of doing, so don't laugh at me, because I'm thinking of doing it.
No, listen.
I'm thinking of telling my mum what I done and telling her to go to the doctor and tell the doctor that I'm doing stupid things and that, to get me put away.
Do you think it would work?’
‘Well, it might get you to a psychiatrist.’
‘Because I was under psychiatric report.
In the jail — for aggression fits.
See, all my records are of aggression, assault, serious assaults, actual assaults.’
Jock's choice emerges as a lonely and demanding life.
But Shirley, Bill, Keith and Roger have found a more comradely social milieu in which to begin their pursuit of the good life, and to seek out occasions for the establishment of a reputation — Football!
Questioner : And what about school?
Bill : I'm never there.
Shirley :[sarcastically]I love school — best days of my life.
Questioner : Why do you think that Saturdays and football is better than school?
Shirley : ‘Cos it is.
You can come up and let yourself go — shout about and that and muck about.
Where we live and go to school you can't do that.
Roger : You can get it out of your system…get rid of your frustrations about your parents and that.
Bill : You can let yourself go.
Roger : They get on your nerves.
John : You haven't got teachers — they ain't up at football.
They're not on your back and telling you what to do all the time.
Keith : Yeah — they always tell you what to do.
But that doesn't happen at football.
You're on your own — you're free.
They ain't in the ground.
Roger : One of our teachers — Mr P, he's here.
Questioner : Does he support Oxford United like you?
Roger : Yeah — but it's all right 'cos he still can't do anything if he sees us mucking about.
3
Life on the Terraces
Territory
Young supporters at every football league ground (and at many non-league grounds) have defined sections of the terracing as their own territory — an area from which they always watch the football game.
Although, to the casual observer, the terraces may seem unremarkable slabs of tiered concrete, certain areas within them are sacrosanct to the fans who habitually occupy them.
The chosen section is usually in the open areas behind the goals — areas of the ground which have traditionally been occupied by working-class men since the grounds were built.
Such areas also tend to be the cheapest to get into.
These territories are known by the generic term Ends and each ground has a distinctive name for its End.
The ‘Kop’ of Liverpool and the ‘Shed’of Chelsea are two well-known examples.
In addition, many Ends are known by the name of the road which runs past the turnstile entrance to them — eg. the ‘Stretford End’ at Manchester United and the ‘London Road End’at Oxford.
Ends such as these are reserved by the home fans solely for their own use — visiting fans being relegated to other areas of the ground.
These ‘away’ areas are often behind the opposite goal to the home End and are recognized by the visiting supporters as their ‘spots’.
The distinctive nature of Ends is further reinforced by the subsequent actions of club officials and police.
Once territories have been established by young fans, occupants are physically confined within them for the entire duration of the match.
Barriers have been erected at all Football League grounds in the light of recommendations made in the Lang Report (1969)— their purpose being ‘the segregation of young people from other spectators’.
In most cases this has meant that steel fences and wire grilles have been built  around the Ends and the areas most frequently occupied by young visiting supporters.
At some grounds (notably Manchester United's) security fencing and iron grilles of the type that zoo cages are made of have been installed.
Young fans, particularly those wearing what we shall describe as the standard ‘Aggro Outfit’, are directed by the police and officials into the appropriate secure area of the ground as they enter.
Both the police and the fans themselves refer to this process as ‘penning’.
Persistent attempts by fans to get out of such areas and into the opposition's area is one of the most common reasons for their arrest or ejection from the ground.
In addition to these measures, fans are further restricted by ‘dry moats’ dug between the terraces and the pitch itself and by suitably dispersed groups of ‘trouble shooting’police constables.
Many grounds also employ Alsatian dogs around the perimeter of the pitch, and police spotters are often to be found with binoculars and two-way radios in the TV camera gantries below the roofs of the main stands.
At Leeds United's ground the system of control and restraint has reached perhaps the ultimate in sophistication.
Here senior police officers sit in a windowless room, facing a bank of video-monitors and operating, by remote control, TV cameras which can zoom in on any area of the terraces or stands.
The net effect of the fortifications around Ends, and of the strategies to keep people in them, is, of course, the highlighting of their distinctive nature.
The police and officials have succeeded in delineating fans' territories in a way that the fans themselves could never have done.
Another by-product of official strategy is one which involves the fans and the police acting in a concerted and co-operative manner.
The maintenance of territorial integrity has become a joint enterprise.
Invading fans are not only repulsed by the occupants in defence of their home ‘turf’, but also by the police in their pursuit of law and order and the status quo.
It thus comes as little surprise to find that police and fans share similar commonsense conceptions of territoriality, and that their accounts of what goes on during ‘raids’ on Ends have much in common.
The notion of territoriality here is quite critical to an understanding of social action on the terraces and to the social structures that exist.
Territories here are seen as action-facilitating in the sense that many of the patterns of action we have observed rely for their appropriateness on the fully defined context in which they take place.
Using the notion provided by Erving Goffman (1971), and further elaborated by Lyman and Scott (1970) football Ends are viewed as ‘free’ territories.
As Lyman and Scott explain:
Free territory is carved out of space and affords the opportunities for idiosyncrasy and identity.
Central to the manifestation of these opportunities are boundary creation and enclosure.
This is because activities that run counter to expected norms need seclusion or invisibility to permit unsanctioned performance, and because the peculiar identities are sometimes impossible to realise in the  absence of the appropriate setting.
Thus the opportunities for freedom and action — with respect to normatively discrepant behaviour and maintenance of specific identities — are intimately connected with the ability to attach boundaries to space and to command access to or exclusion from territories.
The free territories of the Ends become ‘converted’, through regular use, into ‘home’ territories.
A special kind of relationship comes to exist between users of such a territory and the physical space itself such that new conceptual and linguistic markers are attached to the space.
Unlike most forms of home territory, however, Ends are not colonized in opposition to authority.
In reality, the guardians of authority collude in the maintenance of the territory once it has been colonized, and as a result enter into the social framework on the terraces.
Police at football matches are not seen as the immediate enemy in the way that they might be, say, in dealing with trespassers or others laying false claim to an essentially public area.
They may be seen as obstructive when restraining rival groups of fans, but the venom and anger characteristic of, for instance, thwarted political demonstrators, is noticeably absent at most football matches.
During the 1974 and 1975 seasons young supporters of Oxford United were concentrated in an area of terracing known as the ‘London Road End’.
During the close season in 1974 a dry moat had been constructed and new barriers installed.
The setting in some ways was a little unusual in that rival fans occupied the other half of the same block of terracing.
In 1974 the two rival groups were separated by a corridor of barriers patrolled by police.
In 1975 a steel fence was added on the visiting supporters' side of the corridor to further restrict access between the two halves.
Figure 2 shows the general layout at Oxford United.
The home fans occupy the left half of the London Road end.
Most football grounds now divide their rival fans by placing them at opposite ends of the ground and by preventing access between the ends.
At Leeds, for example, not only are fans separated in this way, but a wedge-shaped piece of terracing at the corner of the visiting fans' terrace is designated a ‘no-man's-land’, surrounded by high fencing, and kept empty.
Any fan trying to get from one end to the other would have to pass through this area and would be  immediately arrested.
Strategies at other grounds are often even more elaborate.
With the Oxford system, however, a distinct interface existed between the two sets of rival fans, and although kept apart by police and fences.
it was still possible to ‘get at’ the opposition with determined effort.
The system also resulted in chants and songs being directed sideways to the rival fans, rather than across the pitch to the other end.
The fact that visiting supporters were allowed in to the same terracing, even though distinctly segregated, was a constant source of irritation to many Oxford fans, and it was often pointed to as an explanation for the occurrence of ‘bovver’.
The label ‘London Road End’ was carefully used to refer only to the half of the terrace occupied by Oxford fans.
Social Groupings at Oxford United
Initial research work at Oxford United's ground consisted mainly of making a large number of video-recordings of fans in the London Road End.
These were made discreetly with the aid of a telephoto lens and with the full co-operation of the club.
Early analysis of these tapes revealed a grouping pattern in the London Road End which remained quite static over a considerable period of time.
Later reports from the fans themselves revealed that they were very aware of such groupings and were able to attribute a number of salient behavioural and social characteristics to them.
The main groupings are shown in Figure 3.
Group A comprised boys mainly between the ages of 12 and 17.
The mean age of a sample of thirty-four boys in this group who were to contribute greatly to the later stages of the research was 15 1 years.
The most distinctive aspect of this group was the pattern of dress — the ‘Aggro Outfit’ which is discussed in Chapter 4.
The presence of flags, banners and emblems of allegiance was also very marked.
When the newspapers and television hold forth about football hooligans it is usually to members of groups like this that they are referring.
Not only are they the most identifiable group in terms of their appearance, but also in terms of the high level of activity among the group which is apparent even to the casual observer.
They make the most noise — singing, chanting and shouting imprecations against the opposition fans — they run the most and they can represent a rather awesome spectacle to their rivals.
For this reason we refer to this group as the Rowdies,rather than the media appellation of hooligans, for as we shall see, the label ‘hooligan’ carries special meaning within the soccer micro-culture.
Group C, in contrast to the Rowdies group, consisted of rather older boys and young men up to the age of about 25.
The mean age of a sample of fourteen was 18 7.
The style of dress within this group was unremarkable and differed little from that worn by people of this age group in most social contexts.
Nor were any banners or flags visible.
In fact, members of this group would not be identifiable as football fans at all outside of the ground.
Younger fans referred to this group as the ‘Town Boys’ and were clearly deferential to them.
Group B, lying between the Rowdies and the Town Boys on the right-hand side of the London Road Terrace, was a much less  distinct group which varied in composition from game to game.
One consistent characteristic, however, was the presence of a disproportionately high number of boys with a record of arrests, probation and care orders.
Out of a total of seventeen boys from this group interviewed over a period of one year, no fewer than ten had been in trouble with the police for offences not connected with activities at football matches.
This compares with an overall average of about 8 per cent for the London Road End as a whole.
Apart from this characteristic, the group seemed to have features of both the Rowdies and the Town Boys groups.
The average age was about 16 5 and some of the more distinctive dress elements were present.
The activity level, however, was much lower than that of the Rowdies and some of the fans in this group were only infrequent attenders at football matches.
Groups D and E were much less homogeneous than any of the others and effectively marked the edges of the active arena in the London Road End with which we are concerned.
In the main, they both consisted of boys and young men who were rather more reluctant to join in the ritual chanting and singing and were even less keen to get mixed up in the aggro.
The only difference between the groups was that those in E were generally a little older and a few females were also to be found there.
Both groups contained a number of fans who were scathingly referred to as ‘part-time’ supporters by those in the Rowdies and the Town Boys groups.
Among such part-timers were a few public-school boys playing at being football fans but failing really to understand what it was all about.
The left-hand boundaries of these groups was totally undefined.
In group F were to be found young children (average age about 10) who sat, when they were not moved off by the police, on the wall in the front of the terrace, overlooking the dry moat.
Their major occupation consisted of watching the antics of those at the back in the Rowdies group.
Because of the age and inexperience of these boys, we refer to this group as the ‘Novices’.
Other fans simply call them little kids, but they are to be distinguished from other ‘little kids’ in other areas of the ground.
The pattern of grouping described here is probably unique to Oxford United's ground, but analogues of such groups appear to be present at all league club grounds — with the possible exception of some of the very small Fourth Division grounds.
What is most striking about such groupings is that they provide for careers on the football terraces.
The Novices, Rowdies and Town Boys provide a fairly linear hierarchy.
Fans may aspire to progress through this hierarchy, and within each group certain role positions are open.
The role positions enable demonstrations of character and worth, leading to the attainment of status, to take place within an ordered and rule-governed framework.
‘Becoming somebody’ on the terraces is a highly structured affair, and an understanding of this structure is the first step in rendering the apparently anomic behaviour at football matches intelligible.
Careers
In using the by no means original sociological concept of ‘careers’ we do not wish to imply that action of the part of soccer fans is somehow determined by a restricting set of institutional restraints.
We would certainly want to use the term ‘careers’ in a rather different way from some criminologists who speak of ‘delinquent careers’in which young deviants are inescapably forced along the path of community school, borstal and prison.
Rather we see careers in a much less mechanistic way — as available structures in a youth culture for the establishment of self.
At this point we are seeking only to explain the social frameworks which render certain actions intelligible, and we do not wish to imply causal links between social frames and social action.
The extent to which fans will carve out careers for themselves on the terraces will, to a large extent, reflect their commitment to the soccer culture and to their immediate peer group.
The greater the commitment, the more a fan has at stake.
But, as we shall see, the richness of the soccer social world provides for commitments to be expressed in many different ways.
We have suggested that the Novices-Rowdies-Town Boys groups provide a distinct hierarchical framework for careers.
Such a framework has more than a passing similarity with the career structure observed by Howard Parker in his study of young delinquents in Liverpool.
Although his groups, ‘Tiddlers’, ‘Ritz’, and ‘Boys’, reflected increasing involvement in delinquent activities, they served the same function of enabling young people to achieve the sort of reputations and images denied them in mainstream society.
On the football terrace, however, the other groups mentioned serve as side channels to the main career framework.
They provide for the less committed who still wish to enjoy some of the fruits of the soccer culture.
Groups D and E can certainly be seen to have this function.
A fan who was totally uncommitted to the culture, who simply wanted to watch the match, would probably choose not to go into the London Road End at all but rather to one of the quieter side terraces.
Group B, on the other hand, seems a little anomalous.
To some extent we see members of this group as ‘failures’ in the career development process.
They occupy fringe positions to both the Rowdies and Town Boys but have status in neither.
Their high  delinquency level also puts them at a further distance.
But more will be said of this ‘delinquent fringe’ later.
In charting the progress of fans' careers, two types of data have been used.
The first, and the easiest to collect, consisted of biographical material obtained from samples of fans in each of the groups, with special attention given to the Rowdies and Town Boys.
The second type of data was obtained from close observation of the changes in the compositions of the groups and in the holders of clearly defined role positions within the groups.
Both types of data, however, are problematic in that the whole structure within which careers are established changes over time.
Physical locations of groups, for example, are very much influenced by changes in official club policies regarding the positioning of barriers and turnstiles.
At one time, the Club went as far as refusing to allow juveniles a reduced entrance price for the London Road terrace but allowed them half price for other areas.
The intention was clearly to deter younger fans from getting into what were viewed as ‘trouble spots’ and, at the same time, to improve the total gate money a little.
(Oxford United is a very impecunious football club).
For a time fans were split.
Many remained in the London Road End, but others established a new piece of territory at the other end of the ground where it was cheaper.
Other changes in structure developed more slowly, but although the pattern looked different over a period of a few years, analogues of the basic groups seem to have been present ever since the phenomenon of the contemporary football fan arose in the middle to late 1960s.
There has always been the equivalent of the Novices group, for example, allowing entrance to the soccer microculture for any boy willing to learn the rules of being a fan.
Similarly, the Rowdies have always made their presence felt — as any ‘old-timer’ will eagerly tell you.
At one time the Rowdies were mainly Skinheads for whom the terraces were but one of a number of arenas for collective action.
Those most dedicated to soccer culture became known as ‘Terrace Terrors’, but their successors are currently moving away from the baggy trouser and braces image that they fostered.
Rowdies today often have quite elaborately coiffeured hairstyles — contrasting markedly with the heavy Dr Marten footwear which they still retain.
Finally, Rowdies have always had the more manly and mature equivalent of the Town Boys to join once they had proved their worth and their masculinity.
In interpreting data, then, the gradual changes in the social framework at Oxford United have been taken into account.
Note has also been taken of where particular groups have positioned themselves at various times in their evolution, and of the differences in style which have characterized such groups over time.
Two distinct aspects of the career process are to be distinguished.
The first of these, the between-group graduation process, is concerned with movement from one group to another and with the fact that membership of a particular group affords a certain status in relation to members of other groups.
The second, the within-group development process, is concerned with the establishment of certain well-defined status positions within each group and with the acquisition of the appropriate social knowledge to equip a member to ‘carry off’ the performances required by such roles.
Social Roles
Social roles within each of the groups have been isolated primarily from the accounts given by fans and from prolonged observation in the London Road End.
In many cases fans were able to attach labels to certain positions, but in some cases the role was defined only by the range of behaviours required for it.
The Rowdies group provided by far the widest range of available roles, and it is with a discussion of these that we start.
Chant Leader
During the 1974 season about six individuals occupied such a position within the group.
The role of such a person was simply to initiate songs and chants and to act as ‘caller’.
The job of a caller is rather like that of a priest who intones, line by line, the words of a prayer and to whom the congregation respond, at each stage, using the appropriate replies.
A simple example of this calling takes the following form
Give us an ‘O’
[O]
Give us an ‘X’
[X]
Give us an ‘F’
[F]etc.
What have we got?
[OXFORD]
At other times the chant leader is required to initiate chants in reply to a chant from the opposition fans.
A common example of  this occurs in the interposing of an imprecation in between a chant of allegiance by the rival group.
Thus, a chant of ‘Chelsea!
Chelsea!’ is transformed into Chelsea (Shit) Chelsea!
(Shit).
The job of the chant leader is simply to make sure that ‘Shit!’ comes in at exactly the right time.
Other examples of these chants are to be found in Chapter 5.
The major characteristic of chant leaders is that they are all quite tall.
They can therefore be seen by most of the fans around them, especially when they hold up their arms to indicate that a chant is about to begin.
One individual, however, can never be visible to all fans at the back of the terrace, and for this reason more than one chant leader is required.
Achieving this kind of position within the group requires, in addition to being tall, a full knowledge of the entire repertoire of chants and of the occasions on which it is appropriate to use them.
To forget the words in the middle of a chant would be most embarrassing.
Quite a lot of fans, at one point or another, succeeded in starting off chants and songs, but few could do so consistently.
To fail in such a venture, to sing out ‘Give us an ‘O ’ and get no response, is to lose face and effectively to be deterred from making a similar attempt in the future.
To achieve this position a chant leader has to engage in a form of ‘hazarding’ of a particularly subtle kind.
One might expect that being a chant leader afforded a number of privileges within the group, but this in fact was not the case.
‘Leadership’ was very restricted to the narrow confines of ritual expression of allegiance and denigration, and carried little weight in other situations.
An illustration of this came when the Daily Mirror,for reasons of their own, carried a feature article about Oxford United and paid particular attention to Eric — one of the most regular of the chant leaders.
Immediately after this, a number of fans complained that to over-emphasize Eric's role was unfair, and that although Eric was respected for his loud voice, stature and chanting ability, he was ‘nobody special’.
Eric readily agreed with this.
One other major aspect of the chant leader's role is related to the creation of new chants and songs.
The vast majority of chants are common to virtually all football grounds, with slight variations.
Liverpool supporters would have us believe that they all originate from the Kop, but this is doubtful.
One reason for the ubiquity of chants lies in the fact that a large number of fans move around the country to support their team at away games.
A rapid and widescale communication network is thus provided, and good chants can be taken over from one set of fans and used against a different set the following week.
From time to time, however, songs and chants of a completely novel kind are heard.
The origins are often to be found by watching and listening to what goes on in the Soccer  Specials — the trains and coaches which fans hire to transport themselves to away games.
To fill in the travelling time chant leaders are actively engaged in trying out new versions of old chants or making them up from scratch.
Those that meet with approval are then usually tried out on the terraces, and if found to have some power, make their way into the repertoire.
Subjects for new, and often short-lived, chants often reflect ‘in jokes’ which, because they are totally unintelligible to the opposition fans, can be used to create confusion among them.
On one occasion, for example, a member of the delinquent fringe had arrived on a special coach with a cardboard box containing two gross of packets of Maltesers.
In a short space of time, the coach was sticky with chocolate and fans were being sick out of the window.
On arrival in Nottingham the chant ‘If you all hate Maltesers clap your hands’had gained considerable currency.
Bemused fans of Notts County thought that this was some oblique reference to their West Indian members.
Aggro Leader
An aggro leader is not to be confused with a ‘good fighter’ for, because of the peculiar nature of aggro, * he might never have to do any fighting at all.
At Oxford United a person occupying such a role would have been one of six or seven boys who were always at the front when conflicts arose with the rival fans.
In ‘running battles’ they would always be the last to retreat.
For these purposes they would also tend to wear the most heavily reinforced boots and might occasionally carry weapons of some kind.
Within the Rowdies group, there was some confusion as to who was and who was not an aggro leader and also with regard to the characteristic behaviours expected of such a person.
Three fans were placed in this category on the basis of lengthy observation and in accord with what were taken to be the appropriate criteria for judging such people.
These boys, however, turned out not to be aggro leaders at all.
This was because a very important dimension had been ignored — one, which in keeping with everyday social talk, we refer to as ‘Bullshit’.
In order to prove himself as an aggro leader, a fan has not only to prove his ability to lead charges but also the fact that he really means what he is doing.
The manner in which he must
We make a strong distinction between ‘aggro’ and violence.
Aggro we take to indicate a ritualized expression of aggression which, by and large, is not seriously injurious.
A full development of this theme is postponed until Chapter 5.  do this however, is not always clear.
He may do it by actually ‘clobbering’ somebody, but this would imply a rather drastic escalation of the conflict situation and happens too rarely for everyone in the aggro-leader role to prove themselves.
Instead, there simply has to be some consensus among the Rowdies that if things got really bad he would still maintain his stance and be man enough to deal with it.
Evidence for such qualities might come from other areas of youth culture.
Thus a boy with a reputation for challenging the authority of his teacher in school, or with a record of resisting the restraints of the police, might find it easier to be accepted in the aggro-leader role.
Without a reinforcing reputation he might simply be classed as a ‘Bullshitter’— the boy who thinks he's hard but isn't and rejected accordingly.
Phil, a 17-year-old currently in borstal for a cheque book fraud, and for a time one of the most respected ‘hard men’ of the London Road End, had these comments to make about his role as an aggro leader:
‘Lots of the smaller kids really look up to you.
Me and Rich we always get all these kids crowding around us — away matches specially.
They look up to you and think you're a good fighter.’
‘And are you a good fighter?’
‘Yes — well me and Rich fight from time to time.
Not so much now 'cos they get a bit scared — but used to quite a bit.
If people start some trouble or something like that then I'll be in there — but I don't go round looking for it or anything like that.
If you live up on the Leys [a local housing estate]then you have to fight or else people piss you about and think you're a bit soft or something…
At the football I try to keep out of it.
If fans from Millwall or Villa or somewhere like that come down — causing trouble and that, then I'll have a go.
I mean, you can't let them come here and think they can walk all over you, because then next time they come they'll get a bit cocky and think they can do what they want.
So I'm in there — making them run — that's what you're trying to do and make them feel small.
So we're round outside after the game and down the road after them.
But I don't go round thumping people all the time.
You don't have to.
People know who you are.’
Being in this kind of role clearly affords a great deal of status.
In fact aggro leaders are probably afforded the greatest degree of deference within the group and by novices as well.
It is this sort of person who is always allowed the best seat on coaches, is given  cigarettes, whose suggestions concerning strategies in conflict situations are always most heeded, and who is generally held in the highest esteem.
All this may be achieved without recourse to bullying or intimidation.
Leadership of this nature seemed to be thrust upon certain members without them having to achieve dominance over would-be contenders for the title.
In general, an aggro leader has to show a distinct sense of fearlessness — he has to be a ‘hard case’.
But his lack of fear must not be too great, for total fearlessness, the issuing of challenges against impossible odds is the prerogative of the nutter.
And fans are in no doubt as to where bravery ends and sheer lunacy begins.
Nutter
There are usually about five or six nutters in the London Road End at any one time.
These are individuals whose behaviour is considered to be so outrageous as to fall completely outside the range of actions based on reasons and causes.
Typical of their behaviour would be ‘going mad’, ‘going wild’ or ‘going crazy’.
Attempting to beat someone to a pulp would be described in these terms.
It is the existence of this kind of role, and the presence of notions of ‘unreasoned’ action, which is taken as strong corollary evidence for assuming the existence of a tacit awareness among fans of the rules governing social behaviour on the terraces.
To call someone a nutter, however, is not to use what they would see as a term of abuse.
It is simply to make a comment about their style of doing things.
Blackpool fans even have a chant which runs:‘We are the Nutters — we come from the sea’.
The implication would seem to be that the opposition fans had better watch out because Blackpool fans might not be restricted by normal conventions.
The chant ‘There's gonna be a Nasty Accident’probably expresses a similar sentiment.
We talked to nutters frequently over a period of two years and some were ‘interviewed’ in a more structured manner.
All of them were aware of their role and didn't seem to mind too much that their peers thought them to be crazy.
They tended, however to be much less articulate than others in the Rowdies group and to possess far less social knowledge.
But it would seem that nutters are more accepted among soccer fans than among groups in other areas of youth culture (cf.
Paul Corrigan (forthcoming) and Howard Parker (1974)).
The function of their role we see as being, like that of the deviant in relation to society, the visible demonstration of the limits to ‘legitimate’ action.
The nutter is acceptable in that he demonstrates to other fans what they should not do, and provides living  proof of their own propriety.
It is at this point that we can begin to see how deviant groups — even evil Folk Devils — construct an order which in many ways is based closely on the order of the society which makes them outcasts.
Although the behaviour of nutters is clearly different from that of other fans in the Rowdies group, there is still a sense of order in what they do.
Even ‘going crazy’ involves the following of certain conventions and restrictions, as we will further elaborate in the next chapter.
In many ways, their crazy actions are analogous to the hysteria of young girl pop fans, who on first sight seem to be totally out of control, but can clearly be shown to be engaging in an intentional, conscious and structured activity.
(See Marsh 1975).
Hooligan
The term ‘hooligan’ derives from the name ‘Houlihan’, a noticeably anti-social Irish family in nineteenth-century east London.
Since 1970, the media in this country have become very attached to the label, judging by the extent to which they increasingly use it.
Before this time, fans were referred to mainly as ‘ruffians’ or ‘tearaways’and the use of ‘hooligan’marks a distinct stage in the media's contribution to deviancy amplification.
But as Laurie Taylor and others have shown (Taylor, 1976), terms which originally begin life as terms of abuse or disapproval often become used by the victims of the term to mean something quite different.
Thus football fans have incorporated the term ‘hooligan’ into their own social talk and use it as a term for referring to boys who commit acts generally thought worthy of some praise.
Such acts often involve minor damage to property or disruption of certain routine social events.
The main characteristic, however, is not the act itself, but rather the manner in which it is carried out — in particular it has to be funny.
Picking up a bubble-gum machine from outside of a shop and running off with it, for example, would be generally thought rather dull.
Picking it up and pretending to do a rather elaborate waltz along the road with it, on the other hand, would be thought of as a much more creditable act of hooliganism.
The object is not to create damage and disorder per se,but to carry out an act which is guaranteed to enrage the victim without doing what he thinks you are doing, i.e. stealing his machine.
In all probability the machine would be replaced once the ‘laugh’ was over, and failure to do so might well lead to censure from others in the Rowdies group.
Those most skilled in carrying out such activities and getting away with them come to be recognized within the group as hooligans.
Hooligans have something in common with nutters in that they  both provide the group with a good deal of entertainment.
The hooligan, however, tends to have the longer career since part of his art lies in knowing how far to ‘push his luck’.
The nutter, in contrast, is constantly being caught by the police because part of being ‘nutty’ is absence of any real form of self-preservation.
For a whole season at Oxford United, Geoff, a 16-year-old fan, held the position of a ‘right hooligan’ and was renowned for his ‘wicked’acts.
One of his friends gave this description of one of his typical escapades:
‘Once, against Swindon a couple of seasons ago, there's this fat cunt and Geoff's standing outside the ground before the match and this cunt bungs a bit of old dog shit he's found by a hall at him and it hits him on the arm…
Anyway, at half time, Geoff's standing right at the back of the London Road — and at the back there you can see down to the tea place underneath because some bugger's smashed out some of the asbestos bit along the back.
Anyway, he sees this fat cunt with some of his mates with some tea — and he's moved along a bit to the end and he's pissing down and out through the open bit and its all blowing down on these cunts’ heads and into their
tea and all over — and its raining a bit as well so they don't notice.
Me and some others, we run down and were watching this and we're killing ourselves.
But Geoff, he don't shout out or anything — he just waits for a bit till they finish their tea and then he shouts out ‘Enjoy your tea then’, and as they look up he pisses a bit more and they go barmy.’
This may seem a rather distasteful episode, and it is undoubtedly more than a little apocryphal.
But whether or not it is a completely accurate report of what actually happened is perhaps not the point.
This is the way hooligans are seen — as perpetrators of the gratuitously outrageous act which nobody else could ever manage to pull off.
Other fans may feel the need to embellish the stories about what hooligans do, but the embellishments stop short of pure fantasy.
There is always a sense of reality and credibility in the accounts.
All this contrasts markedly with the media image of the hooligan as a purely destructive agent.
To see hooligans as destructive is to miss the subtlety of their actions — it is, in a sense, to be conned by the hooligan into believing what he wants us to believe about him.
Becoming a hooligan within the Rowdies group is not a simple matter.
Powers of witty innovation have to be developed which enable a fan to change the whole nature of a social situation.
In a sense he must be a jester — a player of practical jokes and a bit of a ‘devil’.
But he must never be simply a ‘clown’.
Clowns in the social  world of soccer fans, are the pathetic figures who will never make it.
They are the ones who aspire to being hooligans but lack the ‘bottle’ to succeed in such a role.
Organizer
The London Road End always seems to have at least one organizer, and usually two.
Their function is simply that of dealing with the business aspects of terrace life and of negotiating with the outside world.
Chiefly they are responsible for hiring coaches to away matches and for getting occasional petitions signed.
The need to hire coaches arose from the fact the Supporters' Club actively discouraged membership from fans under the age of 18.
The Club claimed that this was because the premises were licensed but fans had other interpretations.
The effect of this was that young fans rarely got the opportunity to travel on the Supporters' Club coaches and, since travelling by British Rail was often a hazardous and expensive venture, alternative arrangements were needed.
Mike, now training to be a chartered accountant, was one of the most efficient and respected organizers the London Road has ever seen.
He would book coaches well in advance and collect the fare in instalments prior to each away trip.
The fact that he also made a little money for himself in the process was considered only reasonable by the majority of fans.
During his time as organizer there were no instances of damage to the coaches, and on every trip a whip-round was arranged for the driver.
Petitions were sometimes drawn up when a need was felt to comment on official club policy.
Occasions occurred for this when the manager was sacked and when the admission charges were put up.
The petitions had little or no effect but at least they afforded some sense of involvement in what was going on.
Like the other roles we have sketched, being an organizer required a particular set of skills and a particular commitment to the group.
It demanded a lot of work and the carrying of a great deal of responsibility.
But it provided the occupant of this role with a very central and secure position within the group via a means that required no conflict with the rest of society.
Other social roles within the Rowdies group were much less easy to isolate.
The ones described so far probably represent the major positions available to fans, but it is vital to note that simply having a strong relationship with an occupant of one of these role-position holders also afforded some degree of status.
Being Phil's mate, for example, was something which many fans aspired to even though they could never hope to carry off the performances required of an  aggro leader themselves.
Like any group there were, of course, scapegoats and ‘creeps’, and such individuals inevitably got pushed around and blamed for everything.
But what was noticeably absent was any serious intra-group rivalry.
Rivalry, when it did occur, was usually deliberately manufactured when the number of visiting fans was too small to constitute any real opposition.
Only at these times did any sub-divisions within the Rowdies group become apparent.
The sub-divisions which arose were, in the main, based on where fans lived or went to school.
During a very dull match one might hear chants such as ‘Berinsfield Boys are Wankers’or ‘Gosford Boys, we are here’‘Doo da’‘Doo da’.
Similar patterns could also be observed on the coaches to away matches.
Conflicts of a very minor nature were manufactured out of anything.
Boys sitting on the right-hand side of the bus, for example, would set up in opposition to the boys on the left in order to have someone to mock and to shout joking imprecations at.
The major purpose in outlining the roles within the Rowdies group has been to demonstrate that football fans of this type are not simply to be viewed as a disordered bunch of maniacs.
But a demonstration of orderliness must also involve appeal to an existing social structure which serves to ‘institutionalize’ action — that is, to impose a set of constraints on behaviour and, at the same time, to endow action with meaning.
For this purpose, we need to show that the roles serve as a focus for patterns of social relationships and for a framework enabling social development.
With this in mind, one must be concerned with how fans gain admission to the Rowdies group, how they are able to progress socially within the group, and with how they are able to graduate out of the group.
Admission to the Rowdies group can be obtained in one of two ways.
The first method involves graduation from the Novices group.
Having spent some time as a ‘little kid’ at the front of the terrace, and having learned through close observation the most rudimentary rules of conduct appropriate to being a Rowdy, the young fan simply shifts his location to the back of the End and to the fringes of the Rowdies group.
Here he will have to serve a form of apprenticeship before he is accepted or even noticed.
An exception to this might arise if a young fan has, as a Novice, shown special merit which has come to the attention of others.
He might for example, have shown himself to be a ‘little hard-nut’.
A small boy of 8 called Louis had done just this.
His diminutive figure was always to be seen during battles with the opposition, and for this reason he gained exceptionally early admission to the Rowdies as a kind of unofficial mascot.
Apart from Louis, however, most Novices moved quietly up when they felt ready for it.
Within their own group there was little to strive for since there were no clearly identifiable roles  available.
Nor was there much in the way of a social structure.
Novices ‘hung around’ together but there were few strong ties between them.
The other method of entry to the Rowdies was by joining one's mates from school or local housing estate.
In this way many fans were able to miss out the first graduation step and serve a short probation at the back of the terrace.
It should be remembered that there are no formal rules for admission to the Rowdies.
Anyone who is prepared to wear the right ‘gear’ and to join in the singing and chanting will be accepted.
Identification with the team and engaging in the correct patterns of support for it are sufficient.
(So long as one isn't a ‘creep’ of course).
Having gained admission, the way is then open to choose the direction of one's career and to become known by name to others in the group.
In charting development within the group two samples of boys have been used to reduce the task to manageable proportions.
During the 1974 season thirty-four boys were enlisted and the exercise was repeated with a smaller group in the following season.
These boys were not chosen at random but on the basis of their being,a priori,representative of members of the Rowdies group as a whole.
This task was made much easier by Mike, the organizer, who knew everybody and encouraged their co-operation.
Of the thirty-four boys in the first sample, twenty-six had joined the Rowdies group directly by having friends already established within it.
The other eight had ‘grown’ into it from the Novices group or its historical equivalent.
About fifteen of the boys said that they felt some need to prove themselves to the others and to become known to them by name.
Virtually all the boys in the sample were known by name to at least three others in the group and, in the majority of cases, to considerably more.
By piecing together all the interviews, and on the basis of continued observation at matches and elsewhere, a rough approximation of the fairly static social structure is shown in Figure 4.
Although Figure 4 looks like a sociogram it should not be treated as such.
Lines linking two individuals represent an indication of association between them, but the nature of the relationships vary.
In order to keep the diagram simple only data for the most central twenty boys are included.
The sample breaks down into three clear sub-groups, and adding in the other fourteen boys would not change this picture.
S1 always stood out as a unit and these boys, who were always together, were known by everybody in the sample.
The other two sub-groups were similar, but members within them had little contact with the rest of the sample other than with boys in S1.
The distinctive nature of this pattern was best illustrated in the coaches to away matches.
S3 always sat at the front, S2 at the back and S1 in  the middle.
Boys 14 and 15 once tried to sit at the back of the coach but were rapidly sent to the front where, it was said, ‘they always sat’.
The scapegoat and the remaining members of the group had no fixed seat and sat wherever they could.
Similar patterns of dispersal could be seen on the terraces themselves, with S3 always standing further back than the rest.
This desire for knowing one's place, even at the level of physical location, was very marked within the Rowdies group.
Where one stood and where one sat in relation to others was always very prescribed.
In many ways it was like the staff common room in a school where institutionalization of this nature always seems to be very strong.
There was a similar need to understand one's place in social terms.
Fans often described themselves and their position in terms of their relationships with others.
They might introduce themselves as being the best mate of a particular fan or as the one who hangs around with a particular group.
In describing his social contexts Mark, who was Mike's best mate made the following comments.
‘Me and Mike(3) — we always go together — and Martin(1) the coloured kid too — and John(4) who's at my school as well.
We're a kind of little click [clique].
But you get to know lots of others to talk to and that and on trips to away matches then you get to know them a lot better.
But Mike and me,
well mostly Mike really — he organizes a lot of trips and gets  the buses and coaches and things like that — and we collect money from the other kids on the Saturday before…
But we're there with everybody really — singing and shouting and that…you're all together and it doesn't matter who else is there as long as they're Oxford fans…it's all about the team, isn't it?…
We run down the other end and have a go at Sunderland fans…and like against Villa when they all got pushed onto the pitch…we're all in there…
But we don't go round smashing things up all the time like some kids.
Its more for the excitement really and the football…
I started coming just after Mike came — that was four seasons ago, and Martin he came two seasons ago and he used to live in the same street as me.’
One of the aggro leaders, a 16-year-old boy called Rich, also had interesting things to say about his time in the group and about his rise to the position he held:
‘I've been coming to games at the Manor since I was 10…not every week like but since three seasons ago I haven't missed a match — I've been to them all.
But it used to be different then…there wasn't no atmosphere like there is now and there weren't no fence around the London Road like now…
It was about then [three years ago]that I started going with some of my mates like Kevin(10) and Eddie(6)…and Eddie and me we got into a lot of fights and that…and the fucking coppers — they always grab either him or me when there's any bother or that.
We been in Cowley nick so many times they keep a special room for us and inside it's got Eddie and Rich written on the walls — and they don't bother to clean it off 'cos they know we'll be back and write it up again…
A lot of kids — when there's any bother they all start running.
That's the trouble with Oxford — they run too much.
But Eddie and me and kids like John(8) and Alf(9) we always get left there.
These kids was coming at us once and six of them grabbed hold of me and when I turned round all the others had fucked off and left me to get a kicking…
But John, he doesn't care or nothing about how many there are — he'll just fly at them fucking mad like and have a go.
[This John is a nutter.]
I try to keep out of it a lot now but I'm not scared or nothing.
If someone wants to have a go I'll give it to him.
But I wait for him to start it — and then I just finish it off.’
The Rowdies group represents the most salient stage in the fan's career.
It is within this group that he comes to establish both  personal social bonds within his particular sub-group, but also comes to feel part of a wider social collective, as witnessed by the ‘we're all in it together’ type of accounts given by members.
It is also within this group that a fan has the most obvious opportunities for becoming somebody special.
By the time he has reached the age of 17 or 18, however, a new decision has to be made.
By this time a fan will be working and will be getting too mature to maintain the style of dress and behaviour that membership of the Rowdies group requires.
Two choices present themselves.
He can either ‘retire’ to less active parts of the ground (assuming he wishes to continue watching football) or he can seek acceptance with the Town Boys.
The Town Boys in a way are an enigma, and how one joins them is by no means easy to discover.
They speak disparagingly of the Rowdies, yet many of them were once Rowdies themselves.
They have a reputation for being tough but rarely give any evidence of being so.
In fact, at most matches, they do very little at all except set up a few chants when things are a bit quiet.
Despite this, however, it was possible to isolate two major roles within the group and to gain some insight concerning the requirements of anyone wishing to graduate into this group.
Fighter
About six members of the Town Boys were consistently referred to as people with reputations for fighting.
Stories were told about how they had actually done considerable damage to some visiting fans when situations had got out of hand.
There was no indication that they, unlike the aggro leaders, were actively engaged in inciting other fans to join in the scraps or that they led concerted attacks against the opposition.
Rather, when trouble had boiled over, which was pretty rare, they were the ones who stood and slugged it out.
Two such fighters were persuaded, over several pints of beer, to talk about themselves and the reputations they had acquired.
(One doesn't simply interview a fighter).
One fighter had been a Skinhead and had worn the appropriate ‘gear’ of his time but had now grown out of this kind of thing.
(He was 22).
The other fighter came from Nottingham four years ago and had seen much worse than one ever saw at Oxford.
At Nottingham, he claimed, there had been a tradition once of wearing metal pit helmets at football matches.
The peaks of these helmets, however, were sharpened up with the aid of a file and ‘nutting’ someone whilst wearing such a weapon, he claimed, could literally chop their head off.
Both reluctantly agreed that they had reputations for fighting, but insisted that they had not  strived for such status.
They only fought in order to protect somebody else (‘like one of the younger kids who's getting smashed up’) but were clearly very capable of making a good job of it.
They totally dissociated themselves from the Rowdies, who they thought of as kids, who, by mouthing off all the time, started trouble which was left to them to finish off.
One of the fighters later became a club steward, and dressed in a white coat with a red armband was officially hired to sort out the Rowdies.
Heavy Drinker
A number of other young men in the Town Boys group were well known for their ability to drink impossible-sounding quantities of beer.
Estimates of the volume varied, but a figure of fifteen pints in one evening was common.
Many appeared to be visibly drunk at matches and were often thrown out by the police for this reason.
They did, however, provide a good deal of entertainment for the rest of the group and would be missed if they did not turn up for a game.
The common feature of all members of the Town Boys group was that they had all held dominant roles within the Rowdies group or its equivalent at some stage in their careers.
Their entry into the Town Boys appeared to rest not only on the fact that they had gained reputations but also on their ability to maintain such reputations in the absence of the symbolic dress and tokens of status which had assisted them in the past.
An aggro leader, for example, needs a particular set of clothes in order to maintain his image.
Simply being ‘hard’ is not enough.
But if he can leave all this behind, and wearing only ordinary casual clothes still keep up his peers' belief in him, then the Town Boys are likely to accept him.
Not only will he be accepted on the terraces but also as a drinking partner in the local pubs.
Similarly, other Rowdies who have been shown to have given long service through organizing or chant leading might also have a chance of making the grade.
Membership of the Town Boys represents the last promotion in the career of the football fan at Oxford and only the most committed are eligible.
Having got this far they can rest on their laurels for as long as they wish.
No more will they be called upon to prove themselves by engaging in certain prescribed activities and no longer need they safeguard their hard-won reputations.
Eventually they will retire to other parts of the ground to watch the match with their wives and girlfriends.
It would be a mistake to claim too much for the career structure or  to suggest that the graduation process is a rigid one.
There were many fans who drifted in and out of the groups without making any sequential progress at all and the groups to the left of the terrace always provided for an escape from the soccer ‘rat race’.
One should also remember that for a period of about three or four months in the summer the terraces are closed completely.
Positions and statuses are held in abeyance until the following season until they can be redefined and re-established.
It would also be a mistake to suggest that the rhetoric of careers is present as such in the everyday conceptual system of fans.
In fact it is not — it is a gloss which we have imposed on the accounts and stories they have provided.
But this does not mean that any undue ‘stretching’ of the data has taken place.
On the contrary, some of the best evidence for the presence of a linear graduation process has come from the biographical material given by samples of fans in the three major groups.
In collecting biographical material fans were asked to give accounts of the ways in which they had come to their present position in the terraces and to indicate on a sketch plan of the London Road End, past, and projected future locations.
They were also asked to describe the major characteristics of the groups in which they had found themselves at each point in their time on the terraces.
Such material was collected in a variety of ways, ranging from formal tape-recorded interviews to casual discussions in and around the football ground.
Information from the Novices showed quite clearly that they all saw themselves as working towards a position at the back of the terrace.
When asked why they would make such a move, most replied that
‘It's more fun up there.’
‘My mates are up there.’
‘It's where everyone goes.’
Such a move, however, would rarely be made during the course of a particular season.
Instead, the Novice would wait until the start of a new season and, having managed to buy some appropriate clothes, would then ‘appear’ at the back of the terrace.
Observations of the composition of the groups over three seasons confirmed that this was what happened.
Many of the Novices also expressed an ambition of ‘getting in’ with a particular group of individuals in the Rowdies group.
From their lowly status they were still able to perceive who was who in the Rowdies hierarchy and which subunits were worth making a try for.
Many, of course, had brothers or older friends in the Rowdies group and had already had some  experience of ‘hanging around’ with them in other social arenas away from the terraces.
Novices who had been in the London Road End for at least a good part of one season displayed quite a detailed acquisition of social knowledge which was appropriate to correct conduct in the Rowdies.
Most seemed to know what one should do there in a variety of situations in order to be an accepted member.
Those lacking this knowledge tended not to succeed in the first graduation step and usually were to be seen a year or so later in either group D or E.
All of the sample of Rowdies were able to plot very accurately where they had stood on the terraces over the last few years, who they had been with, and where they expected to be in the future.
There was a steady shift over time from the edges of the group to positions near the central barrier and towards the front of the group.
Most talked about an increasing feeling of security within the group.
David, for example, had this to say about the three years he had been in the group:
‘When I used to come here first of all I didn't know everybody like now.
I knew some of the kids from school but not most of the City kids [he lived in Witney].
But that's the
thing about football.
Because you're all United fans you become part of something that's big.
Its the atmosphere that does it — its electric.
Other kids get to know who you are and what you're made of.
If you show them you're not scared to really get in there you make a lot of friends.
They know me now in the London Road and that's great.
They know me and Paul and Steve 'cos we've been around here in this bit of the London Road for three seasons now and they know that we wouldn't let them down.’
With regard to their futures, most of the Rowdies felt that they would ‘pack it all in’ when they left school or when they were 17 or 18.
By ‘packing it in’ they meant that they would stop wearing the uniform and ‘tearing around’so much.
Some felt that they had mellowed already and that they weren't so active as they had been before.
A few said that they would like to be a ‘Towny’ or at least be able to command similar respect.
None, however, felt that it was possible to ‘join’ the Town Boys in any simple sense.
There was a feeling that the Town Boys were an arrogant elite and to actually get in with them you would probably have to do a lot of serious drinking in the Marlborough Arms.
Living outside of Oxford would also be a serious handicap.
The origins of some of the Town Boys have already been mentioned.
From the biographical material it was sometimes difficult to chart progress accurately because the groups from which they had graduated were no longer in existence.
Many, for example, talked about the gangs they had once been involved in but these gangs, if they remained at all , were not, as one Town Boy said, ‘a shadow of what they used to be’.
We have been suggesting that career structures can serve well in the explanation of social behaviour which might otherwise appear to have little rationality.
The activities of a fan become intelligible if we can interpret them as being instrumental in establishing him in a particular role, or if such activities can be shown to be acceptable demonstrations of character and worth among his peers.
This is not in any way to imply any moral or ethical stance on our part.
The task is not one of excusing behaviour or of attributing condemnation to it — only one of rendering it explicable in terms of a revealed social order.
We may not like what fans do and we may view aggro leaders and their like as unhappy reminders of a violent society in which we live.
Similarly we may see the nutter as a pathetic figure who has to resort to self-humiliation in order to establish an identity for himself.
But at the same time, we must pay careful attention to what such young people are actually doing rather than to the easy caricatures of them which some seem to prefer.
Whilst we may feel that it is unfortunate that such career structures exist at all we might do well to examine our own mechanisms for getting ahead.
In doing so, we might, to our discomfort, recognize that football fans are playing a very similar game to the rest of us in society.
The notion of careers is, of course, only one aspect of order on the terraces.
It provides the framework for an interpretation of action but the full story is only revealed by an examination of the rules which direct action and which provide for the interpretation of situations.
It is to the elaboration of rules that we direct our attention in the next chapter.