

COVER ILLUSTRATIONS
FRONT: Mr and Mrs Roberts, farmers at Somersby, with their Welsh Cob mare, Demelza, and Lincolnshire Market Cart made by Vince, Coach Builders of Spilsby, about 1908; photographed outside Stockwith watermill in 1989.
BACK: St James Church, Louth
INTRODUCTION
East Lindsey is an area of Lincolnshire blessed with a very great variety of attractions of interests.
Spreading westwards from the North Sea's expansive coastal beaches, through tranquil marshlands to the serenely undulating wolds and beyond, it beckons lullingly to any visitor weary of the hard sell commercial tourism of the more well trodden regions.
The fact that East Lindsey is slightly off the beaten track is the very reason it has so much to offer that is unusual and refreshing.
To travel for miles along a country lane seeing no traffic other than a solitary tractor is rare in England generally but usual in this vicinity.
Even pony trap revivalists feel safe to venture forth here.
Overwhelmingly it is a region of spectacular skyscapes complimented by the distinctive pastel tones of agricultural patchwork, mellow Lincolnshire brickwork and the occasional touch of Ancaster stonework, such as in the region's most majestic landmark — the spire of St James church, Louth.
Sometimes the skyscapes are utterly dramatic — inky black with the sun striking through a hole in the cloud to radiate the countryside in surreal tones.
Then the odd whitewashed marshland cottage stands strangely palpable, as if it could be plucked from the scene and held for ever.
Often, especially in autumn, the sky is streaked with the incandescent brilliance of oranges reds and gold as an enormous fiery ball sinks down behind the wolds.
Innumerable country spires turn bronze amid newly ploughed fields of copper, just for a few moments before the ball disappears.
Always the sky imposes its moods and the landscape beneath responds in perfect harmony.
There is nothing in between to impede man's absorption of this natural beauty — no smog, no skyscrapers, no big city pressures to cloud the mind.
Everywhere is one is made aware of this, whether walking on the vast beaches with the oceans of sky above, or in a friendly market town where orange pantiles brush blues or greys beyond but never totally obscure.
All the East Lindsey market towns are gems.
Each is steeped in interesting history and has at least one claim to national fame.
Louth has its spire — the tallest and perhaps most beautiful parish church spire in England its King Edward school which educated at least three famous Lincolnshire sons: Alfred Lord Tennyson, Captain John Smith and Sir John Franklin.
Horncastle was a walled Roman settlement.
Later, it was famous for its horse fairs.
Now it is an important antique-dealing centre.
Alford Grammar school also had a hand in the education of Captain John Smith before he went to Louth and Thomas Paine, famous for abolishing slavery in Pennsylvania and for his written works, in particular‘The Rights of Man’, lived here for several years when he worked at the Excise Office.
Spilsby was the birthplace of Sir John Franklin, and Wainfleet, once notorious for its smuggling associations, is the home of the well known Bateman's Brewery and also the birthplace in 1484 of William of Waynflete: founder of Magdalen College, Bishop of Winchester, Provost to Eton, Lord Chancellor to Henry VI and tutor to Edward, Price of Wales.
Nearly every village has some secret treasure to be discovered; be it a pottery, a moated rectory, or the ruins of an abbey or priory, dozens of which stood resplendent throughout the region before the dissolution of the monasteries.
Old Bolingbroke, now no more than a picturesque small village but once much larger and with a castle, was the birthplace of Henry IV
East Lindsey has a very healthy distribution of nature reserves and conservation areas, meticulously maintained for the benefit of both the indigenous wildlife and the visiting general public.
Gibraltar Point is an important bird protection area.
The Rimac reserve, a little further north on the coast, protects the Natterjack toad and the beautiful Marsh orchids which grow here in profusion.
There are nature walks through woodland at Snipe Dales, Kenwick woods and Bardney Forest, famous for its abundance of the uncommon small-leaved lime.
In 1891 Woodhall Spa became a resort for people to take the waters.
It continues as an usual inland resort set in woodland of silver birches, rhododendrons and conifers.
It has an air about it quite unlike the rest of East Lindsey and so displays yet another diverse aspect of this varied region.
Scattered throughout the area are sights of the greatest architectural and historical interest, from the remains of Motte and Bailey castles and the Tudor Tattershall castle, past Windmills and Watermills, country houses and Lincolnshire barns to the thatched round house at Langton and Lincolnshire's only thatched church at Markby.
Alfred Lord Tennyson, Lincolnshire's most famous son, was born at Somersby and the surrounding woldland area is now known as Tennyson country and has a wealth of interesting connotations with the poet.
The coastal resort of Skegness and Mablethorpe have long been famous for the seaside delights they offer and for many, who do not know East Lindsey well, these may be the only places here that they have heard of.
FROM THE COAST…
The East Lindsay coastline boats some of the best sands in the country; a key reason for the development of the resorts of Skegness and Mablethorpe and for their continuing popularity.
But beyond the resorts the coast holds other more subtle and some very unusual attractions.
It is a coastline that can be enjoyed throughout the year and is by no means an exclusively summertime haunt.
In some areas, such as a Donna Nook and Theddlethorpe, the sand and mud flats are incredibly vast.
It is not unusual for the sea to be at least a mile's walk from the coastline sand-dunes.
Here, truly, is a place to sense freedom, to be away from the crowds and the pressures of the world, to wander for miles seeing only a handful of people enjoying the same leisurely activity, or maybe no-one at all.
Occasionally a distant thudding is heard but, if too far away, one has to be equipped with binoculars to see a group of horsemen galloping through the sea spray.
This is a place to expand the lungs and the mind.
Sometimes the air is bracing, sometimes balmy.
Always one returns from the coast relaxed and refreshed.
Here there are activities with which to occupy oneself in addition to the popular walking.
In September the samphire seaweed is ready to be harvested.
This is avidly collected by the locals as it is delicious boiled and pickled.
In winter colonies of seals arrive from further north to have their pups.
Often a family of bull, cow, and pup can be found quite close to the dunes and is most interesting to observe from a reasonable distance.
Sometimes they can be heard bellowing far away on the shoreline in very great numbers.
This sound mingles with the similar nautical tones of fog-horns as ships enter the Humber Estuary and can be almost indistinguishable from them when carrying so far through a mist.
On a winter's day there are many such atmospheric experiences to be perceived.
Saltfleet Haven was a thriving port way back in the thirteen hundreds.
Now, although the haven is badly silted, little fishing vessels and a handful of pleasure craft have moorings here and so maintain the ceaseless nautical atmosphere which Saltfleet has exuded throughout the centuries.
The village straddles the coast road and includes a row of coastguard cottages, an ancient manor house (where Oliver Cromwell once stayed and claiming the oldest section of wallpaper in the country), and the most interesting New Inn; a large  uncommonly tall building for this area.
Somehow it conjures images of smuggling days, perhaps because of its standing as the chief gathering place for the seafarers of former times.
A little further north is the small village of Conisholme which for many years has been famous for its Appleby's Ice Cream establishment.
There is an extremely pleasant, airy and tastefully designed parlour where the exclusive, prize-winning ice creams may be purchased and eaten.
This is popular venue for visitors to the coast throughout the year.
East Lindsey's coastline extends northwards to just beyond Tetney lock, which is the last lock on the disused Louth Navigation Canal before it reaches the sea.
This is a popular place for angling.
Sea angling is a favourite sport, particularly at Trusthorpe, further south, where quite a row of fishermen can often be found.
Between Saltfleetby and Theddlethorpe over 1,000 acres of tidal sand, mudflats and saltmarsh, freshwater marsh and sand-dunes now comprise a National Nature Reserve.
This is the haunt of the Natterjack toad, a protected and endangered species with the delightful and befitting name of Bufo Calamita — certainly it would be a calamity if it were to become extinct.
Hopefully, it will thrive safely in the reserve.
Very rich flora here includes fairyflax, viper's bugloss, autumnal hawkbit, sand sedge, pyramidal orchid and the marsh orchids which create a truly magnificent display in June, when the wild flower enthusiasts and others flock to witness and photograph this rare pictorial scene.
From a high dune vantage point one can only look in awe at the purple dappled carpet spread out below.
Just south of Skegness, Gibraltar Point is an important nature reserve with precious flora and birdlife.
Nesting birds include the little tern, redshank and shelduck.
Here there is a visitors' centre from which there are guided walks in the summer and plenty of books on sale to help identify species.
In 1953, the coastal region was the site of one of Britain's worst natural disasters when the tide surged in and caused extensive flooding and loss of life.
Since then the sea defences have been built up to ensure that such a disaster will not strike again.
There are many who will never forget that sad time but now the East Lindsey coastline has a happy atmosphere; sometimes throbbing with the joy of summer seaside thrills but more constantly pulsating gently in natural  tranquility,.
…
THROUGH THE MARSHES…
One hundred thousand years ago the North Sea lapped against chalk cliffs in this area.
Eventually it receded leaving the fertile marshlands stretching for more or less ten miles to the wolds, whose now gentle eastern slopes were once the exposed chalk cliffs.
Settled by Anglo Saxons and known also to the Romans, this agriculturally rich marshland was a tempting site to be invaded by the Vikings and the Danes.
Many of the marshland village names have the Danish suffix ‘by’— Grimoldby, Manby and Saltfleetby are a clutch within half a mile of each other.
In more recent historic times the area had links with Holland.
Many of the now indigenous family names are of Dutch derivation.
A little of the architecture, particularly the gable ends of some buildings, express Dutch influence.
But predominantly the architecture is distinctively Lincolnshire with a preponderance of old brick farmhouses and barns, a few whitewashed cottages and many, many churches built of local greenstone.
There is an overall quiet and stillness in the marshlands despite the fact that there is much agricultural activity and some fair-sized villages interspersed with the hamlets.
Nearly every lane is edged by a dyke to drain the land.
Here children, in springtime, search for frog spawn and ‘tiddlers’.
In some of the remotest areas swans nest on the dykes but more frequently they are the breeding ground for moorhens.
Nearly every lane is edged by a dyke to drain the land.
Here children, in springtime, search for frog spawn and ‘tiddlers’.
In some of the remotest areas swans nest on the dykes but more frequently they are the breeding ground for moorhens.
Nearer to the coast the dykes are lined by fescues which swish their verdant stems and almost purple heads in early summer breezes and turn to a mellow gold and brown in autumn and winter.
Year round the hedgerows produce constant flashes as Yellowhammers flit in and out.
Her the narrow lanes are most pleasant for cycling, horseriding or even driving out in a pony trap for there is so little traffic and so much nature to be observed.
A commanding view of practically the whole of the marshlands between the wolds and the North Sea can be had from a spot near the hamlet of Muckton, on the edge of the wolds.
Old Lincolnshire folk claim that in the 1920's one could stand at this point and see no less than sixteen windmills noiselessly at work.
Windmills
Windmills certainly proliferated in these flat and windswept lands from the seventeen hundreds onwards.
The typical Lincolnshire windmill was the brick-built tapering towermill which varied in height from about  fifty feet to ninety feet and was surmounted by an ogee cap carrying four to eight sails and also the fantail.
The brick tower was usually black tarred for weather protection and contained up to seven floors.
These allowed for the use of up to five pairs of stones.
There seems to have been a windmill for practically every village and sometimes two or more in the market towns.
It was in Lincolnshire that windmills reached the height of their technological perfection and the king of them all was, and still is, the mill at Sibsey.
It was built in 1877 by Saundersons of Louth and has six patent sails (the most advanced type).
It was an advantage to have an even number of sails as, if one went out of action for some reason, the opposite one could be taken off with it and still the mill could work without being unbalanced.
East Lindsey is blessed with three fine examples of these mills, complete with sails: the one at Sibsey and two five-sailed ones at Alford and Burgh-le-Marsh.
These were built in 1813 and 1833 respectively, by Oxleys of Alford.
An interesting difference between them is that Alford's sails rotate anti-clockwise, which is usual and Burgh-le-Marsh's rotate clockwise which is now unique.
Apart from these three beautifully restored examples there is only the evidence of many tower shells to point to that former hard working and glorious age of cost-free power for corn-milling.
Many mills met their fate in storms when they were ‘tailwinded’, in other words, the wind caught the sails from behind after suddenly changing direction before the sails could be rotated.
Fires were a common hazard, often caused by sparks from the stones igniting combustible material in the dusty dry atmosphere.
But mostly it was the name of ‘progress’ that caused the decline of the working windmill!
Redundant Churches
In the marshland area from times distant the countless mills were known to provide food for man's physical well-being and the numerous churches sustenance for his spiritual health.
Even as the mills were seen to decline in useful service, so too were the churches.
Now there is an extraordinary number of so-called redundant houses of God.
Some have had to be demolished because they became dangerous with neglect.
Others, though redundant, are maintained to the point of safety and stand as an impressive reminder of a more faithful age.
Skidbrooke church, which also used to serve Saltfleet Haven, is one such example.
All the pews have been removed from inside but the font and  the altar rail remain.
Why such a church should become redundant is easily understood.
It stands in a field completely cut off from human habitation.
Yet it remains as a holy sanctuary where birds and green slime mould give it life and only the occasional human passer-by ventures in to discover its cavernous majesty.
St Bartholomew's church at Covenham was declining to the state of danger when a parish in California asked if they might have it and ship it stone by stone to the U.S.A. This caused much controversy for a while but finally it was decided that it should remain and be safely maintained on its original consecrated site.
It took the desire of the Americans to possess an ancient parish church to prompt the authorities concerned to realise its worth and the importance of not allowing such an historic treasure to decline to the state of dereliction and so be lost from our heritage.
Farmhouses
And so to the farmhouses of the marshland stretch.
There are a multitude of the typical ancient mellow brick farmsteads; many of them listed buildings.
Every village and every hamlet has them.
Sometimes they stand completely isolated, surrounded by acres of fields.
A few have become derelict as smaller farms have been taken over by the larger conglomerates but many have been restored for non-farming families: that is, those which have not got past the point of no return after being left open to the four winds for too many years; fit only for pigeon habitation.
These old Lincolnshire farmhouses, especially the derelict ones, tell a fascinating story of farming life in more ancient times.
There are the inevitable baking ovens beside powerful chimney stacks and meat hooks hanging from kitchen and scullery ceilings.
Church Farm Museum
But the best way to savour this atmosphere is to visit Church Farm Museum on the outskirts of Skegness.
It was established by the Lincolnshire County Council's Department of Recreational Services and is a most wonderful memorial to the old Lincolnshire Farm and farming days.
It is set in the middle of a modern housing estate and is a sheer oasis out of the past.
The setting might appear incongruous but it can also be seen as being particularly poignant.
Wandering around the grassy yard, farm buildings and ancient treasures one becomes totally lost in that former mellow, hard-working but tranquil age.
The farmhouse, which was built in 1760, is furnished to exhibit all the traditional antiques of the 1900 — 1910 era.
There is a wash-house with its original copper and an early example of a washing machine.
The kitchen has a marvellous range and a typical scrub-topped table.
The pantry displays examples of all the home-made preserves the farmer's wife would have busied herself with.
The living-room has a lived-in feel about it and the parlour, so immaculately tidy was so obviously only used for special occasions.
Upstairs two bedrooms and a maid's room are a-clutter with Victorian and Edwardian bedroom ware.
Outside, the orchard has been restored to its former glory.
In the yard the ancient farm implements and a fine display of farm carts.
Some of he old outhouses have been converted into a Wheelwright's workshop, a Blacksmith's forget and a Plumber/Tinsmith's workshop.
Often local craftsmen and women exhibit their talents, such as spinning, corn-dolly making and weaving.
Two major undertakings of the museum were the dismantling, transportation and rebuilding of a barn and a cottage from nearby locations.
The traditional brick and pantile barn, with granary above, came from a farm at Wainfleet.
It now houses a refreshment area for visitors to the museum and the granary is used for exhibitions.
The cottage was found to be an early eighteenth century timber framed building when it was being demolished at Withern.
It was discovered that its mud walls had been encased by bricks and its thatched roof covered by pantiles in the nineteenth century.
Though build-about 1740 this timber frame type of construction dates back to the Middle Ages.
The cottage was acquired by the museum and, under the combined direction of Mr John Severn, a Nottingham Architect, the County Architects Department and Professor Maurice Barley, the cottage was moved, stick by stick, and re-assembled at its new site.
The consistency of the mud and straw daub for the walls was arrived at through experiment.
It is eighteen inches thick and seems to be holding up very well.
Now the cottage displays its original circular brick bread oven which, at Withern, had been hidden behind a Victorian cast-iron fireplace.
The friends of Church Farm Museum have planted a delightful, traditional cottage garden outside.
Hollyhocks splash pastel tones against the whitewashed walls and reach almost to the upper storey.
The whole is surrounded by a rustic fence.
Leaving the museum and instantly stepping into the twentieth century again is a strange experience.
There are the pro's. and con's. of both eras to consider.
The Withern cottage is damp and musky and inspires images for former occupants with bronchitis and other chest complaints.
But the bread oven conjures up delicious smells of baking and a homely warmth, missing in most modern homes.
There is a natural tendency to incline towards that which we no longer have, that which we have lost possession of with the passing of time.
It is good that we can walk into that world again, even if only for a brief interlude.
Alvingham
One of the most interesting marshland villages is Alvingham, situated just three miles to the north-east of Louth.
For a small village it has an absolute wealth of historic treasures and one most impressive modern innovation — Alvingham Pottery.
The first very fascinating discovery a visitor to Alvingham will make is that this small village has two churches in one churchyard.
One is the parish church of St Adelwold, Alvingham and the other the parish of St Mary, North Cockerington; the village of North Cockerington being situated almost a mile away.
Both churches were built in the early twelfth century and can be approached from two directions.
Either from the North Cockerington side along the towpath of the Louth to Tetney Navigation Canal and over a wooden bridge to the Yew lined churchyard path, or from the Alvingham village side and, equal as novel, through a farmyard, loudly alive with the grunting and squealing of pigs in their sites.
On the site to the north of the churchyard there once stood a Gilbertine Priory.
It was founded about 1154 and housed 80 nuns and lay sisters and 40 canons and lay brothers.
Though it was a thriving concern for several centuries it eventually fell into decline and finally out of existence with the dissolution of the monasteries in 1537.
So now, save for a few interesting mounds in the field, there is no visible evidence of its existence.
Running through this field is a stream which feeds a most admirably restored and fully working watermill.
The history of milling at this site is almost as ancient as the village itself and dates back at least 900 years.
The mill is open to the public on certain days in August and September and on Bank Holidays.
It is a veritable relic from the past to be observed in a setting which has changed little in the last few hundred years, thus making the pervading atmosphere one of awesome pastoral antiquity.
In the village centre are the stocks.
These were made in 1977 and placed on the site of the original stocks to commemorate the Queen's Silver Jubilee.
Though they are not authentic they are apt reminder of everyday life in past ages in Alvingham.
The Alvingham pottery is most attractively sited with a good sized gravel parking area.
It is housed in a lovely old wheelwright's house which has been tastefully converted to provide a large workshop downstairs, where potters may be watched at their wheels, and a large showroom in the upper loft area.
Thee is also a pleasant tea-room downstairs.
The pottery designs are distinctive and a diverse range of colours used.
Alvingham, through all its centuries of existence, has seen much activity of a pastoral nature.
Even though time has marched on and Danes and Vikings have invaded it, Catholic, Anglican and Methodist religion have influenced it, nothing has really changed its basic aura and raison d'etre.
It was and is surely always will be the epitome of pastoral life in England.
Claythorpe Watermill
There are many other watermills scattered throughout the marshlands in addition to the wonderful Alvingham example.
They appear in the most numbers where the marshes meet the wolds and where the stream that feed them from this higher region are, in consequence, faster flowing.
Of them all Claythorpe watermill is the one most worthy of exploration.
The village of Claythorpe, once quite large and with a railway passing through, has disappeared from the face of some modern-day maps and the railway has long since been dismantled.
A handful of houses, a trout farm and the watermill are all that remain today in this tranquil backwater nestling at the foot of the wolds, just a few miles away from Alford.
The narrow lanes here are frequented more by pheasants and rabbits than people.
A few years ago Claythorpe mill was in a state of dilapidation; a sad, neglected relic of a past long forgotten.
The dull coloured brickwork merged into the undergrowth of trees, weeds and plants untamed and was hardly noticed by most passes by who probably dismissed it as one of Lincolnshire's useless ruins, which would either fall down or have to be pulled down eventually.
This might indeed have happened but for the good fortune of it being discovered by Frits and Maaike Luikens, a Dutch couple who were living in Alford at that time.
They settled in England after Frits had spent many years serving in the Dutch Merchant Navy.
Latterly he had been involved in eel fishing and had been seeking a place to keep his eels alive and fresh.
The claythorpe mill pond had seemed ideal.
The Luikens duly bought the mill.
Then, with great creative inspiration and insight, they painstakingly transformed it into one of Lincolnshire's most original and interesting restaurants.
No longer is it the dull old building lost in the undergrowth.
Now an inspiring white-painted and immaculately maintained watermill nestles idyllically in wooden grounds and all is serenely reflected in the calm, cool mill pond.
The history of the mill can be traced back to 1710 but quite possibly there may have been an older mill on the same site.
it was built to grind corn.
At one time (it is thought in the late 1800's), there was a devastating fire caused by the mill stones turning too quickly and creating sparks which easily ignited the dusty dry building and much of it was destroyed.
When it was reconstructed a rare turbine, instead of the usual waterwheel was installed.
To this day the milling machinery is in working order.
The interior of the building has been most aesthetically restored to incorporate as many as possible of the working parts of the mill in the dining area.
The turbine is sealed off behind a tasteful stained wood casing with leaded windows lit from behind.
Above, on a wooden platform, are the mill stones, accompanied by one or two antique items of interest.
All the tables and chairs are of solid dark wood to match the dark stained original wooden beams of the mill.
At the entrance to the mill driveway is the old bake-house.
This was transformed into a smokery by the Luikens.
Here eels, mackerel and trout are smoked.
Anyone who may have passed the mill, a few years ago would not believe the transformation now.
For then, not a soul moved amongst the decay and no-one would have paused at the spot for long.
Now the place has an aura which is so enticing and unexpected in this quiet rural area that few people can pass by without stopping to go inside and become a part of the idyllic scene.
The Luikens sold Claythorpe mill (which remains as a restaurant) in 1988, to return to the sea which they both love.
But they will be remembered for their profound creative insight and as the people who restored the mill as a vibrant life-force.
Willoughby
Another village nestling at the foot of the wolds, not far from Claythorpe and adjacent to extensive woodlands, is Willoughby.
This is the birthplace of Captain John Smith.
Born in 1589, he was the son of a small tenant farmer.
He was reputed to have been a short, stocky and aggressive Lincolnshire man.
From such humble beginnings in a remote Lincolnshire village he was, however, destined to make his impression on the world.
John Smith was baptised at the Willoughby parish church of St Helena on 9th January, 1580.
Much of his remarkable life story is revealed in the stained-glass windows of the church; which were a gift from Philip L. Barbour of Kentucky, U.S.A. who was a foremost biographer of Willoughby's famous son.
After an education at both Alford and Louth grammar school, John Smith went on to become a pirate, adventurer, map-maker, explorer, Founder and President of Virginia and Admiral of New England.
During his brave and daring life he came up against many dangers, none so well remembered and retold as the story of how he was saved from death at the hands of the Red Indians by Pocohontas, daughter of Chief Powhattan.
Willoughby has one other, less widely known, treasure of novel interest — a moated rectory.
It can be approached from a path made of gravestones laid end to end through the churchyard and over a brick-built bridge.
Both church and rectory are set in a serenely tranquil site, partially secreted by a variety of lovely trees.
Here is spring and summertime the quiet is broken only by the soothing sound of wood pigeons, which somehow creates an aura of timelessness.
The atmosphere cannot have been so very different in John Smith's day.
Markby
Across the marches, a few miles to the north-east of Willoughby is Markby.
Here is Lincolnshire's only thatched church.
Built on the site and with some of the stone of an old Augustinian priory, it is a real gem: small, cosy, and tranquil.
It retains the font from the old priory church and the bell is thought to have come from the priory refectory.
Somehow, perhaps because of the retention of the ancient stones and bell tone, the air of monastic mystery and peace pervades to this day and is easily absorbed in this small environment of stillness and solitude.
Motte and Bailey Castles
Amongst many ancient earthworks in this area are two remains of Motte and Bailey castles.
One at Castle Carlton and one at Tothill.
The one at Castle Carlton, is known to have been owned by one, Justicar Bardolph in the twelfth century.
The mounds are clearly distinguishable and surrounded by the remains of a moat which still retains water.
The Motte is surmounted by five ancient and spreading yew trees in the form of a cross.
The entire site is well wooded and a sanctuary for badges and a profusion of primroses, wood anemones and bluebells in the appropriate seasons.
At Tothill the mound is known as Toot Hill and is situated behind a lovely seventeenth century Lincolnshire manor house.
Little Cawthorpe
One of the prettiest villages in the area, right at the foot of the wolds, is Little Cawthorpe.
Here, a fast, sparkling fresh stream springs into existence, fords a lane and runs parallel to a wooden pathway.
This is the Great Eau and the ford is known locally as the ‘splash’.
The Royal Oak pub is popular for families as there is a childrens' room and large gardens outside, with tables and chairs in summer.
There is a delightful duckpond, in the village, fed from within by more springs and edged by overhanging willows, creating a picturesque scene.
Nearby is a gracious and mellow Jacobean manor house.
Gunby Hall
Between Burgh-le-Marsh and the wolds is one of the area's most lovely country houses, set in outstandingly beautiful gardens.
Now a National Trust property, Gunby Hall was built in 1700 by the Massingberd family.
The house is approached by a long drive through pastoral fields.
The drive is lined all the way by graceful lime trees and provides the first hint as to the verity of Tennyson's description of Gunby Hall in a poem dated 1849, where he describes it was a ‘haunt of ancient peace’.
These words, in his own hand, are to be found, framed, inside the hall.
The interior of the house is beautifully maintained and has several lovely panelled rooms, bedecked by portraits of virtually the entire family through the generations.
Predominantly these are gracious dark oils, some by Sir Joshua Reynolds.
But one, hung in the dining room, by a window looking out onto a most majestic ancient cedar tree, is strikingly different to all the others.
It is a lovely brightly colourful portrait of Margaret Massingberd, by Arthur Hughes.
She stands in the garden with a basket over her arm and white pigeons flying over her head.
She is pictured with astonishingly beautiful delphinium blue eyes, matching the delphiniums growing beside her.
As this portrait indicates, Margaret Massingberd was largely responsible for creating much of the garden areas as they still exist today.
She died in 1900.
Today sweeping lawns, lovely herbaceous borders, flowering trees and extensive walled garden areas, complete with ancient pigeon house effuse a perfect combination of spacious elegance and secret corner, alive with everchanging colours.
Old Bolingbroke
A few miles from Gunby is a quite unassumingly important site to be found where the marshlands give way to the slightly hilly area in the shadow of the wolds.
Old Bolingbroke is situated in an isolated pocket — the valley of a nameless brook.
This pretty little village of narrow lanes and attractive cottages is in fact a Royal Village.
For here, in 1366, the future King Henry IV was born; the son of John of gaunt who had inherited Bolingbroke Castle through his wife, who was heiress to the Lancaster estates.
Recently the castle remains, neglected for centuries and largely hidden, have been excavated to expose some solid stonework foundations and a few ancient arches.
It is sited unusually, on flat land rather than atop one of the encircling hills.
Here, like to many other ancient sites mentioned above, there is a provocative stillness.
Something gives out a breathtaking aura of timelessness.
Perhaps it is the view from beneath an archway of the castle, which takes in the parish church, said to have been built in 1363 by John of Gaunt himself.
A few, familiar to those of centuries ago is once more revealed to modern man.
…
TO THE WOLDS AND TENNYSON COUNTRY
The East Lindsey region of Lincolnshire is blessed with a large portion of the wolds, which are designated as an area of outstanding natural beauty.
Part of this region is now known as Tennyson Country and is indeed a perfect paradise for a potential poet to have been born and bred in.
A landscape which has changed only a little since Tennyson's birth is now, as it was then, quietly, naturally, yet profoundly charged with a sense-awakening atmosphere.
This very landscape must have played no small part in the formation of Tennyson's poetic mind, as it is vibrantly alive with nature and natural forces.
Here the curving chalk hills are interspersed with abundant fresh and sparkling streams in their valleys.
Unpretentious yet beautiful orange brick and pantiled watermills, trout farms and farmhouses rest peacefully in isolated spots and cosy little hamlets appear unexpectedly as one turns of a bend of a woldland way.
One such hamlet is Somersby, in the heart of the wolds, just a few miles east of the market town of Horncastle.
It was here, in 1809, that Alfred Tennyson was born at the rectory.
His father, the Reverend George Tennyson, was rectory of Somersby and the nearby village of Bag Enderby.
Today Somersby has a population of around twenty-five though in Tennyson's time the figure was nearer a hundred.
The reason for this decline seems to be twofold in light of the fact that families were much larger in Tennyson's day (he himself was one of eleven children), and that several dwellings have disappeared from the hamlet over the years.
The rectory, now in non-ecclesiastical ownership, is a long pale, yellow building opposite the church, with a tall hedge half hiding it from view.
It stands solidly still, much as it must have done in the eighteen hundreds, though minus:
‘The seven elms, and poplars four,
That stand beside my father's door’
referred to in one of Tennyson's early poems.
It would seem to stand more peacefully now when considering that there used to be much bustle and slamming of doors, the shouts and cries of a houseful of children and the ailing Reverend Tennyson.
Indeed it was to escape this commotion of the house that young Tennyson sought sanctuary and solitude in the surrounding countryside, where he could be at peace with all he beheld and find the inspiration for his poetic thoughts which he conveyed to us by his pen.
His great awe for the timelessness of the  landscape which surrounded him and the transience of mere man by comparison he revealed in his poem ‘The Brook’…
‘By thirty hills I hurry down,
Or slip between the ridges,
By twenty thorps, a little down,
And half a hundred bridges
Till last by Philip's farm I flow
To join the brimming river,
For men may come and men may go,
But I go on for ever…‘
CLAYTHORPE WATERMILL
Above : THROUGH THE ‘SPLASH’, LITTLE CAWTHORPE
Below : MARKBY CHURCH
Above : THE WOODMAN'S COTTAGE, TENNYSON COUNTRY
Below : PETWOOD, WOODHALL SPA
ALFORD WINDMILL
It is believed that the Philip's farm referred to in this poem is in fact Stockwith watermill, one of his favourite haunts, just a mile or so from his home.
The history of this mill previous to the seventeenth century is unknown.
It was part of the nearby Harrington Hall Estate and was in use until the end of the second World War.
In 1914 a wealthy American wanted to buy the mill and ship it, brick by brick, to the States.
However, the negotiations fell through and Stockwith mill remains in its natural, tranquil setting to delight all who visit it.
Though not working now, several of the working parts remain, not least the interesting water wheel which has an iron centre and rim but wooden spokes.
The sluice gates are lifted by chains on old fashioned rollers.
Three old mill stones serve as the steps up to the door of the mill, an aesthetically appealing alternative use for them now that they are no longer required for the purpose for which they were designed.
The mellow orange brick and creeper clad mill house has now been converted into a restaurant and the nearby stable block into a craft shop.
Outside in the gravel forecourt are rustic benches and tables for visitors to sit beside the mill pond, having cream teas on hot summer days.
This is a slightly different scene to the one Tennyson portrays in the same setting in his poem ‘The miller's Daughter’, where he describes the miller consuming a beverage:
‘In yonder chair I see him sit
Three fingers round the old silver cup —
I see his grey eyes twinkle yet
At his own jest — grey eyes lit up
With summer lightnings of a soul
So full of summer warmth, so glad,
So healthy, sound and clear and whole,
His memory scarce can make me sad…‘
The actual mill pools are undoubtedly much as they were two hundred years ago, for the natural element, water, is timeless and Tennyson's description of the pools, from ‘The Miller's Daughter’, could easily have been written today:
‘I loved the brimming wave that swam
Thro’ quiet meadows round the mill
The sleepy pool above the dam,
The pool beneath it never still…‘
Such a scene can still be witnessed while standing on the quaint little hump-backed bridge opposite the mill.
St Margaret's Church at Somersby is small but full of interest.
It was constructed of local greenstone in the early fifteenth century and contains two mediaeval bells in the low tower.
There is a sundial over the door, dated 1751, and inscribed with the reminder ‘Time Passeth’— a concept which surely impressed the young Tennyson and which he must have mused upon a length as a boy.
It is echoed in many of his poems and particularly in ‘A Farewell’, where he describes the rivulet flowing to the sea:
‘A thousand suns will stream on three,
A thousand moons will quiver;
but not by thee my steps shall be,
For ever and for ever.’
Inside the church is a fine carved wood bust of Lord Tennyson, by Thomas Woolner.
It was placed in the church in 1911 by the Tennyson Centenary Committee and was dedicated by the Bishop of Lincoln.
In a small glass cabinet are examples of Tennyson's clay pipes and writing quills.
The Reverend Tennyson died in 1831 and his grave can be found near the south-west corner of the tower.
After the death of his father, Tennyson and his family continued to live at the rectory for a further six years.
Another of Tennyson's haunts was Harrington Hall, some two miles from the rectory.
He is reputed to have fallen in love with Rose Baring, who was the ward of the tenant of Harrington Hall.
His poem ‘Maud’ is said to be about her and reveals how his advances, as the son of a country parson, were not approved of by her guardians.
He describes how he is not invited to a ball at Harrington but waits in the terrace garden to see ‘Maud’ afterwards:
‘Come into the garden, Maud
For the black bat, night, has flown,
Come into the garden, Maud,
I am here at the gate alone…‘
The terrace garden still exists and is probably little changed since Tennyson's time.
It is approached by a fine set of steps built in 1722.
There is a central herringbone brick pathway with flower beds on either side.
Harrington Hall and gardens are open to the public on certain days.
The Hall, mentioned in the Domesday Book, is a lovely Caroline Manor, built on a mediaeval stone foundation.
It has an Elizabethan porch tower and in 1678 the mullioned windows were changed to sash ones.
Inside are interesting examples of seventeenth and eighteenth century furniture, china and pictures.
There is an ormolu chandelier, said to have come from Versailles, a circular marble-top table made form a section of a pillar from St Peter's, Rome, some Chippendale and Hepplewhite pieces, and paintings by Dutch, Italian and French artists.
Most of the rooms are panelled.
The lane between Somersby and Harrington is very harrow and, in summertime, shaded by dark green foliage.
Tennyson would have frequented this lane in his youth for he liked to visit the Woodman's cottage which nestles beside a wood and has an astonishingly colourful cottage garden.
It can not have changed much in two hundred years and still, today, the tireless plume of woodsmoke wafts up from the chimney, proving that life goes on in much the same way as it always have done in this particular vicinity.
There is not an abundance of thatched cottages in the wolds, but those that do exist are real gems.
One, not far away at Langton, is probably not much changed since Tennyson's day.
It looks  as if it has come straight out of a childrens’ story book, for it is round with cosy little windows peeping out of the almost conical thatched roof.
The memories of his early years and surroundings and the impressions he formed on life as a result are immortalized in so many of Tennyson's poems.
Yet to go to the countryside where these impressions were formed, to be able to see what he saw, almost unchanged, two centuries later; is to experience his poetry vividly brought to life.
‘Time Passeth’, yet, but poetic values are untouched by the passing of time and what existed for and moved the man Tennyson, still exists to move man today.
LOUTH
Louth is undoubtedly one of East Lindsey's greatest treasures.
It is perfectly sited on the River Lud, right at the foot of the wolds.
From miles around, in every direction, the most beautiful church spire in England can be seen.
This majestic sight, glimpsed through undulating woldland patchwork, or from the flatter marshland, entices all strangers who behold it for the first time to come and investigate the town further; to discover its rich history and its modern enchantment.
One of the most interestingly picturesque aspects of Louth is its roofscape.
Mellow orange pantiles seemingly cascade at many angles, surmounting buildings of varying heights, covering lower and higher ground.
Everywhere the create a warm orange sweep up to the contrasting Ancaster stone of St James's spire.
There has been a church on this site since 1170 but the present building dates from 1430, with the famous hexagonal and crocketed spire being added in the early fifteenth hundreds.
The tower is almost equal in height to the surmounting spire, creating aesthetically appealing proportion and a height of some 295 feet.
On market days (Wednesday, Friday and Saturday) the Cornmarket area bustles with life and bright colour.
At the Wednesday market an open-air auction of poultry, farm produce and second-hand items of great variety is conducted.
When the weather is fine this even creates a waving sea of people; many bidding, many just enjoying the lively atmosphere.
Of equal interest is the Cattle Market, held at the site on Newmarket.
Farmers gather from all over the region and all over the country for the auctioning of livestock.
Here the colour tones overall, are more subdued than at the Cornmarket auction, with a multitude of tweed or tan flat caps and Lincolnshire green ‘wellies’, bodywarmers and anoraks.
Most shops in the town have modern facades to the ground floor but above and around is a variety of lovely historic architecture; some Georgian, some Regency, some Victorian.
A little museum in Broadbank helps to tell the history of the town and right at the door is placed the Blue-stone: an enormous boulder which once stood on a street corner in the town and is thought to have been brought here by the Scandinavian ice flow.
The Market Hall was built in 1866 in Gothic style, of similar design to Kings Cross Station and it has a clock tower.
Underneath are extensive brick vaulted cellars, some of which have been converted into a most atmospheric restaurant aptly named ‘The Cellars’.
The King Edward VI grammar school is one of the most ancient in the country and is known to have been an educational institution from at least 1276, though it received its Royal Charter in 1551.
It was here that some of Lincolnshire's most famous sons were educated, including Sir John Franklin, Captain John Smith and Alfred Lord Tennyson.
Though the last mentioned apparently hated it.
Perhaps it was too confining for his poetic mind for he said of it, ‘The only good I ever got from it was the memory of the words ‘sonus disilientis aquae’ and the old wall covered with weeds opposite the school windows’.
An interesting area of the town is Riverhead.
This is the site of the beginning of the Louth to Tetney Navigation Canal, which was completed in 1770 and still retains something of its former atmosphere because of the presence of some mellow old warehouses.
Though long since disused the canal is presently being restored somewhat and a pleasant canal-side walk has been built.
Louth's greatest benefactor was undoubtedly Auguste Alphonse Pahud M.A., A.K.C., J.P.
He came to Louth from Switzerland in 1875 to teach the French and German at King Edward School.
He married locally and remained blissfully happy with his wife for twelve years until her death.
This left him dreadfully depressed and he was treated for melancholia and insomnia.
Finally on 5th August 1902, he committed suicide.
But not without making his will with a Trust Fund providing for a public park for Louth.
This public park is now known as Hubbards Hills.
It is a most lovely valley area, extending to over forty acres.
Here the River Lud gently wends it sway between sheer beach-clad valley faces and more level grass expanses.
In summer it is a wonderful place for picnics and for children to paddle in the stream.
Year round it is popular for walks as it exudes an elegant serenity inspired of the water and the graceful trees.
Louth Park Abbey was founded on the eastern edge of the town in 1139.
It was Cistercian and colonized by monks from Fountains Abbey in Yorkshire.
Today only a few stones and mounds remain as evidence of its existence.
Louth was much involved in the Lincolnshire Rising after the dissolution of the abbey in 1536 caused grave discontent in the town.
The members of the Rising wrote to Henry VIII insisting that he should dismiss his evil counsellors.
Along with many others the vicar of Louth and one of the monks from the Abbey were executed for their part of the revolt.
On the western side of Louth is Thorpe Hall; a beautifully mellow brick house with lichen-clad roof.
It was built in 1584 by Sir John Bolle.
He was involved in the siege of Cadiz and came to have charge of an aristocratic lady there.
She fell in love with him but, on discovering he was already married, she retired to a nunnery.
The  memory of this tragic story has been kept alive throughout the centuries and continues to be by the occasional appearance of The Green Lady — a ghost said to cross the road from Thorpe Hall only to disappear into the trees opposite.
Many have seen this apparition, some claim to have hit her with their cars and to have been astounded to discover no evidence of a body on further investigation.
The Green Lady is also the subject of an oil painting; a portrait of herself in a green dress which the Spanish lady gave to the Bolle family as a gift.
For many years it hung in Thorpe Hall.
Later it was owned by the late John Bourne, a lord of Louth Manor, but it was auctioned after his death in the early 1980's.
On an international scale Louth sits right on the line dividing the Eastern hemisphere from the Western.
This fact is recorded on a building in Eastgate where a plaque marks the exact point of the Greenwich Meridian.
On a more local side Louth is significant as the East Lindsey town where the marshlands meet the wolds.
As such it is well placed at a centre point to visit all the other treasures of the region.
ALFORD
Alford is a delightful market town because it is relatively untouched and certainly unspoilt by the twentieth century.
Perhaps what has saved it is the fact that  it is not situated on a major road.
It nestles on the B.1104, a little distance from Lincolnshire's arterial A.16.
It is instantly evident to a visitor to Alford that this was once an elegant and thriving market town.
Its ancient buildings reflect the air of a former age, when the pace of life was slow, when landlords and merchants lived off the fat of the land and when labourers, in vast numbers, worked that land.
Indeed in the nineteenth century Alford was a hive of agricultural and allied industries, with agricultural-implement making, rope-making, brick-making, brewing, tanning and corn milling to name the most prominent.
As more and more people drifted away from the land and sought work in large urban areas, during the late nineteenth and early twentieth centuries, so Alford found itself left behind — a hollow yet tranquilly pulsating image of its former glory.
Today this forgotten rural haven comes to life again in several delightful ways.
The first feature to strike a motorist passing through and which can be seen from several miles away, is Hoyles windmill.
This magnificent five-sailed towermill, was, as mentioned previously in this book, constructed by Sam Oxley, a millwright of Alford, in 1813.
It is the last remaining of four windmills which once stood in the town.
It is a striking reminder of the pastoral rural life of long ago and the first pointer to the fact that one is entering ancient quarters.
The mill is open to the public on certain days of the year.
Sam Oxley's millwright business was taken over by a Mr Wheatcroft in a turn a Mr Thompson took over from him.
Now Thompsons of Alford is the only remaining millwright business in Lincolnshire.
The manor house is Alford's most imposing building.
Constructed in the early sixteenth century with a heavy timber frame mounted on  saddlestones , with mud and stud walls surmounted by a thatched roof and with hand-made brick chimneys, it must have stood thus, virtually unaltered for about two hundred years.
Then in the early eighteenth century the brick facade was added.
In 1967 the owner of the Manor, Miss Dorothy Higgins, gifted it to the Alford Civic Trust who have since done much to restore it after years of neglect.
In 1969 the roof was rethatched with Norfolk reed, after the removal of three layers of thatching which, in places, was six feet thick.
Now the manor has been turned into a folk museum.
A visitor can wander through rooms which reincarnate life as it used to be lived over the last centuries.
There is even one corner where life in the year 2000 B.C. is represented: when Alford, or whatever the site would have been known as then, would have consisted of straw huts where its inhabitants might have been weavers and flint tool makers.
Some of the flint tools found in the area are displayed here.
The Manor kitchen has an enormous Tudor fireplace with the original oak beam.
There is a dairy displaying ancient implements, a chemists shop with articles on display taken from two former chemists shops of the town; a boot and shoemakers shop and a schoolroom to name just a few of the varied and intriguing glimpses into the life of past ages.
The Manor is sited in pleasantly wooden grounds and it is here that Alford truly comes to life on Spring and August Bank Holiday weekends.
For several years this has been the setting for the Alford Craft Market.
Here about thirty selected craftsman and women display and sell their work.
There is a healthy mingling of ancient and modern crafts with pottery, woodwork, patchwork, weaving, leatherwork, jewellery, and artists' stall.
The market is further enhanced by live performers who act out the varied timeless arts.
There are folk singers, Morris Dancers, Live Theatre artistes and puppeteers.
Alford is the perfect setting for this revival of the old skills and here, more than in any other town, the unique and profound atmosphere of ‘life as it was’ can be absorbed.
In addition to its important pointers to ancient English history, Alford also has links with the history of America.
Captain John Smith (Mentioned in greater detail in the Willoughby section) attended the Queen Elizabeth grammar school here.
In 1764 Thomas Paine was posted to Alford to work in the Excise Office which was housed in the old Windmill Inn in the market place.
He worked here until 1769, during a period when smuggling was rife.
In 1774 he emigrated to America where he edited an influential newspaper and became friend to Benjamin Franklin, Thomas Jefferson and George Washington.
It was Thomas Paine who is said to have suggested United States of America as the name for the new country but he is perhaps best known for abolishing slavery in Pennsylvania 1780 and for his important written works including ‘The Rights of Man’.
Ann Hutchison, daughter of the Reverend Francis Marbury of Alford, was baptised at the church in 1591 and married William Hutchinson in 1611.
Following the Reverend Cotton to Boston, Massachusetts , in the ‘Griffin’, after becoming a Cottonian Puritan, she tried to change religious opinion in the colony.
She was banished from  Massachussetts for her efforts and moved to Rhode Island with her husband an large family of children.
Soon after her husband died and she went to Long Island with six of her children.
Here she and five of the children were savagely killed by Indians.
The sixth child was taken captive but returned to friends a few years later.
In St Wilfrid's church, Alford, there is a photograph of Ann Hutchinson's bronze statue which is sited outside the state house in Boston, Massachussetts .
WAINFLEET
Wainfleet is an East Lindsey market town with a wealth of history and few unusual surprises.
It is a town that has changed subtly with the subtly changing times and yet has maintained a distinct identity and a strange diversity of atmospheres, steeped in interest and beckoning to times ancient.
The people of Wainfleet are openly friendly, keen to welcome visitors and proud to tell them about the fascinations of the town.
Set beside the River Steeping which becomes Wainfleet Haven, it is five miles from the sea.
It is believed that long before it became a market town, serving a largely agricultural community, it was the ancient Roman port of Vannona, which was supposed to have been the principal harbour on this coast.
In the late seventeenth and the eighteenth centuries Wainfleet had its fair share of smuggling activity.
The ban on the export of wool, which was so extensively produced in Lincolnshire, led to it being smuggled out of the country.
In return contraband spirits, tobacco, and silk were surreptitiously imported.
A favourite place for stashing the loot, until it was safe to move it further, was on hooks suspended under bridges which crossed the many dykes.
Today it is possible to explore the meandering River Steeping by hiring a rowing boat or canoe from a wharf near the railway station.
Upstream is the most interesting direction, passing a variety of fascinating buildings.
Bridge house, with its thatched roof, rare fretwork fence and Gothic doorway, creates an idyllic scene, overlooking the river.
Passing under the main A.52, which is supported by an old brick bridge, one comes to Wainfleet's major  landmark and one of its greatest claims to fame — the old brick-tower windmill.
Built in 1820 it ground corn for a hundred years.
It was a fine five-sailed windmill, probably build by Oxleys of Alford.
Now it has a very different raison d'etre.
In 1920 it was acquired by George Bateman, brewer of Wainfleet and he installed his brewery in and around the mill premises.
Though the sales have long since gone the mill now has a castellated top and refulgent water vane in the shape of a beer bottle.
Not only does a tower provide a landmark, alerting everyone for miles around to the presence of the brewery, it also provides the brewery with a trademark, though on the printed version the mill has acquired the adornment of four sales — historically inaccurate but more symmetrical!
The brewery is a large concern, employing many of the Wainfleet folk.
It supplies about a hundred pubs, and three large hotels in Skegness.
It brews pure, unadulterated ‘Real Ale’, which is so popular it is now even finding its way abroad.
Wainfleet, unlike most market towns in East Lindsey, actually has a railway station in use.
Over the years most of the stations and lines in the region have been dismantled but Wainfleet is on the main ‘trippers’ line to Skegness.
In summertime trains run as often as every ten minutes taking holiday-makers through to the popular resort.
Thus there are often traffic jams for several minutes on Wainfleet's main through road, while motorists wait at the level crossing.
While waiting they are  pleasantly confronted by what must be one of the prettiest and best dressed greengrocers in the country.
Its primrose yellow facade perfectly complements the outside displays of brightly coloured fruits and vegetables and vibrant hanging flower baskets.
The town square is large and surrounded by a variety of interesting buildings — ivy-clad low terraced houses, quaint shops and a hotel.
In the middle is an attractive stone Butter Cross.
There is also an appealing clock tower, built in 1899.
A cattle market used to be held in the square but now it serves as a the town's chief car park.
The building with the oldest history in the town is Magdalen College School.
Founded by William of Waynflete in 1484 it was intended that it should act as a feeder to Magdalen College itself, which he also founded.
It is a long narrow building 70 feet by 20 feet, built of brick with impressive polygonal towers at the front.
It was designed by Henry Alsbroke and the brickwork looks similar to that of Tattershall Castle for which he was also the architect.
William of Waynflete, had a shining career, particularly in the fields of education and the church.
Not only was he Bishop of Winchester but also Provost to Eton, Lord chancellor to Henry VI and tutor to Edward, Prince of Wales.
Magdalen College school is now the town library.
Perhaps the greatest surprise in Wainfleet is Barkham Street.
It is a double row of fine, tall and expansive Victorian terraced villas and looks as if it is straight out of London.
The houses were in fact built in the eighteen hundreds to a design by Sydney Smirke for Bethlem Hospital.
A number of similar terraces stood in Southwark, near Bethlem Hospital.
Barkham Street is a source of constant incredulity for visitors who come upon it so unexpectedly amongst the natural less sophisticated architecture of rural Lincolnshire.
Two churches which once stood in Wainfleet have long since been dismantled.
Now there is a modern one, built with some of the stone from a predecessor.
At the door is an insight into the true melding nature of all that goes on in Wainfleet — half a wooden beer barrel from Bateman's Brewery, planted with flowers and set beside an iron shoe scraper.
This, together with the fact that the whole town is well kept up and bustling with life, seems to hint that the people of Wainfleet have a strong community spirit and pride in all their town's endeavours and achievements.
It seems they work hard, are aesthetically inclined and, on Sundays, scrape the mud from their toil and worship God.
Wandering around Wainfleet one finds oneself walking from one atmosphere to another.
By the river the ambience is entirely nautical.
Yet, just a few yards away, is the busy main street and the railway  station.
Waiting behind a stream of cars for the railway crossing barriers to be opened the countryside might seem miles away.
The town square, where neighbours chatter, has a tranquil atmosphere and has more the feel of village life about it.
In Barkham Street, once could be in London and Lincolnshire seems a hundred miles away.
All these diverse atmospheres merge together beautifully to create a most delightful and unique East Lindsey market town.
HORNCASTLE
In the fourth century the Romans enclosed seven acres of land and called it Banovallum — walled place on the Bain.
This was Horncastle's beginning.
It was actually sited on a horn shaped piece of land between the River Bain and the River Waring.
Thus the inspiration for the first half of the more modern name of Horncastle.
There is still some evidence of the roman wall at various sites in the town.
Perhaps the most interesting example of this is to be found in the Manor House garden, where a large section was unearthed and found to be well preserved.
It embraces the remains of a mediaeval well and has been made most aesthetic use of by the present owners of the manor as an interesting garden feature where flowering colours splash against the solid, more sombre stonework.
This Manor was mentioned in the Doomsday Book.
Later it was owned by Bishops of Carlisle, Lords of the manor and lay Rectors from 1229–1856.
In the middle seventeen hundreds the house was largely rebuilt after fire damage but the original Tudor kitchen section of the building survived.
The manor is set right in the middle of Horncastle and has a large and colourful garden, much admired by passers-by who cannot help but pause at the usually open corner gate in the garden wall.
There are several old pubs sited around the centre of the town.
One the King's Head, is a tiny ancient building with a thatched roof nestling between two far taller and more modern edifices.
The old pubs evoke images of a former time when Horncastle was famous throughout the land for its Horse Fairs and when hostelries were packed with horse dealers.
Today the pubs are the haunt and meeting place of another type of dealer.
Horncastle has become Lincolnshire's principal Antiques Centre where over sixty dealers have their businesses and many more from all over the country and abroad come to trade.
Horncastle is a pleasant town to come to and browse, for it is seldom crowded, even on market days.
SPILSBY
Spilsby is situated on the A.16 but the market square is a little to the east of this relatively busy arterial road.
On Mondays lively market auctions are held in the square.
These are very popular with people gathering from towns and villages from miles around.
The market square activities are overseen by a commandingly large bronze statue of Sir John Franklin, discoverer of the North-West Passage.
He was born in Spilsby in 1786 and died in Arctic regions in 1847.
Recently a circular walk, taking in old footpaths and land given by local farmers, has been signposted and named the Franklin Way in honour of Spilsby's famous son.
This is to be found to the west of the town and starts from a point on the A.16.
Spilsby is well known locally for its Theatre which regularly puts on performances to provide musical and dramatic culture in this rural township so inaccessibly far from the big city footlights.
FROM WOODHALL SPA…
In the early eighteen hundreds were boring for coal at Woodhall.
They found none but instead discovered medicinal water, unique for its richness in salts of iodine and bromine.
The discovery of the water together with the idyllic setting in pine and birch woods scattered with rhododendrons meant that Woodhall Spa was destined to successful growth as an inland resort.
By the late eighteen hundreds a pump room has been built, secreted amid the restful towering pines.
Two large hotels, the Victoria and the Royal appeared, to accommodate those who flocked to take the waters for the treatment of rheumatism, or merely to holiday in this new, unusual and tranquil place.
As well as the hotels very fine dwelling houses began to be built; many using all the best building materials available at the turn of the century.
Woodhill Spa developed an architectural elegance comparable to the best residential areas of Surrey and quite unlike the ancient rural architecture of most of the rest of Lincolnshire.
Perhaps the most magnificent mansion to be built here at the turn of the century was Petwood: this by Lady Weighall.
As daughter of the great furniture stores magnate of the 1800's, Sir Blundell Maple, she had the  wherewithal to choose a site in her favourite wood, which at that time, extended to an estate covering several miles.
Petwood was built of all the very best materials and the Maple craftsmen were responsible for carving the lovely oak staircase and interior panellings.
Most of the original furniture was Maple and some is still in use today.
Sir Archibald Weighall was Conservative M.P.
for Horncastle and together with this wife at Petwood played host to many Royal and prestigious guests, including George V and his son, later to become George VI, who came for tennis parties.
In the 1930's the new high tax burdens resulted in the Weighalls turning Petwood into a hotel.
Later they gave it up entirely and went to live in their home in Ascot.
Petwood continues as an hotel and conference centre to this day.
Though the estate has somewhat diminished since the Weighall days it still has superbly laid-out grounds of over thirty acres.
Visitors are free to wander through the woods and across the extensive lawns to admire the lily pond, the fountain and the rose gardens.
Petwood is a long, low building which exudes an air of absolute tranquility when viewed from a distance at the lawn's extremity.
Surrounded by woodland it seems set in a pocket of secluded spaciousness, watched only by wood pigeons and squirrels.
Lady Weighall was also responsible for laying out Jubilee Park, opposite Petwood, and later gifting it to the authorities.
It has an open air swimming pool and offers and variety of leisure activities including: putting, bowling, cricket and tennis.
On Spring Bank Holidays it is the venue for the Woodhall Spa Agricultural Show.
During the Second World War Petwood was requisitioned by the R.A.F. and it became the Officer's Mess for 617 Squadron, better known as ‘The Dambusters’, after their bombings of the Mohne and Eder dams.
Displayed in the grounds of the hotel is an interesting relic of that time: the remains of a Barnes Wallis bouncing bomb.
In the village centre is a recently erected and sweepingly designed memorial to 617 Squadron, listing all their daring bombing-raids and their names.
The Victoria and Royal Hotels have long since gone but in addition to Petwood there is another fine looking place to stay — The Gold Hotel.
Here both professional and amateur put up, attracted by the championship golf course lying to the east of the town, where several annual competitions are held.
Woodhall Spar retains its air of tranquility and graciousness.
Its woodland walks are delightfully peaceful and plead for exploration not only in summer but throughout the year.
There is a an oak wood said to have grown from acorns planted after the Battle of Waterloo and is known as Waterloo Wood.
Here in the 1844 the Wellington Monument was erected which tells the story of the acorns.
For some years the town's symbol has been The Tower on the Moor.
This is the brick constructed remains of a hunting lodge, thought to have been built by Ralph Cromwell, the Lord Treasurer.
It dates from 1440.
…
THROUGH KIRKSTEAD AND CONINGSBY…
Visitors to ancient monastic sites often comment on an atmosphere of profound peace which they seem, instantly, to absorb.
Kirkstead Abbey, near Woodhall Spa, is no exception but here the peace is tinged with a hint of sadness.
Today all that remains of this once extensive abbey is a striking pinnacle of crumbling stonework which was the South East angle of the central tower of the Cruciform church.
It points like a finger to heaven and like a magnet it attracts strangers passing by to come closer and investigate its history.
The abbey site is approached through a gate in a country lane and along a grassy track.
There is still evidence of the moat which totally surrounded the abbey and in addition to the one remaining section of stonework there are several mounds covered in stinging nettles, indicating the extent of the foundations.
Today this is grazing land for sheep, as most of the surrounding area has been since the founding of the abbey.
For this was a Cistercian concern, colonized by monks from Fountains Abbey, as Louth Abbey was, and the Cistercians' business was sheep farming.
The Abbey of St Mary at Kirkstead was in fact founded in 1139 by Hugo Brito, the son of Eudo who was a companion of William the Conqueror.
At the time of its foundation it must have been a serenely beautiful sight to behold — spreading golden-white stonework set amid the pastoral Lincolnshire greens.
The monks wore coarse linen habits which surely blended harmoniously with the surrounding natural tones.
Looking at the graceful lofty sweep of the stone finger now it only takes a slight imaginative leap to picture the majestic beauty of the abbey in its former entirety.
It is then that the atmosphere of peace becomes tinged with a sense of sadness at such a loss…beauty desecrated.
But the history and the atmosphere of Kirkstead does not end at the abbey ruins.
Further along the grassy track, half hidden behind trees, a church roof can be glimpsed.
Visitors should not be put off by the modern appearance of this roof, nor by the notice on the gate to the abbey field which indicates a slight trek back along the lane to Abbey Farm to pick up the key to view St Leonard's Church, Kirkstead.
For they are on the right track to the discovery of treasures steeped in antiquity and an atmosphere charged with the presence of the past.
St Leonard's is an early thirteenth century church, built just outside the walls of the abbey.
It is believed that it was built as a chantry chapel in memory of Robert de Tattershall who died in 1121.
It was probably used by travellers and villagers as the abbey church would, most likely, have served only the monks.
The church is entered through its original door complete with ancient iron hinges and immediately one is plunged into an anachronic atmosphere.
Time seems to have stood still here for centuries.
The relatively modern pews and colourful hassocks seem merely transient and do nothing to conceal the vibrant essence of this ancient environment.
There is a dank muskiness purveyed through the very stone of the walls and the original plaster of the unexpectedly beautiful vaulting.
This long-passed-by and relatively infrequently visited church has two historic treasures of National significance.
It must be its isolation which has kept them so unreasonably concealed from common knowledge.
The first is the chancel screen which retains two sections of the original oak arcading.
This delicately thin and woodwormed treasure is still firm and silky smooth to touch.
It is thought to be the earliest example of screenwork in existence.
The second is a recumbent military effigy, thought to be that of Robert de Tattershall himself.
It is carved out of Purbeck marble and is of a knight in barrel helmet and banded-mail.
This is arguably the earliest military effigy in England and can be dated to around 1200 by the helmet which has eye slits but no breathing holes.
The latter being introduced around 1225.
St Leonard's church has stood witness to the incredible changes wrought by the dissolution of the monasteries and the general passage of time and yet has managed to retain its own original identity throughout all this.
At one point, towards the end of the seventeenth century, the church was possessed by Daniel Disney who turned it into a Presbyterian Meeting House but by 1812 it was back in the hands of the Church of England again.
To step outside the church today, back into the twentieth century, is to awaken abruptly to our modern ‘sophistication’.
For, although St Leonard's is surrounded by fields, R.A.F. Coningsby is only a second away as the supersonic fighters fly.
This roar and power reverberates to the  core of the being to bring one of the ancient atmosphere and into an instant consciousness of how man has progressed since the days of Robert de Tattershall's banded-mail.
There is a rumour, locally, that St Leonard's is haunted by monks.
It is certainly easy to reconcile the likelihood of this when considering the violence which finally felled the abbey and some of its inmates.
For in 1536 the insurgents involved in the Lincolnshire rising, who were gathering at Horncastle, enlisted the help and support of the monks of Kirkstead.
The abbot was reluctant to allow the Brethren to join in.
However they were threatened that if they did not the Abbey would be burnt down.
So some went.
Because of their participation in the abortive Rising, three monks and the Abbot of Kirkstead were executed in 1537.
The abbey was surrendered the same year.
This sudden and violent less of the abbey, its Abbot and three of its Brethren is perhaps the cause of the locally reported transmutations and the essence of the profoundly poignant atmosphere commented upon by so many visitors so the site — that overwhelming peace, tinged with a hint of sadness.
Coningsby has been an R.A.F. station since 1940 and is now the base for Phantom fighters.
It also houses a collection of old aeroplanes which make up the Battle of Britain Memorial Flight Museum; which includes among its exhibits a Lancaster bomber, two Hurricanes and four Spitfires.
The most remarkable feature of Coningsby village is the single handed clock on St Michael's church tower.
Dating from the seventeenth century, it is said to be the largest antique one-handed clock in existence.
It has a diameter of 16 feet 6 inches and the hand is 15 feet long.
The clock face is painted white and so stands out clearly from quite a distance, allowing the time to be easily read.
…
TO TATTERSHALL…
For miles around the impressive Tattershall Castle is a dominant feature.
Owned now by the National Trust it is a delight to visit.
Inside, the enormous brick-walled chambers and massive stone fireplaces are thoroughly awe-inspiring, as is the view from the battlements on top of the castle, where the flatlands of Lincolnshire stretch for miles in every direction.
The history of a castle on this site dates back to 1231 when a stone castle, or more likely a fortified manor was built by Robert de Tattershall.
But the present brick castle keep, towering to 110 feet, was built around 1430 by Ralph, Lord Cromwell, Treasurer of England.
Thanks to the restoration work carried out by the Marquess Curzon, of Kedlestone K.G., in 1911, it remains as the most perfect example of a castle keep from the later Middle Ages.
There is a museum and gift shop in the gatehouse of the castle.
Peacocks strut through the grounds and the whole is surrounded by an inner and outer moat.
Occasionally archery competitions are held here — a perfect setting for such an event.
One could almost imagine oneself back into the Middle Ages but for the fact that technology has marched on through the centuries to replace rough-hewn bows of Yew with fibreglass ones, equipped with very advanced sights.
WOODLANDS
Some of the loveliest places in East Lindsey are best enjoyed on foot.
This is particularly true of the woodland areas which are freely open to the public and which often have well marked nature trails to follow.
Snipe Dales, not far from Spilsby, includes grass and woodland areas with well laid trails.
Among the birds to observe, in addition to the park's namesake, are woodcock, siskin, and goldcrest.
There is also a good variety of wild flowers; including primrose, marsh marigold and saxifrage.
This reserve is particularly pleasant for family outings as it incorporates a picnic area.
At Kenwick woods, near Louth, there is a footpath through one of the loveliest sites on the eastern slopes of the wolds; where pines, beeches, poplars, limes and many other varieties of tree impress a gracious elegance amid the surrounding, intensely agricultural, rolling  landscape .
The woodlands of perhaps the greatest historic interest are those which make up the very extensive Bardney Forest.
Here the Lincolnshire Limewoods are to be found — the best area of small leaved limes in the whole of the British Isles.
In mediaeval times ditches were dug around these woods to prevent deer from entering them and also to hinder those who ma have inclined towards helping themselves to underwood.
These ditches still remain.
From times ancient the woods were coppiced and the timber sold.
Lime was particularly good for coppicing and its timber prized for turning, furniture making and much used in coachwork.
The  best was used for basket and rope-making.
Today the woods continue to be coppiced and also provide some most delightful circular nature trails — one extending to two and a half miles.
All the typical woodland flowers can be found here in abundance, including serene displays of lily of the valley.
Birds abound too, and this is a good place to discover the great spotted woodpecker.
East Lindsey