

Bon Appetit Never before has Edinburgh had such a selection of exciting, excellent,different restaurants, hostelries and cafes in which to wine and dine.
In the following pages we suggest some of the most popular.
All are good, all have a mood and atmosphere of their own.
All offer a friendly welcome and range in price from the first-class hotels to the friendly little restaurants and bistros in which the city abounds.
For the convenience of those who like foreign food we have double listed some of Edinburgh's most popular foreign restaurants under countries.
It is an impressive selection with its choice ranging from Moroccan, Mandarin and Russian eating houses to Greek, Swiss and Turkish establishments.
Where, outside of London, could you find a wider choice?
Indeed, outside of London few cities can offer such a choice of different places to eat.
Immensely popular these days is pub food.
It is usually very good and usually very reasonable.
Practically all city centre pubs offer excellent bar lunches, some serve meals all day, and many in addition to the bar lunches offer supper snacks.
You will find a selection on pages 54–64.
On pages 42, 43 there are some suggestions of where you might like to explore Edinburgh's night life, where you can dance the night away, relax and enjoy cabaret, or take part in a medieval banquet out of town.
It is all fun and all the venues are easily accessible.
Eating and drinking is fun.
Enjoy yourself!
Restaurants
For all tastes and for all occasions
The Abbotsford
You can have a good reasonably prices meal in the upstairs restaurant or a hearty snack in good company at the famous Abbotsford bar, a glorious piece of Victoriana.
House wines.
Restaurant Alp-Horn
À la carte Swiss cuisine.
Pleasant Alpine atmosphere.
Very attentive service.
Pricey but excellent value.
French, German, Austrian, Swiss, Australian wines; Scotch, Irish and American whiskies; bottled.
The Anarkali Tandoori Restaurant
In addition to the extensive Tandoori menu there is a wide selection of vegetarian dishes.
Decor is Indian with friendly waiter service.
Extensive choice of wines, whiskies and beers.
L'Aperitif
Continental style restaurant situated between Royal Lyceum Theatre and Usher Hall.
French, Italian and Scottish menu plus excellent choice of vegetarian dishes.
The Arches
Small friendly candlelit restaurant with Scottish and Continental dishes.
Specialities of the house include seafood and steak Dishes.
Extensive range of wines and whiskies and various draught beers.
Asha Tandoori Restaurant
Tandoori, North Indian and Kashmiri dishes to a gentle background of Indian music.
Vegetarian fare a speciality.
Wide ranges of wines and whiskies.
L'Auberge
With its authentic modern French atmosphere, L'Auberge appeals to the connoisseur with special emphasis on modern French cooking and beauty of presentation.
Fixed-price lunches are good value and very stylist.
Also à la carte.
with a variety of gastronomic specialities.
French wine, of course.
Good range of whiskies and cognacs.
La Bagatelle
Intimate restaurant offering traditional French fare.
35 French wines.
½ bottles available.
Balli's
A plush new Tandoori restaurant specialising in Asian Punjabi cuisine.
House wine (and others), whisky and beer available.
Bamboo Garden Chinese Restaurant
Relax in a decor of bamboo and cane art and enjoy regional cuisine from Canton, Szechuan, Peking and Shanghai.
Wide ranges of wines, whiskies and beers.
Bar Italia
A bright, cheerful, bustling restaurant with typical Italian fare, wine, espresso and good service.
Bar Roma
Another highly popular Italian restaurant.
Everything served with gusto!
Pizzas, Pastas, Steaks and Veal.
Barnton Thistle Hotel
The elegant Crichtons dining room and Kitcheners Restaurant are popular with local residents as well as visitors from town.
Hot and cold snacks in the friendly lounge bar.
Private parking.
Beehive Inn
A unique inn of much character in the historic heart of Edinburgh.
The 17th century building is full of interesting mementoes, including the door of the condemned cell of the Calton Jail.
The steaks are superb, so is the seafood.
Excellent wine list — and 120 malt whiskies.
Must book.
Bianco's
Fashionable West End restaurant and bar, voted Scottish Cafe Brasserie of the Year 1986.
Continental breakfast served.
Excellent daily menu of hot and cold lunch dishes.
Lively, busy bar.
Wide selection of whiskies and beers.
Le Bistro
Popular French bistro in the heart of Edinburgh's West End.
Chili, steaks and fish specialities.
French and German wines, lots of whiskies and beers.
Blakes
Modern bar and restaurant in the West End.
Bar lunches in the wine bar, table d'hôte downstairs in the restaurant.
Braid Hills Hotel
Standing on the Braid Hills, with a fine view over the city, two miles from Princes Street, off A702, this is a popular resort for Sunday lunches (best book in advance) and a pleasant spot to eat on any occasion.
À la carte, French and Scottish fare.
Good range of wines and whiskies.
Brasserie
A friendly intimate Franco-Scottish restaurant with outside seating — weather permitting.
Crepes a speciality.
Wide range of wines.
Choice of whiskies, bottled beers.
The Brasserie
Bright, cheerful and friendly.
Choice of Pizzas, pastas, steaks and burgers, plus a salad bar.
Brasserie St Jacques, King James Thistle Hotel
Regional French dishes a speciality.
Hot and cold bar snacks.
Scottish cabaret April–October.
Extensive range of wines, whiskies and beers.
Bruntsfield Hotel
One of the privately owned city centre hotels.
Home made pies and fresh haddock a speciality of the bar lunches.
Haute cuisine in the dining room.
Wines, whiskies and beers galore.
La Buca Ristorante
The proprietors style themselves as a Fawlty Towers Italian restaurant!
Good food and good humour abound.
Fish, poultry, veal, meat and home made pasta are specialities.
Italian wines and beers and selection of whiskies.
Bungalow Restaurant
‘A taste of India you will never forget,’ promises the proprietor.
Enjoy with your Tandoori special fine wines, draught or bottled beer.
Le Cafe Noir
Delicious French fare in the boulevard atmosphere of a Parisienne brasserie and bistro.
Extensive range of house wines and champagne, whiskies and draught beers.
The Cafe Royal Oyster Bar
First class French cuisine with caviar and lobster specialities of the house.
Caledonian Hotel
Within the impressive red bulk of the Caley there is something to satisfy every fancy — from the haute cuisine of the glamorous Pompadour Restaurant to the modestly priced Gazebo.
There are three bars, with live entertainment in the trendy Platform 1 bar.
Excellent range of wines.
Over 50 whiskies, blended and malt.
Carlsberg and various beers.
Capital Hotel
Newly refurbished and under new management, the Capital specialises in Scottish fare and vegetarian dishes, with a popular buffet table.
Wines, spirits and beers.
The Carlton Highland Hotel
Completely transformed from the famous old Patrick Thomson/House of Fraser department store, the Carlton Highland Hotel has several welcoming restaurants.
French and Scottish dishes feature prominently.
Champany Inn Town
Snugly situated in the picturesque village of Colinton, this off-shoot from Champany Linlithgow maintains the same high standards of steaks and cuisine.
The wine list is equally select.
Chans Restaurant
Serves Szechuan cuisine in addition to Cantonese, Peking and vegetarian cooking.
Fully licensed.
Chez Julie
A friendly, informal little restaurant in Stockbridge.
À la carte French cuisine.
Don't miss the onion soup.
Extensive wine list.
Blended, de luxe and malt whiskies.
Carlsberg Light and Special.
Christopher North House Hotel
Wine and dine in the classic atmosphere of Georgian Edinburgh.
La Cloche
Classic French cuisine served amid sumptuous Georgian surroundings.
Extensive wine list.
Open 6 days.
Lunches served five weekdays.
The Cassis Bar has live music every Sunday.
Coconut Grove Restaurant
Mexican restaurant with 1940s decor.
Enchiladas a speciality.
Mexican and German beers, Tequila and Mascal plus a variety of whiskies and a good selection of wines.
Cosmo Restaurant
A fine Italian restaurant for the discriminating.
The à la carte menu is a gastronomic delight, especially the seafood and veal dishes.
Italian, French and German wines and a selection of whiskies, blended and malt.
The Courtyard Restaurant
Snacks, lunches, dinners in the beautiful surroundings of a secluded courtyard, only 50 yards from the West End of Princes Street.
Eat outside (in summer!) at umbrell'd tables or enjoy the elegant à la carte restaurant upstairs.
Cousteau's
An original seafood restaurant with sub-aqua atmosphere.
Lobster tanks with live lobsters and aquarium.
Exciting selection of dishes excellently cooked.
Cramond Brig Hotel
Dine in style in the restaurant, or choose to eat in the bar buffet.
There is a family room.
Atmosphere convivial.
Parking.
Cramond Inn
Charming old inn picturesquely situated at the mouth of the Almond.
Excellent menu includes roast duck, smoked salmon, fish and game dishes.
Over 50 wines, large selection of blended and malt whiskies.
Carlsberg, Tennent's Tartan Special, Guinness and Lorimers 80/ — Ale.
Ample parking.
Crêperie Française
Intimate little restaurant with real French atmosphere highly appreciated by discriminating theatre-goers for a special meal before or after the show.
All-French wine list.
Crest Hotel
Formerly known as the Esso, this bright modern caravanserai has all the comforts and expected facilities.
The restaurant has a varied à la carte and table d'hôte international menu.
Select choice of wines and whiskies, blended and malt.
The Crest Bar is a popular meeting place.
Private parking.
Dairo's Pizza and Spaghetti House
Great places for pizzas, lasagne and other Italian delights prepared in the traditional manner.
Deja Vu Cafe/Bar
A handy and popular eating place for travellers.
Continental dishes and Scottish fare available.
Good selection of wines, whiskies and beers.
Desperate Dan's
Claims to sell the biggest steaks and kebabs in Scotland.
Good range of wines and whiskies.
Bottled lager.
Doric
A jovial information bistro — where fish dishes are specialities ranging from the basic to the luxury.
The wine bar offers a vast choice.
The Dragonara Hotel
Picturesquely set in the Dean Village overlooking the tumbling waters of the Water of Leith, the Dragonara is a favourite place for functions and executive get-togethers.
A special feature is the Old Granary Pub where Bar lunches are served from 12.30–2 pm.
Private parking.
Dragon's Castle
Lemon chicken, dim sum and aromatic crispy duck are a few of the specialities to be enjoyed in this pleasant Chinese restaurant situated in the heart of the town.
There is a selection of wine and whiskies.
2 Function rooms.
Duncan's Land Restaurant
A quaint little restaurant well worth a visit.
Nicely restored 18th century Scots vernacular building.
Delicious Italian cuisine, Lunches great value for money.
Well chosen wine list.
Edinburgh Wine Bar
Club atmosphere.
Nice place to meet and have a glass of wine — from a very fine selection.
Meals include paté, roast beef, mussel and onion stew and a variety of delicacies.
Meals noon till 15 minutes before closing.
Ellersly House Hotel
Edwardian country house with a secluded 2 acre walled garden.
À la carte, table d'hôte .
Hot bar meals.
Good range of wines, whiskies and beers.
Entertainment Friday and Saturday.
Elmer's
A Memphis-style barbecue restaurant and bar.
Authentic Tennessee ribs a speciality.
Fully licensed.
The Engine Room
Interesting West End basement bar/restaurant.
Fairmile Inn
Attractive Swiss chalet effect dining room.
Fat Sam's
A lively American restaurant with 30s style Chicago decor.
American and Italian dishes giving a tremendous choice of pizzas, pastas, steaks and barbecues.
Fully licensed.
Bands play Sunday–Thursday.
Pianist Friday and Saturday noon–3 am.
Gandhi Restaurant
Indian Tandoori dishes in intimate cabin-style booths.
The George Hotel
Haute cuisine in the beautiful Chambertin Restaurant, with a more relaxed alternative offered in the elegant Carver's Table restaurant where you can help yourself as to as much roast beef, lamp or pork (hot or cold) as you wish or the Balcony Restaurant offering quick service and budget menu.
Good range of wine and spirits.
Get Stuffed
A popular steakhouse in the heart of town.
Charcoal grilled steaks, 8 oz to 24 oz a speciality.
The Gilded Balloon
Situated on the site of an 18th century tavern of the same name.
Meals (a varied menu) and drinks available from noon till midnight.
Golf Tavern
A fine old hostelry, dating from 1456, rich in character.
Good selection of cask conditioned ales, wines and whiskies.
Gordon's Trattoria
Cheerful Italian restaurant offering pizzas, pastas, steaks and gorgeous sweets.
Italian wines.
Fully licensed.
The Handsel
A pleasant restaurant in an elegant Georgian house with good food.
Patronised by West End professional and business people.
The handsome and comfortable wine bar on the ground floor serves meals and drinks from 11 am–11 pm.
The Harp Hotel
À la carte, table d'hôte and bar snacks.
Dinner dance on Saturdays.
Parking facilities.
Henderson's Salad Table
Vegetarian buffet with wide range of salad and hot dishes.
Specialities include stuffed marrow.
Extensive range of wines and beers.
Real ale.
Live music.
The Honey
Peking and Cantonese dishes.
Fully licensed.
Hotel De France
Enjoy French cuisine in elegant surroundings upstairs.
Brasserie-style meals on ground floor, meals 7 am–4 am.
French and German wines, malt whiskies and Tennents and S & N beers.
Howard Hotel
The Howard's Restaurant concentrates on good Scottish, French and vegetarian food in an atmosphere of Georgian Edinburgh.
An extensive selection of whiskies and draught beers, real ale.
The Howtowdie Restaurant
An elegant Georgian basement restaurant in the heart of Edinburgh's West End, offering superb cuisine, both Scottish and French dishes.
Specialities are game, salmon and prime Scottish beef.
Table d'hôte lunch and open sandwich lunches also available.
Extensive selection of French wines and malt whiskies.
Hunter's Tryst
Scott, Hogg, Lockhart and other literary stalwarts are reputed to have frequented this old hunting inn, part of which dates back to the 18th century.
The restaurant is in the old barn and usually has an interesting menu.
Tasteful lounge bar.
Private parking.
Imperial Chinese Restaurant
Delicious Cantonese dishes served in a Hong Kong atmosphere.
Authentic Chinese decor.
Indian Cavalry Club
Capture the Indian Officers' Club atmosphere in this brightly lit restaurant.
Speciality dishes include Viceroy's lamb pasanda, Calcutta fish with mint, and Red Fort chicken.
Select wine list, wide choice of whiskies and beers.
Jackson's Restaurant and Bar
Small, friendly candlelit restaurant specialising in Scottish fare: Laird's venison, fresh Tweed salmon, Queen Isle scallops and Aberdeen Angus steaks.
Jules
French, Italian, Chinese, Mexican, Scottish and vegetarian dishes.
Specialities range from hot curries to lasagne and steak pie.
Wide range of wines, whiskies and beers.
Kalispera
Warm, friendly Green restaurant offering and excellent choice of authentic dishes.
Greek, French and Italian wines.
Kalpna
Indian vegetarian/wholefood restaurant.
Specialities include Mughal Kufta and Navratan Kurma.
House wine only.
Kavio
Inspired by the success of their Leith restaurant, the Turkish owners of Kavio have opened a new restaurant in the city centre.
Here in sophisticated surroundings you can wine, dine and dance, or simply enjoy a pleasant lunch or good dinner.
Kildonan Lodge Hotel
Seafoods, steaks and grills, with exciting sauces.
King James Hotel
Striking decor with sculptured murals of Scottish history.
À la carte, table d'hôte .
Menus strongly feature Scottish fare.
About 50 wines and a good range of blended and malt whiskies.
Scottish cabaret May–October.
Bar lunches.
Koh-i-noor Tandoori Restaurant
In addition to the Tandoori specialities, Scottish and vegetarian dishes feature on the menu.
Nice range of wines, whiskies and draught beer.
Kweilin Cantonese Restaurant
One of Edinburgh's finest Chinese restaurants.
Lachana Vegetarian Restaurant
Freshly prepared vegetarian and vegan meals in a friendly non-smoking atmosphere.
Lady Nairne Hotel
Original home of Baroness Nairne, poet and songwriter, with modern additions.
Specialities of the house include steaks and scampi.
Wines and a wide range of whiskies and beers.
Bar snacks.
Private parking.
Lafayette
Small, intimate, friendly restaurant.
Excellent French cuisine.
Chef's speciality coq au vin au Beaujolais.
Wide selection of French wines.
Range of blended and malt whiskies.
Laigh Kitchen
An original Edinburgh coffee house in an old kitchen with stone flagged floors and period oven.
Home baking a speciality from soups and patés and chocolate cake.
La Qila
Indian tandoori dishes.
Fully licensed.
Lancers Brasserie
Lancers is unique and distinguished.
Not only will you find here Bengali and North Indian cuisine prepared with pride and delicacy but you can have vegetarian and French dishes if you desire.
Also very special Bengali dishes ‘fit for a Mogul emperor’ at 48 hours notice.
The decor recalls the British Raj and the service is impeccable.
Downstairs the Officers' Club, elegant in Chippendale, is available for select functions.
Michelin Guide recommended 1987.
La Lanterna Restaurant
Friendly family run Italian restaurant with home made minestrone and tagliatelle house specialities.
Lauriston Farm Restaurant
Enjoy a fabulous view over the Forth as well as a delicious meal.
The bar lunches feature over 60 items on the menu.
The Carvery every lunch time serves prime roast sirloin.
In the evening there is a full à la carte menu with many steak specialities.
Excellent range of wines, whiskies and beers.
Lazio
Fine selection of Italian dishes: Trout, scampi and steaks.
Italian and German wine, malt whiskies, good selection of beers.
Learmonth Hotel
Pleasant West End hotel where meals, à la carte and table d'hôt, can be had from noon to 9.30 pm, and drinks from 11 am to midnight.
You are always sure of a welcome from the friendly, cheerful staff.
Jazz and brunch every Sunday afternoon.
Their popular Polly's Bar is open 9.30 am–12 pm daily.
Bar lunches are a speciality.
Lillig's
An informal German restaurant full of character.
Specialities include schnitzel and sauerbraten.
Furstenburg, Antonius and Hofmark beers.
Linklater's Eating House
A cheerful, bright, colourful rendezvous, difficult to find but worth the effort.
French, Scottish and vegetarian fare.
Extensive choice of wines, whiskies and beers.
Loon Fung Restaurant
A deservedly popular restaurant with all who enjoy genuine Cantonese fare.
Loon Fung Sea-Food Restaurant
In addition to the many Chinese sea-food delicacies there is an excellent choice of traditional Chinese fare too.
Selection of wines and beers.
Lune Town
Pleasant Cantonese restaurant with Imperial decor.
Popular, so better to book you table.
Mackintosh's Restaurant
Elegant West End restaurant with decor in the style of Charles Rennie Mackintosh.
French and Scottish dishes with fresh seafood, game and Aberdeen Angus steak specialities.
Extensive range of wines and malt whiskies.
Madogs
American/Mexican restaurant.
Specialities include black bean soup, seafood crepes, chicken enchilada and filet mignon.
Scotch and American whiskies.
Budweiser, Schlitz and other US beers.
Iced cider, hot bread, Mexican dips.
The Magnum
Subdued and intimate restaurant.
Lunches, dinners, bar meals and open sandwiches.
Saturday brunch.
Mammas American Pizza Company
American-style pizzas served in a relaxed fun atmosphere.
Italian wines and choice of beers.
Le Mange Tout Restaurant
Delicious French fare à la carte or table d'hôte.
Veal Jurassienne must be ordered!
Warm, relaxed atmosphere.
Friendly pleasant service.
French wines, malt and blended whiskies.
Le Marché Noir
Intimate little restaurant offering French provincial cooking, with fish a speciality.
Extensive range of wines, whiskies and beers.
Maridor's Restaurant
This Swiss-owned restaurant is rightly popular with its cheerful and friendly atmosphere as well as its varied and excellent Scottish/Continental menu.
Interesting wine list.
Marrakech Restaurant
Georgian architecture, Moorish decor.
Delicious Moroccan cuisine with Couscous and Tajins specialities of the house.
Unlicensed, no corkage charge.
Martin's
Set quietly behind trendy Rose Street this is a discreet little restaurant of some distinction.
Worth seeking out by foodenthusiasts.
Maxies Bistro
A happy, relaxed bistro with good French cooking, including vegetarian dishes.
Well-chosen wines.
Medio
Sophisticated popular city centre restaurant.
Log fire.
The chefs cook in front of customers, and you can make your own pizzas.
Italian and house wines, blend and malt whiskies, bottled lager and Export ale.
Merchants
A restaurant with the atmosphere of a comfortable French country house.
A great variety of French dishes offered, with a wide selection of French wines.
Mermans Bistro
Sea food dishes a speciality.
Meteora
Claims to have the best Greek dishes in Britain.
Greek, French, German wines, malt and blended whiskies.
Wide selection of beers.
Occasionally live Greek music and dance.
Mr. Boni's Restaurant
T-bone steaks, giant burgers, pizzas and outrageous sundaes.
Interesting selection of Italian wines.
Wide range of whiskies and beers.
Monsoon Tandoori Restaurant
Asian cuisine with tandoori chicken and chicken tikka massalah specialities of the house.
Approved Les Routiers and Good Curry Guide 1987.
Montgomeries at the Mansion House
Enjoy Scottish Victorian cuisine amid Victorian decor.
Jugged beer in stout and port wine sauce specialities of the house.
Select wine list, 40 malt whiskies.
Real ale.
Negociants
Here's somewhere different to eat.
The menu, which changes every day, offers Malaysian, Brazilian, French and Indonesian dishes.
The wine list features wines from different countries.
Welcome to Parador Restaurant at The Queensway Hotel
Just across the Dean Bridge beside the imposing facade of Stewarts Melville college can be found the gracious Victorian setting of the Queensway Hotel.
At the Parador restaurant, Pepe, the proprietor, welcomes you to try the best fresh fish and seafood dishes, such as King Prawns, Calamares, Halibut, Sole on the Bone, Mussels as well as Pincho Moruna or the very special Paella.
Available in the Bar is a selection of Tapas (Spanish for snacks and savories) as well as an interesting bar lunch menu.
The Restaurant, although renowned for its seafood also boasts and good selection of meat and poultry dishes as well as vegetarian dishes e.g. the special vegetarian paella.
The wine list at the Queensway Hotel (150 wines) boasts the best Spanish section in Scotland if not in Britain.
The proprietor has spent years building up a remarkable cellar of aged Riojas, which lie side by side with the best that Burgundy and Bordeaux have to offer.
Of particular interest and remarkably god value are the Berberana Gran Reservas (particularly the 1970) or the fresh white Rioja in the modern style called Carta de Oro.
When Miguel Torres Jnr.
stayed at the Queensway during the summer he was, no doubt, delighted to find a range of unique Torres wines that could provide an accompaniment to any of the dishes in the restaurant.
The Gran Vina Sol (with a large proportion of Chardonnay) and the superb oak aged Gran Vina Sol Green Label  complement any of the Parador's Seafood dishes.
Another favourite is the spicey Vina Esmerelda (with smoked salmon of course).
The Torres reds are also available and surely the ‘jewel in the crown’ must be the superb Gran Coronas Black Label, which the proprietor serves with the pride of someone who knows you won't be disappointed.
Behind the bar you will find a huge range of interesting Spanish liqueurs and brandies and you will find a bottle of dry sherry chilling in the fridge.
A Bertola Pale Dry Fino or Manzanilla is worth a try and proves that this well known house produces more than the famous Bertola Cream.
New Edinburgh Rendezvous
Chinese food, Peking style.
Specialities include deep fried shredded beef, duck, prawn dishes and hand-made noodles.
New Town Hotel
Home cooked bar lunches.
Good selection of blended and malt whiskies, and beers.
North British Hotel
An Edinburgh landmark, social as well as architectural.
Impressive pillared dining room with a good international menu.
French cuisine a speciality plus traditional Scottish dishes, Italian and vegetarian fare.
Hot and cold bar meals.
Their ‘Hail Caledonia’ evenings, in season, feature a four course Banquet plus lively traditional Scottish entertainment.
North Sea Village Seafood Restaurant
A Chinese restaurant with an atmosphere all its own.
The seafood dishes are special, but traditional Chinese fare is also offered.
No. 10
Continental menu with a fine selection of veal, chicken, beef and fish dishes.
Egon Ronay listed.
O Sole Mio
Italian cuisine with freshly prepared pizza and pasta specialities.
Italian, French and German wines, Scottish and Irish whiskies, various beers.
Old Waverley Hotel
Dining in their Cranston's restaurant is a delight.
The decor is attractive, the service good, and the menu has something to suit all tastes, with the Carvery deservedly popular.
Omar Khayyam Tandoori Restaurant
There are no fewer than 118 Indian and European dishes on the menu.
Wine is available by glass, bottle or carafe, and there is a choice selection of spirits and beers.
The fountain, centre- piece of the restaurant, is surrounded by lush green plants.
The whole atmosphere exudes  tranquillity .
Orchid Lodge
A candlelit Chinese restaurant serving delicate Cantonese cuisine.
Pachuko Cantina
Enjoy traditional Mexican dishes in a ranch house setting.
1940s–1950s record sleeves decor.
The Palumbo
Excellent Italian cuisine.
À la carte.
Specialities include fish, veal, pasta, meat and chicken.
Good selection of wines and whiskies.
Advisable to book.
Pancake Place
Pancakes with sweet and savoury fillings.
House wine by the glass or carafe.
Patio Restaurant
Lively Italian restaurant in the city centre.
The Peking Restaurant
The authentic taste of China — Peking and Canton cuisine.
Fully licensed.
The Pimpernel
Provincial French cooking.
Charcoal grills for the ‘plain eater’.
Beer and French wines.
Ping On
Fine Cantonese fare served with tremendous geniality.
Good selection of wines, spirits and beers.
Pirie's Hotel
The Parlour, Pirie's elegant Victorian restaurant, offers traditional Scottish fare, home-made steak pie a speciality.
Wide range of wines, spirits, beers as well as real ale.
Live Scottish music Thursday, Friday, Saturday.
Pizza Hut
Pizzas of all kinds made to order.
Wines and beers available.
all are bright, comfortable restaurants with cheerful service.
Pizzaland
Wide choice of pizzas, with wine available by bottle, half bottle or glass.
Carlsberg Lager and Beck's Beer.
Pizzaland
Warm and friendly pizza house in city centre offering Italian and American dishes.
House wines, beers and lagers.
Post House Hotel
Trust House Forte well-appointed hotel next to the Zoo.
The à la carte Ravelston Restaurant has a magnificent view.
Private parking.
Premier Mandarin Cuisine
A bright, modern Chinese restaurant decorated with Chinese opera paper cut pictures.
An extensive menu, with a choice range of wines, spirits and beers.
Prestonfield House
Delightful 17th century house, period furniture, peacocks on the lawn.
A place to take your overseas friends who will be enchanted with the aura of history as well as the excellence of the food.
À la carte French and Scottish cuisine.
Full wine list and a fine range of malt whiskies.
Queensway Hotel, Parador Restaurant
In this old town mansion, only minutes from the West End, you will find a menu of some distinction, with emphasis on Spanish dishes and seafood plus a great Spanish wine selection.
Over 25 whiskies, lager and exports.
Raffaelli
This stylish restaurant situated in the heart of the West End features Georgian and Florentine decor and furnishings.
Its Italian cuisine has a strong emphasis on Tuscan dishes.
There is a fine selection of Italian wines and also of blended and malt whiskies.
Wine bar.
Rasputins
Traditional Russian dishes such as  bortsch , chicken Kiev and goulash, served amid decor designed to evoke a restaurant in Czarist Russia.
Ravello
Choice Italian cuisine.
Specialities include seafood, veal and pastas.
Fine Italian wines.
Personal service.
Must book.
The Rendezvous
A pleasant basement bistro with a delicious French menu.
Inexpensive interesting lunches.
Extensive dinner menu, with seafood a speciality.
Ristorante Gennaro Pizzeria
Enjoy home made paté, pizzas and pasta in a warm Italian atmosphere.
Italian wines, good ranges of whiskies, draught lager and Italian bottled beers.
Ristorante Milano
A well-appointed Italian restaurant with excellent cuisine.
Pleasant atmosphere and attentive service.
Italian wines, blended and malt whiskies, Tennent's Lager, McEwan's Export.
Ristorante Tinelli
Friendly, family-run Italian restaurant where North Italian food is the speciality.
La Rocca
Pizzas, pasta, veal and steak all served with cheerful personal attention.
Italian and French wines.
Rock Bottom
American-style hamburger basement with unique burgers, steaks, fish, poultry and pizzas.
The variety and size of the sweets is colossal.
Select range of wines and whiskies.
Cocktails soothing as a kick.
American canned and bottled beers.
Rockville House Hotel
A family run establishment offering Italian, Swiss and Scottish home-cooked dishes.
Extensive choice of wines, spirits and beers.
Roxburghe Hotel
Befitting its site in Adam's famous Georgian square, the hotel and restaurant have elegance, style and dignity.
Haute cuisine, à la carte and table d'hôte .
Royal British Hotel
One of Edinburgh's favourite hotels.
Pop in and enjoy everything from a fine à la carte meal to a chat over a drink.
The Royal Scot Hotel
Bright, modern, sophisticated, at Maybury junction on road to the Airport.
Wonderful view of Pentland Hills.
Haute cuisine, à la carte , table d'hôte .
Good range of wines.
Beautiful terrace restaurant.
Private parking.
Rutland Hotel
The Carvery and Wine Bar is a popular lunch time rendezvous.
The Rutland, also known as No. 1 Rutland Place was Guinness Pub of the Year for 1986.
Credit Cards: Access, Amex, Diners, Visa.
San Marco Ristorante
Authentic Italian food and friendly service.
The menu is extensive and adventurous, the atmosphere happy and bright — typically Italian.
The wine list is mainly Italian.
Scots Restaurant
Fine Scottish food using the best of local produce including salmon, venison and seafood.
Shamiana
Indian restaurant, conservatory decor, serving traditional North Indian and Kashmiri fare.
Much frequented by Indians — a good recommendation.
Specialities include Kashmiri Chashni and Bataire.
Select choice of wines and whiskies, Carlsberg Lager.
Shanaz Tandoori
The best in Tandoori and Indian cuisine served in suitably exotic surroundings.
The Sheraton Hotel
Edinburgh's newest luxury hotel.
International cuisine, à la carte, table d'hôte .
Bar snacks.
Superb range of wines, whiskies and beers.
Entertainment 6 nights per week in Atholl Bar.
Stakis Grosvenor Hotel
Old Victorian house with period decor and its own grapevine.
French cuisine and Scottish fare, à la carte and table d'hôte, with steaks a speciality.
Good range of wines, whiskies, and beers.
Hot and cold bar snacks daily.
Tex Mex
Texan and Mexican fare, plus vegetarian dishes.
Enchiladas, tacos, burratos and burgers all specialities.
Umberto
An Italian restaurant offering the best of Italian dishes in excitingly different sauces.
An extensive wine list.
The Verandah Tandoori Restaurant
Egon Ronay and Michelin Guide 1987 recommended Tandoori restaurant.
Traditional Bangladeshi and North Indian dishes.
Specialities include murgi massallam, king prawn pathia, josh and lamb pasanda.
Extensive range of wines, whiskies and beers.
Occasional live entertainment.
Victoria and Albert
Lively restaurant and bars in mock Victorian atmosphere.
À la carte, table d'hôte .
Hot and cold bar meals.
Carafe and popular wines.
Honky Tonk entertainment.
Vitos
An Italian restaurant of taste and quality.
A wide range of excellent dishes prepared by an expert Italian staff.
Italian wines.
Viva Mexico
Cheerful friendly Mexican restaurant decorated with pictures of revolutionaries.
Specialities include Chimichangas and Ceviche.
Californian house wines, beers.
Whighams Wine Cellars
Old wine cellar dating from 1800.
Seafood a speciality.
French, German, Italian and Spanish wines, blended and malt whiskies, real ale and lager.
Willis
Meals to suit every mood from self-service snacks to cafe society fare served in elegant luxury.
The beautiful dining room has an Adam ceiling, crystal chandeliers and Chippendale furniture.
The bar tender can mix over 150 different cocktails.
The Witchery By-The-Castle
Good food and wine in the macabre atmosphere of the spot where the witchcraft was once practised — and witches burned.
Venison, duck, lamb, steaks and seafood are specialities of the house.
All the information in this guide is factual and objective.
It is as accurate as possible on going to press but it should be remembered that the catering business is subject to frequent changes.
Eating and Drinking in Edinburgh is a selective guide but omission from its pages should not be regarded as implying criticism.
Wining and Dining in LEITH
At one time the Peacock Inn in Newhaven was the only place to find seafood on Edinburgh's waterfront.
Today there are numerous seafood restaurants.
Skippers Bistro in Dock Place set the example, but several others followed, on both sides of the mouth of the Water of Leith.
But it's not only for seafood that people today move towards the docks: the Raj in Henderson Street is one of the most elegant Indian restaurants in town and, in the hinterland of the Ferry Road, there's the Vinotheque, which has the feel, and the appearance, of a genuine French routier bistro.
All these, and several more, have helped to give Leith its own culinary identity in recent years.
Caprice Restaurant
A busy, friendly Italian ristorante. À la carte, table d'hôte .
Italian-Swiss cuisine.
Specialities are giant pizzas cooked in a real log oven.
Elmer's
A Memphis-style barbecue restaurant and bar.
Authentic Tennessee ribs a speciality.
Fully licensed.
Kavio
A lively international restaurant which is lots of fun, with laser lights, bubble machines, and message scanner relaying messages to customers.
A great place for office parties.
Children welcome.
Specialities include Kebabs.
Kilderkin
Dine by candlelight.
French, Mexican, American, vegetarian fare.
Salads available all day.
Mariners
Exciting new eating house with that rarity — an award winning chef.
Every dish is a speciality!
Atmosphere is easy going, service is attentive.
Peacock Inn
A famous old hostelry of great character.
Good traditional fare and seafood dishes.
The speciality, not to be missed, is fresh fillet of haddock.
The new Captain's Carvery room is proving popular and very good value.
The Raj
An exciting, new up-market Indian restaurant based on the days of the ‘Raj period’.
Bengal fish curry, Kadai chicken and Achar Gosht are all specialities.
Extensive selection of wines, spirits and beers.
Ristorante Tinelli
Friendly, family-run Italian restaurant where North Italian food is the speciality.
The Seagull's Nest/Kobe's Restaurant
À la carte.
Hot and cold bar meals.
Specialities are steaks, sauced dishes and seafood.
Excellent wine list, over 70 whiskies, real ale.
The Shore
Seafood here is a speciality.
Inexpensive wine list.
Interesting atmosphere.
Skippers bistro
Off-beat but well worth seeking out.
Old-fashioned bistro atmosphere with nautical flavour.
Menu mostly French.
Specialities are fresh fish and shellfish.
Attractive range of wines and whiskies.
Belhaven beer.
Sorrento
Intimate little Italian ristorante with a nice range of pizzas, pasta and veal.
The Tattler
A warm, friendly Victorian hostelry.
Scottish, French, Italian and vegetarian dishes all feature on the menu.
Specialities include fresh fish, seafoods and best Scottish beef steaks.
Hot and cold bar snacks.
La Vinotheque
Out of the way but well worth seeking out.
Authentic French atmosphere and superb French regional cooking.
Over 85 different French wines.
Tables in courtyard.
The Vintners Room
An elegant new restaurant and wine bar in the old Port of Leith, situated on the site of historic 12th century wine vaults.
The traditional style and character of the building have been carefully retained.
The dining room is beautiful and quite unique.
The wine list is extensive and selective.
The French cuisine excellent.
The Waterfront Wine Bar
Eat French, Italian, Asian or Greek-style in a free, happy- go-lucky atmosphere in a delightfully informal dockside bar- restaurant, where you can dine outside from May to September.
Various wines, malt whiskies, real ale.
Leith's Pubs and Bars
The Bay Horse
A splendid, trim Edwardian bar with fine period fittings, lovingly preserved.
Large selection of malt whiskies.
The Central Bar
Baroque fittings, picture tiles and stained glass give rich character to this fine Leith pub.
The Drawbridge Tavern
Old, unspoiled and couthy, strongly local in character.
Booth seating.
Bar meals offering Scottish fare.
The Elephant and Castle
One of Leith's most popular hostelries.
Lunches served from noon till 3 pm.
Good range of beers and lagers, including real ales.
The Golden Lion
A free house with real ale where you can enjoy a meal in the glow of a roaring open fire.
The King's Wark
Interesting 18th century building with older traditions, mercifully saved from demolition.
Rehabilitated and well furbished it is now the pride of the waterfront.
Well worth a visit.
The Lobster Pot
Strong nautical motif.
Fish nets and modern trawlers.
Snacks.
Noble's Bar
Superbly ornate Victorian façade painted in startling hues.
The patrons round the horseshoe bar are a lively lot.
The Old Ship
An interesting, friendly howff in a Victorian building replacing the original Inn built in 1676.
A plaque on the quay commemorates the landing of George IV on his visit in 1822.
Papa's
A family run pub where brightness, comfort and service are the order of the day.
The Peacock Inn
An old and convivial haunt which has undergone a number of recent changes but outwardly at least still retains much of its fishing port atmosphere.
Persevere
Enjoy traditional home cooking in a friendly, relaxed atmosphere.
Pillars Lounge
Accent is on comfort when you step in for a relaxing drink.
Excellent business lunches.
Prom Bar
Bar snacks all day.
Queen Victoria
Hot bar lunches Monday–Saturday and late opening most nights.
Wide ranges of ales, wines and spirits.
Large Bar Lunch menu.
Skivvy's
Eat, drink and be merry!
Good food, entertaining cabaret, live band, disco.
Starbank Inn
A former coaching inn that dates back to 1780.
Has lovely panoramic views over the Forth plus real ales and good food.
The Thistle Bar
An admirable Edwardian pub with some attractive art nouveau not too badly impaired with the passage of time.
The Windsor Buffet
Busy, popular Victorian pub, with secluded booths.
Famous for its good food.
Out of town
What is better than a run in the car followed by a good meal in a country inn or a pleasant roadhouse?
Here are some attractive places to bear in mind when you feel like a day's outing.
Airth Castle Hotel
A fascinating partly 14th century building with every modern luxury including a new conference and leisure complex.
Three restaurants serving Scottish and French food.
Five bars.
The main Regency style dining room has a very comprehensive à la carte menu offering rare delicacies and wines that include a connoisseurs selection for those seeking something extra special.
The Auld Toll
A serene, restful, friendly hotel with Italian food a speciality.
Hot and cold bar meals.
The Bridge Inn
A delightful inn picturesquely situated on the Union Canal, where you can enjoy traditional Scottish fare, French cuisine and vegetarian dishes too.
Wide range of wines, whiskies and beers.
Their popular Canal Boat restaurant has live music.
The Caprice
A good place for a meal on Sunday or any other day! À la carte, table d'hôte .
Italian cuisine, select choice of wine, whiskies and beer.
Champany Inn
Old converted farm steading, furnished in antique Victoriana.
Specialities include Scots blue grey charcoal-grilled steak.
Good wine list, many excellent malt whiskies, real ale.
Cringletie House Hotel
A beautiful country mansion which has retained the warm atmosphere of a private country house, set in 28 acres of gardens and woodland.
Imaginative menu featuring an international range of dishes.
Good choice of wines and whiskies.
Dalhousie Castle Hotel
800-year-old castle set in acres of land.
Dine in interesting dungeon restaurant, drink in the library.
Menu a combination of French and Scottish dishes.
Large selection of wines, malt and de luxe blended whiskies.
All day drinks licence.
Dalmahoy Country Club
Visitors are welcome for golf and squash at this beautiful Georgian country house hotel.
Meals are table d'hôte, with hot and cold bar lunches also available.
The Foresters
Dine in the original atmosphere of an old Coaching Inn.
Bar lunches.
Suppers and à la carte meals served every day in restaurant including Sundays.
Pastry dishes are a speciality.
Select wine list.
Over 200 whiskies, beers.
Glenburn Hotel
Dine out in style in this grand Victorian mansion.
À la carte, table d'hôte .
Extensive wine list, Grouse and malt whiskies, real ale.
Dinner dances.
Live music.
Goblin Ha'Hotel
Charming inn situated in picturesque village at the foot of the Lammermuirs.
Hot roasts, casseroles, home baking and vegetarian dishes are specialities.
Good range of wines, whiskies and beers.
Greywalls Hotel
A delightful Edwardian country house designed by Edwin Lutyens but with all modern conveniences skilfully added.
The formal garden was designed by Gertrude Jekyll.
Superb modern menu.
Quiet taste, comfort and thoughtful service.
Select wine list.
The Harvesters Hotel
Georgian country house of character.
Excellent cooking with mainly fresh produce.
Fresh salmon a speciality.
Hot and cold bar snacks.
Full wine list.
Belhaven Heavy and Carlsberg Lager.
The Hawes Inn
A place of some character with Scott and Stevenson associations.
Real log fires in bar.
Attractive menu and wine list.
Lounge bar.
Superb view of the Forth bridges.
Private parking.
The Horse Shoe Inn
A comfortable and hospitable country inn.
French dishes a speciality.
Blazing hearth.
Good wine list, over 30 whiskies, draught beers including Guinness.
Private parking.
Houston House
16th century laird's house in 18th century garden.
French and Scottish cooking.
Interesting and unusual dishes.
One of the best cellars in the country with over 600 listed wines.
100 malt whiskies.
Belhaven and Carlsberg beers.
Johnsburn House, Country Club and Restaurant
A Scottish country club with a fine restaurant for visitors.
Log fires, 18th century decor.
Johnstounburn House
Beautiful 17th century house.
Fine walled gardens and park.
French cuisine.
Interesting wine list, good selection of blended and malt whiskies.
Private parking.
Justinlees Inn
Old coaching Inn set on site of 14th century jousting ground with Minstrel Gallery bar.
Victorian bar has coal fire.
Pleasant friendly atmosphere.
Unique collection of old photographs.
À la carte.
Steaks a speciality.
Hot and cold bar meals.
Good range of wines, whiskies and beers.
Private parking.
The Langskaill
A country restaurant with a difference — home made cheeses are the speciality although there is an extensive menu offering other home-made fare.
In fine weather eating out is ideal for families.
Grassy slopes surround the dining area where children can play.
Leadburn Inn
Dine in luxurious splendour in a beautifully converted railway carriage, which affords panoramic views over the Pentlands.
Or simply enjoy the homely comfort of the inn restaurant.
Lunches are served Monday–Friday.
Bar suppers served nightly.
Longniddry Inn
Designed with the shell of the old smiddy and adjoining cottages, the inn retains something of the original atmosphere.
Incorporates the first traditional clay oven in Scotland.
Good à la carte menu, plus hot and cold bar snacks.
Private parking.
Marchbank Hotel
Country house atmosphere, set in 7 acres wooded grounds with beautiful lawns and beer garden.
À la carte menu.
Specialities include pheasant and steak Marchbank.
Hot and cold bar meals.
Good range of wines, malt whiskies.
Beers include cask conditioned 70/ — and 80/ —.
Melville Castle Hotel
18th century mansion house designed by Playfair, modernised but retaining rich character and its own friendly ghost.
Fine hanging staircase and library.
Set in private woodland estate.
French cuisine, à la carte, table d'hôte .
Scandinavian cold table.
Huge selection of wines and whiskies.
Drybrough and Norwegian beers.
Nivingston House
Charming old country house restaurant.
Scottish dishes feature delightfully unusual sauces.
Wide range of wines, whiskies and continental bottled beers.
Real ale.
AA Rosette awarded in 1986.
Norton House Hotel
A Victorian mansion house set in 55 acres.
A traditional family welcome is extended to all guests and the menu features both Scottish and French cuisine.
There is an extensive range of international wines, a wide variety of malt and blended whiskies, beers, and also real ale.
Old Howgate Inn
A schedule historic building of great character.
The inn was rebuilt in 1743.
Specialises in vast selection of Danish dishes.
Over 75 wines, excellent selection of blended and malt whiskies.
Car park.
The Old Smiddy Inn
Converted smiddy.
Country pub atmosphere.
À la carte and table d'hôte, with steaks, chicken and veal specialities.
Hot and cold bar snacks too.
Open Arms Hotel
Country house on the village green.
Comfort, quality and log fires.
Haute cuisine with a Scottish bias.
Specialities include mussel and onion stew and chicken de vaux.
Approximately 80 wines.
Extensive range of blended and malt whiskies and beers.
Private parking.
Park Hotel
A picturesque building of white walls and crow-stepped gables with a fine view of the Tweed.
Interesting and reasonable menu with good wine list.
Speciality dishes include Border lamp, fresh trout and salmon.
La Potiniere
This is for the connoisseur.
No other restaurant in Britain, says the good Food Guide ‘so clearly in its cooking, wine cellar, prices and philosophy’ expresses the Guide's ideals.
Must book.
Car park.
Sheep Heid In
Situated in the shadow of Arthur's Seat at Duddingston Loch.
This is the oldest licensed inn in Scotland.
In addition to the excellent wholesome Scottish dishes served in the restaurant, there is a fine cold Buffet able.
The beer garden is popular in summer.
Waterside Bistro
A lively, informal bistro with outside eating and drinking in summer.
French, Italian, Swiss, Scottish and vegetarian dishes all available.
Wide choice of wines, whiskies and beers.
Woodside Hotel
Just across the road from the racecourse, this is a comfortable hotel with good food.
Game a speciality.
Choice of wines, all leading brands of whiskies, Alloa Ales.
Parking facilities.
A night out
Edinburgh has few late, late night spots but the following section lists a number of places which present lively cabaret and entertainment of various sorts.
Buster Brown's
A dashing and exciting night spot.
Not for the stuffy — white collars and ties are irrelevant and the atmosphere could be described as flamboyantly casual.
Exotic drinks.
Chicago and Millionaires
Disco open 11 am to 2 am.
Restaurant mid-day to 3 am. 7 days.
Turkish and Italian dishes feature prominently with kebabs and pizzas specialities.
Cinderellas Rockerfellas
Lush decor.
Wine, dine and disco dance.
Scampi in Pernod a restaurant speciality.
In-house video system, 3 bars.
Live music.
Dalhousie Courte
A medieval banquet held in a turreted mansion.
Non-stop entertainment, meal and wine included in fixed price.
Dinner 7.30 pm, one sitting only.
Book in advance.
Ellersly House Hotel
Entertainment Friday and Saturday.
King James Hotel
Seasonal cabaret and Scottish entertainment.
Dinner dances.
The Lord Darnley
One of the city's most exciting night spots.
Live music Thursday, Saturday afternoon, Sunday.
Discos Friday and Saturday.
Madisons
Wines, cocktails, American beers and non-stop music.
North British Hotel
‘Hail Caledonia’ presents traditional Scottish entertainment plus a sumptuous 4 course banquet 6 evenings per week, including Sunday (no Monday performance).
The Rock
Rendezvous for the younger set with dancing Thursday, Friday and Saturday.
Styx
A fun pub with a super-sophisticated sound and lighting system.
Styx burgers and pizzas are bar specialities, entertainment ranges from disco and live music to pianist and cabaret.
Tokyo Joe
A disco bar for the over 21s where the emphasis is on fun events.
Happy hour every night, and cocktails can be made to order.
Top O'Night Club
Sophisticated night spot with style and taste, wide range of wines and whisky.
Zenatec
A disco for the over 21s every Friday, Saturday, Sunday.
The Savour of other lands
Some of Edinburgh's many foreign Restaurants         
RESTAURANTS OPEN ON SUNDAYS
Many restaurants close on Sundays but here is a list of some of the more convenient places which do open.
Details will be found on pages 5 to 40.
FACILITIES FOR PRIVATE PARTIES AND CONFERENCES
TAKING YOUR CAR?
No parking problems at these restaurants with private car parks.
ALL THE INFORMATION IN EATING AND DRINKING IN EDINBURGH IS AS ACCURATE AS POSSIBLE BUT THE PUBLISHERS CANNOT ACCEPT RESPONSIBILITY FOR ERRORS OR CHANGES WHICH MAY TAKE PLACE AFTER GOING TO PRESS.
Pubs and Bars
Licensing hours on weekdays for public houses and bars are 11 am–2.30 pm and 5–11 pm, but many are now open all day and some into the early hours of the morning.
Most, but not all, pubs now open on Sundays, usually 12.30–2.30 pm and 6.30–11 pm.
CENTRAL
The Abbotsford
One of Edinburgh's most famous pubs.
Genuine Victorian atmosphere.
Good selection of whiskies and beers.
Bar meals with good menu and generous helpings.
If you want away from the crowd try the upstairs restaurant.
The Auld Hoose
Drybrough's atmospheric decor belies the couthie name but escapees from office austerity seem to like it, and the beer is good.
The Beau Brummel
Plus lounge bar with attractive Regency decor and good bar lunches.
Bennet's
Splendid and beloved bar of great character next to the King's Theatre.
Fine woodwork, mirrors and leaded windows.
Vast selection of whiskies and beers.
Excellent pub lunches.
Blithe Spirit
Maclays Real Ales, Tennent's Lager.
Fine selection of wines and spirits.
Coffee and croissants from 9 am.
Bar meals all day.
The Boston Bean Company
American beers and cocktails, 20+ wines, 21 whiskies.
Brando's
Open 7 days, busy, bustling, cheerful bar.
Bull and Bush
Ales, spirits and wines plus fine food.
Cafe Royal
Around the famous circle bar gather a splendidly mixed company of intellectuals, bright sparks and couthie regulars.
The island gantry and the whole atmosphere is superbly Victorian.
With first-class French cuisine in the adjoining Lobster Bar.
The Cambridge Bar
Lively, up-market West End rendezvous.
Real ale, wine by the glass or bottle.
Choice of 16 malt whiskies.
Hot bar meals.
Chez Fred
Plush, popular and well stocked bar adjoining Le Chateau Restaurant.
La Coquette
A popular Rose Street rendezvous with live music Tuesday and Golden Oldies Thursday.
Bar meals with Crepes a speciality.
The Cottars
Kitsch cottage atmosphere but a friendly place popular for pub snacks.
Le Demi-Tasse Wine Bar
Enjoy a distinctly French ambience in the heart of the city.
Fresh French bread and paté, soups and cheeses, salads and hot dishes.
Wine by the glass or bottle.
Doric Wine Bar and Bistro
Good selection of wines and malt whiskies.
Tennent's, Export, Guinness and Cider.
Europa Wine Bar
Hot and cold meals from 11.30 am till 9 pm.
Disco Sundays 7.30–11 pm.
The Grosvenor
The long bar is convenient for a five o'clock quick one.
Large lounge for those who want to linger.
The Guildford Arms
Fine ornate Victorian fittings and ceiling.
Motley, bustling city crowd.
Great range of beers and whiskies.
Haymarket Bar
A typical friendly Scottish public house.
Hot and cold bar lunches noon–2.30 pm.
Friday and Saturday live DJ from 7.30 pm.
Sunday, resident Jazz band.
Haymarket Station Bar and Basin Street Lounge
A lively, happy bar with jazz band.
Bar snacks available.
Extensive selection of whiskies, bourbons and beers.
Henderson's Bar
Popular adjunct to Henderson's Salad Table Restaurant.
The Jolly Beggars
Wide choice of beers and large variety of wines.
Home-made bar meals.
The Kenilworth
A vintage Victorian pub well worth a visit for its rare fittings as well as for the drink.
The Laughing Duck
Wide range of whiskies and beers.
Hot and cold bar meals.
Disco Weekends.
Madogs
Lively cocktail bar, emphatically American.
As well as other Yankee tipples you can even get American beer.
Malt Shovel Inn
Enjoy friendly jazz in a old worlde atmosphere, Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday and Thursday.
The Mary Rose
A busy, popular bar situated in the heart of the town.
Mather's Bar
A good city pub patronised by loyal regulars.
Imposing gantry has a fine selection of whiskies including some noble malts.
The Melville Lounge
Rendezvous of aspiring West End executives, young professionals and ambitious secretaries.
Moderately priced lunches with table service.
Milne's Bar
A bar where people like to meet and talk.
Lingering memories of Scottish Renaissance days.
Mister Mustard
Fashionable city centre bar.
Exciting range of drinks and cocktails.
Hot and cold snacks.
Playfairs
Congenial lounge bar in the city centre.
The Precinct
Popular Rose Street howff.
Bar snacks.
The Pub
Popular Rose Street bar, with excellent pub grub, personal as well as self-service.
The Queen's Arms
A cheerful pub with lots of regulars in saloon and lounge bars.
Good pub lunches with all dishes prepared on the premises.
Rake's Wine Bar and Restaurant
Offers a wide selection of hot and cold dishes, with Italian food their speciality, plus a choice of French and Italian wines.
Robertson's 37 Bar
An intimate, sociable pub with no distractions from the real pleasure of drink and talk.
Fine range of whiskies, particularly malts.
Hot bar snacks.
The Rose Street Brewery
Formerly the White Cockade this exciting Ind Coope Alloa minibrewery/pub now brews its own beer, consumed on the premises.
Scott's
Refurbished since Ma Scott's reign, but old regulars still miss her dominating personality.
Popular spot for the after- office drinks.
Sinatra's Bar
Hot and cold snacks with haddock a speciality.
Friendly bar staff, pleasant surroundings.
Stiffs Wine Bar
A family run wine bar where hot and cold meals are served from noon to 7 pm.
Open all day.
7 days.
Styx
Basement bar opposite Assembly Rooms, specialising in an amazing range of cocktails.
Three Tuns Wine Vaults
Restored vaulted cellar wine bar in the centre of Edinburgh.
Over 40 wines, ports and sherries, and interesting food all day in the Salad Bar.
Cask beer.
Top o'the Walk
Home-made meals and rump steaks are served in the comfortable lounge at lunchtime.
Tramps
Formerly the Lochiel, this Drybrough pub has been renovated in humble Victorian style, with blanket boxes, Welsh dresser, wooden chairs etc.
Has a chilled wine cabinet and a good range of blended and malt whiskies.
Keg Heavy, Burns Special, Carlsberg and Guinness on draught.
Hot and cold light pub meals.
Victoria and Albert
Amusing gimmickry enjoyed by all who crowd the bars of this jolly mock-Victorian eating house.
Free and easy atmosphere, singalong and Honky Tonk.
Whigham's Wine Cellar
Attached to the famous wine merchants.
Established in 1766
Whistler's Bar
Busy, popular city centre pub.
Bar food served all day.
OLD TOWN
Allan Ramsay Tavern
The author of The Gentle Shepherd might well approve of this pleasant modernised pub on the site of his old wig shop and circulating library.
Snacks.
Bannerman's Bar
Old worlde pub in heart of the told town.
Hot and cold bar meals available, plus table d'hôte.
The Burke and Hare
A cheerful atmosphere far removed from the grizzly association of the body-snatchers it is named after.
The Covenanter Tavern
A modern pub with decorative reminders of the thrawn Covenanters.
Snacks.
Deacon Brodie's Tavern
Free house.
Jacobean/tartan decor.
Good range of blended and malt whiskies.
Wine by the glass.
Youngers, Guinness, Skol, Belhaven and Special Export.
Ensign Ewart
The Castle pub.
Interesting military relics.
Extensive range of blended and malt whiskies.
Wide selection of beers.
Bar snacks.
Students from the Army School of Piping and ministers to be, slake their thirsts along with local worthies and, of course, tourists.
Gladstones Lounge Bar
Pleasant and cheerful Royal Mile hostelry with very attractive gantry and bar.
Bar lunches include many Scottish dishes.
The Green Tree Tavern
17th century Tavern.
Beer garden.
60/ —, 70/ —, 80/ — cask conditioned ales.
Buffet lunches.
Greyfriar's Bobby
A popular student's howff beside historic Greyfriar's kirkyard.
Hot and cold snacks.
Chilled wine by the glass.
Cask conditioned real ale.
Special, Export, Heavy.
Halfway House
A small friendly old pub pleasantly furnished and discreetly tucked away behind The Scotsman office.
Bar snacks.
Favourite resort of journalists.
Holyrood Tavern
A completely refurbished tavern which still retains much of the character of the old pub.
Has a good pool room.
Home-made lunches served noon–2 pm, snacks served all day.
Jenny Ha's Bar
Tastefully designed pub perpetrating the memory of Jenny Ha's Change House, once a Jacobite centre.
S & N beers.
Snacks.
Jinglin' Geordie
One of the pleasantest pubs in the Old Town and a favourite resort of journalists.
Has a renowned collection of fine malt whiskies.
Lunches.
Jolly Judge Lounge Bar
Ploughman's lunch, soup and toasties.
Draught Special, Skol, Cider, Real Ale.
David Hume, the philosopher, stayed in James Court.
So too did Dr Johnson and James Boswell before going on their famous journey to the Western Isles.
The Jolly Judge has some interesting old beams and painted murals.
Lord Darnley
Hot and cold bar lunches with foreign dishes a speciality.
Preservation Hall
Home-cooked hot and cold bar snacks.
The Royal Archer
One of Edinburgh's oldest pubs.
Sneaky Pete's
Tucked away in the nether-regions of the Old Town this remarkable pub offers an experience you'll want to repeat, if you've got the stamina.
Its well stocked gantry includes 100 whiskies, Schnapps, Cherry Vodka, Tequila, Saki, Calvados and exotic drinks galore.
Many beers, including Traquair.
A unique hostelry with terrific atmosphere.
Stanfield's Lounge
For centuries a Royal Mile eating and drinking house has stood on this site.
Today's bar is comfortable and couthy.
Waterman's Bar
Hot and cold bar snacks.
Wine by the glass, 20 different whiskies, full range of beers.
Meals all day.
White Hart Inn
Burns, during his Clarinda infatuation, and Wordsworth visited this old Inn, now patronised by Heriot-Watt students and locals.
NEW TOWN AND NORTH
The Antiquary
Good bar lunches noon–2 pm Monday–Saturday, plus a fine selection of draught products such as Becks, McEwans 80/ — and Stella Artois.
Barony Bar
Interesting Victorian fittings, mirrors and tiles.
De Luxe malts, bourbons.
Large selection of whiskies.
Export, Lager, draught Guinness, 80/ — beers.
Bar snacks.
The Christopher North
Charming lounge bar in a house once the home of Christopher North.
The Claret Jug
Popular basement lounge, frequented by Heriot Watt students.
Specialises in cask conditioned real ales.
Coconut Tam's
Though now brewery owned this old basement bar, dating back to 1830, remains little changed — thanks to the pressure of the locals.
You've really got to be one to appreciate the spirit of the place but pop in to see what a real pub should be like.
The Drummond Hotel
A favourite haunt of the literati.
Conversation flows freely in the Georgian bars.
Blended, malt and irish whiskies.
Good range of wines and beers.
Hare O'The Dog
A popular local, frequented too by greyhound racing enthusiasts from nearby Powderhall Stadium.
Kay's Bar
Tucked behind the douce elegance of India Street, this quaint little building was from 1915 until recently a wine importer's warehouse.
Rows of barrels and original fittings retain the old atmosphere.
A snug haunt of neo-Georgians, with a fine range of drink for sophisticated palates.
Neighbours
Friendly lounge bar offering a Free House choice of a large selection of wines, beers and spirits.
Home cooked dishes on the bar's menu range from jumbo sausages to steaks.
New Town Hotel
A relaxing oasis for professional and business men.
Two bars.
Northumberland Bar
An unpretentious local in contrast to most of the chic New Town bars.
Friendly local clientele.
Selection of blended and malt whiskies.
Good selection of beers, homemade pub grub lunches.
Raeburn Bar
One of the friendliest and most popular bars in Stockaree.
Lunch served in the lounge bar.
Raeburn House
A pleasant bar in a fine old house overlooking the Academy ground.
Naturally a haunt of rugger enthusiasts.
Good selection of malt whiskies.
Raffles
A lounge cellar bar with a relaxed atmosphere and a real coal fire.
Hot and cold bar meals.
House wines, good selection of whiskies.
Belhaven Heavy, Tennent's Export and Guinness on draught.
Real ale.
Smithie's Ale House
A real ale house serving Lorimar and Clark 80/ —, Burton ale and Arrol's 70/ — on draught.
Extensive lunch menu.
The Tilted Wing
Strong legal atmosphere doesn't prevent locals and others enjoying Paddy Crossan's friendly pub and halesome fare.
Small selection of wines and good range of whiskies.
Draught Tartan, Export, Harp and Carlsberg de luxe, real ale.
SOUTH
The Buckstone
Adjoining the Braid Hills Hotel this is a cheerful nineteenth hole for golfers and a favourite of locals.
Bar snacks.
Callyr Inn
Hot and cold bar meals served, with salads the speciality of the house.
54 malt and de luxe whiskies.
The Canny Man's
A free house boasting no change in the last 110 years.
Decor is Victorian and original; special features include 100 antique clocks.
Variety of wines, whisky and real ale.
Live music most nights.
The Captain's Bar
Small bar with some nice old mirrors and woodwork, frequented by students from the Old quad.
Chaplin's Lounge
A small friendly bar open all day for the over 21s.
Bar snacks served all day along with coffee and wine.
Real ale.
Forrest Hill Bar
The fabulous Sandy Bell's, famous for its music, talk and worthies.
Haunt of medical students and other lighthearted spirits.
Even if you're not part of the ‘in’ crowd you can appreciate the atmosphere.
The Gold Medal Tavern
A popular Inn opposite the Commonwealth Pool.
Restaurant, bar snacks, public, cocktail and lounge bars.
Golf Tavern
One of the oldest hostelries in Scotland, said to date back to 1456.
A place of rich character and good cheer — encouraged by a vast selection of whiskies and beers.
Pub lunches.
The Hermitage Lounge
Worth making the acquaintance of this very friendly free house beloved by Morningsiders.
Jamie's Lounge Bar
An excellent pub catering for the sedate, the posh and not so posh residents of select Newington.
A busy, friendly house with a great deal of character and a good range of whiskies and beers.
Leslie's Bar
A fine piece of Victoriana and one of the best pubs in South Edinburgh.
Splendid ceiling, woodwork and fittings.
Dedicated clientele.
Good range of whiskies and beers.
Old Bell Inn
Friendly a comfortable lounge bar in a fine old building of character.
Bar lunches.
Proctor's
Good ales and snacks in a warm, friendly atmosphere.
The Southsider
Enjoy real ale in the friendly atmosphere of a family-run pub.
The Craggenemars Restaurant offers full lunches and dinner menus incorporating traditional Scottish fare with dishes from other lands, such as pastas, curries, paella and coq au vin.
WEST
Barnton Hotel
Highly popular at weekends with local suburbanites and visitors from further afield.
Public bar and pleasant lounge and cocktail bars.
Private parking.
The Blackhall Lounge
A pleasant lounge attractive to smart suburban couples.
Corstorphine Inn
A jolly place for beers and skittles.
Bar lunches.
Cramond Inn
Edinburgh's most photographed picturesque inn.
Visitors come from far and wide, mainly to eat, but there is a busy cocktail bar and lounge bar.
The Harp Hotel
Lounge bar with heavy atmospheric decor, restaurant, and public bar without distractions.
The Mid Yoken
A bustling, friendly local which, in addition to its well-stocked bar, provides morning coffees, home-cooked lunches, afternoon teas and suppers — with special children's menus available.
The Rainbow
A lovely setting for a good night out.
A free house with a wide range of lagers, traditional ales, wines and spirits.
Roseburn Bar
Good Victorian bar with interesting fittings, well known to rugger fans.
Wide range of whiskies and beers.
Ryrie's Bar
Unpretentious but highly popular mid-Victorian bar with interesting fittings and considerable character.
Good variety of whiskies and a fine choice of beers.
Two public bars and upstairs lounge.
Winston's
Great choice of real ales, lagers, beers, wines and spirits, plus morning coffee and home-made snacks.
Ye Olde Inn
Village Inn atmosphere with friendly crowd of locals.
Pleasant beer garden.
Good choice of wines, varied selection of blended and malt whiskies.
Drybroughs beers, Carlsberg and Foster's lagers, real ale.
EAST
The Battery Bar
A cheerful, modern local beside the now demolished Power Station and Promenade.
Drybrough, Guinness and S & N beers.
Snacks.
The Bluebell
This fine, friendly local with lots of character boasts an immense range of whiskies.
The sell beer too.
Grant's
A ‘Pub of the 80s’.
Hot and cold bar snacks.
Party nights.
Private parking.
The Hop, Step and Jump
Unusually well designed modern pub, handy for Meadowbank Stadium.
Everything comfortable in excellent taste.
Jimmy O'Rourke's Bar
A popular local with real ales and excellent lunches served in lounge and bar.
Proprietor is an ex-Hibernian footballer and this bar buzzes with personalities on match day.
The Loch Inn
Close to Hibs football ground.
Snacks.
Skol, Diamond, Guinness beers.
The Marine Bar
An exuberant pub, right on the Promenade.
Porter's
Busy, friendly pub where snacks are served all day.
Sheep Heid Inn
Situated at the top of Duddingston Loch, this is the oldest licensed Inn in Scotland (1360) and has a 250 year old skittle alley.
Hot and cold meals, with steak pie and haggis specialities.
Beer garden where children are welcome.
The Windsor Buffet
An excellent bar, handy for the STV studios and popular with businessmen.
Table lunches and snacks.
Good friendly service.
Drybrough beers.
EDINBURGH Pocket Guide
OLD AND NEW Edinburgh Pocket Guide
Welcome to Edinburgh
Edinburgh is a sublime mixture of old and new.
The Old Town, built in a time of strife, occupies a fairly small area and nestles for protection close to the Castle.
The New Town, the central part of which was built mainly in the second half of the eighteenth century, is more spaciously laid out in classical streets and squares —‘not only gay and airy’, said Robert Louis Stevenson, ‘but highly picturesque’.
Wonderful views of the Old Town can be seen from the new Town.
Wonderful views of the New Town can be seen from the Old Town.
Wonderful views of both, and of the Pentlands in the south and of Fife and the Firth of Forth in the north, can be seen from the many hills upon or around which Edinburgh drapes itself.
But not only is it a city of views and skylines, it is a city of skies.
Stevenson knew this when he spoke of the ‘subarctic sunsets, with the profile of the city stamped in indigo upon a sky of luminous green’.
H. L. Gee knew it when he said that Edinburgh is ‘perhaps never seen to greater advantage than late on a midsummer evening, the stones crimson in the setting sun, western windows ablaze with fire’.
Nowhere is this more impressive than on the Dean Bridge at sunset, when one looks over the deep valley of the Water of Leith and sees the glistening windows of Moray Place and Ainslie Place.
It has been said that nobody with eyes in their heads or any appetite for the oddities and splendours of the human achievement or the natural scene can possibly be bored in Edinburgh.
In appearance, it looks like a stage set for drama — and indeed it has always been just that, whether in historic times, when the drama of John Knox and Mary, Queen of Scots, was played out in the streets, or today, when Schiller's Mary Stuart , or Donizetti's or Thea Musgrave's operas about the ill-fated queen, may be staged at the Edinburgh Festival.
And at whatever time of the year you visit Edinburgh, there are the art galleries and museums — though the priceless and vulnerable collection of Turner water-colours can only be seen for a short period in winter.
Galleries which are essential viewing include the National Gallery of Scotland at the Mound, the Scottish National Portrait Gallery in Queen Street and the Scottish National Gallery of Modern Art in Belford Road.
Museums not to be missed are the Royal Scottish Museum in Chambers Street and the National Museum of Antiquities in Queen Street.
some places of interest
ARTHUR'S SEAT.
The volcanic mountain the Queen's Park.
Enter from gates at Holyrood house.
See page 19.
CRAMOND VILLAGE.
Originally a Roman settlement, this picturesque little village is now a popular small-craft sailing centre.
Delightful walks along the Firth of Forth.
DEAN VILLAGE.
See page 33.
DUDDINGTON VILLAGE.
See page 19.
EDINBURGH CASTLE.
See page 19.
FLORAL CLOCK.
See page 11.
FORTH BRIDGES.
For striking views of the famous road and railway bridges spanning the Firth of Forth, take buss from St Andrew Square bus station to South Queensferry.
GALLERY OF MODERN ART.
See page 38.
HOLYROODHOUSE, PALACE OF.
See page 19.
JOHN KNOX'S HOUSE.
High Street.
See page 17.
MUSEUM OF ANTIQUITIES.
Queen Street.
See page 13.
NATIONAL GALLERY OF SCOTLAND.
Mound.
See page 37.
NATIONAL LIBRARY OF SCOTLAND.
See page 21.
NATIONAL PORTRAIT GALLERY.
Queen Street.
See page 38.
ROYAL BOTANIC GARDEN.
Inverleith Row.
Nearly seventy acres of magnificent gardens and hot houses.
Buses 23 and 27 from Hanover Street.
THE ROYAL OBSERVATORY.
Blackford Hill.
ST GILES.
High Street.
See page 15.
TRANSPORT MUSEUM.
See page 38.
THE ZOO.
The Scottish national Zoological Park on the southern slope of Corstorphine Hill has a wonderful collection of animals in natural settings.
The Zoo is famous for its penguins and the daily Penguin Parade is a great attraction.
The Children's Farm has a natural appeal for young people.
Buses 2,26 and 31 from Princes Street.
LEITH DOCKS.
It is not readily apparent that Edinburgh is a busy seaport but a visit to Leith Docks can be a fascinating eye-opener.
There are also some interesting old buildings to see around the Shore and at the old-world fishing harbour of Newhaven.
Bus 16 from Princes Street.
CANONGATE TOLBOOTH.
See page 17.
GLADSTONE'S LAND.
See page 15.
HUNTLY HOUSE.
City museum.
See page 17.
LADY STAIR'S HOUSE.
Relics of Burns, Scott and Stevenson.
See page 15.
PARLIAMENT HOUSE.
See page 15.
Seen from Princes Street
Few great cities have a principal street with such a spectacular setting as Princes Street.
The view across the garden valley to the Old Town, dominated by the majestic Castle, is extravagantly theatrical.
High against the sky the silhouette of sires and towers and ragged gables presents a constantly changing panorama, from the sharp clear light of morning to the lingering glow of the northern sunset which illumines the old grey stone with a strange radiance.
To identify the landmarks, start from the Castle in the west.
THE CASTLE.
Its origins are lost in antiquity but the Rock has probably ben used as a fortress from the Iron Age.
The oldest building, St Margaret's Chapel, was built in the eleventh century.
From the Half Moon Battery you can see — and hear!— the time gun fired at one o'clock each day.
Edinburgh citizens accept the loud bang with nonchalance and you will see them checking their watches in a kind of ritual.
RAMSAY GARDEN.
Beneath the Castle Esplanade, where the famous Tattoo is held each year during the International Festival, there is a picturesque group of buildings which includes the house of Allan Ramsay, the eighteenth century poet.
OUTLOOK TOWER.
An interesting old building containing the Camera Obscura which provides tourists with fascinating instantaneous moving pictures of the city.
TOLBOOTH CHURCH.
The fine Victorian Gothic spire surmounts what was formerly the Assembly Hall of the Church of Scotland.
ASSEMBLY HALL.
Houses the annual General Assembly of the Church of Scotland, presided over by the Lord High Commissioner, representing Her Majesty the Queen.
During the International Festival it is used for apron-stage theatrical performances.
BANK OF SCOTLAND.
Founded in 1695.
The present head office was built in 1806 but extended and much altered in 1870.
ST GILES.
The beautiful crown spire caps the historic High Kirk of Edinburgh, which dates back to the fifteenth century.
CITY CHAMBERS.
Municipal offices and meeting place of the City of Edinburgh District Council.
Built 1753–61.
TRON CHURCH.
Founded in 1637 and rebuilt after a disastrous fire in 1824.
‘THE SCOTSMAN’ BUILDING.
The offices of ‘Scotland's national newspaper’, started in 1817.
ARTHUR'S SEAT.
Not many cities have a mountain in their midst.
Arthur's Seat, an extinct volcano, is part of the Queen's Park.
NORTH BRIDGE.
Linking the Old Town and the New, the North Bridge was built in 1772 and reconstructed in 1876.
Princes Street and environs
The south side of Princes Street with its gardens and the Old Town skyline is changeless but the shopping side of the street is rapidly being transformed.
Though a few interesting buildings have given way to typically undistinguished modern blocks, the architecture of Princes Street was never outstanding and little is likely to be lost, though little gained by the innovations.
CALEDONIAN HOTEL.
The great red bulk of what is popularly known as the ‘Caley’ Hotel, dominates the West End.
One of the most fashionable hotels in the city.
ST JOHN'S CHURCH.
In the vaults of this pleasant Late Gothic Episcopal Church (1818) is buried Sir Henry Raeburn, the famous Scots portrait painter.
ST CUTHBERT'S CHURCH.
The tower, dating from 1789, is the only remaining part of the original church which was rebuilt in 1892.
In the burial ground will be found the graves of many distinguished men including Thomas de Quincey, author of Confessions of an Opium Eater .
SIMPSON STATUE.
Erected to the memory of Sir James Y. Simpson, discoverer of chloroform.
OPEN AIR THEATRE.
Band performances and other entertainments take place here daily throughout the summer.
ALLAN RAMSAY STATUE.
Memorial to the author of The Gentle Shepherd .
THE FLORAL CLOCK.
This popular attraction for tourists is laid out with over 20,000 plants.
THE MOUND.
Cutting across the valley, which was once an expanse of water known as the Nor'Lock, the Mound was created from the excavations of the New Town.
ROYAL SCOTTISH ACADEMY.
The Greek temple, strangely surmounted by a colossal statue of Queen Victoria, was designed by W. H. Playfair.
The art exhibitions of the RSA and other societies are held here.
THE NATIONAL GALLERY OF SCOTLAND
, also designed by Playfair, has one of the finest smaller collections of paintings in Europe.
THE SCOTT MONUMENT.
Designed by George Meikle Kemp.
The statue of Sir Walter Scott is by Sir John Steel.
THE WAVERLEY MARKET.
The recently rebuilt market is now a bright, exciting shopping centre with elevators, fountains, entertainers, restaurant, boutiques and specialist shops.
NORTH BRITISH HOTEL.
A popular rendezvous and a familiar landmark with its prominent clock tower.
REGISTER HOUSE.
The only notable building on the north side of the street.
Designed by Robert Adam and completed in 1789, it is one of the finest examples of his work.
The building contains the national records of Scotland and the Court of the Lyon King of Arms, the only surviving Court of Heraldry.
Open daily to the public.
ROSE STREET.
Running parallel to Princes Street, this narrow thoroughfare is a convivial haunt full of pubs of character, boutiques and restaurants.
George Street and environs
Originally intended as the principal thoroughfare in the New Town designed by James Craig in 1765, George Street was lined with not very distinguished buildings.
Though a number of the old houses remain, the street now consists mainly of shops and offices.
CHARLOTTE SQUARE
designed by Robert Adam in 1791, is one of the finest examples of Georgian architecture in the country.
Though dormer windows and other extrusions have spoiled the fine proportions of the south and east sides of the square, the north side remains intact.
WEST REGISTER HOUSE
formerly St George's Church, has been reconstructed as an adjunct to Register House in Princes Street and now contains important national archives.
GEORGIAN HOUSE.
No. 7 Charlotte Square has been furnished and decorated in the style of the eighteenth century.
Audio-visuals tell the story of the New Town.
SECRETARY OF STATE FOR SCOTLAND'S HOUSE.
Bute House, No. 6, has been reconstructed and beautifully furnished by private donations and gifts as the official residence of the principal Government Minister for Scotland.
SIR WALTER SCOTT'S HOUSE.
At 39 Castle Street, the author of Waverley lived for twenty-four years and wrote many of his famous novels.
ASSEMBLY ROOMS.
Built in 1787, it was here in 1827 that Sir Walter Scott first publicly admitted that he was the author of the Waverley Novels.
ROYAL SOCIETY OF EDINBURGH
founded in 1783, has a magnificent library of scientific books.
ST ANDREW'S CHURCH
built in 1787, was the first church in the New Town.
It has an oval design of remarkable purity and taste and is one of the most pleasing examples of eighteenth-century architecture in Edinburgh.
ST ANDREW SQUARE
is the financial centre of the city.
Few of the original buildings remain, but the ROYAL BANK on the east side was designed by Sir William Chambers in 1772 as a handsome town house for Sir Laurence Dundas.
The buildings on either side of the courtyard date from the same period.
MELVILLE COLUMN.
Standing in the centre of St Andrew Square gardens is the Greek column erected in 1821 to the memory of the first Viscount Melville, who was Treasurer to the Navy under Pitt.
MUSEUM OF ANTIQUITIES and NATIONAL PORTRAIT GALLERY.
A late flourishing of Victorian Gothic designed by Sir Rowand Anderson, this red stone building at the corner of Queen Street houses both the National Museum of Antiquities of Scotland and the Scottish National Portrait Gallery, each well worth visiting.
BUS STATION.
Entering from St Andrew Square, the Scottish Omnibuses station is the starting point for long distance coaches to all parts of the country.
The Royal Mile
As it descends from the Castle to the Palace of Holyroodhouse the Royal Mile has many names.
Lying immediately below the Caste, the LAWNMARKET — the ‘land market’ where country produce was sold — had become by the eighteenth century an aristocratic quarter.
The HIGH STREET runs from George IV Bridge to John Knox's House, beyond which it becomes the CANONGATE , part of the medieval burgh which grew up around Holyrood.
THE CASTLE.
For details see page 19.
CANNON-BALL HOUSE
, built in 1630, gets its name from the cannon-ball embedded in the wall, the reason for which is unknown.
RAMSAY LODGE.
The house of Allan Ramsay, the eighteenth-century poet and wig-maker.
OUTLOOK TOWER.
The Camera Obscura at the top of the Tower provides fascinating table-top views of the city and surrounding country.
Open daily 9.30 a.m. –6 p.m.
THE TOLBOOTH CHURCH
, with its impressive spire, was built in 1844 and used as the Assembly Hall of the Church of Scotland until 1929.
JAMES COURT.
Dr Johnson stayed here with Boswell before going on their famous journey to the Western Highlands.
For a time it was also home of the philosopher, David Hume.
GLADSTONE'S LAND.
This seventeenth-century town mansion, restored by the National Trust for Scotland, is furnished as a typical home of the Old Town.
It has interesting painted decoration.
RIDDLE'S CLOSE
In the inner court McMoran's Lodging, built in 1590, was the scene of a banquet given to James VI and Queen Anne.
In the house with the date 1726 David Hume wrote his History of England .
LADY STAIR'S HOUSE
in Lady Stair's Close, was built in 1622.
It is a civic museum with an interesting collection of relics of Burns, Scott and Stevenson.
ASSEMBLY HALL.
Behind the twin towers of the New College of Divinity at the head of the Mound stands the Assembly Hall, where the annual ‘parliament’ of the Church of Scotland is held.
ST GILES.
The oldest portions of the historic High Kirk of Edinburgh go back to 1120.
It was rebuilt with the lantern tower in 1495 and ‘restored’ in 1883.
The most recent addition is a beautiful Chapel of the Knights of the Thistle.
PARLIAMENT HOUSE
, behind St Giles, was the seat of the Scots Parliament until the Union with England in 1707.
The building now houses the Supreme Courts of Scotland.
MERCAT CROSS.
A restoration of the ancient Cross from which the laws of the land were proclaimed.
The Lord Lyon King of Arms, with his colourful Heralds, still makes Royal Proclamations from the gallery.
CITY CHAMBERS.
Meeting place of the Edinburgh District Council and municipal offices.
Built 1753–61.
WAX MUSEUM.
No. 142.
Colourful pageant of famous Scottish characters.
TRON KIRK.
An old but much altered city church, recently restored.
ST CECILIA'S HALL.
Down Niddry Street stands the charming concert hall which was a fashionable resort in the eighteenth century.
Long neglected, it has now been restored by the University of Edinburgh and is once again used for its original purpose.
A modern annexe houses the Russell collection of early keyboard instruments.
MUSEUM OF CHILDHOOD.
Contains a unique collection of historical toys, books, costumes and items relating to childhood from all over the world.
Open Sundays during Festival 2–5 p.m.
JOHN KNOX'S HOUSE.
Built in 1490 and reconstructed in the sixteenth century, this picturesque dwelling was reputedly occupied by the great Protestant Reformer from 1561 to 1572.
Open to the public, Monday–Saturday 10 a.m. –4 p.m.
Closed Sundays.
THE NETHERBOW.
Arts and communications centre, 43 High Street.
A multi-purpose arts centre containing theatre, art galleries, restaurant and shops.
TWEEDDALE COURT.
Dating from 1575, here stands the town house of the Marquess of Tweeddale.
MORAY HOUSE.
In the summerhouse in the garden of what is now the College of Education the Treaty of Union with England was signed 1707.
CANONGATE TOLBOOTH.
The Council House and prison of the ancient burgh of Canongate, built in 1591.
Now a museum.
CANONGATE CHURCH.
The parish church of the Canongate, built in 1688.
The churchyard contains graves of many famous people including Adam Smith, author of The Wealth of Nations , Burns' Clarinda (Mrs Maclehose), Mary Queen of Scots' secretary Rizzio, and the poet Robert Fergusson.
HUNTLY HOUSE.
The timbered town house of the marquesses of Huntly, built in 1517, is an interesting museum of local history.
ACHESON HOUSE.
This charming old Scottish house is occupied by the Scottish Craft Centre which has a fascinating range of pottery, jewellery and textiles for sale.
WHITE HORSE CLOSE.
Features in Walter Scott's Waverley and The Abbot .
From the seventeenth- century inn coaches left for Newcastle and London.
QUEEN MARY'S BATH.
A quaint little corbelled tower in which Mary Queen of Scots is said to have bathed in wine.
THE PALACE OF HOLYROODHOUSE.
See page 19.
The Castle
From prehistoric times there have been fortifications of one sort or another on the great Rock which dominates the surrounding countryside, but the first records go back to the seventh century.
The oldest building still standing is ST MARGARET'S CHAPEL , which dates from 1076.
MONS MEG , an ancient cannon nearby is dated 1486.
The ruin of KING DAVID'S TOWER goes back to 1367, but in the wars between Scotland and England most of the earlier buildings were destroyed.
The great HALF MOON BATTERY , from which the One o'clock Gun is fired, dates from 1574.
It was the Palace in CROWN SQUARE that Mary Queen of Scots gave birth in 1566 to her son, James, who was to unite the thrones of the two Kingdoms.
The CROWN ROOM adjoining the Royal Apartments houses the ancient Regalia of Scotland.
The hammer-beamed GREAT HALL was built by James IV in the sixteenth century and was used on occasions for meetings of the Scots parliament.
An impressive addition to the Castle buildings is the SCOTTISH NATIONAL WAR MEMORIAL designed by Sir Robert Lorimer, with its noble Hall of Honour and beautiful Shrine, devoted to the memory of the fallen in both World Wars.
Also worth visiting is the UNITED SERVICES MUSEUM in the Palace Yard.
The ESPLANADE , on which witches were once burned at the stake, is the scene of the famous Military Tattoo held annually at the time of the International Festival.
The Castle is open from:
The Palace of Holyroodhouse
Only a fragment of the original palace built by James IV in 1501 remains.
The present building, designed by Sir William Bruce for Charles II, is still used as a residence by the reigning Monarch and by the Lord High Commissioner during the Assembly of the Church of Scotland.
The Palace is most closely associated with the tragic reign of Mary Queen of Scots and with James IV.
In later times it was briefly occupied by Cromwell and by Bonnie Prince Charlie during the Rebellion of 1745.
Adjoining the Palace are the ruins of the ancient ABBEY OF HOLYROOD and the Chapel Royal, where many of the early kings of Scotland are buried.
The Abbey was founded by David I in 1178 and he granted to the Canons the right to establish their own Burgh of Canongate between the Abbey and the royal burgh of Edinburgh.
The handsome wrought-iron gates of the Palace were erected as a memorial to Edward VII.
Beyond the Palace lies the Queen's Park and the impressive grandeur of Arthur's Seat and Salisbury Crags, encircled by the  three-and-a-half miles long queen's Drive which commands magnificent views of the city and surrounding countryside.
The Park has three lochs and the picturesque village of Duddingston with its Norman church.
George IV Bridge and environs
George IV Bridge is one of Edinburgh's numerous viaducts built to span transverse streets at different levels.
As the buildings rise from ground level, entrance from the Bridge gives access on the middle storeys.
BANK OF SCOTLAND.
Founded in 1695.
The present head office was built in 1806 but extended and altered in 1870.
THE SHERIF COURT
covers a wide range of civil and criminal jurisdiction.
LOTHIAN REGION BUILDINGS.
On both sides of the bridge at the corners of the High Street and the Lawnmarket stand the administrative offices of Lothian Regional Council.
VICTORIA STREET
, curving down to the Grassmarket, is another example of Edinburgh split-level building.
It has a number of attractive old domestic buildings, schedule for preservation, and some interesting antique shops.
THE NATIONAL LIBRARY OF SCOTLAND
, formerly the Advocates' Library, founded in 1689, contains over two million books and 10,000 volumes of manuscripts.
The nine floors below the level of the Bridge are mainly used for the miles of shelving for ‘stacking’ the books.
CENTRAL PUBLIC LIBRARY.
Has extensive lending and reference departments.
The Edinburgh Room has a unique collection of over 25,000 books and 21,000 prints relating to the history of the city.
HERIOT-WATT UNIVERSITY
, in Chambers Street, was founded as a technical institute in 1821 and became a fully- fledged university in 1966.
It is strong in technological subjects and has an important department of architecture and town planning.
A new complex of buildings has been built on the outskirts of the city.
THE ROYAL SCOTTISH MUSEUM
, the largest comprehensive museum of science and arts in the country, has important departments in art and archaeology, natural history, geology and technology.
The Hall of Power — where little boys and grown men delight in pressing buttons — is vastly popular.
GREYFRIARS' BOBBY.
A well-loved monument to the devotion of a little terrier who kept vigil on his master's grave for many years.
Bobby has become a symbol of canine loyalty.
Books have been written about him and Walt Disney built a film round his story.
GREYFRIARS' CHURCH.
Here the National Covenant was signed in 1683 and in 1679 hundreds of Covenanters were barbarously imprisoned.
Old Greyfriars' Church, now restored, dates from 1620.
It has been burned down, blown up, divided and used as a barracks by Cromwell's army.
On the tombstones in the churchyard will be found many famous names and some grotesque designs.
GEORGE HERIOT'S SCHOOL
, endowed by the goldsmith to James VI and I. This magnificent Tudor building, supposed to have been based on designs of Inigo Jones, was begun in 1628.
THE ROYAL INFIRMARY
, founded in 1729, is one of Britain's most famous teaching hospitals.
It moved to its present site in 1879.
Many of the world's leading doctors have been trained here and at the neighbouring Medical School of Edinburgh University.
McEWAN HALL.
The imposing nineteenth-century Renaissance graduation hall of the University was designed by Sir Rowand Anderson.
Across the Bridges
The North Bridge, which spans the Waverley Station, was built in 1769 to link the Old Town with the New.
It was reconstructed in 1897.
The South Bridge viaduct, completed in 1786, has nineteen arches only one of which is visible.
The buildings which line either side of the bridge descend as far below the street as they rise above it.
THE GENERAL POST OFFICE
stands on the site of the old Theatre royal in which Sarah Siddons performed.
The British Post Office Philatelic Bureau has an interesting exhibition gallery open to the public.
Entry from 2–4 Waterloo Place.
‘THE SCOTSMAN’ BUILDING
is a notable example of much of Edinburgh's two-level architecture.
TRON KIRK.
Founded in 1633, it suffered a disastrous fire in 1824 which destroyed its fine steeple, replaced later by the present one.
No longer used as a church, the Tron has recently been restored.
Though of no great architectural value the Tron is a beloved Edinburgh landmark where people gather on Hogmanay to usher in the New Year.
OLD UNIVERSITY.
Originally designed by Robert Adam and completed, with alterations after his death, by W. H. Playfair.
Begun in 1789 and finishes in 1824, it replaced the original University buildings dating back to 1583.
THE SURGEONS HALL
was also designed by Playfair, in 1755.
It contains the private Museum of the Royal College of Surgeons, only to be seen on written application.
The Calton Hill
Of the many hills within the city boundaries the Calton has probably more interesting features than any apart from the Castle Rock.
Proceeding from Princes Street along Waterloo Place on comes to the Old Calton Burial Ground where there is a memorial to the Chartists; the tombs of the philosopher David Hume and Archibald Constable, Sir Walter Scott's publisher; and a monument to Abraham Lincoln.
ST ANDREW'S HOUSE
, designed by Thomas Smith Tait, contains the Government administrative offices for Scotland.
Access to the Hill is gained by a flight of steps on the left, just beyond St Andrew's House.
NELSON MONUMENT.
The round tower looking uncommonly like a lighthouse or a telescope, contains relics of the hero of Trafalgar.
At the top of the tower the time-ball falls at one o'clock each day — originally intended as a signal to ships in the Firth of Forth.
ROYAL HIGH SCHOOL.
This impressive Grecian building, designed by Thomas Hamilton in 1825, has helped to gain for Edinburgh the description of the Modern Athens.
The school, whose origins go back to the twelfth century, has been moved to a new location.
The buildings, reconstructed to house the proposed Scottish Assembly, are now used by departments of the Crown Office.
CITY OBSERVATORY.
The old building (1776–1792) is by James Craig, the designer of the New Town.
The adjacent New Observatory in Roman Doric is by Playfair (1818).
NATIONAL MEMORIAL.
Sometimes called Scotland's Disgrace, because it was never finished for lack of funds, this fragment of a memorial to the fallen in the Napoleonic War was intended to be a facsimile of the parthenon.
Some think it better than the completed edifice might have been.
BURNS MEMORIAL.
On the south side of Regent Road is another classical monument, to the memory of Robert Burns.
Designed by Thomas Hamilton, it is a copy of the temple of Lysistrates at Athens.
Running round the base of the Hill REGENT TERRACE, CARLTON TERRACE and ROYAL TERRACE , designed by W. H. Playfair, form a handsome extension of the New Town development.
They were built around the beginning of the nineteenth century.
From the Calton Hill looking south there is a fine view of the Palace of Holyroodhouse, Salisbury Crags and Arthur's Seat.
ST JAMES CENTRE
, at the top of Leith Street, is a popular covered shopping precinct.
It also includes the Secretary of State's office, a multi-storey car park and the King James Hotel.
The Grassmarket
Reached most easily from Lothian Road, down King's Stables Road, the spacious Grassmarket has something of the air of a decayed French place .
With its doss houses and  meths drinkers it was for long Edinburgh's ‘skid row’ but it in the process of being tidied up and its picturesque old buildings are being steadily restored.
Antique shops and attractive restaurants abound.
It is well worth a visit on many counts, not least for its striking view of the Castle towering above the rooftops.
Though no long regularly used as a market place, the Grassmarket received its charter from James III in 1477. it was the scene of the Porteous Riots described in Scott's Heart of Midlothian , the haunt of the Burke and Hare murderers and the scene of public hangings.
THE BEEHIVE INN
, now a noted restaurant, was a famous coaching hostelry in the eighteenth century.
It contains some interesting relics, including the door of the condemned cell from the old Calton jail.
THE WHITE HART INN.
Here Robert Burns stayed on his last visit to Edinburgh in 1791.
Wordsworth also put up here on his visit to Scotland.
THE TRAVERSE THEATRE.
At the foot of the West Bow, this intimate little theatre has achieved an international reputation for its advanced and often controversial productions.
COVENANTERS' MEMORIAL.
On the site of the old gallows a St Andrew's Cross is inlaid to the memory of Covenanter martyrs who died for their Protestant faith.
HERIOT-WATT UNIVERSITY.
The somewhat inharmonious modern building on the south side of the square houses a section of the new university.
THE VENNEL
, a steep passage-way rising to Heriot's School, contains remains of the old Flodden Wall built for the defence of the city.
Lothian Road to Tollcross
Proceeding south from the West End of Princes Street the Lothian Road leads to the residential districts of Bruntsfield and Morningside and on to the Pentland Hills — R. L. Stevenson's ‘hills of home’.
Just beyond St John's Church the first opening on the left is KING'S STABLES ROAD which leads to the Grassmarket, a picturesque quarter once the seat of public executions, now more noted for its antique shops, boutiques and restaurants.
CASTLE TERRACE
has a multi-storey car park convenient for extended parking.
USHER HALL.
The city's main concert hall, opened in 1914, holds over 2,500.
THE LYCEUM THEATRE
, behind the Usher Hall in Grindlay Street, was opened by 1883 by Henry Irving.
It is now owned by a civic trust, and the royal Lyceum Theatre Company has established a high reputation for its enterprising productions.
FILMHOUSE.
Repertory Film Theatre.
headquarters of the Edinburgh International Film Festival and the Edinburgh Film Guide.
ABC FILM CENTRE.
A complex of three cinemas of varying size showing both first-run successes and specialised programmes.
THE KING'S THEATRE
, also now civic trust owned, presents opera, visiting productions, resident shows and pantomime.
Around the West End
West of Princes Street lies a later stage of the New Town planning, centred on the wide and dignified MELVILLE STREET with the triple spires of St Mary's Cathedral rising at its far end.
ST GEORGE'S WEST CHURCH
in Shandwick Place, was designed by David Bryce in 1869.
The campanile was added later Sir Rowand Anderson.
THE ENGLISH-SPEAKING UNION
has a gallery devoted to periodical exhibitions of contemporary art.
GLADSTONE MONUMENT.
Designed by Pittendrigh MacGillivray, in memory of the famous Liberal statesman.
ST MARY'S CATHEDRAL.
Completed in 1879 from designs by Sir Gilbert Scott, the Episcopal Cathedral is one of the most impressive ecclesiastical buildings erected in Scotland since the Reformation.
Its Walpole Hall commemorates Bishop Walpole, the father of Hugh Walpole, the novelist.
Specially worth noticing is the charming little house, built at the beginning of the sixteenth century, now the home of the only choir school in Scotland.
A few minutes from the West End, down Queensferry Street, lies the picturesque VILLAGE OF DEAN , a surprising sight in the middle of a city, huddled in the deep valley beneath the DEAN BRIDGE , one of Telford's finest works.
The Port of Leith
Leith, the ancient port of Edinburgh and, until 1920, a separate town, retains a distinct and salty identity of its own.
Docks are always fascinating and rich in character.
In 1561 Mary Queen of Scots landed at Leith Shore from France and rested at Lamb's House, a picturesque vernacular building lovingly restored and now used as an old people's centre.
Also at the Shore, the 17th century King's Wark is another interesting conservation.
The Custom House in Commercial Street and the Old Town Hall and the Assembly Rooms in Constitution Street are interesting examples of 19th century architecture.
The old fishing village, Newhaven, just west of dockland, is worth visiting for its photogenic closes and quaint Flemish houses.
The link between Edinburgh and Leith is the spacious boulevard known as Leith Walk, which sadly lacks the Parisian elegance it might have had but still retains a certain impressiveness.
If you take the bus to the Foot of the Walk you will be able to spend a day full of interest and surprises, including some excellent places to eat.
The Tattler in Commercial Street has a charming Victorian atmosphere.
Skippers Bistro in Dock Place has a real nautical atmosphere and good seafood as has The Waterfront where you can dine outside from May to September.
The Maj is one of the most elegant Indian restaurants in town, and the Peacock Inn at Newhaven is a famous old hostelry of great character.
Galleries and Museums
CANONGATE TOLBOOTH.
Canongate.
Includes the Telfer Dunbar collection of Highland dress.
CITY ART CENTRE.
2 Market Street.
Changing displays from the city's collection of paintings and sculpture and exhibition of contemporary art.
EDINBURGH WAX MUSEUM.
142 High Street.
A colourful pageant of Scotland's past.
FRUIT MARKET GALLERY
28 Market Street, off Waverley Bridge.
Regular exhibitions of contemporary art.
GEORGIAN HOUSE
7 Charlotte Square.
Furnished in period.
Audio-visual shows tell the story of the New Town and the development of Georgian architecture.
GLADSTONE'S LAND.
Lawnmarket.
A 17th century six-storey building with interesting painted ceiling and wall decoration.
HUNTLY HOUSE.
Canongate.
Not on Sunday.
museum of local history, illustrating the life of Edinburgh from early times.
LADY STAIR'S HOUSE.
Lady Stair's Close, Lawnmarket.
Interesting relics of Burns, Scott and Stevenson.
LAURISTON CASTLE.
Davidson's Mains.
Sixteenth-century mansion with fine furniture, tapestries and objets d'art.
MUSEUM OF CHILDHOOD.
High Street.
A fascinating collection of historical toys, books and costumes, appealing to both adults and children.
NATIONAL GALLERY OF SCOTLAND.
The Mound.
One of the finest small collections in Europe.
Scottish art is strongly represented and the European and English sections include many famous masters.
NATIONAL MUSEUM OF ANTIQUITIES OF SCOTLAND.
Queen Street.
Pre-historic, Roman and later archaeology, furniture, costume, etc.
PHILATELIC BUREAU.
G.P.O., Waterloo Place.
Extensive display of British postage stamps.
ROYAL SCOTTISH MUSEUM.
Chambers Street.
One of the greatest comprehensive collections of the decorative arts, natural history, geology and technology in the United Kingdom.
SCOTTISH CRAFT CENTRE.
Acheson House, 140 Canongate.
Fine display of Scottish crafts.
All items for sale.
SCOTTISH NATIONAL GALLERY OF MODERN ART.
Now in its new permanent home in Belford Road.
An excellent collection of British and European twentieth-century painting and sculpture.
SCOTTISH NATIONAL PORTRAIT GALLERY.
Queen Street.
Portraits and sculpture illustrating the history of Scotland from the sixteenth-century to the present day.
SCOTTISH UNITED SERVICES MUSEUM.
Edinburgh Castle.
Uniforms, arms, colours, trophies, etc.
TALBOT RICE ART CENTRE.
Old University, South Bridge.
Torrie collection of 16th and 17th century European painting and sculpture.
Also modern gallery of changing exhibitions.
TRANSPORT MUSEUM.
Shrubhill, Leith Walk.
Original and model exhibits illustrating the historical development of transport in Edinburgh.
Where to eat and drink restaurants, pubs, bars
Licensing hours on weekdays for public houses and bars vary throughout the city, but in the centre most are open from 11.00 to midnight, some even later.
Most, but not all, pubs are open on Sundays, usually from 12.30–14.30 and from 18.30 to 23.00, but there are variations.
In hotels visitors may obtain alcoholic drinks outside the regulation hours for their own consumption in the hotel in which they are resident.
(Map references are in brackets )
The Abbotsford
Lunches and quick bar snacks in good company.
A rich piece of Victoriana.
Alp-Horn
A la carte Swiss cuisine in pleasant alpine atmosphere.
L'Auberge
Intimate French atmosphere and menu for the connoisseur.
The Beehive
A fine old Inn of character and atmosphere.
Charcoal grilled steaks are a speciality.
Biancos
Bustling, lively west end bar/restaurant rendezvous.
The Brasserie
Choice of pizzas, pastas, steaks and burgers, plus a salad bar.
Buster Brown's
Enjoyment is the keynote of this popular Edinburgh night spot, with exotic drinks a speciality.
Open nightly from 9.30 p.m. till the wee sma' hours, except Mondays.
Caledonian Hotel
Fashionable restaurants, lounges, cocktail bar.
The Gazebo has an excellent menu and the elegant Pompadour Restaurant is outstanding for its haute cuisine.
Platform One Bar specialises in bar lunches and music sessions at night.
Caprice Restaurant
Giant pizzas, Italian and Swiss cuisine.
Licensed.
Carlton Highland Hotel
Opposite The Scotsman building.
Several popular restaurants, cocktail bar and lounges.
The Courtyard Restaurant
Snacks, lunches and dinners in the beautiful surroundings of a secluded courtyard.
The Consort
Select menu and elegant surroundings.
Cosmo Ristorante
A select restaurant with fine Italian and Continental cooking.
Cousteaus
Good variety of seafood dishes.
Cramond Inn
A favourite resort for all who enjoy good food in picturesque surroundings.
Car park.
Le Creperie Française
Intimate restaurant with notable French cuisine
The Dragonara Hotel
Picturesquely set in the Dean.
Old Granary Mill is a friendly rendezvous.
The George Hotel
Haute cuisine in the beautiful Chambertin Restaurant with a more informal alternative offered in the elegant Carver's Table Restaurant.
Gordon's Trattoria
Enjoy Italian food in a warm and friendly atmosphere.
Handsels
A charming little West End restaurant with reliable menu.
Henderson's Salad Table
Licensed wholefood restaurant with a remarkable selection of dishes.
The Howtowdie
Intimate atmosphere, excellent menu and friendly service.
Good list of wines and malt whiskies.
Leadburn Inn
Dine in splendour in a beautifully converted railway carriage.
Madogs
Pleasant American cocktail bar and restaurant.
Mr Boni's Restaurant
Popular Italian restaurant.
Handy for King's Theatre.
North British Hotel
Good restaurants, grill room, lounges and cocktail bars.
Savour real Scots fare plus French cuisine.
Number 10 Restaurant
Continental menu.
Select wine list.
The Pimpernel
Situated in one of Edinburgh's historic closes.
Here you can enjoy the finest French country cooking plus good plain Scottish fare.
Post House Hotel
Fine modern hotel-restaurant.
Next to Zoo.
Prestonfield House
Fine food in seventeenth-century mansion.
Peacocks on the lawn.
Genuine antique furnishings and the aura of history.
Queensway Hotel, Parador Restaurant
Spanish and Continental cuisine.
Private car park.
Open all day, seven days.
Raffaelli's
A stylish restaurant with distinguished Italian cuisine.
Ristorante Milano
Italian cuisine with many special dishes.
The Royal Scot Hotel
International and Scottish cuisine.
Magnificent view over Pentland Hills.
Shamiana
Excellent Indian restaurant.
Kashmiri and North Indian specialities.
Shanaz Tandoori Restaurant
Tandoori and Indian cuisine.
Skippers Bistro
Specialises in fresh seafood.
The Tattler
Amid Victorian elegance enjoy everything from tasty bar snacks and meals to superb à la carte dinners.
Piano.
Verandah Tandoori Restaurant
Excellent traditional and Tandoori dishes served in an Eastern setting.
The Victoria and Albert
Lively restaurant and bars.
Victorian honky-tonk.
Vito's
Intimate Italian restaurant with fine cuisine.
Waterfront Wine Bar
Delightful dockside bar/restaurant.
International menu.
Dine outside May to September.
The Witchery By-the-Castle
Good food and wine in the macabre atmosphere of the spot where witchcraft was once practised — and witches burned.
Foreign Restaurants
AMERICAN
ARMENIAN
ASIAN
CHINESE
FRENCH
GERMAN
GREEK
ITALIAN
MEXICAN
MOROCCAN
RUSSIAN
SPANISH
SWISS
TURKISH
Restaurants Open on Sundays
Many restaurants close on Sundays but here is a list of some of the more convenient places which do open .
Some pubs of character
The Abbotsford
Genuine Victorian atmosphere.
Auld Hundred
Pleasant old Inn.
Bar lunches.
Bennet's
Interesting, nineteenth-century fittings.
Vast range of whiskies.
Near King's Theatre.
Cramond Inn
Charming riverside pub.
Good food.
Deacon Brodie's Tavern
Called after the original of Stevenson's Dr Jekyll and Mr Hyde .
Ensign Ewart
The Castle pub with a distinctive character.
Military relics.
Golf Tavern
One of the oldest pubs in Scotland.
Rich atmosphere.
Bar lunches.
Greyfriars Bobby
Beside Greyfriars' Kirkyard.
Guildford Arms
Crowded bar with fine Victorian fittings.
Jinglin' Geordie
Old Town atmosphere.
Haunt of journalists who appreciate fine malt whiskies.
The Kenilworth
Fine Victorian fittings.
The Pub
Popular bar lunches.
Robertson's 37 Bar
Friendly atmosphere and fine range of whiskies.
The Sheep Heid
A delightful village pub with traditions going back to the eighteenth-century.
Skittle alley.
Waterloo
Dates from 1830.
Fine façade and period interior.
The Waverley
Enchanting Victorian decor.
Folk singing.
White Hart Inn
Eighteenth-century coaching Inn visited by Burns and Wordsworth.
Entertainments
THEATRES
Royal Lyceum Theatre
The resident Royal Lyceum Theatre Company has established a high reputation for its enterprising productions, both classical and contemporary.
King's Theatre
Presents opera, ballet, visiting productions and revues.
Playhouse Theatre
In addition to visiting opera and ballet, Edinburgh's largest entertainment centre now includes top star pop concerts, films, discos, live music.
Traverse Theatre
Edinburgh's unique intimate theatre which has achieved an international reputation for its experimental and controversial productions.
CINEMAS
ABC Film Centre
Three separate cinemas.
Cameo
New films and revivals, late-night screenings.
Classic
‘X’ films.
Dominion
Three cinemas with separate programmes —‘family’ audiences.
Odeon
First run releases.
Three separate cinemas.
Filmhouse
Classics and revivals.
GREYHOUND RACING
Powderhall Stadium
Meetings Tuesday, Thursday and Saturday.
ZOO
Scottish National Zoological Park
One of Europe's largest and most beautiful zoological parks.
Over 2,000 animals, birds, fish and reptiles.
Open seven days a week.
Restaurant and cafeteria.
CABARET, DANCING, DISCOTHEQUES
Buster Brown's
A flamboyant addition to Edinburgh night-life, this licensed disco is open Tues, Wed, Thurs, Fri, Sat, and Sun. from 9.30 p.m. –3 a.m.
Exotic drinks.
A great place for parties.
Chicago and Millionaires
Disco.
Cinderellas Rockerfellas
Night Spot.
Disco.
3 bars.
Live music.
King James Hotel
Seasonal Cabaret.
Bright and talented Scottish floor show, music, dancing and comedy.
Madisons
North British Hotel
‘Hail Caledonia’.
Four course Banquet and Scottish entertainment.
Platform One
The Caledonian Hotel's famous jazz centre bar.
Styx
A fun pub with entertainment ranging from disco and live music, to pianist and cabaret.
Top-O
Smart, stylish night spot.
A good place for private parties.
Victoria and Albert
Music hall sing-song.
Zenatec
A disco for the over 21s every Friday, Saturday, Sunday.
ALL THE INFORMATION IN THE EDINBURGH POCKET GUIDE IS AS ACCURATE AS POSSIBLE BUT THE PUBLISHERS CANNOT ACCEPT RESPONSIBILITY FOR ANY ERRORS OR CHANGES WHICH MAY TAKE PLACE AFTER GOING TO PRESS.
Bus services and sight-seeing tours
Practically all routes likely to be used by visitors pass along or cross Princes Street.
The junction of Hanover Street and Princes Street (map ref.
C2) is the most convenient spot for getting services in all directions.
Ask any passer-by for information about the right Stop.
Last buses from Princes Street leave at approximately 23.30.
All-night buses run at  from Waverley Bridge.
Route Guides and Time Tables are available from the Transport Information Centre.
Sight-seeing tours with guides leave Waverley Bridge at frequent intervals each day.
The tours vary from 1–4 hours.
No advance booking is necessary on most departures.
For other sight-seeing tours, including places of interest outside the city, consult any tourist agency or hotel porter.
Taking Your Car?
No parking problems at these restaurants with private car parks 
Where to shop for Scottish Goods and Souvenirs
TARTAN AND HIGHLAND DRESS
KNITWEAR
SCOTTISH CRAFTS AND CELTIC JEWELLERY
BOOKS