

Chapter two
THE STRUCTURE OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT: ORIGINS TO 1970
The origins of local government in Britain are lost not so much in the mists of time as in a fog of detail.
Bryan Keith-Lucas describes how Sidney and Beatrice Webb began an analysis of English local government with a preliminary chapter on pre-1835 arrangements.
This chapter grew to eleven volumes totalling 4,212 pages.
They never fulfilled their original intention (Keith-Lucas 1980: 11).
The difficulty was the lack of system: local government's lack; not the Webbs'!
Every generalisation had to be accompanied by qualifications and exceptions.
Every municipal corporation had a separate and different charter; various ad hoc bodies each had their own Acts of Parliament; parish councils arose from the operation of the common law without benefit of statute; and Quarter Sessions ‘had developed a rich variety of practice’(Keith-Lucas 1980: 154).
In Scotland, local government services were provided by parishes, county commissioners of supply, and burghs which were ‘governed according to their own different constitution’.
In contrast with England, the magistrates played only a relatively minor role in local government (Page 1983:42).
Traditional local government arrangements came under increasing pressure from the continuing industrialisation that gathered momentum from the middle of the eighteenth century.
People began to move from rural areas into the new industrial towns.
Living conditions in the countryside had never approached the Arcadian well-being implied in romantic notions of sturdy peasants following the plough.
The cottages were small and damp, with earth floors and none of the cooking or sanitary arrangements that make for domestic comfort.
Nevertheless, these conditions did not produce the consequences that became apparent in the industrial towns.
The reasons have been strikingly depicted by Cole and Postgate (1961:306): The appalling sanitary conditions were accompanied by an increase in destitution and pauperism as people left the countryside, or were forced to leave by the Enclosure Acts, and sought jobs in the manufacturing towns.
Crime, and even sedition, festered in the crowded streets.
These evils in the Webbs' view ‘completely undermined the old principles of government inherited from time immemorial and embodied in local custom, the Common Law and the Tudor and Stuart legislation’(Webb and Webb 1963:91).
The immediate response was to establish new types of local authorities for specific purposes.
These ad hoc bodies, as they are frequently described, were created by local or private Acts of Parliament, the scope of which is limited to the locality or interests concerned.
This method avoids the full demands upon parliamentary time that is made by the better known procedure for considering general, or public, legislation.
The private Acts of Parliament affecting local authorities were numbered in thousands.
They included provisions to establish ‘some 1, 100 turnpike trusts, over 100 poor law boards, and some 300 boards of improvement commissioners’(Keith-Lucas 1980: 108).
The improvement commissioners were given powers which varied in every Act.
In addition to paving, cleansing, lighting the streets and providing watchmen, they might be empowered to deal with a variety of nuisances.
These included, in particular instances, the muzzling of bulldogs, the prevention of impropriety on public beaches and early attempts at smoke abatement (Keith-Lucas 1980): 115).
Changes in the social environment were not the only consequences of the Industrial Revolution to have importance for the development of local government.
There were also changes in the social and political structure that were not accommodated in existing local government institutions.
The new manufacturing towns were growing around collections of villages in the north of England far removed from the privileges of the chartered municipal corporations.
Growing cities were governed for some local government purposes by the county magistrates: an indignity that the prosperous entrepreneurs resented.
The manufacturers found themselves ‘excluded alike from the County Commission of the Peace and the Municipal Corporation’, and from ‘this essentially ‘caste’ struggle between the Tory squires and the radical manufacturers’(Webb and Webb 1963:93) there emerged not only the widening of the parliamentary franchise but also the pressure for change in the urban areas.
One of the first decisions of the reformed Parliament elected in 1833 was to appoint a Royal Commission staffed ‘by eager young intellectuals of Whig opinions’ to inquire into the municipal corporations (Webb and Webb 1963: 141).
The consequent Municipal Corporations Act 1835, gave the existing boroughs a new constitution based upon an elected council  (Redlich and Hirst 1958: 116ff).
The larger unincorporated industrial towns could petition for incorporation under this Act and many did so over the following years.
Although the county areas remained unreformed until the end of the nineteenth century, the modern system of local government really begins with the creation of the municipal corporations in 1835.
Local government is thus clearly intertwined with the growth of the towns.
The middle years of the nineteenth century witnessed a continued preoccupation with the  consequences of urbanisation.
Measures concerned with the relief of destitution, public health, sanitation, housing, highways, public order and eventually education were provided through the reforming social legislation of the period.
In some cases responsibility was entrusted to the municipal boroughs or the existing county institutions or parishes.
but there was also a continuous proliferation of ah hoc bodies, Many of these bodies had the right to levy a tax.
Their boundaries might overlap; or leave some areas in a curious limbo unattached to any part of the institutional structure.
There were, for example, settlements claiming to be ‘extra-parochial’ and thus outside the jurisdiction of local Poor Law Boards of Guardians (Lipman 1949:69ff).
Even after legislative efforts to remove some of the anomalies, the complexity of the system was apparent in the number of authorities existing at a local level.
Lipman gives figures for each of the main classes of local government existing in England and Wales in 1870.
They included some 3,000 authorities at town, district or county level, and nearly 25,000 smaller authorities such as parishes and school boards (Lipman 1949: /2 — 3).
It was no wonder that the position was described in the House of Commons in 1871 as ‘a chaos as regards authorities, a chaos as regards rates, and a worse chaos than all as regards areas’(quoted in Thornhill 1971:49).
THE ACTS OF 1888 AND 1894
The confusion of local authorities provided the need for a reorganisation of the structure of local government: the occasion was once more the aftermath of parliamentary reform.
The Great Reform Act of 1832 had been followed by the Municipal Corporations Act 1835; the extensions of the franchise in 1867 and 1894 were accompanied by further discussions of local government reform.
The 1884 Act, which brought a wider suffrage to the countryside, was particularly significant as it was in the counties that local government retained its unreformed structure.
The municipal corporations had ‘shown such vigour and enterprise in the use of their new powers’(Redlich and Hirst 1958:201) that the benefits of representative democracy were to be brought to the rural areas.
The political initiative was again taken by the radicals: on this occasion the Liberal Unionists led by Joseph Chamberlain, upon whose support the  Conservative government of Lord Salisbury depended (Redlich and Hirst 1958; Dunbabin 1963).
The Local Government Bill when introduced to Parliament contained six principal features which may be summarised from Redlich and Hirst (1958:202 — 3) as follows:
1.
The transfer of the administrative powers and duties of the Justices of the Peace to the county council;
2.
The division of the county into electoral districts of equal size within which each ratepayer had one vote — voting to be by ballot;
3.
London, with the exception of the City of London, to become an administrative county;
4.
Within county areas, urban and rural districts to be created;
5.
The transfer of certain functions of administrative control from central departments of government to the county councils — decentralisation;
6.
A new method of licensing public houses.
The debates that accompanied the passage of this Bill through Parliament reflected two themes which constantly recur in discussions about local government reorganisation.
first, the relationship between local democracy and central government; and second, the relationship between the larger towns and cities and the surrounding county areas.
The impetus for the Bill, as we have seen, came from two sources: first the need to deal with the growing mass of social legislation and the proliferation of agencies responsible for its administration; and second, the belief in popular democracy.
Thus, the arguments from efficiency and democracy were joined in the proposals contained in the Bill; but they were not held by all the protagonists in equal measure.
The intention of the government, as remembered in evidence to the Royal Commission on Local Government in 1925, was ‘to set up in nearly every County a Local Authority which he called a provincial Parliament’(quoted in Hampton 1966:463).
The provincial parliament would relieve the central government in Westminster and Whitehall of much of the detail associated with the growth of the interventionist state.
This dream of decentralisation as a means to administrative efficiency continues to the present day, but it always wakes to the reality of Political control.
The extension of the suffrage for parliamentary elections meant that working-class voters had to be accommodated within the ‘pale of the constitution’ in Gladstone's well-known phrase: the extension of this principle to local elections raised the possibility of working-class control in some councils.
This was the real fear behind the arguments about the declining calibre of the new county councillors compared with that of the magistrates of Quarter Sessions (Dunbabin 1965; Dearlove 1979:Ch. 4): ‘democratic alterations were widely believed to be dangerous, and expected to lead to extravagance, inefficiency, or even rapacity and disorder’(Dunbabin 1963:227).
for similar reasons the House of Lords had insisted  on the introduction of aldermen to the councils of the municipal boroughs established by the 1835 Act.
Aldermen were indirectly elected by the councillors for a six-year term and comprised one-quarter of the total council membership.
The intention was to add ‘continuity or stability’ to the council (Redlich and Hirst 1958:132).
The aldermanic principle was carried into the new county councils, and there were other indications that power would not easily be dispersed: ‘the provisions for decentralisation…were whittled away, and in the end very little was left of the grand scheme of devolution’(Redlich and Hirst 1958:207).
There was hesitation, too, in providing for decentralisation within the counties.
The proposals for district councils within the counties ‘seemed to be premature’(Redlich and Hirst 1958:207).
They were withdrawn at that time but enacted in 1894 along with provisions ‘to introduce local self-government into rural parishes’(Redlich and Hirst 1958:216).
The other major change which developed as the Bill Passed through Parliament related to the position of the towns and cities within county areas.
The government had recognised that the largest of these had a claim to continued autonomy and proposed to exclude ten of them from the jurisdiction of their surrounding counties.
They were to become boroughs with the status of counties — or county boroughs.
Following parliamentary pressure, the population which would attract this privileged status was reduced to 50,000 to allow for the claims both of the boroughs with ancient histories and the growing manufacturing towns.
By the time the Bill was enacted sixty-one boroughs — including a number which had a population below 50,000 — had received county status.
The exception had become the rule; nearly half the counties had lost their largest urban centres; the division between rural and urban local government had hardened in a form which caused controversy for nearly a century, and which is still reflected in the current structure (Hampton 1966:464 — 5).
The structure of local government existing immediately before the changes in the 1960s and 1970s was, therefore, largely settled by the end of the nineteenth century.
The system was different in London from the rest of England and Wales, and differed again in Scotland and, of course, in Northern Ireland.
ENGLAND AND WALES
England and Wales were divided into counties each of which contained a number of districts variously known as municipal, or non-county, boroughs, urban districts or rural districts depending on a combination of size, type of area, and historical circumstances.
The rural districts were further divided into parishes.
The main services provided by local government were divided between the counties and the districts with the parish councils, where they existed, looking after footpaths, parish halls and similar ‘parochial’ matters.
Completely outside this county structure were  the county boroughs in cities and larger towns.
The county boroughs were responsible for all local government services within their boundaries.
In London, the 1888 Act had created the London County Council (LCC) as an administrative county comprising Parts of Middlesex, Surrey and Kent.
The picture was completed in 1899 by the creation of twenty-eight London boroughs within the LCC area.
The City of London itself, the square mile comprising the financial and commercial heart of the capital, retained its ancient privileges and independence.
SCOTLAND
Developments in Scotland followed a rather different pattern from that of England and Wales.
The Royal Burghs (Scotland) Act 1833, established elected burgh councils, thus anticipating the 1835 Act in England and Wales.
Not all Scottish burghs were covered by the 1833 Act, but ‘it was open to any community of 2,000 or more inhabitants to apply for a charter’(Keating and Midwinter 1983:95).
In 1889, the counties were given additional responsibilities and subsequently the four largest cities became counties of cities — the equivalent of the English county boroughs.
There was no equivalent of the 1894 legislation that created the districts in England and Wales.
further major change awaited the Local Government (Scotland) Act 1929.
This Act ‘created a local government system that persisted for 45 years, until reorganisation in 1975’(Page 1983:43).
There were ‘five kinds of local authority, each with its elected council: counties of cities (4); large burghs (21); small burghs (176); counties (33); districts (196) ' (Wheatley 1969:26).
The large burghs retained more functions than the small which had given up ‘most of their important functions to the surrounding county council’(Wheatley 1969:25).
The districts existing in the rural areas following 1929 were not as powerful as their English counterparts.
They were concerned with only limits amenity services unless the county council delegated something more substantial.
The parishes, for local government purposes, were abolished in 1929.
IRELAND
The origins of Irish local government echo the history of the three other countries of the United Kingdom.
Some elements may be traced to medieval times or even earlier, but in the main local government is a product of nineteenth-century urbanisation.
In Ireland, however, the position has been complicated by the failure of the attempted union with Britain.
The structure of Irish local government, in common with all Irish politics, must be considered against the backcloth of continuous struggle between Unionists and Nationalists.
Municipal reform came later in Ireland than in either England or Scotland; and when the Act was passed in 1840, the new councils were given more restricted powers (Roche 1982:33 — 4).
Similarly, major reforms were not enacted until the Local Government (Ireland) Act in 1898.
The delay from the earlier English legislation was due to‘unionist fears of nationalist ambitions and spendthrift councils’(Roche 1982:45).
The Act introduced county councils, county boroughs and county districts on the English pattern (Rowat 1980:289).
Parish councils were not created.
When Ireland was divided under the Government of Ireland Act 1920, control of local government in the six counties of the north was given to the Stormont government in Belfast.
The Nationalists held majorities on some local bodies which led the Unionist majority in the province to disband several councils and to withdraw the system of voting by proportional representation that had been introduced in 1919.
The systematic manipulation of the franchise and local authority boundaries continued as the Unionists used their control of local government as a source of patronage.
Equal adult suffrage was not conceded in local government in Northern Ireland until 1969 (Arthur 1980:108).
THE EARLY YEARS OF THE MODERN SYSTEM
The division between counties and county boroughs established in England and Wales in 1888 did not provide a settled and agreed pattern for the future.
The urban areas continued to grow in population and as they did so they claimed an improvement in their status within the local government structure.
By 1922 the original sixty-one county boroughs ‘had increased to 82 and, by new creations and extensions, about 350,000 acres, with a population of 3 million people, had been lopped off the counties and incorporated into the county boroughs’(Keith-Lucas and Richards 1978: 199).
The counties were always liable as they grew, therefore, to lose their most populous and most highly rated areas to new or expanded county boroughs.
A similar, if less dramatic, process ‘was taking place at a lower level; new urban districts were being carved out of the rural districts’(Keith-Lucas and Richards 1978:200).
Dissatisfaction with this position led to the establishment of a Royal Commission in 1923 and after it reported in 1925 it was made more difficult to achieve county borough status.
Doncaster, in 1927, became the last new creation until further measures of reorganisation in some major urban areas began in the late 1950s.
In 1929 legislation provided for each county council to review the boundaries of its districts every ten years (Keith-Lucas and Richards 1978:202).
For thirty years the structure of local government in England and Wales remained untouched.
There were significant changes in the services  provided, but these are more properly discussed in Chapter 4.
The lack of change in the structure did not imply satisfaction.
The disputes between the counties and county boroughs continued as the population began to move out of the industrial cities into surrounding suburban estates or commuter villages in county areas.
The ebbs and flows of population movement could not be matched by changes in a local government structure which had become fixed in the pattern established in the nineteenth century.
There were constant discussions, and some attempts to produce new proposals, but all foundered upon the entrenched conservatism of the existing authorities with respect to their boundaries.
There was also the underlying awareness of senior politicians that changes in local government boundaries might have unpredictable effects on parliamentary worth taking.
THE REORGANISATION YEARS
Every aspect of local government in Britain was placed under scrutiny, and many changes were made, in the two decades following 1960.
The territorial structure, the distribution of responsibilities, the internal organisation and the system of finance were each examined.
The proposals that emerged were different for London, the rest of England, Wales and Scotland: to say nothing of the difficult position which developed in Northern Ireland.
The amount of detail facing the student is immense.
We will continue to concentrate on the structure leaving the other matters to later chapters, but a few general remarks may help to clear the ground before the discussions over boundaries are outlined.
The general analysis of the need for local government reorganisation was presented in straightforward terms relating to changes in the socio-economic geography of the country.
The growth of suburbia and the use of the motor car, it was argued, were making the old boundaries irrelevant for planning Purposes and a cause of friction between existing local authorities.
In addition, many of the authorities were considered too small for existing or possible future purposes.
These inadequacies of structure in turn were thought to have a bad effect on the efficient delivery of local government services, and on the ability of citizens to understand the role of local democracy.
This analysis was presented very clearly in the Report of the Royal Commission on Local Government in England (Redcliffe-Maud 1969:Ch. 3), but it is there to a greater or lesser extent in all the discussions of the period (cf.
Wheatley 1969).
Beyond this analysis there were more complex considerations.
There was a concern in many quarters that local authorities should be controlled by officers and councillors more in tune with the needs and methods of  local industry and commerce.
There was also an interest in integrating local authorities more closely with the developing machinery for economic management at both a regional and a national level.
These aims required larger local authorities irrespective of the more usual arguments advanced in favour of reorganisation (Dearlove 1979).
Support for these generalisations will be given as we proceed, but we should be aware that descriptions of institutional change need to be understood in the light of political and theoretical considerations.
LONDON
The restructuring of the British economy in the depression years between the two world wars was accompanied by a movement of population into the south-east of the country.
The population of Greater London increased by about 2 million (Cullingworth 1988:7) and many were housed in new developments beyond the existing LCC area.
As a result, Greater London extended into the surrounding counties and contained in total ‘117 separate organs, of which all but 4 are directly elected’(Robson 1948:165 — 6).
The Royal Commission on Local Government in Greater London was established in 1957 ‘to examine the present system and working of local government in the Greater London area; to recommend whether any, and if so what, changes in the local government structure and the distribution of local authority functions in the area, or in any part of it, would better secure effective and convenient local government…’
(Herbert 1960:1).
The reasons for the establishment of the Royal Commission lay in the continued growth of London and the confusion of local government institutions that had resulted.
The occasion for its appointment was the coming to office as Minister of Housing and Local Government of Mr Henry Brooke in January 1957.
Mr Brooke was a former leader of the Conservative opposition on the LCC and he was receptive to the advice given by his civil servants that an examination of London government was necessary.
The decision was strongly opposed by the Labour Party who suspected the Conservative minister of being more concerned to destroy the Labour-controlled LCC than to reform local government.
A later assessment of the decision found no evidence to support these suspicions (Rhodes 1970:233 — 5).
The Royal Commission recommended the creation of a Greater London authority extending over an area with a population of some 8.5 million — roughly double the population of the LCC area.
Within this area they recommended fifty-two London boroughs with populations ranging from about 100,000 to 250,000.
The exception was the City of London with a population of less than 5,000 (Herbert 1960:233 — 6).
The proposals of the Herbert Commission were opposed by groups other than the Labour Party.
first, the existing local authorities argued for the retention of the status quo; second, some Conservative Members of  Parliament sought to retain the existing system as far as possible in such areas as Surrey; third, groups concerned with some services — particularly education — pointed out weaknesses in the proposals as far as their service was concerned (Rhodes 1970: 120).
The government's response was to introduce changes with respect to both areas and services in the Bill based on the Royal Commission Report.
first, some peripheral areas were excluded from the new Greater London area (see Map 2. 1); second, the number of boroughs was reduced to thirty-two (plus the City of London which received the responsibilities of a borough but retained its own status)(see Table 2. 1); third, education became the responsibility of a new ad hoc body in Inner London and the enlarged boroughs in Outer London.
The Bill was enacted in 1963 and came into effect in April 1965.
At the first elections, Labour gained a majority on the GLC and in twenty of the thirty-two London boroughs (Rhodes 1970:222).
Subsequently, the   GLC showed that it had indeed become more marginal than the previous LCC and control fluctuated between the Labour and Conservative parties.
The reorganisation of local government in London Provided the forerunner of the reorganisations in other parts of the country in the 1970s.
The nettle had been grasped: the sting had not proved unbearable.
But had the reorganisation in London achieved its objectives?
In a careful review of the first few years after reorganisation, a group of academics from the London School of Economics assessed the performance of the new London local authorities (Rhodes 1972).
In a final chapter the editor evaluated the experience against the objectives identified by the Herbert Royal Commission: ‘administrative efficiency and the health of representative government’(Rhodes 1972:457 — 8).
Rhodes suggested that the two-tier structure had been related to these two objectives.
The new strategic authority, the GLC, had been created to improve the efficiency of strategic planning whereas the boroughs were to maintain closer links between local government and citizens in the provision of more personal services.
Rhodes considered that there had been an improved performance in services which were the sole responsibility of either the GLC or the boroughs: but of those services which were shared ‘only the group of transportation functions seems to show any marked advantages; over both housing and planning there hang certain question marks’(Rhodes 1972:468).
As far as local democracy was concerned, no evidence was clearly discernible either for an improvement or for a deterioration.
The councillors were drawn heavily from people who had served on the previous local authorities: and most of the public remained ignorant and apathetic towards local government (Rhodes 1972:420 — 1).
During the 1980s, the government of London again became a major matter of political controversy.
The GLC, under Labour control, stretched its responsibilities in unexpected ways and pursued policies in conflict with the priorities of the Conservative government.
The GLC, together with the English Metropolitan County Councils, was abolished in 1986.
These developments are considered in more detail in the next chapter.
ENGLAND
The Royal Commission on Local Government in England established in 1966 was restricted in its terms of reference to provincial England.
London, as we have just seen, had recently been reorganised.
Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland were also treated separately.
Scotland had its own Royal Commission established in the same year; in Wales consultations had already begun leading to the appointment of a working party (Wood 1976: 119; Alexander 1928b:29); and Northern Ireland was still governed in these matters from Stormont.
Bruce Wood has written of the long- and short-term factors coinciding in 1966 which caused a Royal Commission to be appointed in this  controversial area.
The long-term reasons were the perceived weaknesses of the existing structure of local government in relation to socio-economic geography, size of authorities, and complex division of powers.
The short-term factors included the election in 1964 of a Labour government committed to an administrative reform of the institutions of government; the appointment of a reforming minister — R H S Crossman — to the Ministry of Housing and Local Government; and the support for the idea of reform that he received from his senior civil servants (Wood 1976: 176–7).
At first this support was for a cautious continuation of the patching of the existing system.
This had begun in 1958 when a Boundary Commission had been appointed to consider piecemeal structural reform in various parts of the country.
Crossman eventually became convinced of the need for more radical action: the Boundary Commission was dissolved and the Royal Commission appointed (Alexander 1982b:18 — 19).
The Royal Commission was chaired by Sir John Maud (he became Lord Redcliffe-Maud in 1967) who was already chairing a departmental committee on management in local government.
Of the other members, only two were completely new to the problems of local government structure.
The rest included such experienced practitioners as Dr A H Marshall, a former treasurer of the city of Coventry, and T Dan Smith, a former leader of the city council of Newcastle upon Tyne — as well as Dame Evelyn (Baroness from 1966) Sharp who had been Permanent Secretary at the Ministry of Housing and Local Government when Crossman arrived in 1964 (Wood 1976:40 — 1).
The membership also included Derek Senior, who had for many years been advocating a fundamental reorganisation of local government.
Lord Redcliffe-Maud considered that Senior was the only one of the eleven commissioners who had made his mind up before the first meeting of the Royal Commission (Wood 1976:8).
Certainly he was not convinced of the soundness of the Royal Commission's eventual recommendations and submitted a Memorandum of Dissent as long as the majority Report.
The Royal Commission began by analysing the need for change and the challenges that local authorities would face in the future (Redcliffe-Maud 1969:Vol. 1 Ch.
III).
Given the existing climate of optimism in Britain in the mid-1960s the challenges foreseen were those of growth.
The demographic trends indicated a growth in population of 30 per cent by the end of the century with a consequent substantial increase in the proportion of children.
Car ownership was expected to increase ‘at a very much faster rate than population’(Redcliffe-Maud 1969:Vol. 114).
finally, the Royal Commission foresaw a general demand for higher standards in local government services.
The expectations of growth were not fully realised.
The number of births soon began to fall dramatically — by the early 1980s it was only two-thirds of the figure reached twenty years earlier; car ownership did not increase at the expected rate — due in part to the sharp increase in Petrol prices in the early 1970s; the demand for higher standards conflicted from the mid-1970s with central government's  belief that local government expenditure needed to be curtailed in line with a monetarist approach to economic policy.
Such mistaken prognostications do not necessarily invalidate the Royal Commission's conclusions, but they warn of the difficulties facing any attempt to order human affairs for the future.
The Royal Commission did not believe that the existing local authorities were in a position to meet the challenges they had identified.
There were weaknesses in respect of boundaries, the administration of certain services, and the workings of local democracy (Redcliffe-Maud 1969:Vol. 1 25 — 31).
Each of these factors had two aspects (see fig. 2.1).
first, they deplored the separation of town and country which was reflected in the distinction between county boroughs and county councils, and in the existence of urban and rural districts in the county areas.
The resulting conflicts between county boroughs and county councils had ‘dominated the work of local government for many years past’(Redcliffe-Maud 1969:Vol. 1 26).
Second, the division of responsibility within the county areas was seen as a weakness; and many local authorities were seen as too small to accept the responsibilities appropriate to the needs of their areas.
There was also a great variation in the size of local authorities of the same status.
Counties ranged in population from about 2 million (Lancashire) to less that 30,000 (Rutland); county boroughs ranged from over 1 million (Birmingham) to 33,000 (Canterbury)— less than the minimum population stipulated in 1888.
Districts varied in population from over 120,000 to under 2,000, with one-third falling in the range between 10,000 and 20,000 (all figures from Redcliffe-Maud 1969:Vol. 1 Annex 4).
Third, Mere was the question of local democracy.
The Royal Commission considered that the ‘relationship between local authorities and the public is not satisfactory’(Redcliffe-Maud 1969:Vol. 128).
They drew attention to the difficulties of knowing which local authority was responsible for a particular service — especially in the county areas.
The inadequacies in the existing structure of local government also meant that central government needed to keep too close a watch on the provision of local services, thus reducing the scope for local decision-making.
The recommendations of the Royal Commission were based upon three premisses.
First, local authorities should be bigger and more uniform in size.
Second, they should be all-Purpose (unitary) in character.
Third, they should be based wherever possible on existing boundaries in order to maintain continuity and build upon traditional loyalties.
The proposals accepted by the majority as flowing from these principles provided for fifty-eight unitary authorities with populations increasing in a steady progression from 195,000 (Halifax) to 1,081,000 (Sheffield and South Yorkshire).
In three areas of the country the unitary principle was considered impractical because of the heavy concentrations of population within a continuous built-up area.
These were designated as metropolitan areas and were given a two-tier structure of metropolitan counties and districts.
The three areas comprised SELNEC (south-east Lancashire and north-east Cheshire) with a population of 3,232,000; the West Midlands (3,014,000); and Merseyside (2,063,000).
The smallest metropolitan county had, therefore, a population approximately double that of the largest unitary authority.
The twenty metropolitan districts range in population from 176,000 (Warrington) to 1,314,000 (Birmingham)(see fig. 2.2).
In addition to these main units of local government, the Royal Commission proposed both provincial and local councils.
The eight provincial councils were required to ‘settle the broad economic land use and investment framework for the planning and development policies of operational authorities’(Redcliffe-Maud 1969:Vol. 1 74).
They were to be indirectly elected from the main local authorities.
In this instance Greater London would have been included within a provincial area.
finally, local councils were to be formed for each former borough, urban district or parish council area in the new unitary authorities, and where wanted in the metropolitan areas.
They were to have parish council responsibilities.
The variation in size would have been enormous as the existing parish councils would have  been joined by such cities as Sheffield as ‘local councils’.
Neither the proposals for provinces nor for local councils were accepted by either the Labour or Conservative governments.
The proposals for provinces were referred to the newly established Royal Commission on the Constitution, while the proposals for local councils were thought to add too much extra work to the already formidable task of local government reorganisation.
Senior
Derek Senior accepted the analysis of the problems facing local government, indeed in some ways he could count it as his own, but he did not accept the possibility of effective unitary authorities.
He explained the difference in approach between himself and his colleagues in the following words: His approach, based on ‘the facts of social geography, the requirements of functional effectiveness and the conditions of democratic viability in relation to one another’(Senior 1969:5) led him to adopt a two-tier structure with 35 directly elected regional authorities and 148 district authorities.
In four areas local conditions made him favour a unitary approach and the same authority would, therefore, ‘exercise both regional and district responsibilities’(Senior 1969: 159).
Senior also differed from his colleagues with respect to the larger and smaller councils that would complement the local authorities providing the main services.
His five provincial councils were to be appointed rather than indirectly elected and concerned primarily with intergovernmental relations.
At a ‘grass-roots’ level he proposed a series of common councils without statutory duties that were similar in conception to those later established in Scotland.
WALES
Discussions of local government reorganisation in Wales were not conducted in an atmosphere of concern over population growth — quite the contrary.
The population was distributed in a very uneven pattern with the concentration in four county boroughs of the south providing a contrast to the scattered and declining population of north and mid-Wales: ‘six of the thirteen counties were experiencing falling populations and most of the others were only just holding their own’(Wood 1976: 117).
These circumstances led the Boundary Commission established in 1958 to recommend radical changes for Wales in 1962.
These would have extended the county boroughs of Cardiff and Newport; made minor  adjustments to the boundaries of Swansea; demoted Merthyr Tydfil to a non-county borough; and reduced the number of counties to seven.
Ministerial caution and the General Election of 1964 ensured that these proposals were not implemented.
The incoming Labour government created a separate Welsh Office with a Cabinet minister at its head in line with the long-standing Scottish Office.
One of the first actions of the new department was to begin consultations about local government reorganisation.
A working party consisting of senior civil servants and an academic political scientist was appointed.
These consultations resulted in a White Paper (Welsh Office 1967) completely at variance with the views developing in the English Royal Commission.
The three main county boroughs were to be retained and five counties were to replace the existing thirteen.
Within the counties 36 districts instead of 164 would form a second tier.
The White Paper thus retained both the separation of town and countryside and the two-tier system — both of which were criticised by Redcliffe-Maud.
Crossman ‘regarded the Welsh proposals as reactionary, inadequate and miserable’(Keith-Lucas and Richards 1978:218) and the Labour government began a fresh search for a solution more in keeping with the principles being adopted in England.
The outcome was a proposal to create three unitary authorities in Glamorgan and Monmouthshire which would replace the proposed system of counties and county boroughs in those areas (Wood 1976: 124 — 5).
Another General Election in 1970 intervened before these proposals could be implemented.
SCOTLAND
The Royal Commission on Local Government in Scotland (Wheatley 1969) followed the same broad analysis of the ills of the system as their English counterparts, but their prescriptions were different and in some ways more radical.
Wheatley was heavily influenced by evidence given by the departments of the Scottish Office and particularly by the planners of the Scottish Development Department (Keating and Midwinter 1983:97; Page 1983:44).
The Royal Commission recommended a two-tier structure based on the concept of the enlarged city region.
The arguments were similar to those Senior had used in criticising the English unitary authorities: all-purpose authorities would reflect neither the administrative needs of the services, nor the boundaries of community feeling (Wheatley 1969: 164 — 5).
They recommended, therefore, seven regional authorities which would be responsible for most of the major local authority services and thirty-seven district authorities.
In addition they recommended the creation of community councils ‘to express the voice of a neighbourhood’(Wheatley 1969:206).
Community councils would have no statutory functions.
Once again the correspondence with Senior's views is clear.
NORTHERN IRELAND
The population of Northern Ireland is about 1.5 million which is less than the larger units of local government in England or the Strathclyde region in Scotland.
Together with the political background in the province, this smallness of scale has complicated discussions of local government reorganisation.
First, there has always been the option of providing local services directly from Stormont or some other provincial agency.
Second, any change in the existing structure might affect the distribution of power between the two rival communities.
When discussions on reorganisation began in the mid-1960s both these considerations were present.
The proposals for ‘a simplified, single-tier, strong local government system with a wide range of powers based on twelve to eighteen ‘area councils’(Arthur 1980:97) were strongly opposed by local interests who wished to retain their sectarian control in the existing small local authorities.
When the disturbances began with a fresh fury in 1969, the Unionist domination of local government was a focal point for discontent.
The allocation of public authority housing produced a ‘patently sectarian decision’ which ‘ignited the powder-keg’(Roche 1982:290).
As part of the government's response to these disturbances, all housing responsibilities were removed from local authorities and a review body was established ‘with three Protestant and three Catholic members under the Chairmanship of Patrick Macrory’(Rowat 1980:296).
The Macrory review considered the existing proposals for reshaping local government in Northern Ireland but they were not limited to these in making their recommendations.
They looked at both the Redcliffe-Maud and Wheatley approaches and concluded that the principles of the latter ‘were more appropriate to the circumstances of Northern Ireland’(Macrory 1970:24).
When the review was completed in 1970, Macrory recommended the creation of twenty-six district councils to provide mainly environmental health, cleansing, recreational and other services able to operate on a similar small scale.
The major services of local government, including child care, education, planning and roads, were to become the responsibility of the appropriate departments of the Stormont government.
In effect this produced a two-tier structure based on the Wheatley approach of regions and districts with Stormont acting as a ‘region’.
Of course, only the district councils would normally be thought of as ‘local government’.
The Macrory proposals also received ‘a rough ride’(Arthur 1980:98) but they nevertheless formed the basis of the Local Government (NI) Act 1972.
CONCLUSION
By 1970 proposals for reorganising the structure of local government had been suggested for every part of the United Kingdom; but only in London  had the changes been introduced.
It is a good year, therefore, at which to take stock of the various proposals and identify a number of common themes.
First, there was a movement towards larger units of local government.
The small units based upon traditional settlements or rural areas were to be replaced by wider areas with larger populations.
Second, there was a general acceptance of the need for a multi-tier structure if the demands of democracy were to be reconciled with the administrative or functional need for larger units.
The recommendations of the Redcliffe-Maud Commission were the major exception to this generalisation.
They favoured unitary authorities for most of England though, as we shall explain in the next chapter, this recommendation was never implemented.
Even in this case, Redcliffe-Maud recommended a two-tier structure in the three major conurbations outside London.
The population of these three conurbations was over 8 million which when added to a similar population in London meant that approximately one-third of the population of England would have been within areas covered by a two-tier structure of local government.
The special pressures and problems of the major urban areas form the third common theme to emerge.
London was the subject of a separate Royal Commission.
In the other areas the larger cities and conurbations proved difficult to incorporate in a wider uniform pattern.
The three metropolitan areas in England and the county boroughs of South Wales were exceptions to the general recommendations for those two countries.
In Scotland the size of the recommended region centred on Glasgow caused considerable controversy.
These three themes of scale, single versus multi-tier, and the special problems of the conurbations will recur both in the following chapter and when we discuss the services provided by local government in more detail in Chapter 4.
Chapter three
THE STRUCTURE OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT: 1970 TO THE PRESENT
The previous chapter illustrated both the complexity of the development of the present structures of local government in the United Kingdom and the common trends which emerged during the reorganisation years.
In this chapter we shall outline the present position in each country and consider the response to the reorganisation of the early 1970s. first, however, we need to consider further the principles which informed the debates about local government structure.
The government White Paper issued as a prelude to the reorganisation of local government in England outlined the aims which a new system should incorporate: At the start of the next paragraph the White Paper summed up the problems inherent in this approach with a statement of the classic political dilemma: ‘Practical realities prevent all these aims being fully achieved together’(DOE 1971:6).
The boundaries suggested by history and tradition, for example, while appearing sensible to the electors, might bear little relationship to the patterns of employment or shopping that were appropriate to officers preparing a transportation system.
Nor is the phrase ‘recognisable community’ capable of a precise meaning.
Research conducted for both the Redcliffe-Maud and Wheatley Commissions indicated that people recognised extremely localised communities as a basis for their social life.
SucH communities might provide a basis for a neighbourhood approach to management, or for some development of the parish council concept (Boaden et al .
1982:Ch. 3), but there was no possibility of using them as the basis for a reorganised local government structure.
The conflicting demands of efficient service provision, democratic involvement, and local historical or community traditions led to different proposals for dealing with the perceived shortcomings of the existing local government system.
In part these various proposals reflected the circumstances of the areas concerned, whether they were densely or sparsely populated for instance; but in part they represented the different emphasis in the proposals on the objectives being pursued.
Senior, for example, was primarily concerned with the socio-geographical areas that would provide the best focus for the services needed by city regions.
The Redcliffe-Maud Commission on the other hand — and later the Conservative government — placed more weight on the importance of established boundaries.
After the reorganisations had been completed there were six main local government systems in the United Kingdom: three in England, together with separate approaches in Wales, Scotland and Northern Ireland.
The structure adopted in London in 1965 has been described in the previous chapter.
The changes introduced in other areas, together with the subsequent abolition of the GLC and MCCs, will be discussed below.
ENGLAND
The Labour ministers who received the Redcliffe-Maud Report were willing to accept the recommendations in principle and issued a White Paper in February 1970 outlining their proposals.
The most important variation from Redcliffe-Maud as far as the structure of local government was concerned was the addition of two further metropolitan areas.
These comprised the West Yorkshire area and an area based on South Hampshire and the Isle of Wight.
In both cases the reasons advanced were concerned with the need for co-ordinating planning policies in these urbanised areas (MLG 1970: 12 — 13).
The government was defeated in the General Election of June 1970 before further progress could be made on proposals which would have added another 3.3 million people to those already to be covered by two-tier local government.
With these additions the unitary principle, supposedly at the heart of the Redcliffe-Maud recommendations, had been rejected for nearly 20 million people out of England's population of approximately 45 million.
The incoming Conservative government announced a reopening of consultations on local government reorganisation.
The proposals in the Labour White Paper were rejected as the Conservatives intended to ‘provide for the existence of a two-tier structure’(Conservative election manifesto quoted in Wood 1976: 100).
A White Paper outlined their proposals in February 1971 and legislation followed in the parliamentary session of 1971 — 72; but before looking in detail at the consequent Local Government Act 1972, a few general considerations need to be discussed.
First, there is the question of how far the Conservative proposals which form the basis of the present structure were consistent with the Redcliffe-Maud analysis.
The central concept of the unitary authority had been rejected, but in other respects Wood suggests that there was more consistency (Wood 1976:104 — 5).
The general diagnosis of the weaknesses of the existing structure followed the usual pattern of a criticism of small outdated local authorities: ‘There are too many authorities and many of them are too small…’
(DOE 1971:6).
The size of population accepted as necessary to fulfil the functions of the new major authorities was within the range 250,000 to 1 million.
Also the necessity for a separate structure for local government in some of the conurbations was accepted, and the Conservative White Paper criticised ‘the artificial separation of big towns from their surrounding hinter-lands’(DOE 1971:6).
Even allowing for the similarities in language in these respects, however, the Conservative proposals sometimes had a different content from the Redcliffe-Maud approach.
The Conservatives ‘were unwilling to interfere any more than was absolutely necessary with existing county boundaries’(Alexander 1982b:38).
This attachment to the historical counties led to tighter boundaries for the metropolitan areas and to the maintenance of some boundaries which separated major urban centres from their surrounding region.
In these cases Wood concluded that ‘the ‘shire county’ principle overrode that of the ending of the urban-rural dichotomy’(Wood 1976: 106; cf.
Brand 1974:80).
There were also important differences in the allocation of services to the different tiers but these will be considered in Chapter 4.
Second, there is the question of the parliamentary process through which the Bill became an Act.
In his careful assessment of this process, Wood shows how the existing authorities kept up their Pressure for local interests — essentially for as much of the existing structure as they could maintain intact — until the last possible moment for amendments (Wood 1976:Ch.
VI).
The government responded to this pressure: the Bill differed in some respects from the White Paper, and the Bill itself was constantly amended as it went through Parliament.
A major amendment was accepted by the government even at the report stage in the House of Lords' consideration of the Bill: the Isle of Wight was separated from Hampshire and retained a separate county council (Wood 1976:151).
The government showed itself willing to accept a large number of amendments of detail and a few  of substance affecting boundaries as long as they could maintain the principle of a two-tier structure.
Third, it is instructive to consider how far the final form of local government reorganisation in England was affected by party politics.
There are several aspects to this question.
In the first place, there was undoubtedly a major difference of approach between the Labour and Conservative governments.
Labour favoured a unitary system based on the experience of the county boroughs while the Conservatives preferred a two-tier structure based on the existing counties.
The result of the parliamentary election of 1970 was, therefore, crucial to the final outcome.
We need to consider, however, whether the different approaches of the two parties were based on a rational assessment of party advantage.
Here the evidence is less conclusive.
The Labour proposals to extend urban boundaries to take in surrounding suburban and rural areas in a pattern of unitary authorities threatened the traditional Labour dominance in the major cities in the non-metropolitan areas.
On the other hand, the Conservative proposals, while abolishing the Labour strongholds in the county boroughs, retained districts based on towns and cities that Labour could be expected to control — and created large metropolitan counties which Labour could dominate in favourable years.
Thus the proportion of the population, as opposed to the number of local authorities, under Labour control might be substantial.
following the elections in the early 1980s Labour controlled all six metropolitan counties together with the GLC.
The party considerations, in this as in so many other aspects of local government reorganisation, seemed to have been based more on an assessment of the past rather than on considerations for the future.
The Labour Party was influenced by the county boroughs and the Conservatives by the counties because that was where their current political strength rested in local government.
The prospect for the future authorities was less carefully examined.
Local government reorganisation was also extremely unpopular among people concerned with the smaller local authorities which would be abolished.
Many of these people were conservative by either party or inclination — or both.
The Conservatives faced strong opposition within their own ranks to any major changes in boundaries: they could only contain this opposition by their readiness to accept detailed amendments throughout the process.
THE 1972 ACT
The Local Government ACT 1972 provided for a two-tier structure throughout England with the addition in some places of a third tier of Parish councils.
Subsequent legislation abolished the metropolitan counties (together with the Greater London Council).
These changes will be discussed at the end of the section.
The two-tier principle was strictly adhered to in the 1972 Act even when there seemed little justification for it in  particular circumstances.
In the most extreme case, the county of the Isle of Wight was divided into two districts even though this created three local authorities for a population of 100,000 (Alexander 1982a:26 — 7).
The two tiers are not intended to exist in a hierarchical relationship to each other.
Each tier has its separate responsibilities.
There is no provision for a regional or provincial level of local government.
The distinction between the metropolitan and non-metropolitan areas lay in the distribution of services between the counties and their districts.
In metropolitan areas the districts are responsible for education, social services and libraries.
In non-metropolitan areas these responsibilities are retained by the county.
This distinction is linked to the different population size of the various units of local government and it will be discussed further in Chapter 4. for the present we may note the importance of the distinction for the status of local authorities.
The tier of local government which accepts responsibility for the major spending departments of education and social services becomes dominant in financial terms and consequently in status.
As early as 1976, the Layfield Committee was distinguishing not between counties and districts, but between ‘major spending authorities’ and the rest in their discussions of the possible introduction of a local income tax (Layfield 1976:196).
The 1972 Act created, therefore, four rather than two types of local authority in England.
These can be thought of as two separate systems with the non-metropolitan counties and metropolitan districts forming the core authorities (see fig. 3.1) The first local councils under the 1972 Act were elected in 1973 and after a year of preparation, took office formally on the first day of April 1974.
Metropolitan counties
Six metropolitan counties were created, comprising Tyne and Wear, Merseyside, Greater Manchester, West Yorkshire, South Yorkshire and the West Midlands (Table 3. 1).
The six counties varied considerably in character: four were based almost exclusively on continuous urban areas — the original meaning of conurbation — but the two in Yorkshire included stretches of rural countryside.
South Yorkshire in particular did not conform to the normal definition of a conurbation.
The county comprised four districts based on city regions surrounding the former county boroughs of Sheffield, Barnsley, Doncaster and Rotherham.
Only  the urban areas of Sheffield and Rotherham have contiguous boundaries and Doncaster is separate in many ways from the Sheffield urban influence.
‘Shire’ counties
The non-metropolitan counties, or ‘shire’ counties as they have come to be called, are substantial local authorities in terms of both area and population (see Map 3.1 and Table 3.2).
They comprise most of the traditional names from English history though there are three newcomers: Humberside, Avon and Cleveland.
In the early 1970s the new counties of Humberside and Avon were expected to grow rapidly as the population of the country expanded.
feasibility studies which examined the possibilities of growth, including the development of large new cities in the two areas, were published by the Central Unit for Environmental Planning in 1969 (Humberside) and 1971 (Severnside)(Cherry 1974: 197).
The decline in the birth-rate from the mid-1960s and the developing economic recession made many of these plans redundant, but the counties of Humberside and Avon remain.
The other new county, Cleveland, was also created to deal with large-scale planning developments, though in this case there was no thought of a major population expansion.
The area had already been reorganised in 1968 following a report from the Local Government Boundary Commission (LGBC).
Middlesbrough had been joined with five neighbouring local authorities to form the county borough of Teesside.
The new county borough proved to be one of the shortest-lived local authorities in local government history.
Six years after its creation it was transformed into the county of Cleveland by the addition of Hartlepool and other parts of south-east Durham and a small area of north-east Yorkshire
Metropolitan districts
The metropolitan counties were divided into metropolitan districts.
The number varied according to the population size and nature of the area (see Table 3. 1), from four in South Yorkshire to ten in Greater Manchester.
The typical population of a metropolitan district is about 250,000 though some based on the larger cities reach 500,000.
Outside these limits, Birmingham is exceptional in having a population of about 1 million and a few districts have populations below 200,000.
These smaller districts have populations well below those thought necessary by Redcliffe-Maud for the effective provision of some of the services allocated to them.
Only three of the thirty-six metropolitan districts do not include a former county borough within their boundaries.
The former county boroughs had preferred the unitary approach which would have made them the core of enlarged areas, but when a two-tier system was adopted it was obviously preferable from their point of view to obtain metropolitan district status and thus retain as many services as possible.
was large enough to dominate the merger.
These considerations affected the boundaries of the new districts.
There was also the undoubted administrative convenience of having the experience and structure of the former county boroughs to draw on when establishing departments in the new authorities: a district without this advantage would need to create departments from scratch amid the other upheavals of reorganisation.
‘Shire’ districts
The detailed arrangements for the non-metropolitan districts were not included in the 1972 Act but determined subsequently by the LGBC.
The original intention was to produce authorities within a population range of 75,000 to 100,000 with 40,000 as an absolute minimum (LGBC 1972:2).
In the event, ‘the effect of local pressure was to reduce the amount of change and produce rather more authorities’(Keith-Lucas and Richards 1978:229).
Of the 296 districts, 111 had a population below 75,000 and 14 were below 40,000 (LGBC 1972:9).
The new districts were very largely based on amalgamations of existing district authorities which in turn derived from the sanitary districts created in the mid-nineteenth century.
Parishes
For local government purposes the parish had only existed within the boundaries of the former rural district councils.
The 1972 Act enabled these parishes to continue into the new system and also made provision for some small former boroughs or urban districts to continue with parish status.
They could adopt the title of a town if they wished (LGBC 1973).
As town councils may elect a mayor there is the curious anomaly of local town mayors existing within shire districts headed by a chairperson.
There are no parish or town councils within London or the major urban centres of other large cities though some exist within the more rural parts of metropolitan districts.
Titles and dignities
In legal terms local government in England outside London is divided into areas known as counties and districts with parishes existing in certain circumstances.
None of the other titles such as‘borough’, ‘city’ or ‘town’convey any additional powers or responsibilities.
The Act allowed the retention of adoption of such titles simply as a further concession to local sentiment.
Similarly, the title of mayor or lord mayor where retained adds to the social status but not to the legal position of the person holding the chair of the council.
Such questions of status and local dignity are not unimportant.
When Liverpool City Council abolished the title of lord mayor in 1983 there was a ‘public outcry’(The Times 18.5.83), thus demonstrating once again a point made 100 years earlier in 1888: ‘that a sentimental grievance is by no means the least difficult to overcome’ when considering changes in local government (quoted in Hampton 1966:463).
THE ABOLITION Of THE GLC AND METROPOLITAN COUNTY COUNCILS
A Conservative government was re-elected in 1983 on a manifesto that included a commitment to abolish the GLC and the MCCs.
Legislation was introduced in the session 1984 — 85 and became effective in April 1986.
The government argued that local government reorganisations in the 1960s and 1970s were typical of ‘a time when resources seemed to be freely available…the heyday of a certain fashion for strategic planning, the confidence in which now appears exaggerated’(DOE 1983b:2).
According to this thesis, the distribution of responsibilities left the GLC and MCCs with too little to do, but with access to large rating resources: ‘This generates a natural search for a ‘strategic’ role which may have little basis in real needs' (DOE 1983b:3).
The ‘search’ for a ‘strategic’role was, of course, the main reason for the creation of the metropolitan authorities.
The proponents of unitary authorities in the Royal Commission on Local Government in England accepted a need for a wider authority for some services in the metropolitan areas and for an authority that could prepare a strategic plan for conurbations.
In this they were following the example of the reorganisation of London local government a decade earlier.
The Royal Commission's proposals for the conurbations survived the Conservative government's different attitude towards unitary local authorities and became part of an overall two-tier system.
The MCCs thus created differed in at least two respects from the Royal Commission's recommendations: first, the boundaries of the conurbations were much more tightly drawn; second, the number of metropolitan counties was increased from three to six.
The metropolitan areas (both GLC and MCCs) consisted of strong boroughs or districts and relatively weak strategic authorities when looked at in terms of the services provided.
The boroughs and districts were made responsible for high spending services such as education (except in inner London) and social services.
The GLC and MCCs were responsible for strategic planning, refuse disposal, transport, fire and police (outside London).
They shared some other responsibilities with the lower-tier authorities.
Both the police and transport were subject to special arrangements that differentiated their administration and policy control from the general procedures of local government.
Within their limited powers, the metropolitan authorities sponsored some important developments in their areas, but despite their achievements they occupied an uneasy position between powerful boroughs and districts and an emerging regional tier of special purpose authorities (Flynn et al .
1985).
The Royal Commission had recommended a regional tier as a necessary complement to a unitary system of local authorities.
The London boroughs and metropolitan districts closely resembled the unitary authorities but they operated in a quite different regional context from that intended by the Royal Commission.
The structure created in 1974  was supplemented by a increasing number of special purpose authorities (see Chapter 11).
These authorities accepted powers that strengthened local or regional elected authorities might have been expected to obtain.
The GLC and MCCs were thus weakened from the start and regarded as far too small for some purposes and too large for others.
The White Paper preceding the abolition of the GLC ad MCCs stated that on reorganisation the London boroughs and metropolitan district councils would ‘acquire responsibility, individually or collectively, for the functions currently exercised by the GLC and MCCs, with the exception of London Transport, flood protection in the London area [which went to the RWA]and a few minor aspects of other functions’(DOE 1983b:6).
Subsequently, the government responded to public pressure and provided for an elected single-purpose authority to take responsibility for the ILEA (see below).
Although the metropolitan district councils received additional powers under the legislation, the main services formerly provided by the MCCs, including police, fire and public transport, became the responsibility of joint boards comprising nominees from the district councils.
These services had accounted for approximately two-thirds of MCC expenditure (Coopers and Lybrand Associates 1984: 14).
The joint boards have precepting powers on the district councils.
As well as these precepting bodies there are numerous joint committees for other services where co-operation is needed over a wider area than the individual district.
The decision to abolish the GLC and MCCs was taken at a time of major political disagreements between the GLC, in particular, and the national government (Livingstone 1988).
The result was to leave London without an elected representative body for the first time in a hundred years, and all the metropolitan areas without an authority responsible for producing an overall strategic plan.
In addition, the various special purpose authorities and joint boards that took over many services in the metropolitan area added another dimension to the complexity of local government arrangements.
These points will be referred to again at appropriate places in later chapters.
ILEA
When the GLC was established, education became the responsibility of the Outer London boroughs and a specially constituted Inner London Education Authority.
The ILEA was a committee of the GLC consisting of councillors representing inner London constituencies plus thirteen members appointed by the twelve inner London boroughs and the City of London.
The ILEA covered the area of the former LCC and thus ensured a continuity going back to the establishment of the London School Board in 1870 (Maclure 1988: 110 — 11).
This continuity had not been maintained without a struggle, and once again when the GLC was abolished there were moves to distribute the responsibilities of the ILEA between the constituent boroughs.
At that time a determined campaign backed by parents and many MPs of all parties caused the  proposals to be dropped.
Instead, the ILEA became a directly elected, single-purpose authority.
The Conservatives remained dissatisfied with these arrangements and returned to the matter in their manifesto for the 1987 General Election.
They suggested that any inner London council so wishing should be enabled, with the Secretary of State's consent, to take responsibility for education.
Such a piecemeal dismemberment of an integrated service would obviously have caused difficulties for the whole of the area covered by the ILEA.
The proposals were heavily criticised and eventually, as a Bill legislating for the changes went through the House of Commons, the government bowed to their own back-benchers and produced an amendment introducing a total reorganisation (Maclure 1988: 109).
The Education Reform Act 1988 abolished the ILEA with effect from 1 April 1990 and transferred the responsibility for education to each of the thirteen inner London councils.
WALES
The 1972 Act that legislated for England also accomplished the reorganisation of local government in Wales.
The principles established in England were followed in the smaller country.
A two-tier structure of counties and districts was established: 8 counties were created from the existing 13 and 37 districts from the existing 164 (see Map 3.1).
There are, however, no metropolitan areas in Wales and three other differences from the position in England deserve some comment: the small population of many of the Welsh authorities; the exceptional dominance of Cardiff in South Glamorgan; and the role of community councils.
Much of Wales is sparsely populated.
Some of the counties, therefore, have very low populations despite covering a wide area.
Powys is the extreme example: with an area comparable to the larger English counties, it has a population smaller even than the Isle of Wight (Table 3.3).
The division of Glamorgan allowed each of the former county boroughs to be placed in a separate county though in terms of total area or population a unified Glamorgan would not be unusual in an English context.
The separation of South Glamorgan proved particularly controversial.
Introduced by the government for the first time in the Local Government Bill, the county consists of only two districts and is dominated by Cardiff which at the time contained ‘just about the only pocket of Conservative Party strength in south Wales’(Wond 1976: 127).
As a result of this circumstance, the creation of the separate county was described as a ‘gerrymander’ and was a source of bitterness in south Wales (Alexander 1982a:27).
Community councils
Community councils provide the Welsh equivalent of the English parish councils.
Richards suggests that ‘since the Anglican Church in Wales was disestablished in 1919, it is not fitting that a name associated with church organisation should be linked to a secular unit of local administration (Richards 1983:39).
The variation in name appears to be the major difference between the two types of minor authorities: the functions allocated to them are the same.
As the population of Wales is smaller and more dispersed than in England, the creation of community councils as successors to former boroughs and urban district councils was more widespread than the creation of successor parishes in England.
In neither country were these created in the larger urban areas, but in the principality this only meant a few heavily populated areas in south Wales.
The Welsh community councils should not be confused with the Scottish community councils (see below) which are quite different in character.
SCOTLAND
The proposals of the Wheatley Commission were substantially accepted by the government, but this did not ensure an easy passage into law.
Page considers: ‘There was little enthusiasm for the legislation among Members of Parliament, and substantial opposition from local councillors’(Page 1983:44).
In part this reflected the usual vested interests of existing local authorities, but there were also the special difficulties caused by an uneven distribution of population.
This uneven distribution produces anomalies far more obvious than those in England or even Wales (Alexander 1982a: 125 — 131).
The Bill contained some departures from the Wheatley  proposals and there were further amendments as it passed through Parliament.
The main effect of these changes was to create a number of new authorities and thus reduce their average size.
Two new regions were created in the Borders and Fife; sixteen new districts were formed; and three islands authorities were separated from the regional structure to become unitary authorities.
The government also allocated housing to the districts rather than to the regions.
THE 1973 ACT
The Local Government (Scotland) Act 1973 created nine regional councils, fifty-three district councils, and three islands councils (Map 3.2).
The Act also provided for the introduction of community councils as a vehicle for the expression of local opinion.
The Act took effect from May 1975.
Regions
The nine regions have widely differing populations and areas (Table 3.4).
The Wheatley Commission was concerned to establish regions that would conform to four criteria: they should be large enough to carry out their functions effectively; they should correspond with genuine communities; they should form distinctive parts of Scotland; and finally, there should be a ‘certain balance’ between the various regions (Wheatley 1969:176).
Geography and the distribution of population made the achievement of these aims difficult.
For the purpose of examination, Wheatley divided Scotland into five major parts: the Highlands, the North-east, the East (or Tayside), the South-east and the West.
Three main questions were then identified:
1.
Should the Highlands be treated as a single region, or divided?
2.
Should the Borders be treated as a region distinct from the rest of the South-east?
3.
Should the West be treated as a single region, or divided?
(Wheatley 1969: 176).
The answers Wheatley gave to the first two questions were in favour of retaining the larger unit, but in both cases the government reversed this recommendation in the final legislation.
The recommendation for the West was to divide it into three regions: South-west (Dumfries and Galloway); Central — based on the Falkirk-Stirling area; and the West or Clyde Valley (Strathclyde).
These recommendations were accepted by the government with only relatively small boundary changes.
The Wheatley Commission was not unanimous in recommending a single region for the Highlands and Islands.
Three commissioners entered notes of reservation recommending separate all-purpose island authorities.
They drew attention to the distances involved and the communication problem for islanders visiting the mainland.
Shetland, for example, is 338   kilometres (210 miles) north of Aberdeen and attendance at a mid-week meeting on the mainland could involve five days away from home for a councillor from the northern isles (Wheatley 1969:292).
The Orkneys and Shetland also have a long history of independence in local government terms and pride themselves on their Scandinavian roots and their distinctiveness from Scotland.
The 1973 Act followed the notes of reservation and the three island authorities were the only unitary local authorities created in Britain during the reorganisations of the 1970s.
The separation of the Borders and fife from the proposed South-east region was more controversial.
The Borders form a region with a population no larger than many English and some Scottish districts.
The removal of the south Fife coalfield from a Lothian region based on Edinburgh has been criticised on similar political grounds to the slicing of Glamorgan into three counties: it appears to derive from considerations of Conservative Party advantage.
But if political calculations did enter the minds of the Conservatives (Alexander 1982b:46) then they have been disappointed.
Labour continued to control Lothian Regional Council and engaged in substantial disagreements with Conservative governments.
The Borders also resisted Conservative attempts to gain control and Independent councillors retained their power (Keating and Midwinter 1983:109).
The size of the Strathclyde region has been a constant source of argument.
The Wheatley Commission was convinced ‘that the lack of a single unit for the entire Clyde Valley area is one of the greatest impediments to the economic and social regeneration of the west of Scotland’(Wheatley 1969: 186).
They refused, therefore, to consider separating the Glasgow  conurbation from the more distant parts of the region and the government accepted their opinion.
The result is a region that dwarfs all the others, containing about half the population of Scotland and bringing remote rural areas into association with the urban problems of Glasgow.
The region is often criticised for being bureaucratic and remote without too careful an analysis of these concepts (Page and Midwinter 1979); but one criticism must surely be accepted — the ‘certain balance’ that Wheatley advocated is scarcely obtained when one region outweighs the rest.
Districts
The districts are even more varied in size than the regions.
The largest, Glasgow, has a population of 765,951 (1981): several of the smaller districts have populations below 10,000.
The district of Glasgow therefore is larger than each of the regions other than Strathclyde.
Of the fifty-three are below 40,000 — many very much below.
Community councils
Parish councils for local government purposes were abolished in Scotland in 1929.
The 1973 Act provided for community councils to operate at a similar ‘grass-roots’ level, and in so doing introduced a new concept into British local government — a statutory body without statutory functions.
1 he Act states ‘…the general purpose of a community council shall be to ascertain, co-ordinate and express to the local authorities for its area, and to public authorities, the views of the community which it represents…and to take such action in the interests of that community as appears to it to be expedient and practicable’(Section 51(2)).
The councils are established in accordance with schemes drawn up by the district or island authorities and are partly funded by them, but the procedures are only operated where there is a clear local demand.
The schemes provide for 1,343 community councils to be established (McQueen, freeman 1978:2) of which approximately nine out of ten had been formed by mid-1978 (Masterson 1979:106).
The councils have ‘tackled a great variety of jobs: commenting on local plans, clearing up their area, dealing with traffic problems, organising carol services and other social events, protesting about bus routes and becoming involved in the many other neighbourhood activities so typical of residents' groups and parish pump politics’(Boaden et al .
1982:47).
NORTHERN IRELAND
The Local Government (NI) Act 1972 closely followed the recommendations of the Macrory Report, but this did not imply a consensus about  the merit of the proposals.
Like everything else in Northern Ireland, local government is evaluated in the context of a wider political controversy.
‘Among Catholics the response ranged from mild support to disinterest.
Local councils were to be made more democratic but less important’(Carroll and Carroll 1980:297).
Some Protestants opposed the weakening of the dominance that they had exercised in local government since partition.
The legislation was introduced in Stormont by the Unionist majority, but the provincial parliament was suspended in favour of direct rule before the process could be completed.
The British government then continued with the reorganisation.
Elections took place in May 1973 under a system of proportional representation and the new local authorities came into being.
Districts
In a formal sense, local government in Northern Ireland consists of twenty-six unitary district councils.
(Map 3.3).
Each of these is centred round a town and includes the adjacent rural areas.
The populations range   from 14,372 to 297,862 (Belfast), but only the latter exceeds 100,000.
The rest of the districts have populations between 20,000 and 80,000 (Table 3.5).
They are, therefore, very similar in size to many of the Scottish districts, but they are not responsible for as many services: housing, for example, a district function in the whole of Britain, is administered centrally in Northern Ireland.
Regional boards
The small size of the population of Northern Ireland, together with the political difficulties experienced by the province, have led to many services being administered at a provincial level.
These include education, personal health, welfare and child care, housing, libraries, planning, roads, water and sewage.
Since the suspension of Stormont these services are administered by the appropriate department of the Northern Ireland government.
Local government is associated with some of these services through a system of regional boards.
There are four regional Health and   Social Services Boards, and five Education and Libraries Boards.
These are ‘largely nominated but…about one-third of the members are district councillors’(Roche 1982:290).
DISCUSSION — SINGLE-TIER OR TWO-TIER
With the exception of the three islands' authorities in Scotland, the system of local government in Britain following reorganisation in the 1970s consisted of a two-tier system.
Even in Northern Ireland, the districts are best thought of as the lower tier in a system that simply lacks a democratically elected higher level of local government.
In this respect the United Kingdom was not unique.
Throughout the world, local government has been moving increasingly towards two-tier systems in recent years — often under pressure from the needs of metropolitan areas for overall planning agencies (Rowat 1980:1 — 3).
The abolition of the GLC and MCCs is contrary to this more usual trend, but the moves towards a two-tier structure are often accompanied by considerable and continuing controversy as the advantages and disadvantages of the single- and two-tier systems are discussed in the context of political advantage.
These questions will be elaborated as a prelude to a discussion of local government services in Chapter 4.
The advantages of a single-tier system are considerable.
They were put most clearly by the Redcliffe-Maud Commission which recommended, as we have seen, a system of unitary local authorities.
They based their case on grounds of both efficiency and democracy.: These advantages were obtained by many of the former county boroughs which Redcliffe-Maud considered to have ‘been the most effective local government unit we have known’(Redcliffe-Maud 1969:Vol 1 68).
The difficulty with a single-tier system is to arrive at areas large enough to obtain the benefits of unifying the provision of services requiring an extensive area for their efficient operation, yet small enough to form a have for local democratic involvement.
This problem is compounded in  metropolitan areas where socio-geographic boundaries may spread far beyond any normal understanding of ‘community’.
A further difficulty arises when considering the catchment areas required for different services.
Some, such as strategic planning or transportation, require far wider areas than others, such as housing or the Personal social services.
For these reasons, Senior opted for a two-tier system, and the Conservative government in the early 1970s also sought to marry the advantages of a quite different two-tier structure for the benefit of both efficiency (top tier) and democracy (lower tier).
The controversies that have since arisen are of threefold origin.
They are concerned, first, with the demoting of the former county boroughs and the consequent loss of the strengths that Redcliffe-Maud identified; second, with more general questions of relations between the two tiers; and third, with the party political considerations that cast shadows behind the curtain of official reports.
First, there is the problem of the former county boroughs.
Cities the size of Glasgow, Bristol and Hull are no longer responsible for education or social services.
They have the same responsibilities as the smallest district councils.
The large cities have not been happy with this position and various proposals have been made to meet their objections.
In Scotland the possibility of devolution has kept alive the thoughts of further changes in local government.
Both the Scottish Nationalists and the Liberals favour the transfer of some strategic local government functions ‘to a devolved Assembly, and the creation of a single-tier system of multi-purpose authorities’(Keating and Midwinter 1983: 101).
In non-metropolitan England, the nine largest former county boroughs, all with populations above 200,000, began ‘a campaign within two months of the new authorities taking over, to win back some of the powers they had lost to the counties’(Alexander 1982b:64).
The nine are: Bristol, Derby, Hull, Leicester, Nottingham, Plymouth, Portsmouth, Southampton and Stoke-on-Trent.
They expressed their ‘dissatisfaction…with the restricted powers available to them as a result of local government reorganisation.
These powers have been found to be completely inadequate to deal with the challenges and problems presented in complex urban situations’(quoted in Alexander 1982b:64).
The ‘big nine’ sought to regain some of the major services they had lost to the counties, but were not the only districts dissatisfied with the present position.
A further group of medium-sized districts sought less extensive changes in the allocation of responsibilities (Alexander 1982a:44).
Professor Stewart and his colleagues at the University of Birmingham identified a number of difficulties with these proposed changes, although with academic care they added the proviso: ‘to identify problems is not to draw a conclusion’(Stewart et al .
1978:1).
The study, commissioned by the Association of County Councils (ACC), discussed the implications of an allocation of responsibilities within a county that varies from district to district depending on its size.
For example, education or social services  might, under such a system, be a district responsibility in some Places and a county responsibility in others.
Though admirably flexible, this would lead to confusion in the financing, management and constitutional arrangements of the system as a whole.
The constitutional questions include the tricky decision as to which councillors could vote on which issues at county council meetings.
If they were restricted to those matters for which the county was responsible in their areas then this could lead to differing party majorities for different services.
On the other hand, to allow county councillors from the larger districts to vote in the county council on matters which were a district responsibility in their own areas would be deeply resented by the smaller districts.
Stewart et al .
concluded, ‘proposals for organic change cannot be regarded as a limited change…it introduced a fundamental change within the existing structures of local government’(Stewart et al .
1978:58).
The difficulties of co-ordinating the work of counties and districts, or regions and districts, has not been confined to questions of status relating to the former county boroughs.
The division of responsibilities between the two tiers means that some co-ordination is necessary if an effective service is to be provided.
There are also provisions in the legislation for one local authority to perform a service on behalf of another in order to prevent wasteful overlap in provision.
These ‘agency’ arrangements have proved a constant source of disagreement between local authorities.
There are, no doubt, many examples of harmonious relationships between the two tiers, but the tensions have been significant in both England and Scotland since reorganisation (Alexander 1982a:Ch. 3 Passim; 132 — 3).
Nor are the disputes confined to those instances where the two tiers are controlled by different party majorities, though such differences may add to the bitterness of the disputes.
The implications of local government reorganisation for party political control is an important consideration in many of the debates between advocates of single- and two-tier systems.
The Royal Commissions and official committees of inquiry have maintained a reticence on such matters that has at times made their recommendations Appear naïve — as if one could consider the reorganisation of Political institutions in isolation from politics!
Governments, too, have adopted a suitably objective approach in public, basing their arguments on considerations of administrative efficiency and democratic improvement.
In practice the actions of governments have been less high-minded: a fact the opposition is always quick to point out.
Traditionally, the Labour Party has derived its strength from the urban areas while the Conservative Party is based in the suburbs and rural areas.
Labour has, therefore, perceived its interests to lie in the protection of the urban authorities whether the former county boroughs or the present metropolitan areas.
It was a Labour government that proposed to implement a process of ‘organic change’ to accommodate the demands of the former county boroughs (DOE 1979).
The Conservatives, on the other hand, protect the counties and suspect the great urban  authorities of being extravagant.
The Conservative government rejected the proposals for ‘organic change’.
The perceptions of their interests by the two parties may not always be entirely accurate, or they may change over time, but there can be no doubt of the importance they hold for local government structure.
The 1980s saw another twist in the controversy surrounding the structure of local government.
The Conservatives, who introduced the country-wide two-tier system, came to believe that ‘in the case of Greater London and the six metropolitan counties…the hopes of the last reorganisation have been disappointed’(DOE 1983b:2).
They abolished both the metropolitan counties and the GLC.
The ending of the metropolitan top-tier authorities destroyed one of the advantages that led Redcliffe-Maud to support the Conservative reorganisation in the early 1970s.
As ‘an unrepentant believer in the Commission's unitary plan’ he came to accept as an advance on the existing system the Conservative proposals for ‘two tiers everywhere’and in particular the establishment of ‘the principle of metropolitan counties for great conurbations’(foreword to Wood 1976:8).
In the further reorganisation in 1986 some former GLC and metropolitan county services were allocated to the London boroughs and metropolitan districts which became single-tier authorities, and some services became the responsibility of joint boards or new ad hoc bodies.
After these changes, more than one-third of the Population of England lived in areas with only one tier of local government.
The system had, however, neither become simpler to understand nor reverted to the strengths observed by the Redcliffe-Maud Commission in the former county boroughs.
The various inter-authority arrangements had an aura of impermanence.
The political parties began to consider future manifesto proposals.
The debates between advocates of single-tier and two-tier local government are, therefore, conducted within an atmosphere in which the relative merits of the two different systems for the values of efficiency and democracy are infused with the expectations of party or local advantage.
The result is often a series of complex compromises that obtains the theoretical advantages of neither system and forms the basis for further argument.
Neither the reforms at the end of the nineteenth century, nor the reorganisations of the 1970s and 1980s stopped the debate.
The legislation was followed almost immediately by suggestions of further change.
Chapter four
THE SERVICES PROVIDED BY LOCAL GOVERNMENT
When considering the services provided by local government there are two major questions to be discussed.
first, what services are to be allocated to local government as a whole; second, how are these services to be distributed among the agencies of local government itself.
The second question is, of course, a more specific version of the first if we consider local government within the broader context of public administration and attitudes to the state provision of goods and services.
After a brief discussion of the first question, we shall go on to consider the present distribution of services within local government in the United Kingdom.
We shall look in turn at the background to the allocation of the present services, the criteria adopted for the distribution of services during the reorganisation years in the early 1970s, the present position, and the problems that have arisen since reorganisation.
finally, we shall discuss the controversy surrounding compulsory competitive tendering.
There is no universally accepted pattern for the distribution of governmental services between the various agencies of the state, or even of the appropriate services to be performed collectively through government rather than by private initiative.
There are variations in the public services deemed necessary, desirable or possible in the circumstances obtaining in different countries at different times.
for example, the governmental services provided in a modern industrial country differ from those provided in a country with fewer resources, and the services provided vary in any country over the years.
Disputes over the role of the state and the extent of state provision of public services are at the heart of many political controversies, but there are other considerations affecting the special role of local government.
First, there are factors related to the size of the country and its internal organisation: whether it is a federal or a unitary state for example.
A small country, either in terms of area or population, or one with a federal structure consisting of relatively small units, will  retain more responsibilities at federal or state (that is, second-tier) government levels.
Local government will correspondingly be denuded of services accepted by local authorities in other systems.
Second, the allocation of services to local government will be affected not only by attitudes towards state provision and the concept of the Welfare State, but also by attitudes towards decentralisation in any provision being made.
In some services, for example the making of monetary payments through social security in Britain, the necessity for equal treatment throughout the country is considered to override any benefits to be gained from local government involvement and discretion.
finally, the structure of local government itself will affect the services to be provided.
Recent reorganisations have been strongly influenced by discussions about the appropriate size that would enable a local authority to accept particular responsibilities.
The effect of these considerations on a specific service can be illustrated by education.
This service is provided by a central government department in New Zealand, by the state governments in Australia, by local government in Britain, and by local ad hoc bodies in many parts of the United States and Canada (Bowman and Hampton 1983).
Even in Britain, the position varies considerably.
Education is a top-tier service in Scotland and in the shire counties, and, after much controversy, a district and borough service in the metropolitan areas and London.
In Northern Ireland, of course, education is a provincial service now administered by a special authority.
When considering local government services, therefore, we must be careful to avoid the assumption that these refer to a settled collection.
The correct interpretation is to regard local government services as simply those services provided by local government in Particular circumstances.
Which services these are to be is always a matter of dispute and may be a crucial factor in relations between central and local government.
There is, after all, no surer way of influencing the power of local government than by varying the range of services for which it is responsible.
Some of these questions will recur in the discussion section at the end of this chapter, and in later chapters on both intergovernmental relations and the services provided regionally, but for the present we will remain with those services provided by local government in the United Kingdom.
THE DEVELOPMENT OF LOCAL GOVERNMENT SERVICES
Local government has its origins, as we noted in Chapter 2, in the growing urbanisation of the nineteenth century.
The services provided were related to the social conditions associated with that growth: the need to regulate  health and sanitary conditions, and to maintain public order.
At first these services were administered by ad hoc bodies but legislation covering England and Wales in 1888 and 1894 began to draw them together into modern units of local government.
The timing of these changes and the details of the structures adopted varied between the countries comprising the United Kingdom, but ‘as a service provider, local government in Scotland developed at broadly the same pace as local government in England and Wales’(Page 1983:43; cf. foster et al.1980: 102 — 7).
In Ireland a similar but slower growth reflected both the political circumstances of the country and the slower rate of economic growth and urbanisation (Roche 1982:Ch. 4).
The Acts of 1888 and 1894 did not bring all local services under the control of the new local authorities.
Some ad hoc bodies remained.
The most significant of these were concerned with education and Poor Law relief.
The Education Act of 1902 finally brought education under local authority control in England and Wales and abolished the school boards; similar legislation produced the same effect in Scotland in 1918.
The 1902 Act, in the words of Maureen Schulz, Following the Local Government Act of 1929 the last of the great nineteenth-century ad hoc bodies was laid to rest.
The Poor Law Boards of Guardians were abolished in 1930 and their responsibilities distributed among the appropriate committees of the county councils and county boroughs.
The responsibilities of local authorities are not limited to those conveyed in general legislation.
The promotion of private Acts of Parliament continued throughout the nineteenth century, and indeed beyond, bringing a bewildering and sometimes surprising range of services within the power of particular local authorities.
By 1900 ‘Doncaster had a racecourse, Wolverhampton a cold store, Glasgow and Tunbridge Wells had telephone services; a few years later, Birmingham was to get powers to establish its ‘penny bank’’(Keith-Lucas and Richards 1978:36).
Some of these powers remain with individual authorities.
Doncaster racecourse, for example, is still controlled by municipal enterprise — to the great joy of the councillors who have special privileges during St. Leger week.
There are numerous responsibilities of greater or lesser significance scattered among local authorities throughout the country.
After 1900 there was a dual development with regard to the services provided by local government.
first, there was the accretion of new  powers and the growth in scale of those that continued to rest with local authorities.
Second, there was the loss of certain responsibilities either to central government departments or to the regional structure of nationalised industries or services.
The new powers were concerned, as Schulz pointed out, very largely with the development of broadly defined social provision.
Education after 1902 immediately became the largest and most important service provided by local government and has remained so ever since (Regan 1979).
Approximately half the total current expenditure on goods and services provided by local authorities goes on education.
In addition to schools for children of compulsory school age, local authorities provide nurseries, colleges of further education, and a general adult education and youth service.
Housing is another local authority service that grew rapidly from the beginning of the present century, particularly after the First World War (Cullingworth 1966).
Housing represents most of the capital assets of local government.
The proportion of the housing stock owned by local authorities in England and Wales was ‘13 per cent in 1947.
This had risen to 25 per cent by 1961 and 30 per cent by 1976.
In Scotland the proportion is higher: 54 per cent in 1976’(Darke and Darke 1979.: 43).
After 1979, the Conservative government adopted a policy for the sale of council houses.
By the end of the 1980s, over 1 million had been sold (Brindley and Stoker 1988:49).
This policy halted the previously continuous growth of local authority tenancies and contributed to the overall increase in owner occupancy.
The Housing Act 1988 gave further encouragement to the breakup of the large housing estates remaining under local authority control.
The Act makes it possible for the properties to be transferred from the local authorities to housing associations, tenant co-operatives, or private landlords.
The initiative for such transfers may come from the local authority concerned, the association or company seeking ownership, or the tenants themselves.
From wherever the initiative originates, the tenants must be consulted and in addition have certain rights affecting the transfer — hence the phrase ‘pick a landlord’.
The personal social services in their modern form developed from the late 1940s.
The earlier transfer to local authorities of responsibilities previously exercised by the Poor Law Guardians had not led to any rapid improvement in the services (Wilson 1948:76 — 7).
Indeed, local government lost some of its recently gained Powers to central agencies soon after the transfer.
In 1934 an Unemployment Assistance Board was established to administer all unemployment relief (Bruce 1968:259).
This board dropped ‘Unemployment’ from its title in 1940 when it also took responsibility for supplementary pensions from local authorities (Wilson 1948:97 — 8).
As part of the post-war creation of the Welfare State, the Children Act 1948, introduced local authority departments responsible for the welfare of children.
This Act laid the basis for the growth of a new  professional approach in social work.
Subsequently, the Local Authority Social Services Act 1970 provided for the combination of the children's department with other local authority social work services into new social service departments (Sainsbury 1977:27 — 33).
These departments have become a major force in local government and are among the main spending departments after education.
The other responsibility we need to mention at this stage is planning.
This, of course, is an exception to the generalisation that the growth of local government services in the twentieth century has been concentrated in the social services.
Planning as a local authority responsibility has its origins in the public health and housing policies of the nineteenth century, but from the outset the objectives were broader than a simple emphasis on the efficient use of land.
John Bums, President of the Local Government Board, when introducing the first legislation with ‘town planning’ in its title in 1909 declared: These objectives may seem happily optimistic when contrasted with subsequent achievements, but they serve to remind us of the tension that always exists in town planning between the engineers and the sociologists (Goldsmith 1980:Ch. 7).
The present powers of local authorities in respect of town planning derive from the Town and Country Planning Act 1968 and the equivalent Scottish Act of 1969.
These provide for local authorities to prepare both structure (that is, strategic) plans and local plans for the implementation of the strategy in smaller areas or for specific purposes.
The legislation includes provision for the involvement of the general public in the planning process, but we shall come back to this point in Chapter 7.
The possibility of transfer of responsibility to central government agencies for some services previously provided by local authorities has already been mentioned.
Such losses of services occurred in the 1930s and 1940s.
‘The Ministry of Transport became the highway authority for 4459 miles of main roads, by the Trunk Roads Act of 1936, and for another 3685 by that of 1946’(Lipman 1949:210).
The Minister of Agriculture assumed direct responsibility for a number of services between 1937 and 1944, and in the post-war years local authorities lost their hospitals to the National Health Service (NHS) and their gas and electricity undertakings to nationalised boards.
The process was continued by the Local Government Act 1972 which transferred the remaining local authority health responsibilities to the NHS and their water and sewage responsibilities to new regional authorities.
THE DISTRIBUTION OF SERVICES
There are several ways of analysing the services provided by local government.
The choice between these ways will depend upon the purpose for which the analysis is being made.
from a legal point of view all services must derive their existence from statute or else fall foul of the ultra vires rule (see Ch. 1).
This gives a threefold division.
first, those services which are mandatory upon a local authority such as the education of children between the compulsory school ages or the provision of a fire service.
In these cases the appropriate local authority must provide the service.
Second, those services which are permissive such as the provision of adult education or numerous recreational and cultural facilities.
In these cases an appropriate local authority may provide the service.
Third, there is a small but important category of provision deriving authority from Section 137 in the Local Government Act 1972 which allowed local authorities to spend the product of a rate of 2p in the pound on anything ‘which in their opinion is in the interests of their area or any part of it or all or some of its inhabitants’.
A similar provision exists with regard to the community charge.
A local authority shall not spend this money on any purpose authorised by other legislation.
A number of initiatives developed from the use of this ‘free 2p’.
Among the most notable of these are the economic and employment departments referred to in Chapter 12.
Another way of distinguishing the services provided by local government is to group them according to certain shared characteristics.
Thus Byrne (1981:70 — 84) creates five categories:(1) protective services, such as police and fire, that seek to Protect the citizen from various dangers,(2) environmental services to control and improve the physical environment such as highways, transport and planning;(3) personal services, such as education, housing and social work, that seek to enhance personal welfare;(4) amenity services, such as museums, theatres and sports facilities that provide for citizens' leisure time; and (5) trading services for which local authorities make commercial charges.
This last category includes markets, crematoria, and more controversially, public transport.
Some local authorities have at times defined transport as a personal service, or as an adjunct to their planning policies, and consequently they have heavily subsidised the fares.
There can be considerable overlap between Byrne's categories.
Some people, indeed, would not wish to distinguish at all between the personal and amenity services, regarding them all as essentially people-based.
The major drawback with the Byrne approach, however, is that it provides only an incidental guide to the way in which the services might be allocated between different types of local authority.
This is a problem that greatly exercised the Royal Commissions and the Northern Ireland review body on local government.
In Northern Ireland, as we have seen, the matter was solved by allocating ill the services of major significance to  the provincial level, but in London, England and Wales, and Scotland a local government solution had to be found.
The solution advocated in general had two aspects.
First, an effort was made to give to each local authority ‘functions and powers which are separate and distinct’(Herbert 1960: 197).
This would, it was thought, avoid difficulties which might otherwise arise through local authorities failing to co-ordinate their activities, and it would also make the system more intelligible to the general public.
Second, services were grouped together with respect to the scale upon which they needed to be provided.
This second principle proved difficult to implement.
There is more than one criterion of scale.
It can refer to geographical area as in planning or other land-based services, or to the administrative needs of personal services such as education.
Housing in particular is hard to allocate: house construction is firmly linked to planning and land-use while housing management needs to co-Operate with the social services.
The Royal Commission on Local Government in England preferred a unitary approach but recognised that this solution would not be appropriate throughout the country.
They distinguished, therefore, between an ‘environmental’ group of services — planning, transportation and development — and a ‘personal’group of services — education, personal social services and housing.
Where two tiers of local government were necessary, the services should be divided in this manner and ‘related services kept together’(Redcliffe-Maud 1969, Vol. 1:68).
Because, no doubt, of the different structure of the population in Scotland, the Wheatley Commission took a different view.
They divided local government services in such a way that most of the major services including education, major planning, personal social services and housing would have gone to the regional authorities while the districts would have been left with minor aspects of these services and certain amenity services.
The government did not accept all these proposals: housing in particular was treated differently in the legislation from the recommendations of both the English and Scottish Commissions.
POPULATION SIZE AND LOCAL GOVERNMENT SERVICES
The basis for the allocation of services both in the various reports and in the subsequent legislation was the size of population accepted as necessary for effective administration.
The Redcliffe-Maud and the Wheatley Commissions were persuaded by the evidence from government departments that education, housing and the personal social services required catchment areas with populations of at least 200,000 to 250,000.
The reasons were to be found in the strong links between housing and Planning, and in the large populations required to justify certain special services and residential accommodation in education and the personal social services.
This evidence is frequently interpreted as suggesting that larger local  authorities are likely to be more efficient than smaller ones, but no statistical evidence has been produced to support this claim.
The only evidence to link size with quality of performance was contained in the subjective opinions of the inspectors for education and child care (Redcliffe-Maud 1969, Vol. 111: Chs 11 and 12).
The statistical evidence was particularly disappointing for Redcliffe-Maud who commissioned several research studies with a bearing on the issue: none could offer a definite answer.
In a wide range of services including housing, education, personal social services, highways and even ambulances, the results did not support the suggestion that size could be linked with efficiency.
Such phrases as ‘no consistent pattern’, ‘no strong relationship’ and ‘difficult to draw any conclusion’are typical of the language of the reports.
In some cases a tendency to diseconomies of scale was even observed (Redcliffe-Maud, Research Study 3:6 and 19).
Redcliffe-Maud summed up: ‘Size cannot statistically be proved to have a very important effect on performance’(Redcliffe-Maud 1969, Vol.
I:58); and then went on to point to the difficulties faced by such statistical studies.
First, they were necessarily related to the existing structure — they could not predict the performance of a new structure based on different principles.
Second, and more fundamentally, they drew attention to the difficulties of finding a satisfactory measure of performance in statistical terms.
The quality of a service has to be related to the environment in which it is provided; and it is difficult to quantify the various facets of each service (Redcliffe-Maud 1969, Vol. 1:58).
The failure of the Royal Commission's own research to support their advocacy of large-scale units of local government led to scepticism in the 1970s as opinion swung away from a belief in bigness as a correlate of efficiency and progress.
Dearlove considers the whole pressure for increased scale simply as a cover for regaining or maintaining the influential position of business interests in local government (Dearlove 1979).
From another point of view, Newton has reconsidered the whole debate in an attempt to assess the impact of size both on functional effectiveness and democracy.
He maintains that the ‘classical conundrum’ of the incompatibility of functional effectiveness (depending on large-scale units) and democracy (depending on small-scale units) is a false one.
After a thorough summary of the evidence he reaches the following conclusions:
1.
The democratic merits of small units of government have often been exaggerated and romanticised, while their democratic deficiencies have been overlooked; 2.
Large units are as economically efficient as small ones, and have a greater functional capacity; 3.
Large units do not seem to be deficient in democratic qualities and may even be more democratic in some respects; 4.
Hence there is no necessary incompatibility between the size necessary for functional effectiveness and that required for democracy (Newton 1982:191).
Thus the approach of the Royal Commissions would appear to have been justified, but no doubt the ‘classical conundrum’ will continue to cause controversy despite Newton's attempt to shift the discussion to firmer ground.
THE PRESENT POSITION
Local services are not distributed in the same manner throughout Britain.
Table 4.1 gives the general distribution following the reorganisations of the 1970s.
The position in Wales is almost the same as in the non-metropolitan areas in England.
The principal differences are that Welsh district councils are responsible for refuse disposal as well as collection, and may exceptionally be designated to provide libraries and certain other services.
The districts are also able to provide both on-street and off-street car parks, subject to the consent of the county council; and share the provision of allotments with the community councils (Department of the Environment/Welsh Office 1974: 10).
In addition to the variations in the distribution of responsibilities between the two tiers in different parts of the United Kingdom, there are two other points to note from the table.
First, the two tiers exercise concurrent powers in a wide range of services.
Second, some services are divided between the two tiers.
for example, refuse collection is the responsibility of the English districts while refuse disposal rests with the counties.
Planning is also divided: responsibility for local plans is with the districts and for structure plans with the counties and regions.
The effects of the division of planning have been particularly disturbing.
Relations between county and district planners have frequently been strained.
The planning process has been delayed and made more expensive by the need for constant negotiations between authorities responsible for two separate parts of a process which was intended in the Town and County Planning Acts of 1968 and 1971 to be fully integrated.
In 1980 the Local Government, Planning and Land Act specified that all planning applications would be received by district councils.
The Act made several other changes in the hope of reducing the friction between counties and districts, but the difficulties remain — especially between the counties and the districts based on former county boroughs (Alexander 1982a:55 — 7; 1982b:67 — 8).
The abolition of the GLC and the metropolitan county councils (MCCs) from April 1986 (see the previous chapter) added further complexity to an already complex system.
Many of the services formerly provided by the GLC and MCCs reverted to the London boroughs or metropolitan districts.
In the MCC areas some services, including police, fire and public  transport, became the responsibility of new joint boards comprising the districts in the county.
finally, some residual responsibilities were allocated to special ad hoc bodies (Leach 1987:31 — 48).
As we have seen (pp. 45 — 46), the position of education in London changed again in April 1990.
After so much controversy, it is too early to assess the performance of the new system in London and the MCC areas.
We may safely assume, however, that the creation of joint boards will not enhance local accountability.
Indirectly elected bodies tend to develop a corporate identity of their own which obscures the responsibility of their parent authorities, particularly when they receive precepting powers.
Nor will a network of single-purpose bodies find it easy to co-ordinate services either with one another or with the services of the districts or boroughs.
There will no longer be a policy forum, for example, for considering the common interests of police, transport and highways authorities.
The longer-term tendency may be for the joint boards to develop into fully fledged special purpose authorities.
In any event the abolition of the GLC and MCCs and the distribution of their major services to special purpose authorities and joint boards can only be interpreted as a weakening of the role of local government.
The current distribution of responsibilities goes against the principle endorsed by the Herbert Commission of giving each local authority ‘functions and powers which are separate and distinct’(Herbert 1960: 197).
The present system is no more comprehensible to the public in this respect than was its predecessor.
Moreover, the recommendations of the Redcliffe-Maud and Wheatley Commissions that the personal services of education, social services (social work in Scotland) and housing should be allocated to the same local authority were not followed outside London and the English metropolitan areas.
In non-metropolitan England and Wales and in Scotland, housing is allocated to the districts, thus separating it from the personal social services.
This separation has caused considerable difficulties and again fresh legislation was needed in 1977 to provide adequate procedures for housing the homeless (Alexander 1982a:53; 1982b:69).
In Scotland, the problems caused by the distribution of services between the two tiers of local government have been considered by a Committee of Inquiry (Stodart 1981).
The terms of reference of the committee were limited.
It could only make recommendations that did not challenge the basic structure of the system.
As a result, Stodart ‘concentrated on tidying up overlapping and concurrent functions in planning, leisure, tourism, environmental health and industrial development’(Keating and Midwinter 1983: 102).
Most of the recommendations have been implemented, but they too have failed to end the controversies that the reorganisations of the 1970s provoked.
The complexity of the British local government system is increased by two further features: first, the possibility of co-operation between different   local authorities; and second, the more formal agency arrangements.
In his study of the problems of implementing the Local Government Act 1972 in England and Wales, Richards describes the various means that ‘exist to facilitate county/district co-operation, some of which depend on the 1972 Act  and some of which do not’(Richards 1975b:76).
These means include the appointment of joint committees for a particular purpose, the ability of one authority to place its staff at the disposal of another, and the possibility of local authorities entering into agreements to provide each other with goods and services.
Alexander considers that ‘the inherent need  for liaison in a two-tier system became a major practical disadvantage of the new local government structure from the moment the legislation was passed’(Alexander 1982b:63).
At first many counties established county-wide committees, but these either degenerated into battlegrounds for county/district rivalries or else atrophied through lack of business (Alexander 1982a:37 — 8; 58 — 9).
Liaison is now conducted mainly at officer level.
In some cases the districts alone have established joint committees within the area covered by a top-tier authority.
The most notable example is the London Boroughs' Association (LBA) which acts both as a representative of the boroughs to outside bodies, and as a forum ‘to advise and assist the constituent councils in the administration of their powers and duties’(Rhodes 1972:446).
In more recent years the LBA was supplemented by a separate association representing the interests of Labour-controlled boroughs.
Agency
The concept of agency — though not the word — was introduced in England and Wales by Section 101 of the Local Government Act 1972.
The former arrangements by which district councils over a certain size could receive or claim delegated powers from counties in respect of certain services were repealed and replaced by a ‘provision under which local authorities can agree between themselves for one to carry out functions on behalf of another’(Department of the Environment/Welsh Office 1974:2).
Such arrangements are specifically excluded from education and the social services.
Agency arrangements have been fraught with controversy.
The government did no intend then to be used in order to restore to the districts responsibilities they had lost to the counties, but many districts hoped this would be possible.
During the preparations for the reorganisation in 1974 no fewer than 127 applications were made to government departments for decisions in disputes over agency (Richards 1975b:84).
Since the early days of the transition from the old to the new system of local government, agency arrangements have continued to be disputed between counties and districts, and in some cases counties have withdrawn or altered agency arrangements into which they had previously entered (Alexander 1982a:60 — 5).
THE SPECIAL POSITION OF THE POLICE
The police in Britain, outside London, have traditionally been in the responsibility of local government.
The degree of control that local police committees can exercise over police activities is limited, however, by special provisions that separate the police from the rest of the services provided by local authorities (Bell 1989:57 — 69).
The modern police services in Britain originated in the needs of the growing urban areas at the beginning of the nineteenth century.
The  police were needed not only to combat crime, but also to provide an alternative to the army in suppressing serious public disorder.
In most European countries these two functions are the responsibility of separate police forces.
The ‘normal’ police work is under local control while a para-military force operates either regionally or on a national basis.
The combination of these two functions in Britain is seen as a safeguard against the development of authoritarian police methods, but it brings other problems, as the methods of public control necessary to one function may not always be acceptable for the second.
Following the reorganisation of local government in the early 1970s, the police became the responsibility of the counties of England and Wales and of the regions of Scotland.
In London, the metropolitan police — established in 1829 — continue to be under the direct control of the Home Secretary.
In Northern Ireland, the police, in common with the other security services, are controlled directly by central government.
Local authority control of the police is complicated by three organisational factors.
In addition there is the complex constitutional position of the constable to which we shall return later.
First, in England and Wales the police authority is the police committee itself rather than the full council (Loveday 1983).
The council receives reports from its police committee, but its control is possibly more tenuous than where its legal responsibility is clear (Elcock 1986: 169).
Following the abolition of the metropolitan counties, the police in these areas became the responsibility of joint boards of the district councils (Loveday 1987: 85 — 101).
Care must be taken not to exaggerate the effect of the special position of the police committee in England and Wales.
In Scotland, the full council is the police authority, but one commentator has concluded that ‘the difference is difficult to discern’(Gordon 1980:77).
Second, police committees in England and Wales — though not in Scotland — must include magistrates as one-third of their membership.
These magistrates are present as full members in their own right and are not co-opted as non-council members may be to the education or certain other committees.
Third, some counties and regions are combined for police purposes.
The constitutional position of the police has been explained clearly and concisely by David Regan in his pamphlet Are the Police under Control ?:
Police committees, therefore, are precluded from either directing or even questioning the chief constable on operational matters (Loveday 1983).
They are confined to discussions of a very general nature and to providing the resources necessary for an efficient service.
Central government retains some direct powers in relation to the police.
Local police authorities receive a 50 per-cent grant in respect of police services and Her Majesty's Inspectorate of Constabulary checks the efficiency with which the service is provided.
The police authority appoints the chief constable, his deputy and assistants, but the short list must be acceptable to the Home Office, who thus control the type of person appointed even if not the specific individual.
The chief constable is responsible for other appointments and promotions.
The various police forces also keep some links with the metropolitan police, especially with respect to the special branches established to counteract ‘subversive, activity (Gordon 1980:Ch. 4).
SUMMING UP
The services provided by local government originate in two ways.
first, local government is part of the overall organisation of public administration within the state.
As such, the central government will allocate responsibilities to local government in accordance with criteria that meet the political and administrative objectives of the centre at any particular time.
Of course, no government operates with a clean sheet: the allocation of responsibilities between the various agencies of the state cannot always be changed easily or quickly.
Nevertheless, changes constantly occur as is shown by a cursory glance at the development of local government services in Britain.
Second, local government is part of the overall democratic structure of the state.
As such, local people expect to exercise power to initiate the provision of services desired in the locality.
This power is secured through permissive or private legislation and is, therefore, granted at the discretion of central government.
Although the services provided by local government originate in these different ways, aspects of the same service may be considered from both points of view.
Education again provides a good example: central government has a strong interest in the provision of an education service which meets its perception of national priorities; local people, especially parents, expect to have considerable influence over the education provided for their children.
There is, therefore, no settled agreement either about the services to be provided by local government or about the discretion local authorities can exercise over the services they provide.
The allocation of services within a multi-tiered system of local government adds another dimension to the complexity.
DISCUSSION — COMPULSORY COMPETITIVE TENDERING
Compulsory competitive tendering (CCT) had its origins both in public doubts about the efficiency and cost-effectiveness of certain local services — especially the public works departments and refuse collection, and in the belief of Conservative governments in the greater ability of the market to provide services in a flexible and economic manner.
The industrial disputes affecting local government services in 1979 (the ‘Winter of Discontent’) were also in the minds of government ministers.
The powerful local government trade unions were likely to have less influence with private contractors than with local authorities (Walsh 1989:33 — 4).
The controversies surrounding the policy have, therefore, a fundamental importance for the discussion of local government services, and indeed for the nature of local government itself.
Local authorities have always relied upon outside sources for many of the goods and services they require.
In many areas the local authority will be the largest customer for a whole range of suppliers.
In 1985, the Controller of the Audit Commission estimated that each year ‘at least £3 billion worth of goods and services is purchased by competitive tendering’(Banham 1985: 12).
Local authorities are no different in this respect from other large concerns, whether public or private, who must decide whether to provide all the components of their activities within their own organisations or to obtain some from outside suppliers.
The commercial reasons for going outside may ‘include cost-effectiveness, lack of in-house expertise, the need to reduce overheads, greater administrative convenience and the need for increased flexibility to respond to changes in market conditions’(Ascher 1987:8).
The disadvantages include the possible unreliability of outside contractors and fewer opportunities to integrate all aspects of provision into a corporate whole.
Contracts are typically for a three- or five-year term and can prove inflexible in the intervening period.
Finally, there is the danger that once an organisation disbands its own workforce it may be exploited by monopolistic outside suppliers.
The arguments surrounding CCT move beyond these purely commercial considerations in two respects.
First, the debates are conducted in ideological terms.
The issue is presented as a conflict between the relative merits of private and public provision.
In this dispute caricatures abound.
On the one hand, private enterprise is presented as efficient, cost-effective and competitive while public provision is shown as wasteful, inefficient, and concerned more with the interests of the workers involved than with the consumers of the service.
From the other side, private enterprise is seen as monopolistic, rapacious and concerned solely with Private profit while public provision is perceived as benign, caring and committed to social welfare.
Of course, these caricatures only highlight certain features in a much more complex reality.
Second, the arguments have become  embroiled in a general deterioration in central-local government relations.
The government has moved beyond exhortation to compulsion and thus removed yet another strand of local discretion.
Central government intervention in local government tendering began with the Local Government, Planning and Land Act 1980 which applied competitive tendering to local authority direct labour organisations (DLO).
These organisations are responsible for a wide variety of building and maintenance work, and by the end of the 1970s there had developed widespread concern at the inefficiency and lack of accountability displayed in some areas.
A Labour minister announced in 1978 that the government would introduce legislation to meet these concerns but a General Election intervened.
The Act introduced by the incoming Conservative government treats DLOs as trading services.
In other words, local authorities must keep separate revenue accounts for different categories of work and provide a balance sheet on a ‘true and fair view’ basis.
They are expected to earn a specified rate of return on capital employed in defined categories of work and must win such work on the basis of a competitive tendering process.
The Secretary of State specifies which areas of work are covered by this process and has overall powers to call for reports on performance and, if the statutory requirements have not been met, to direct that the offending local authority shall cease to have power to carry out the work.
The Act came into effect on 1 April 1981 for England and Wales and a year later for Scotland.
During the early 1980s a few local authorities began to extend the tendering process to other local services.
Several contracts were awarded to private contractors especially in cleansing — and the whole issue attracted widespread publicity.
The use of private contractors to provide services previously provided by local authority staff also provoked strong opposition from local government trade unions (Ascher 1987: 220 — 2).
The trade unions were particularly effective at publicising the difficulties some private contractors encountered in fulfilling the contracts they had accepted (Ascher 1987:224).
After an initial flurry of interest the atmosphere began to cool by the mid-1980s.
Some local authorities continued to engage outside contractors but others that had done so reverted to in-house provision.
The whole issue was then revived by a consultation paper published by the government in February 1985 which led to further legislation.
The Local Government Act 1988 extends the principles of the Local Government, Planning and Land Act 1980 to a further range of services.
These include the collection of refuse, the cleaning of buildings and other cleansing work, catering, the maintenance of ground, and the repair and maintenance of vehicles.
The Secretary of State may add to this list by powers granted in the Act.
Police premises and vehicles are exempted from the legislation for security reasons and there are a few other minor exceptions, but in general the 1988 Act is far more tightly drawn than its predecessor.
Contract Compliance Local authorities when inviting tenders must specify clearly the work to be done and the conditions under which it should be completed.
In the past some local authorities used this opportunity to impose conditions binding contractors to council policies.
These policies might be concerned to promote trade-union conditions, health and safety policies, or equal opportunities for women or black workers; but they might also stray into areas far removed from the purpose of the contract.
There were examples of local authorities banning suppliers who had links with South Africa or with the manufacture of nuclear weapons.
These procedures are known as ‘contract compliance’ and obviously restrict the effects of competitive tendering.
The extent to which an elected local authority should be free to influence the behaviour of suppliers who wish to tender for local government contracts is a matter of democratic discourse.
The Conservative government resolved the issue by statute.
Local authorities must naturally continue to meet their obligations under health and safety legislation and under the provisions of legislation designed to promote equal opportunities, but in other respects their freedom to impose contractual conditions is now restricted.
The 1988 Act lays a duty on local authorities to award contracts ‘without reference to matters which are non-commercial’(s. 17(1)).
These include the terms and conditions of employment of workers engaged by the contractor, the involvement in irrelevant fields of government policy, the conduct of contractors or workers in industrial disputes, the country of origin of supplies and any political, industrial or sectarian affiliations or interests of the contractors.
The Secretary of State may add to this list and has more general powers to ensure that local authorities do ‘not act in a manner having the effect or intended or likely to have the effect of restricting, distorting or preventing competition’(s.4(5)).
The breadth of section 4(5) has led to difficulties of interpretation.
Local authorities have received conflicting guidance from the Chartered Institute of Public Finance and Accountancy (CIPFA) and from the Audit Commission (Hedley 1989a: 10).
The Department of the Environment has become involved in discussions as to whether a local authority was entitled to specify that a contractor for refuse collection must hire council vehicles, or to refuse permission to outside tenderers to use a council depot (Hughes 1989:20).
The Minister has also made statements on the increasingly complex issues of how far a council can allocate its own costs of contract supervision to the tender submitted by an outside contractor (Hedley 1989a:10).
As the full implications of these sections of the Act become apparent, the courts may be asked to resolve the difficulties caused by seeking to impose detailed codes of conduct by Act of Parliament.
The introduction of CCT raises several important issues for local government.
First, there is the effect on the internal organisation and management of local authorities.
CCT is not simply a matter of putting out services to private contractors.
Some local authority departments themselves  are now self-contained commercial organisations bidding for work which previously was their automatic responsibility.
Even when an in-house team has been successful the changes in many local authorities have been significant, costs have been cut and management has adopted more competitive attitudes.
At the end of the first year of CCT one study found that local councils had ‘succeeded in keeping four out of five contracts in-house — but at the cost of substantial job losses among lower paid workers’(The Independent 28. 11.89: 11).
In a majority of cases no tender was made by a private sector firm but the potential threat was enough to cause council leaders to reduce staff or rewrite employees' terms of service (The Price of Winning 1989).
Second, there is the effect on local democracy.
Contracts will usually be let for several years.
The specification will need to be satisfactory over this period with only limited opportunities for a change of policy until the contract finishes.
The whole approach is one of managing the delivery of local services: ‘The ability of elected members to influence services will be limited because they will be tied to contracts…whatever the platform on which they have been elected’(Walsh 1989:50).
The long-term significance of CCT may be greater, therefore, than the relatively small proportion of contracts won by private enterprise would suggest, and certainly more important than the limited financial savings at first achieved.
CCT is part of a restructuring of the role of local government in a post-welfare society, and of a reduction in the significance of the local democratic process.
Chapter five
INTERNAL ORGANISATION
Local authorities are large-scale organisations providing a multiplicity of services and as such present a number of managerial problems.
Some of these are similar to the problems found in any large organisation.
They are concerned with the procedures through which Policies are implemented: communications, co-ordination and control; and with the monitoring of the effectiveness of institutional actions.
Local authorities have distinctive features, however, that complicate the application of managerial theories.
They are public bodies having a duty a accountability both to central government and to the electorate in their area.
They employ large numbers of professional people such as teachers and social workers who practise their skills in providing a direct service to the public.
Finally, and most significantly, the responsibility for providing local services is shared between appointed officials and elected councillors in a way that corresponds neither to the practices found in private organisations, nor to those obtaining in other branches of public administration.
Each of these matters will be taken up later but first we need to outline the growth in awareness of the organisational needs of local authorities.
The origins of modern local government in the many single-purpose authorities created in the nineteenth century continued to be reflected in the strength of departmental organisation in the newly created compendious authorities.
Greenwood and Stewart refer to ‘the traditional conception [which]emphasises the provision of limited, statutorily defined services each of which has a distinct and separate influence upon the environment of the local authority’(Greenwood and Stewart 1974: 1).
Each of these services had a separate department with its own chief officer.
The departmental structure was paralleled by a committee system for councillors.
The chief officer and the chairperson of the committee would often work closely together for years, if not decades, to run ‘their’ particular service.
The clerk to the local authority was the principal legal adviser  and, therefore, invariably a lawyer.
In smaller local authorities a local solicitor sometimes accepted this as a part-time position.
The clerk was regarded as ‘first among equals’ by the other chief officers, but the co-ordination of services was at a minimum and sometimes non-existent.
In addition to the ‘traditional’ approach, Greenwood and Stewart identify two other possible conceptions of the role of the local authority in relation to its environment that have implications for internal management structure.
The ‘federal’ approach recognises the advantages to be gained if the separate local authority services are provided within a framework that allows for economies in the use of resources and recognises departmental interdependencies.
The ‘governmental’ approach moves away from a preoccupation with individual services altogether to a concern for the well-being of the entire local area (Greenwood and Stewart 1974: 1 — 2).
These two approaches correspond to the main movements for organisational change that dominated the 1960s and 1970s: the pressure for improvements in administrative efficiency and the encouragement of corporate planning (Stewart 1974:28 — 9).
These movements found expression in the Reports of the Maud Committee and the Bains Committee respectively.
During the 1980s, the internal organisation of local authorities again came under review.
The enhanced political partisanship of the larger authorities established after 1974 — 75, particularly in the urban areas, led the government to appoint the Widdicombe Committee to consider the conduct of local authority business.
The Committee reported in 1986 and legislation followed in 1989.
A review of these three reports — Maud, Bains and Widdicombe — provides a convenient format for a discussion of the nature of local government management.
THE MAUD REPORT
The Committee on the Management of Local Government was appointed, ‘to consider in the light of modern conditions how local government might best continue to attract and retain people (both elected representatives and principal officers) of the calibre necessary to ensure its maximum effectiveness’(Maud 1967 Vol. 1:iii).
A parallel Committee on the Staffing of Local Government was established at the same time ‘to consider the existing methods of recruiting local government officers and of using them; and what changes might help local authorities to get the best possible service and help their officers to give it’(Mallaby 1967:iii).
Both committees, therefore, were concerned with similar questions and they were serviced by the same secretariat.
The Mallaby Committee concentrated on the problems presented for local government recruitment in a time of full employment and a declining number of eighteen-year-olds  entering the labour market.
They also made recommendations concerning training, including the establishment of a Local Government Training Board.
Where their interests overlapped with the Maud Committee they reached similar conclusions, and we may concentrate on the latter as dealing in greater detail with the concerns of this chapter.
The Maud Committee interpreted its terms of reference in a specific and at first sight unexpected manner.
They identified the internal management of local authorities as an important factor in attracting arid retaining councillors and officers of sufficient calibre and went on to be very critical of the existing system.
Most of their criticisms were related to the survival ‘of a nineteenth century tradition that council members must themselves be concerned with actual details of day-to-day administration’(Maud 1967, Vol. 1:1X).
This led to a reliance on an elaborate system of committees and subcommittees and a failure to trust officers sufficiently in the taking of routine decisions.
The work of local authorities was ‘fragmented between too many separate departments, and these [were]seldom coherently organised or led by the Clerk.
The result [was]often both inefficient and undemocratic’(Maud 1967, Vol. 1:1X).
They found council members swamped with paper: several hundred, or in extreme cases a thousand sheets of paper being distributed to each councillor each month.
Much of this paper was filled with lists of the precise car allowances paid to individual officers, details of minor repairs to council property and similar routine matters (Maud 1967, Vol. 1:34 and 32).
At the same time as this appearance of detailed control was being given, there was little opportunity for councillors to exercise a co-ordinated leadership for strategic policy-making.
The major recommendations following from this analysis may be summarised as follows (Maud 1967, Vol.
I:X).
First, there should be a clearer division between council member and officer.
Committees should cease to be executive or administrative bodies and should concentrate on policy determination.
There should be an increase in the amount of delegation from committees to both their chairmen and officers.
Second, there should be a reduction in the number of committees appointed by a local authority.
The Maud Committee thought half a dozen should be enough and it followed that each committee would be concerned with a wider range of matters than the existing committees.
Third, all but the smallest local authorities should appoint a management board of between five and nine members.
This board would receive wide delegated powers and be the sole channel through which business done in committees reached the full council.
It would formulate and present proposals requiring council approval and serve as the focal point for managing and supervising the work of the local authority.
Members of this management board might be paid a small part-time salary in addition to their normal council allowances.
Fourth, a chief executive officer should be appointed as the undisputed head of the paid officers of the local authority.
He or she would not necessarily be a lawyer.
The response to the Maud Report was mixed.
In a devastating criticism Jeffrey Stanyer concluded ‘that the Maud Committee must be regarded as one of the most disastrous uses of an advisory committee that can be envisaged, if one asks and expects that an advisory committee will provide an authoritative analysis of the problems set by its terms of reference, and by rigorous reasoning propose defensible solutions which have a practical use’(Stanyer 1970:66 — 7).
Stanyer sets a high standard, but the response from practitioners was scarcely more enthusiastic.
Councillors rejected completely the proposal for a management board with its implied differentiation of councillors into board members and the rest.
The drastic reduction in the number of committees was felt to be impracticable.
Despite the response to some of the Maud Committee proposals, many local authorities were already re-examining their management structures.
Indeed, the Maud Committee in some of its less contentious proposals simply represented an encouragement to practices already being developed in larger local authorities (Greenwood et al .
1969).
The number of full committees were being reduced from the two or three dozen common in the early 1960s to a more manageable fifteen or sixteen, and chief executive officers were being appointed in many parts of the country.
There were even some moves towards a central co-ordinating committee, though none of these shared the characteristics of Maud's management board (Hampton 1970:54 — 61).
THE BAINS REPORT
Following the decision to reorganise the structure of local government in the 1970s, further consideration was given to matters of internal organisation.
A study group was appointed jointly by the Secretary of State for the Environment and the local authority associations under the chairmanship of M A Bains, Clerk of the Kent County Council.
The membership consisted of five other local authority officers and a company secretary from Imperial Chemical Industries Ltd.
A similar working group was appointed in Scotland under the chairmanship of 1 V Paterson but as its recommendations differed from its English counterpart only in matters of detail we need not treat it separately (Keating and Midwinter 1983:119 — 23).
The central theme of the Bains Report (1972) is reflected in the following quotation ‘…the traditional departmental attitude within much of local government must give way to a wider-ranging corporate outlook’(Bains 1972:6).
The committee did not engage in a research programme in the manner of the earlier Maud Committee, but contented itself with receiving evidence and visiting a number of local authorities in the early months of 1972.
The report was seen, therefore, as essentially practical  though it was heavily influenced by the corporate planning theories advocated through the Institute of Local Government Studies and elsewhere.
The main recommendations of the Bains Committee centred around the respective responsibilities of members and officers.
They took a very different attitude from Maud to this relationship believing ‘that if local government is to have any chance of achieving a corporate approach to its affairs members and officers must both recognise that neither can regard any area of the authority's work and administration as exclusively theirs’(Bains 1972:8).
While members must make the major policy decisions, Bains recognised that officers contribute to the stimulation and formulation of policy: ‘…the skilled professional officer is not just a servant who is paid to do as he is told’(Bains 1972:8).
On the other hand, members must have an interest in matters of day-to-day administration when these affect their constituents.
The implications of this approach were outlined for both members and officers.
The members should receive full information on matters affecting their electoral area and be provided with basic secretarial assistance in carrying out their duties.
At the policy-making level, decisions should be taken within an administrative context that allowed policy objectives to be examined against the financial constraints imposed by finite resources.
The officers should receive fuller delegated Powers and then accept responsibility for decisions taken under such powers.
Their advice should be available to party groups if that was where effective decisions were being taken: this is a point we shall return to later.
The committee also believed that while corporate management had implications for both councillors and officers, the structure applicable to one side was not applicable to the other.
The identification of one committee with one department should be ended.
It only encouraged the departmentalism that corporate management was intended to avoid.
They recommended that the committee structure should be linked to the objectives of the local authority rather than to the provision of particular services.
At the heart of the system there should be a policy and resources committee.
This committee would include opposition members and would work through subcommittees that might include members who were not on the full committee.
The officers should be led by a chief executive assisted by a principal chief officers management team consisting of about six members.
These principal chief officers should in appropriate cases be responsible for more than one department.
The report included structure diagrams for each type of local authority based on the outlines shown in Figs 5.1 and 5.2.
Finally, the report suggested the adoption of a ‘community’ approach that would include joint committees ‘of county and district members for each district within the county to co-ordinate the interaction of all county and district functions and policies for the locality’(Bains 1972:93).
Most of the new local authorities based their management structure on the Bains recommendations (Alexander 1982a:69 — 72), usually with  modifications affecting the number of committees: local authorities did not follow Bains any more than Maud in the creation of programme committees.
The number of committees in most authorities is now smaller than before the 1974 reorganisation but larger than Bains suggested.
Departmentalism is still strong, and has recovered some of its ground in recent years.
Nevertheless, most local authorities appointed a chief executive officer, a management team of principal chief officers, and some form of policy and resources committee.
The correspondence of these measures with the Bains recommendations gave, perhaps, a false impression of the commitment of the new local authorities to the principles involved.
In an assessment of the years following reorganisation, Alan Alexander examined each of the three major innovations in turn.
He found first, that the chief executives did not play as strong a leadership role as Bains recommended; second, that professionalism and departmentalism had prevented the development of a corporate management team; and third, that the policy committees were  frequently not supported by the full range of subcommittees suggested by Bains.
In particular there were few examples of a successful performance review subcommittee.
Alexander concludes ‘that the influence of Bains…may be more apparent than real, more form than substance’(Alexander 1982a:76).
He also notes the tendency for the various county-district joint committees ‘to decline very substantially in significance and effectiveness, as the new system became established (Alexander 1982a:37).
The community planning approach fell foul of the extensive county-district rivalries referred to in Chapter 3.
THE WIDDICOMBE REPORT
Most local authorities are now contested by the major political parties at local elections (Widdicombe 1986:30).
The parties produce manifestos and when elected in a majority seek to implement their policies.
Official reports into local government administration have in the past been extremely coy about the significance of such Partisanship for the matters they investigated.
The Maud Committee, for example, distinguished between councillors who were members of a political party and those who were not, but did not take the analysis any further.
The Bains Committee dealt with the matter in two very cautiously written paragraphs.
One of these mentioned the role of the party group and the other dealt with the relationship between the majority party leader and the chief executive (Bains 1972:37).
The Widdicombe Committee was appointed in 1985 at a time of high political controversy about the activities of certain local authorities.
The government regarded these authorities, often associated with the New Urban Left (see chapter 7), as a challenge to the accepted role of local government.
The government regarded local government as a convenient way to administer local services within the context of central policies.
The New Urban Left saw local authorities as a base from which to demonstrate the advantages of a different approach to politics.
The terms of reference of the Committee reflected these controversies in muted tones.
They were to inquire, among other matters, ‘into practices and procedures governing the conduct of local authority business in Great Britain, with particular reference to:
a. the rights and responsibilities of elected members; b. the respective roles of elected members and officers’(Widdicombe 1986: 17).
In announcing these terms of reference the Secretary of State went into more detail.
He invited the Committee to Pay particular attention to the role of the party group in decision-taking, problems that could arise from  councillors' conflicts of interest, the merits of full-time councillors, and the relationships of officers to councillors and political groups (Widdicombe 1986:17).
These issues will be considered within the general context of political management.
POLITICAL MANAGEMENT
Formal authority in local government rests in the full council.
Responsibility may be delegated to committees or indeed to officers, but the legal power to act remains with the council.
Local government is different in this respect from central government where ministers derive their constitutional authority from the Crown and their political power from control of the majority of the House of Commons.
Back-bench Members of Parliament whether of government or opposition parties are far more removed from questions of policy and administration than are councillors who discuss these matters through a series of committees and subcommittees.
In the councils where the members are not organised along party lines or where no party has a clear majority the debates and votes in committee and full council retain their significance.
In such circumstances decision-making may become more difficult, or simply more prolonged, and forward planning may be inhibited (Haywood 1977; Wendt 1983).
The councils where one political party has control, however, develop a parallel structure of policy-making alongside the formal machinery of committees and council.
When fully developed the party organisation can transform the decision-making procedures of local authorities (Widdicombe 1986:69; Gyford et al .
1989:ch.6).
The organisation of party groups on the council varies between parties and within parties in different areas but a more disciplined approach is becoming normal procedure, particularly in the larger local authorities and in the urban areas (Widdicombe 1986, Vol. 1:82 — 102).
The group will meet once or twice a month to discuss business coming before the council and to decide on a collective attitude.
Similarly, party factions will meet before major committee meetings.
The leader of the group will represent the group in policy debates.
The growth in partisan organisation on local authorities presents problems of integrating the political reality of decision-taking with the formal administrative structure.
There are three political levels to be considered: individual leaders, group leadership and full group membership.
First, the leader of the majority group now becomes the leader of the council — a position many officers were reluctant to recognise even a few years ago — and acts as a political ‘chief executive’.
As such he or she establishes a close working relationship with the chief executive officer.
The Bains Report referred to the need for this relationship to be ‘informal’(Bains  1972:37), but other commentators would emphasise the necessity for formality if both councillor and officer are to maintain their proper roles: ‘friendly but not familiar’ is a frequent description of the correct attitude for a councillor to adopt towards officers, either as leader or in the chair of a committee.
The role of the leader of the council is recognised in some local authorities by the appointment of an officer to support his or her policy-forming function.
The Widdicombe Committee found such ‘political advisers’ attached to party leaders or groups in at least forty authorities (Widdicombe 1986: 15 1).
The Committee considered such appointments preferable to more covert arrangements whereby certain officers became singled out as sympathetic sources of advice.
They recommended that a limited member of such posts should be available subject to certain safeguards (Widdicombe 1986: 154).
After some initial hesitation, the government accepted the Widdicombe approach.
The Local Government and Housing Act 1989 allows local authorities to appoint assistants to political groups to help councillors in those groups with their duties as councillors, Each of the three largest political groups is allowed to make one such appointment, provided that the group contains at least one-tenth of the membership of the council.
The salary of such officers is restricted to an amount specified from time to time by the Secretary of State and they are not permitted to manage other council staff (clause 9).
The position of the policy and resources committee is the second level to be considered.
The leader of the council will usually occupy the chair of this committee or its equivalent.
Thus the administrative changes since the mid-1960s have given the leader a formal co-ordinating position that was not previously available.
The other members of this committee have sometimes been drawn exclusively from the majority group leadership.
The Widdicombe Committee considered the development of one-party committees and made a distinction between committees and sub-committees with delegated powers and those of a purely deliberative or advisory nature.
They proposed that committees with delegated powers should have cross-party representation and be open to the press and public, but these provisions would not apply to other committees — including policy and resources committees (Widdicombe 1986: 78 — 84).
Once again, the government took a stricter view.
The Local Government (Access to Information) Act 1985 requires the public and press to be admitted to all council committees and sub-committees unless specified business exempts items of the agenda from the provisions of the Act.
The Local Government and Housing Act 1989 similarly ensures that all committees and sub-committees have cross-party representation.
The banning of one-party committees or sub-committees makes it difficult for political groups to develop policy with the benefit of officer advice.
Steve Leach has suggested that ‘The ‘brainstorming session’ and the interweaving of political purpose and professional knowledge and advice have all been facilitated by the use of deliberative forums’(Leach 1989:106).
The true centre of policy decision-taking in a politically organised council is the party group, and this is the third level we need to consider.
Bains believed ‘that the advice of officers must be available wherever the effective decisions are taken and if it is the party group which makes those decisions then a way must be found of making the officers’ advice available’(Bains 1972: 18 — 19).
Before the 1989 Act, some councils designated the party groups as official committees of the council, thus allowing officers to attend to offer advice while withdrawing before the group proceeded to a political decision.
Such devices are now clearly illegal, but the question remains open with regard to the presence of officers at party group meetings as such.
This practice increased rapidly in the late 1980s and by 1989 the chief executive attended group meetings at least occasionally in almost half of all councils (Hedley 1989b: 10).
The Widdicombe Committee recommended that such attendance should remain possible subject to two safeguards:
(i) all requests for attendance should be addressed to the chief executive.
who should decide which officers should attend;(ii) the chief executive should notify the other parties, and offer a similar facility (Widdicombe 1986: 154).
These safeguards should be included in the standing orders and conventions that the Committee recommended all local authorities should prepare.
The Local Government and Housing Act 1989 empowers the Secretary of State to require local authorities to incorporate proscribed provisions into their standing orders and to make or refrain from making other modifications (Clause 20).
At the time of writing no regulations have been issued under this power.
Councillors and officers
The presence of officers at groups of councillors organised on political lines raises in an acute form question of the correct relationship that should exist between them.
We have already noted that local government operates in a different way from central government where ministers draw their executive powers from the Crown.
The statutory location of decision-making power in a local authority rests in the full council.
This means that models of councillor-officer relationships based on comparisons between ministers and civil servants are likely to be misleading.
An officer need not accept instructions from an individual councillor, however exalted his status: officers owe their allegiance to the full council and hence to all councillors so assembled irrespective of party.
Of course, in practice when a particular political party has a clear majority then both councillors and officers will accept the realities of the position and act accordingly; but the difference in the constitutional position is not simply one of form — it undoubtedly affects attitudes throughout local authorities.
The position is complicated by two further factors: the statutory responsibilities placed directly upon certain officers, and the professional qualifications held by many people in local government service.
The  Widdicombe Committee proposed a strengthening of the role of the chief executive in local government.
They suggested that he or she should have ‘overall managerial responsibility for the discharge of functions by officers’ and also be responsible for ‘all statutory functions relating to the propriety of council business’(Widdicombe 1986: 145).
The government did not agree with these proposals, Instead they introduced a requirement to appoint one officer responsible for reviewing the propriety and legality of council business (the ‘monitoring officer’) and another responsible for the management of council services (Local Government and Housing Act 1989: clauses 4 and 5).
In addition, the chief finance officer of a local authority has a duty to report to councillors and auditors if he or she believes there is the possibility of the authority incurring unlawful expenditure (Local Government Finance Act 1988: clause 14).
The separation of these various powers between three officers has been criticised as likely to lead to a confusion of managerial authority (Leach 1989:118), and certainly it represents a move away from the chief executive model advocated in the Bains Report.
In addition to the three officers already mentioned, there are other officers who have specific duties placed upon them by statute.
The special position of the chief constable has been discussed in Chapter 4, but there are other officers whose position grants them a degree of independent authority.
The various Transport Acts make the officers responsible for day-to-day commercial control of public transport in the metropolitan areas.
The special position of transport is described in Chapter 11.
Other officers whose position is defined in statute claim a less specific but still important independent locus of authority.
The chief education officer is the usual example quoted.
A local education authority must by law appoint a chief education officer (Regan 1979:28): the people appointed assume responsibilities within the major spending service provided by local government.
Most of them exercise, and a few have claimed, considerable personal power as a consequence (Kogan and Eyken 1973; Neve 1977).
It is, perhaps, one of the reasons why the education service has been so resistant to the integration demanded by corporate management (Regan 1979:206 — 8).
The chief education officer also provides an illustration of the second factor we wish to mention.
Local authorities are directly responsible for providing services in a way that central government frequently avoids by the allocation of responsibility to other governmental agencies.
Hence local government employs teachers, social workers, housing managers, architects, engineers and so on to carry out their professional duties.
Appointment and subsequent promotion depend upon the possession or acquisition of appropriate qualifications (see Ch.9).
The professional officer relies upon professional expertise when tendering advice and may be bound by formal or informal codes of ethics or professional practice.
A social worker, for example, may refuse to divulge confidential information relating to a case coming before a committee, or an architect may  decline to sign the necessary documents if a professional judgement is not satisfied.
Councillors need to be very strong-minded, and in some circumstances foolhardy, if they are to go against strongly offered professional opinions.
This is not to say, of course, that professional opinions are always correct.
There are fashions among professionals that may lead to decisions lay people would justifiably avoid.
The high-rise buildings of the 1960s are local government monuments to the fallibility of professional opinion (Dunleavy 1981).
On other occasions there appear to be almost as many opinions as there are professionals.
We referred in Chapter 1, also, to the possibility that professional people may develop attitudes which place the interests of the profession before those of the public they are intended to serve.
For all these reasons, the lay control exercised by councillors is a necessary safeguard for the public in a democratic society, but it is a safeguard not easily exercised.
Some of the larger local authorities, as we have seen, are now appointing specialist advisers to the chief executive's office, or even to the leader of the council, who can give advice divorced from the service-providing departments, but such posts are few and regarded with some suspicion by mainstream local government officers.
Some local political parties are also appointing working groups to develop election policies.
These groups may draw on the professional skills of individual party members who can act as an independent source of advice to the party groups on the council.
In a few areas a detailed election manifesto has been adopted at the first meeting of a newly elected council as a basis for council policies (Fudge 1981).
The complex relationship between the professional provision of services and the determination of public policy was one of the major preoccupations of the Widdicombe Report and the subsequent legislation.
The government was concerned that the administration of local services was being politically compromised by more assertive councillors.
The government sought, therefore, to emphasise the distinctive roles and responsibilities of officers and councillors.
We have already discussed the relationship of officers to party groups and the new statutory powers given to three senior officers, but there remains the controversial issue of limiting the political activities of officers.
Officers and other employees of a local authority have always been barred from seeking election to their own council.
The straightforward reason is to prevent a conflict of interest between the two roles.
Employees of one local authority have not, however, been prevented in the past from seeking election to the council of another local authority.
By the 1980s this practice — twin-tracking', as it became called — had become a matter of political controversy.
The Widdicombe Committee found that ‘about 16% of…councillors who are in employment, and about 10% of all councillors, are employees of other local authorities, the majority of these being teachers’(Widdicombe 1986: 11 1).
The Committee believed that this raised two issues for consideration.
First, some local authorities might  give ‘excessive paid leave to employees who are councillors on other authorities’(Widdicombe 1986: 11 1).
This could lead to neighbouring local authorities co-operating to provide for a number of full-time councillors (Widdicombe 1986: 136).
The Committee recommended ‘a statutory upper limit of twenty-six days per year on the paid leave which public sector employees may grant to employees for council duties’(Widdicombe 1986: 137).
The Local Government and Housing Act 1989 enacts this Provision though it substitutes 208 hours for twenty-six days and exempts employees who are elected to the chair of councils (Clause 10).
Second, there is the issue of the propriety of a local government officer being politically active.
The Widdicombe Committee distinguished between senior officers who advise on policy and who should ‘command the respect and trust of all political parties’(Widdicombe 1986:161) and other employees.
The Committee point out that a ‘general ban on twin-tracking would deprive 3 million people of the right to be a councillor’(Widdicombe 1986:112) and they did not believe this to be justified.
In the case of principal officers and above, they recommended a restriction both on these officers being politically active and on councillors being appointed to such posts (Widdicombe 1986:113 and 163).
The subsequent legislation accepted the spirit if not the detail of these recommendations.
Certain senior officers and all officers paid more than £19,500 per annum(or such higher amount as regulations may determine) are now classified as holding ‘politically restricted posts’ and are disqualified from becoming a member of any local authority (Local Government and Housing Act 1989: clauses 1 and 2).
These restrictions do not apply to teachers.
To prevent any impropriety in the appointment of officers on political grounds, the monitoring officer may, by regulations, be given the power to comment on appointments to politically restricted posts (Local Government and Housing Act 1989: Clause 8).
The effect of the restrictions on officers seeking election to neighbouring authorities is likely to be relatively small.
Very few officers at the level proscribed have ever sought election as councillors.
Of those councillors who were twin-tracking at the time of the Widdicombe Committee, 58 per cent were teachers or lecturers, 12 per cent were manual workers, 16 per cent were in professional jobs (social workers, planners and so on and 14 per cent were administrators (Widdicombe Research, Vol. iii:34).
Only a very small proportion of the last two categories are covered by the legislation.
DISCUSSION — SCIENTIFIC MANAGEMENT IN LOCAL GOVERNMENT
The basic principles of scientific decision-making produce a model with the following characteristics: ‘identification of needs/problems; setting of objectives; identification of alternative choices; evaluation of alternatives; choice of preferred alternatives; implementation; and monitoring feedback and review’(Leach and Stewart 1982:6).
At a simple level, some elements of this process enter all decisions — from day-to-day domestic choices to major questions of public policy.
When approached more rigorously, however, difficulties and disagreements soon appear from both political and practical perspectives.
Politics and scientific management
The principles of scientific management expressed through the adoption of corporate planning in local authorities are sometimes criticised for placing too much power in the hands of the full-time officers, and hence reducing the importance of the role of the elected councillors in policy-making.
Scientific management systems are complex and the absorption of the mass of material generated is time-consuming.
The professional officers, particularly when organised through a chief officers' team, as advocated by the Bains Committee, and led by a chief executive officer can provide a formidable obstacle to councillors intent on policy innovation that goes against conventional assumptions.
This was the essence of the arguments over management structure in Sheffield and elsewhere in the late 1960s (Hampton 1972).
The Conservative Party were willing to accept a corporate structure based upon the chief officers' team: the Labour Party wanted the locus of corporate power to rest in a strong policy committee emphasising the practical as well as formal power of the councillors.
The corporate approach demands, as Bains outlined, a central focus in both departmental and committee structures, and John Stewart has argued that this does not lead necessarily to domination by officers or to policies favourable to any particular groups in society.
The corporate approach favours ‘those less committed to service departments…groups interested more in policy analysis than in professional standards, and…those who tend to emphasise local circumstances rather than national standards.
It cannot be assumed, however, that such organisational interests necessarily serve particular external interests….
The corporate approach is a management instrument that can be used to serve or to oppose any particular external interests’(Stewart J 1983: 172 — 3).
The critics of corporate approaches will not be satisfied by Stewart's arguments.
They point first, to the political implications inherent in centralised policy systems irrespective of the policies decided.
John Dearlove argues ‘that they emphasise leadership and hierarchy and centralise and concentrate power into the hands of a small group of leading councillors and officers’(Dearlove 1979:183).
The emphasis is thus on the command structures found in private industry or commerce, where corporate techniques developed, rather than on the popular involvement and bargaining that should accompany democratic processes of public policy-making.
The very notion of public participation becomes a means of incorporating local opinion into a centralised system (Cockburn 1977).
Second, political objectives cannot be as clearly specified as the scientific or rational model seems to demand.
This leads to the adoption of objectives of such generality —‘to provide for the recreational needs of every section of the population’— that they are of little practical use.
It can even be argued that ‘overall objectives’ are inappropriate in ‘practical politics’(Haynes 1980: 100).
The practical politician will not be tied by a commitment to rigid policy objectives, but will search for a high level of consensus around a policy generally favourable to the viewpoint of his or her political party.
The politics of the corporate planner are the politics of the rationalist for whom ‘The conduct of affairs…is a matter of solving problems’(Oakeshott 1962:4), rather than a process of maintaining our common heritage.
Such arguments serve to remind us that scientific management has right-wing as well as left-wing critics.
Practicalities and scientific management
There is a long-standing debate among theorists of management and administration about the possibility of rational approaches.
The rationalist model has been outlined above: it is matched at the other extreme by an approach emphasising the incremental nature of most actual decisions.
The practical critics of scientific management Point to the impossibility of meeting the strict demands of the rational model of decision-making.
The collection and evaluation of the data necessary to make a full comparison of all the ‘alternative choices’ available in any policy process are beyond human capabilities, even when aided by computers.
The difficulties are not simply concerned with the quantity of data, but with qualitative differences as well.
If a new road is being considered, how does one judge between reduced lead pollution in one area and increased noise levels in another?
Or between such environmental health factors and the demolition of a Saxon church?
Attempts to reduce all the factors to a common denominator through placing a monetary value upon them are riddled with uncertainty.
What is the monetary value of a Saxon church or a life saved from a preventable road accident?
Cost-benefit analysis attempts an answer to such questions, and can provide a helpful stimulus in comparing alternative courses of action, but it is costly and ultimately based upon value assumptions that are not always made clear to those who read the reports (Self 1972:288 — 9).
Many of the techniques of scientific management have been developed in private industry and commerce.
They do not always transfer easily to the public sector.
Simon argues, ‘In one respect the decision problem in private organisations is much simpler than in public agencies.
The private organisation is expected to take into consideration only those consequences of the decision which affect it , while the public agency must weigh the decision in terms of some comprehensive system of public or community values’(Simon 1957:69).
These values may not be agreed between the political parties and may be subject to emotional fluctuations among the general public.
A well-made television programme —‘Cathy  Come Home’ is often quoted — may have more effect on policy-making than a scientific assessment of alternative ways of utilising limited resources.
A public body is also accountable both politically and administratively: the politicians consider the effect of a given decision on the electorate at the next election; and the administrators are anxious to avoid any risk of criticism.
The procedures of public decision-making, therefore, may be more cautious than in the private sector, and more prone to the excesses of paper record-keeping in case the decision needs to be defended at a later date.
The consequence may well be the forms of bureaucracy that so occupy the attention of administrative reformers.
As W S Steer pointed out, ‘…the department which prides itself on never making a mistake is almost certainly grossly overstaffed’(Wiseman 1970:87).
Conclusion
The difficulties inherent in the ‘rational’ approach to public policy-making and administration have led to a renewed interest in ‘incrementalism’in local authorities.
There is less emphasis on corporate planning, and on ‘structure plans’ that would provide a policy framework within a county over a fifteen- or twenty-year period.
In place of these grand documents are ‘rolling programmes’ that are revised each year, and the even more prosaic procedures of periodic adjustments in response to perceived needs and anomalies when resources become available — the classic ‘incremental’approach of local government.
These procedures are not without academic credentials (Haynes 1980: 102 — 7), and describe the way most organisations have always behaved for most of the time.
They are now conducted, however, within a very different administrative framework following the changes introduced in the wake of the Maud and Bains Reports.
Stewart argues that ‘the corporate approach has led to important structural changes that have created new roles for actors in local authorities’(Stewart 1983: 172).
These changes provide an opportunity for the ‘mode of thought’ of the rational model to act ‘as a countervailing force to the well-documented tendencies within organisations and departments to perpetuate existing policies and resist innovation and change’(Leach 1982:7).
In more recent work, Professor Stewart argues that, although the corporate approach retains its purpose as a challenge to the dominant functional perspective, the ‘concern of the new management cannot be restricted to the corporate centre’(Stewart 1986: 148; cf Stewart 1989).
Local authorities need to rediscover their closeness to the local community through the diffusion of power to neighbourhood offices or other forms of community management.
There is a need, also, to respond to the changed circumstances of constraint and pressure upon resources by supporting the political basis for policy choice.
The arguments are taking yet another turn, but only serve to emphasise the differences between management in the private and public domains (Ranson and Stewart 1989).
Scientific management techniques will always be an uneasy support for political processes.
Chapter six
LOCAL GOVERNMENT FINANCE
Many of the major controversies concerning local government in recent years have been related to finance.
The subject is so complex, however, that attempts to move beyond the shallows of generalities into the deeper water of detail frequently leave the reader floundering.
The present chapter is written for students of urban politics rather than for accountants, but even so there will be a need for some technical discussion.
We shall be concerned in the main with the amount spent by local government, the services upon which it is spent, and the ways in which the expenditure is financed.
There is also a short section on the special role of the audit in local government.
We conclude by considering alternatives to the present system of local taxation.
Some aspects of the methods of containing local government expenditure introduced by the Conservative governments in the early 1980s have been left for the later chapter on intergovernmental relations.
They had much more to do with the politics of the relations between central and local government than with financial procedures.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT EXPENDITURE
Local government expenditure is divided between current expenditure and capital expenditure.
Current expenditure consists of those items that recur regularly: expenditure on wages and salaries is the most typical example.
Capital expenditure creates an asset that provides a lasting benefit such as a school or a house.
Naturally, the distinction is not as clear-cut as these simple definitions imply: current items do not all disappear on the initial day of consumption; and neither do all capital items last for generations.
In addition to current and capital accounts, appropriate local authorities must by law maintain separate accounts dealing with such services as housing and transport.
The difficulties of assessing total local government expenditure are of two kinds.
First, what items should be included — or excluded; second, what comparative measure of expenditure should be used.
Money spent on goods and services is sometimes the only expenditure included, on other occasions interest charges and transfer payments to companies and individuals are added to arrive at total current expenditure.
To this figure capital expenditure is added to obtain an overall total.
Some of the distinctions being made will be discussed further below, but the way in which different figures for local authority expenditure may be obtained should already be clear.
Differences will also arise depending on whether the figures refer to England and Wales, Great Britain (including Scotland) or the United Kingdom (including Northern Ireland).
As always with statistics, one needs to ask what exactly is being counted, and for what purpose.
Having arrived at a suitable total for local authority expenditure, the next problem is how to express it in a way that allows comparisons to be made either with other contemporary expenditures or with local authority expenditure over time.
When we learn from National Income and Expenditure Statistics that local authority current expenditure in 1988 was £46,453 million our first inclination may be to gasp!
Our second should be to search for appropriate measures for comparison.
Obviously we cannot simply rely on the raw figures if we wish to consider whether local authority expenditure had grown since the £9,230 million spent in 1974 — the year of reorganisation.
The considerable price inflation between these two dates, for example, had an effect on the figures.
This effect can be removed by expressing the expenditure in constant prices by statistical manipulation with an appropriate price index — the choice of which is itself a sensitive issue — but even such sophistication does not allow comparisons with what is happening in the rest of the economy.
The usual solution to this problem is to express local authority expenditure as a proportion of the gross national product (GNP), that is, the total value of the output of goods and services produced within the country, together with the net property income from abroad.
Again, there are different ways of calculating GNP.
The various outputs may be added at market prices, or the effect of subsidies and taxes on expenditure may be excluded to arrive at GNP at factor cost.
The latter method will produce a lower total of which local authority expenditure will consequently form a higher proportion unless appropriate adjustments are made.
Even with such adjustments the proportion may vary between the two approaches if local authority expenditure contains a different proportion of taxes than the GNP as a whole.
The previous two paragraphs may cause the non-mathematically minded to mutter the old adage about there being lies, damned lies, and statistics.
Such a conclusion would be a pity.
Statistics are a convenience and if  properly used allow a mobility between one set of numerical data and another that is not otherwise possible.
But, to pursue an analogy from the motor trade, the small print should be examined, arid one should be careful of the person from whom one buys a second-hand statistic.
The student should look underneath to check that the basic framework is sound, but not be surprised if the framework varies from one source to another.
After all, the construction of one motor car may differ from another without affecting its performance.
However the statistics are compiled, an examination of local government expenditure shows a steady increase over the years.
It now forms a significant part of the country's output.
Christopher Foster and his colleagues estimate that total local expenditure in Great Britain, both current and capital, ‘increased from about 3 per cent of GNP in 1870 to about 18 per cent in 1975’(Foster et al .
1980:78).
Within the overall Upward trend there have naturally been fluctuations and current and capital expenditure have not always behaved in the same manner.
For example, between 1965 and 1975 current expenditure rose quite rapidly as a proportion of GNP, while capital expenditure remained ‘reasonably constant at around 5 per cent ’(Foster et al .
1980:78).
Great Britain is not alone in witnessing a growth in local government expenditure.
By 1975 local expenditure represented over 20 per cent of GNP in Scandinavian countries and had been increasing substantially in other parts of Europe (Newton 1980:8 — 9).
After 1 975 the position changed in response to both economic and political pressures.
Current expenditure continued to grow in real terms, that is allowing for the effect of general inflation, but capital expenditure fell sharply (DOE/Welsh Office 1983a:5 — 6).
Between 1975 and 1981 ‘total local authority expenditure declined by more than 16 per cent in real terms, with a further sharp fall in 1981 — 2’(Wright 1982:17).
The reasons for the growth in local authority expenditure during the 1960s and early 1970s may be summarised as follows.
First, an increase in the general wealth of a country is usually associated with a greater proportionate increase in expenditure on services of the kind provided by local government.
Foster et al show a long-run tendency for ‘a 1 per cent increase in real income per head…to be associated with a 3 Per cent increase in local current expenditure per head’(Foster et al .
1980:90).
As the economy grows, basic living needs are met more easily and extra resources are available for travel, recreation, education, social care and other services that affect local authority budgets.
The growth in such services will often stem from government legislation providing for higher standards as the following examples make clear.
The establishment of polytechnics in the 1960s and the general growth of further education, followed by the raising of the school-leaving age to sixteen in 1972, caused a rapid growth in educational spending on both capital and current account.
New schools and colleges had to be built and more teachers had to be trained and employed.
At the same time there was a rapid growth  in the provision of social services.
This growth was again encouraged by government legislation such as the Local Authority Social Services Act 1970.
This period also saw expansion of motor-car ownership which led to both the provision of more and better roads and other traffic-related expenditure.
Finally, dissatisfaction with housing conditions produced schemes for slum clearance or improvement and substantial house-building programmes.
Second, an increase in demand will sometimes occur as a consequence of maintaining existing standards as other circumstances change.
An increase in the number of children born, for example, will create an additional demand for education.
Improvements in social conditions and health care will extend the life-span of many elderly people thus increasing the demand for welfare services.
Social changes, such as an increase in the number of divorces, may lead to a growth in the demand for more, but smaller, houses or flats, and place extra demands upon child-care services.
These changing circumstances, which are outside the control of governments either national or local, are often of considerable significance.
The number of children born in a year, for example, reached a peak of about 900,000 in the early 1960s and fell to about 600,000 twenty years later.
This circumstance placed extra demands on the education service during the 1960s and 1970s and made possible a reduction in expenditure in the 1980s, in both cases without any change in the level of service provided (Bailey 1982).
Finally, there are a number of factors leading to an increase in expenditure that may affect local authorities at particular times.
In a period of inflation, for example, when wages and salaries are increasing rapidly, local government may be disproportionately affected.
The services provided by local government are labour intensive and have fewer opportunities than other branches of the economy for introducing labour-saving equipment.
The reorganisation of local government in 1974 was another event which undoubtedly accentuated the general tendency for local expenditure to grow.
There was a natural pressure for the newly created local authorities to adopt the highest standards provided for particular services in any of the former smaller authorities within their boundaries.
These higher standards were then generalised throughout the larger area.
The two-tier structure introduced for the first time in some urban areas was another source of increased costs (Alexander 1982a:Ch.3).
The abolition of some second-tier authorities in the mid-1980s did not, however, necessarily lead to corresponding savings.
The transitional costs of any reorganisation can be high.
So far we have considered reasons for the general increase in local government expenditure over the years.
Local government expenditure also differs between local authorities: some spend more than others per head of population on particular services (Foster et al .
1980:261 — 3).
The reasons for these variations are difficult to disentangle.
So many factors may be statistically linked that causality is hard to establish.
In his  pioneering study, Noel Boaden ‘suggests that activity in any service will depend on the incidence of need for that service, on the disposition of the authority to provide the service and on the availability of resources with which to provide the service’(Boaden 1971:21).
These three factors are central to any discussion about urban politics, and ‘needs’ and ‘resources, are terms that recur in every consideration of central government grants.
The ‘need’ for a service may appear obvious.
We might expect a clear relationship, for example, between the number of school children and the amount of spending on education.
The policies pursued by one local authority may, however, differ from those of others with Apparently identical ‘needs’.
After a study for the Layfield Committee, Diane Dawson concluded: ‘we do not at present have any way of finding out why particular policies are adopted by local education authorities.
Why do some authorities make greater provision for pupils with special needs than other authorities faced with the same Problems?’
(Dawson 1976: 14; Hoggart 1983)‘Needs’ other than education may be even more open to interpretation.
How do we measure the ‘need’ for public parks, for an art gallery or for a pedestrian precinct?
When we turn from ‘needs’ to ‘resources’we find that these vary with the general wealth of an area.
One of the objectives of central government grants, however, is to reduce the importance of this factor for individual local authorities.
Boaden found no evidence that the availability of resources was a cause of spending by local authorities though the lack of them may obviously ‘limit how far any authority can go’(Boaden 1971:116).
We are left with the importance of ‘disposition’ which encompasses the political factors involved.
Boaden found that Labour councillors have a tendency to favour higher standards, and hence to support larger expenditures by local authorities, even when allowance is made for other contributory factors (Boaden 1971: 112).
Foster et al .
confirm this finding (Foster et al .
1980:302 — 3), while Dawson draws attention to the probable importance of parent demand (a Political factor) in determining ‘differences in expenditure per pupil’(Dawson 1976: 14).
The technicalities of local government finance obviously cannot avoid the political nature of the decisions being taken (Sharpe and Newton 1984).
DISTRIBUTION OF EXPENDITURE
The broad distribution of local authority expenditure in the United Kingdom is given in Table 6. 1.
The amount against current expenditure final consumption includes all the goods and services provided by local government.
Nearly half of this amount goes on education.
Other big spenders include personal social services and the police, each of which takes about a tenth.
No other service takes more than 3 or 4 per cent.
The subsidies mentioned in the table are mainly directed to housing, passenger   transport and other economic affairs and services.
The grants include scholarships and maintenance awards for students is well as rent rebates and allowances.
Debt interest forms a substantial proportion of local authority expenditure: this burden was reduced as both capital expenditure and interest rates fell in the early 1980s.
The table shows a surplus provided by local authorities to allow for contingencies such as salary and wage increases.
The estimates of these contingencies tend to consider the worst outcome from the point of view of the local authorities.
This avoids the embarrassment — or worse — of overspending.
A substantial surplus usually remains, therefore, at the end of each financial year.
CAPITAL EXPENDITURE AND INCOME
Capital expenditure is defined (Local Government and Housing Act 1989: Clause 40) in terms of the acquisition or enhancement of land, roads, buildings and other structures, together with the acquisition of plant, machinery and apparatus, and vehicles and vessels.
Enhancement in this context means the carrying out of works which are intended to lengthen substantially the useful life of the asset, to increase substantially its open market value, or to increase substantially the extent to which the asset  will serve the purposes of the local authority concerned.
The size of local authority capital expenditure for selected years is shown in Table 6.1.
Capital expenditure by local authorities is subject to close central government control.
This control is justified as part of the general responsibility of central government for national economic management, and since 1990 it has been achieved mainly by controlling the money used to finance capital expenditure.
Local authorities are free to pay for capital spending from revenue and thus balance the benefits of capital and revenue spending against each other.
Naturally, this discretion is constrained by the limits placed on local authority current income (see below).
Central government may also make grants towards some approved capital expenditure (see Table 6.2).
More significant, from the point of view of central control, are the restraints on borrowing and the use of capital receipts.
Local authorities may borrow money from the National Debt Commissioners, the Public Works Loan Board, or by means of loan instruments such as bonds or local authority stock.
Such borrowing is subject to an aggregate credit limit which includes all forms of local authority debt (Local Government and Housing Act 1989: Clause 62).
Local authorities are also constrained in the proportion of capital receipts they may use to support capital expenditure.
The sale of council houses has produced substantial capital receipts, and smaller amounts have come from the sale of other assets.
Conservative governments obviously encouraged such sales as part of their general policy of reducing the size of the public sector.
Seventy-five per cent of the receipts from council-house sales, and half of the receipts from other sales, must be set aside as provision to meet credit liabilities (Local Government and Housing Act 1989: Clause 59), and only the remainder is available for further capital expenditure.
These proportions may be varied by regulations but they obviously have the overall effect of reducing the total indebtedness of local authorities.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT CURRENT INCOME
Current expenditure is supported by income from three broad sources: grants from central government, local taxation and a residual mixture referred to as ‘other income’.
Details are given in Table 6.2.
We will consider these three sources in the ascending order of their importance in supporting current expenditure.
OTHER INCOME
Local authorities obtain income from various rents, fees and charges for the services provided.
Housing rents are the largest source of income under  this heading, but many other services show some income.
There are fees for further education courses and charges for school meals; people pay something towards the cost of home helps and residential care for children or the elderly; commercial customers pay for refuse collection; and so on.
There is also an income, usually a small or even negative net figure when costs are taken into account, for such trading services as markets, slaughterhouses, aerodromes, cemeteries and crematoria, and passenger transport.
Although these various sources of other income provide substantial sums of money, they only occasionally provoke political controversy.
The charge for school meals is one sensitive issue.
Another is the fares paid on passenger transport.
In this latter case a major controversy arose in the early 1980s between a Conservative government committed to a reduction in public expenditure and several local authorities controlled by the Labour Party.
The Labour councils sought to use low fares as both a part of their overall planning policies and a means of   redistributing income in favour of lower income groups.
This conflict resulted in legislation that will be considered in Chapter 11.
Conservative governments and local authorities have recently taken a renewed interest in charges.
They are considered a useful source of income and an efficient method of measuring or allocating demand.
For the latter purpose proposals are sometimes made for charges to be linked with the distribution of vouchers that can be ‘spent’ on the appropriate service.
An education voucher, for example, could be used to obtain a place at a state school, or as part payment of private school fees.
This would provide, in some people's view, a fairer competition between state and private education, and lead to a reduction in the need for the state to provide such a large proportion of the service.
Such proposals are naturally a major source of controversy between the political parties but some local authorities have undoubtedly been looking at charges with a fresh eye in recent years.
LOCAL TAXATION
Some form of property taxes are an almost universal source of income for local government, but in many parts of the world they are accompanied by other forms of taxation.
The variety is immense.
Local sales taxes, motor vehicle duties, poll taxes, taxes on industry, on commuters, or on tourists, are all used somewhere in the world — and local income taxes are common.
The Layfield Committee were ‘aware of cases where as many as 22 different local taxes [were]in use by one authority’(Layfield 1976:190).
In Scotland until 1989 and in England and Wales until 1990, the only local tax capable of local adjustment was the rate levied on occupied property.
This traditional form of taxation remains in an amended form for non-domestic ratepayers but domestic rates have been replaced by the community charge, or poll tax as it is popularly known.
These two taxes win be described in turn and at the end of the chapter other possibilities, including local income tax, will be discussed.
Rates
Rates have their origin in attempts to share responsibility fairly among local residents for services provided in common.
They pre-date modern income taxes and have developed in their present form since the Poor Relief Act 1601 (Foster et al .
1980: 157 — 9).
In formal terms, rates are a local tax levied on the occupiers of land and buildings.
Like all taxes they consist of two elements: the tax base, or what is to be taxed; and the tax rate, or the amount to be levied on the tax base.
The tax base, or rateable value, is the net annual value of the property occupied.
This is defined as the rent which it might reasonably be expected to command if let from year to year, with the tenant bearing the rates and the cost of insurance and repairs.
The rate is then expressed as a  poundage on the rateable value.
The rates actually paid, therefore, may be calculated, It will be clear that the rates paid may vary with a change in either the rateable value or the rate poundage.
This is true of any tax.
For example, the income tax we pay may vary with changes either in our income or in the rate of tax charged.
Rates are a particularly unpopular tax, but as recently as 1983 the government concluded, ‘they do have advantages.
They are highly perceptible to ratepayers and they promote accountability.
They are well understood, cheap to collect and very difficult to evade…rates should remain for the foreseeable future the main source of local revenue for local government’(DOE/Welsh Office 1983a: 14).
The criticisms of rates relate both to the method of calculating the rateable value and to the incidence of this form of taxation.
Rateable values are now assessed nationally, thus removing this sensitive matter from the local authority influence, which continued until 1950.
The assessments, however, have become fraught with difficulties.
They are supposed to be related to rental values, but little property is rented on a year-to-year basis.
Commercial and industrial property is usually subject to longer agreements, while by the time domestic rates were abolished most domestic property was either owner-occupied or rented from a local authority or other public agency.
The calculation of rateable values has become, therefore, more and more removed from the base upon which it is supposed to rest.
These difficulties have been compounded by the infrequency of revaluations.
These have been postponed by successive governments and only three occurred in England and Wales between the end of the Second World War and the abolition of domestic rates in 1990.
These took place in 1956, 1963 and 1973.
A revaluation in Scotland in 1985 caused a political furore and justified the general caution with which governments had generally proceeded in this matter.
During the long periods between revaluations, distortions in the relative valuations of different properties occurred and, of course, new property had to be valued at the notional figure that would have obtained at the date of the previous revaluation.
The difficulties of the present valuation system have been widely recognised and alternative proposals have been made.
These proposals would make either the site value or the capital value the basis for valuation.
Site value rating would tax ‘the market rental of each site on the assumption that it was available for the most profitable permissible development’(Layfield 1976: 170).
The difficulties associated with this approach include the assumption that comprehensive and detailed development plans exist for every property.
These neither exist nor are necessarily desirable on planning grounds.
Capital value rating has received more substantial support.
The Layfield Committee recommended its adoption for domestic property (Layfield 1976: 171) and the government  appeared to accept the point (DOE 1977e).
But once again the prospective change was lost in further postponements of a general revaluation.
The use of capital value ‘that is the price which a property would realise if sold on the open market’(Layfield 1976:170) would not be neutral in its effects on ratepayers.
This is one reason, perhaps, for the caution of successive governments.
The incidence of a tax describes the distribution of the burden it places on different individuals or groups within society.
A proportionate tax distributes these burdens as a ratio of income: each taxpayer contributes the same proportion of income in tax.
A progressive system increases the proportion of tax as income increases.
The justification given is that richer people are better able than poorer people to carry a relatively larger share of the tax burden.
A regressive system reverses this process.
The proportion of tax paid decreases with increases in income: or to put it the other way round — the proportion of tax paid increases at lower levels of income compared with higher levels.
Rates on domestic property are essentially a regressive tax: the value of the house or other property occupied by a taxpayer tends to decline in relation to increased income.
In other words, if one person has double the income of another, the property occupied will not necessarily have twice the rateable value.
Non-domestic rates are also regressive but various measures have sought to ease the burden.
Agricultural land and buildings have been completely free of rates since 1929.
Scottish industry was half-rated from 1958 (Foster et al .
1980:316 — 413).
Industry in Northern Ireland is not subject to rates.
Finally, rates are a deductible expense for tax purposes from company or partnership profits.
A new system of rating for non-domestic property was introduced in England and Wales on 1 April 1990 (Scotland, 1989).
The government argued that the previous system distorted business competition through the variation in rate poundages across the country; further, that it undermined the accountability of a council to the people in its area.
This arose as local businesses paid rates but did not receive a vote.
They could not, therefore, influence spending decisions in the area.
The level of rates could also rise substantially from one year to the next and was unpredictable as a basis for business decisions.
Finally, the rateable values were out of date as no revaluation had occurred since 1973.
The new system introduced a National Non-Domestic Rate (NNDR) together with a revaluation of business properties.
Subsequent revaluations are to take place at not more than five-year intervals (Local Government Finance Act 1988: Clause 41).
The NNDR is set by central government, collected by local authorities, and paid into a central pool.
The total is then distributed among local authorities on the basis of the number of people listed on the Poll Tax register.
The legislation provides for separate calculations to be made for England and Wales.
The Secretary of State may not increase the NNDR from year to year by more than the increase in the Retail Price Index.
In Scotland the NNDR is also ‘linked to the Retail Price Index, but non-domestic rate revenue [is]retained by the local authority, rather than being pooled and redistributed’(Blair 1988a:6).
The NNDR has been criticised for not addressing the deficiencies identified by the government in the previous system.
First, a variation in rate poundage across the country did not necessarily imply a corresponding variation in rates actually paid.
This depended not only on variations in rate poundage but also on rateable values, which varied from one part of the country to another.
In some cases a relatively low rateable value more than compensated for a high rate poundage (Blair 1988a:2).
Second, by averaging the payments made to local authorities, the new arrangements loosened rather than strengthened the links between local authorities and businesses in their areas (Midwinter and Mair 1987:97 — 102).
The most serious criticisms of the new arrangements were concerned not with such technical arguments, but with the political consequences of introducing NNDR and revaluation.
The beneficiaries of the averaging process were to be found in urban rather than rural areas and in the North rather than the South of the country.
The effects of the full implementation of the changes would have been substantial for particular areas and many small businesses would have been badly affected.
The government estimated that nearly one in three businesses would pay rate increases of more than 50 per cent over the first few years, with some paying more than double their previous bill.
Of 1.6 million properties on the new valuation list, ‘928,000 would lose, 590,000 would gain, and 108,000 would experience little change’(The Independent 21. 12.89:2).
The government provided transitional arrangements to ease the difficulties of a sudden and simultaneous introduction of NNDR and revaluation.
Increases necessary to meet the new rate demands were limited to 15 per cent each year for smaller businesses and 20 per cent each year for larger businesses.
In some cases transitional arrangements continue until the end of the 1990s.
Community Charge or Poll Tax
The Conservative government of the early 1980s was committed to the replacement of domestic rates by a system of local taxation that improved the accountability to the local tax-payer for the spending decisions of the local authority.
The Layfield Report on Local Government Finance (1976) had favoured a local income tax, but this was unacceptable to the government (see pages 112 — 13) and no alternative appeared able to raise the sums required.
By 1983, the government seemed resigned to the continuation of the rates and sought other ways to curb what it perceived as the excessive expenditure of some local authorities (see pages 185 — 9).
The Conservative Party manifesto for the 1987 General Election returned to the issue.
It contained the commitment ‘to abolish the unfair domestic rating system and replace rates with a fairer Community Charge’.
Powers to introduce such a tax in Scotland had been included in the Abolition of Domestic Rates etc.
(Scotland) Act 1987 and were implemented in April 1989.
The Local Government Finance Act 1988  extended the system to England and Wales.
The government preferred ‘community charge’ to ‘poll tax’because of the ambiguity of the latter term.
A poll tax may be ‘a tax levied on every person; a capitation or head-tax’(Oxford English Dictionary ) or it may be a tax related in some way to the right to vote.
The community charge is a poll tax in the first sense but not in the second.
There are three types of community charge.
The personal community charge is paid by all resident adults over 18 years of age with certain exceptions.
The exceptions include the homeless and those who live in residential homes, hospitals, prisons or certain religious communities.
School pupils of 18 years of age are also exempt.
People on low incomes are entitled to rebates of up to 80 per cent, and further help is included in payments to those in receipt of income support.
Full-time students pay 20 per cent of the personal community charge.
The standard community charge is payable in respect of second or further homes.
The local authority fixes the amount subject to a maximum of twice the personal community charge.
There are no rebates.
The collective community charge applies to some houses in multiple occupation, some lodging houses and some hostels.
The landlord collects the charge on the basis of the number of days a person has been resident and passes it to the local authority.
Rebates are available on contributions to the collective community charge and, of course, it is not applicable to all residential homes and hostels.
Some are exempt from the community charge altogether.
The level of community charge is set by districts and boroughs after taking account of the precepts of other local authorities.
The Secretary of State indicates the level of community charge deemed necessary for each local authority to provide an acceptable standard of local services, He also retains the power to limit the level of community charge in a manner akin to the former ‘rate-capping’ powers.
The introduction of the community charge aroused considerable controversy around three main issues.
First, the charge is inherently more regressive than the rates it replaced as the tax base is the individual rather than the size of his of her property (Travers 1989a:21).
This regressive nature of the community charge is modified by the systems of rebates and exemptions.
Other provisions protect some community charge payers from the effects of the change from rates where this change would result in large increases in their payments.
Second, the community charge is more costly to collect than rates (Blair 1988b; Travers 1989b:22 — 4).
One reason for this is the need to maintain an up-to-date register of those liable to pay.
This register is not identical to the electoral register and includes foreigners resident in this country and others not entitled to vote.
The number on the register is far greater than the number formerly liable for domestic rates — one reason for the introduction of the new system — and it is correspondingly more difficult to prevent non-registration and evasion.
Any substantial evasion increases  the burden on those who pay because central government grants assume a certain level of income from the community charge for each local authority.
Third, the incidence of the increases in payments during the transition from rates to community charge was Perceived as falling disproportionately on Conservative voters in marginal seats.
Conservative backbenchers put pressure on the government to provide safeguards for households which would lose by more than a certain amount.
The arrangements to achieve this aim added to the complexity of the scheme and hence to the administrative costs (Travers 1989b:13).
GOVERNMENT GRANTS
Government grants to local authorities may be justified for two reasons.
First, as a support for services that have a national or general significance as opposed to being of simply local concern.
The government places a statutory responsibility on local authorities to provide certain services and is not indifferent to the general level of service in localities.
Second, grants may be justified as a method of redistributing the burden of providing an equal level of services among local authorities that differ in both their needs and their available resources.
Grants may be paid to local authorities in either a specific or general form.
Specific grants provide a set proportion of approved expenditure on particular services.
The proportion may vary: 50 per cent for one service; 75 per cent for another; 90 per cent for yet another.
A specific grant allows central government to encourage local authorities to pursue particular policies by making money available only for programmes of which they approve.
Specific grants have increased in importance since 1974 and now account for approximately a quarter of current grants (excluding the housing benefit scheme) from central government to local authorities.
The police account for over a third of these specific grants.
General grants, on the other hand, provide a lump sum in support of local authority expenditure: the amount is not allocated to specific services.
From this very complex subject two topics concerning government grants to local authorities have been selected for discussion in this section: the overall relationship between local taxation and grants as sources of local authority income and the methods used to distribute the general grant.
Local Taxation and grants
The proportion of local authority income deriving from central government grants grew steadily from the middle of the nineteenth century.
At that time grant was minimal but by the 1930s it matched the rates as a source of current income (Bennett 1982:44).
This rough equivalence continued until the 1960s after which the rapid growth in local authority expenditure placed such pressure on the rates — with predictable political controversy  — that central government steadily increased its contribution to local finances.
This contribution reached a peak of around two-thirds of the combined income from rates and grants in 1976.
Thereafter the grant contribution fell.
The pattern of these recent movements is shown in Table 6.3.
The consequences of the declining importance of grants after the mid-1970s were obviously the opposite of the consequences of their former growth.
A greater burden was placed on the rates which could only be met either by cuts in services or increases in rate demands.
The reduction in the proportional importance of government grants to local authorities accompanied a general attempt by governments in the 1970s and 1980s to reduce public expenditure.
The reduction was intended not only to save central government expenditure but also to put pressure on local authorities to curb their own spending by increasing the local cost thus making the expenditure more ‘visible’ to both councillors and the electorate.
In the government's view the relationship between the decision to spend and the financial discipline of meeting the cost had been weakened as the proportion of local expenditure covered by grant had increased.
The government's concern was with the level of public expenditure rather than with the relationship between grant and local income by itself.
This relationship has been a concern, however, of those who perceive the growth of central government financing as a threat to the independence of local government.
The Layfield Committee on Local Government Finance posed stark alternatives.
Either finance local services from central funds and cease to pretend that local autonomy exists, or increase the ability of local authorities to raise their own income.
They argued: ‘whoever is responsible for spending money should also be responsible   for raising it so that the amount of expenditure is subject to democratic control’(Layfield 1 976:283).
The rates were incapable of bearing the burden in their view and they expressed cautious support for a local income tax.
The government in its response to Layfield (DOE 1977e) refused to accept the logic of the alternatives presented: they believed, as politicians are wont to do, in the possibility of finding less radical compromises.
In the event, as we have seen, the Layfield Report was published at the high point of the importance of government grants as a proportion of local income.
Thereafter, both Labour and Conservative governments reduced the proportion, and by the end of the 1980s the community change had replaced the rates.
General grants
A full discussion of the methods of distributing the general grant is beyond the scope of this book.
In their major work on local government finance, Foster and his colleagues describe it as the ‘mystery of mysteries’(Foster et al .
1980:4) while Bennett in more prosaic style simply refers to it as ‘very complicated’(Bennett 1982:3).
The difficulties arise in attempting to devise a formula that will distribute the grant so as to equalise its effects on the needs and resources of all local authorities.
The methods of distributing the general grant have varied over time.
From 1967 the grant was known as the rate support grant (RSG) and contained three elements described by Bennett as follows:
(i)Domestic rate relief : a per capita subsidy to local residential taxpayers as opposed to commercial and non-domestic taxpayers,(ii)Resources equalisation : a component aimed at equalising differences in the tax base of different local authorities.
(iii)Needs equalisation : a component aimed at equalising differences in the expenditure requirements of different local authorities (Bennett 1982:3).
Domestic rate relief was introduced in 1967 as a result of concern at the regressive nature of the rates and the burden they were thought to impose on ratepayers.
In 1981 the resources and needs elements of RSG were combined to form a block grant paid direct to all local authorities and in 1990 the system was changed again with the new grant paid to the ‘charging authorities’ that is, those responsible for collecting the community charge.
The system used to distribute RSG after 1981 became increasingly complex as the government sought to contain local expenditure.
Grant was withheld as a penalty if local authorities spent more than a specified amount and this involved detailed assessments of each authority's needs for expenditure.
As part of the changes in local government finance introduced in 1989 and 1990, the method of distributing grant to local authorities was simplified.
The name was changed to the Revenue Support Grant (still RSG) and the domestic and resources elements disappeared.
The grant is now needs based and designed to compensate local authorities  for differences in the cost of providing a standard level of service in each area.
The approach to needs assessment used in the former RSG has been described as ‘a brilliant device provided one does not inquire too closely into what it means’(Foster et al .
1980:423) and the present system presents some of the same difficulties.
The principal problem is the lack of precise measures of need (Midwinter et al .
1987:35).
Simple per capita assessments, such as the number of schoolchildren, give a very crude measure of need.
The assessment has to be refined, to continue the example, to take account of special needs posed by different circumstances or types of children.
These adjustments to measurable criteria may be made by reference to research studies or to ‘expert’ judgement.
In some cases statistical techniques (regression analysis) are employed that may use past expenditure on particular services as a proxy for need.
This produces something very close to a circular argument: a local authority ‘needs’ to spend more because it spent more previously!
In Scotland a different method of assessment of need has been adopted in response to‘a desire to avoid the heavy dependence on statistical method implicit in the regression analysis approach in England’(Midwinter 1984:67).
The Client Group method takes the number of clients for each service in each local authority and multiplies these by the average expenditure per client based on national figures.
Various adjustments are made to allow for special circumstances affecting local costs of providing particular services.
This approach has been criticised on similar technical grounds to the assessments of need in England and Wales.
In addition there is the conceptual difficulty of defining clients for some services such as the police or highways.
The assessment of needs is not, therefore, a matter of objective measurement.
The assessment is riddled with judgements made on the basis of professional experience or political choice.
Such a subjective process is controversial by its very nature and becomes more so when changes are introduced each year that may have important consequences for the grants payable to individual local authorities.
LOCAL GOVERNMENT AUDIT
The accounts of all local authorities are subject to annual external audit.
Until 1983 the District Audit Service carried out most of this work in England and Wales with the balance being audited by commercial auditors approved by the Secretary of State for the Environment.
From 1983 an Audit Commission absorbed the District Audit Service.
Local authorities no longer have the power to appoint their own auditors.
The commission  is independent of both central and local government although the Secretary of State has a power to issue directives and local councillors are included among its membership.
The new arrangements for England and Wales were anticipated in Scotland following local government reorganisation in 1975.
A Commission for Local Authority Accounts in Scotland ‘is required to appoint a Controller of Audit and to secure the audit of all local authority accounts, either by directly recruited officers of the Commission or by private practitioners appointed by the Commission,(Layfield 1976: 100).
The requirements for local authority audit are wider than those appropriate for commercial accounts.
The code of practice for the former District Audit Service referred to four additional responsibilities.
First, the auditor must be satisfied with the legality of items of account under the strict rules governing ultra vires expenditure (see Ch. 1).
Second, there is a duty to ensure that different sections of the public have been fairly treated.
Third, there is a specific responsibility to uncover fraud.
Fourth, there is a general duty to report on matters arising from the accounts that should be brought to the attention of the council and the public.
The auditor, therefore, ‘must be concerned not only with the form and regularity of the accounts but also with issues of substance arising therefrom, such as the possibility of loss due to waste, extravagance, inefficient financial administration, poor value for money, mistake or other cause’(Layfield 1976, App 1: 188).
The Layfield Committee received complaints about the difficulties of providing safeguards against inefficiency when a local authority is acting within its legal powers.
Ultimately, this responsibility must rest with the electorate, but they do not always receive the information necessary to make judgements.
The Audit Commission originated in these concerns of the Layfield Committee, but its role has been widened to encompass general questions relating to efficiency in local government.
A member of the commission writes of four main differences from the previous arrangements:
1.
The Audit Commission will have resources to do more worth on value for money; 2.
It has no powers to impose solutions on a local authority, but it can insist on adequate publicity for its reports; 3.
It has the powers to investigate the impact of central government actions on economy, efficiency and effectiveness of a local authority.
Local government has frequently complained in the past of the adverse effect of some legislation and many ministerial directives.
In the future they can ask the Audit Commission to investigate the effects; 4.
Above all it has the authority to create the atmosphere for an improvement in the efficient use of the resources from which all local government can benefit (Shaw 1983:21).
The commission should not be concerned with local authority policy decisions, but in how these decisions are implemented.
The distinction  may on occasion be difficult to discern.
Decisions on management structures may themselves be decided on political rather than efficiency grounds (see Ch. 5).
Accountants are not professionally qualified to distinguish between the lack of cost effectiveness arising from legitimate political decisions of councillors and that arising from management failures (The Times 5.4.83).
In these respects and in matters concerning central-local government relations, the Audit Commission has found itself even more involved than its predecessors in matters of political controversy (McSweeney 1988; Gyford 1989).
DISCUSSION — ALTERNATIVE SOURCES OF LOCAL TAXATION
Any local tax should meet several criteria if it is to be introduced.
The Layfield Committee suggested two principal considerations.
First, any new source of revenue should be capable of producing a yield large enough to provide for the possibility of a substantial reduction in both grant and domestic rates.
Second, in order to enhance accountability local taxation should ‘be clearly perceptible.
Thus the level, and most importantly the change in the level, of any source of revenue should be set locally…’
(Layfield 1976: 184).
In addition to these considerations of Layfield, the collection of the tax should not be excessively costly or present substantial new administrative problems.
Finally, a local tax should interfere as little as possible with the ability of central government to pursue its economic policies (Foster et al .
1980:483 — 4).
When measured against these criteria most of the alternatives to the present system are less than convincing.
A local tourist tax, for example, would produce little revenue in most parts of the country.
On the other hand, a local sales tax which could produce high revenues would be complex to administer, and difficult for the local elector to disentangle from value added tax or prices in general.
Moreover, variations in a local sales tax, or in a tax on vehicles or petrol could lead to unwanted distortions in trading patterns.
Some people already move house to escape high taxes based on local residence: it would be even easier to change shopping habits to escape higher sales taxes.
After a careful examination of all these factors, the Layfield Committee concluded: ‘a local income tax (LIT) on personal incomes, levied according to where people live, is the only serious candidate for a new source of local revenue that could give a substantial yield and at the same time maintain or enhance accountability’(Layfield 1976: 190 — 1).
They did not consider the introduction of a poll tax in their review of sources of local taxation.
Presumably they thought such a tax to be politically unacceptable: it is  also regressive and administratively expensive to collect (see pages 106 — 7).
Notwithstanding the reorganisation of local government finance in 1990, the interest in LIT remains and the arguments around the Layfield recommendations are worth rehearsing.
The advantages of introducing LIT would be considerable.
The tax base would be buoyant — that is, it would increase as incomes grew — and the amount paid could be related to income to produce a proportionate or progressive yield instead of the fundamentally regressive impact of rates and the community charge.
A LIT would also be immediately visible to a wide section of the population — income-earners.
The revenue raised could be substantial.
Despite the advantages, British governments have not considered it either desirable or possible to introduce LIT.
The reasons are political, economic and practical.
The political difficulties lie in the relationship between LIT and national income tax.
The level of income tax is a sensitive political issue.
Movements in the basic rate of tax are part of the campaigning rhetoric of general elections.
The public would not easily distinguish between local and national tax payments.
In any case a government committed to a reduction in taxes on incomes would not welcome the substitution of LIT for domestic rates (DOE/Welsh Office 1983a: 13 and 1986:23).
In addition, the government believed that local taxation should reflect the role of local authorities as service providers.
It was inappropriate, they argued, for local authorities to have access to a redistributive tax such as income tax (DOE/Welsh Office 1986:24).
In the evidence to the Layfield Committee, the Treasury outlined the economic implications of LIT.
Such a tax would, they concluded, both ‘constrain and complicate the government's ability to manage the economy’ and ‘carry some possible risk to incentives and to the encouragement of inflationary wage demands’(Layfield 1976, App 8:211).
Two academic members of the Layfield Committee have subsequently described this as ‘just the centralist orthodoxy that should be challenged’(Jones and Stewart 1983b: 100), but it is at present firmly entrenched.
The practical difficulties of introducing LIT have been stressed by the Inland Revenue.
The existing income tax system in this country is more complex than in other countries.
This would complicate the administration of LIT.
The differences also mean that references to countries that already have LIT are not as persuasive as would at first appear.
Another difficult problem to overcome is the lack of an appropriate address list from which to allocate LIT payers to appropriate local authorities.
The Inland Revenue keeps no up-to-date list as most people are taxed ‘at their place of work rather than where they live’(Travers 1986: 119).
The administrative difficulties led the Inland Revenue to argue that unless the national income lax system was made simpler the addition of LIT ‘would be too much’(Layfield 1976, App 8: 185; cf.
Bonner 1977).
The Confederation of British Industry after examining the extra work for employers described themselves as ‘horrified’ at the thought of LIT (Layfield 1976, App 8:249).
For the present these views are likely to prevail despite Layfield's conclusion that LIT was ‘feasible’(Layfield 1976:207).
The government decided against further work on LIT and replaced the rates by the community charge.
Moreover, the growing dependence of local government on central grants that so concerned the Layfield Committee has been reversed.
The proportion of local authority expenditure supported by grants has been reduced to a figure Layfield thought could only be reached with the aid of LIT (Layfield 1976: 184).
This reduction has, however, been accompanied by stringent central controls rather than an increase in local independence.
The arguments for LIT from those who wish to see local autonomy preserved continue (Jones and Stewart 1983b:99 — 102) and there is some political pressure for LIT to replace the community charge as the main source of local government taxation.
The discussion about the merits of LIT that began with the introduction of the modern local government system at the end of the nineteenth century is more likely to stand adjourned than be ended.
Chapter seven
LOCAL COUNCILLORS, PARTIES AND PEOPLE
Local authorities in Britain are part of a wider democratic system of government.
As such there is controversy about the extent to which it is justifiable to describe them as political systems in their own right.
Cox and Morgan define a political system as ‘a set of structures and processes, the core of which is an authoritative centre of decision making’(Cox and Morgan 1973:21).
Local authorities possess in the full council meeting a ‘centre of decision-making’, but they do not control all public policy decisions within the geographical area in which they operate.
Many decisions are taken by local and regional offices of national government departments and other agencies.
These provide a network of public services complementing those provided by local authorities.
In some instances, such as the payment of various National Insurance benefits, the national services are unrelated to the activities of local government.
In other cases there is a close interaction between national and local government responsibilities.
We may instance transport, where there is a complex relationship between a central government department, local authorities and British Rail.
The Training Commission's involvement in vocational training in local authority colleges of further education provides a further example.
In addition to these complications of overlapping jurisdictions within the locality, local government itself is constrained by central government influence and control in a manner we shall discuss in Chapter 10.
Despite these possible obstacles to defining the boundaries and content of a local political system, local government has traditionally shown two characteristics of autonomous behaviour which have been reflected in different policy outcomes between local authorities of otherwise similar conditions.
These two characteristics are control over an independent source of taxation and the legitimacy conveyed by popular election of the local council.
Local government finance was dealt with in Chapter 6, and we now turn to the relationship between the elected councillors and their  constituents.
The interaction of local government with national institutions and central government will be considered in Chapters 9 and 10.
Local government is based on the system of representative democracy: councillors are elected to make policy on behalf of the general population.
One justification often advanced for local government is the opportunity thus presented for wider sections of the population to become involved in political responsibilities than could be accommodated at a national level.
Representative democracy, however, whether at national or local level, must be distinguished from the participatory approaches that provide for direct involvement in the policy-making process (Pateman 1970).
The number of councillors is small relative to the size of the population they represent; and the ratio has grown still larger since local government reorganisation in the 1970s reduced the number of local authorities and hence of councillors.
In considering a local representative system it is necessary first to discuss the nature of both the electoral practices and the people who become elected.
Second, we are concerned with how the representatives perceive their role and how they organise themselves to fulfil their tasks.
Finally, we need to know how the representatives relate to the people they serve.
These relationships between politicians, parties and people form the basis of the chapter.
We conclude with a brief discussion of the interaction of some recent participatory initiatives with the local representative system of democracy.
THE LOCAL ELECTORAL SYSTEM
Councillors are elected in a similar manner to Members of Parliament.
The same Electoral Register is used for both types of election and much the same criteria for inclusion and exclusion are applied.
There are some differences, however, and these are best understood if we consider first those who may vote in local elections and second those who may be elected as councillors.
Every British citizen (or citizen of the Republic of Ireland) who is over the age of eighteen is entitled to vote unless disqualified for a specific reason.
A Register of Electors is compiled each year listing those people resident in the area on the 10 October.
The new register comes into use the following February.
Registration is compulsory — though voting is not — but there are still some people who are not registered either by accident or because they wish to avoid declaring their residence.
People disqualified from voting include those convicted of corrupt and illegal practices in elections during the previous five years; those imprisoned for a criminal offence; and those detained in psychiatric hospitals.
Members of the House of Lords appear on the Electoral Register for local and European electoral  purposes only: they are allowed neither to vote in parliamentary elections nor to serve as Members of Parliament.
Conditions for voting in local and national elections only became fully assimilated following the Representation of the People Act 1969.
Before that Act non-residents could register for the vote in local elections if they occupied property in the area with a rateable value of at least £ 10 per annum.
This provision now applies in the City of London only.
The link between ratepaying and voting went back to the foundation of the present local government system.
‘In 1835 the Municipal Corporations Act had established the rule that the right to choose the borough councillors should be restricted to those who, as ratepayers, made a direct contribution to the funds which the councillors would control’(Keith-Lucas 1952:224).
The local government reforms following 1888 established new authorities with a franchise almost identical with the municipal boroughs.
After 1945 the local franchise was extended to all residents in the area but the right to qualify by occupation of property remained until 1969.
Bryan Keith-Lucas has described how during the nineteenth century the local government franchise gradually became based upon general Acts of Parliament rather than on a ‘medley of jurisdiction and authority’ deriving from the common law and local Acts (Keith-Lucas 1952:221).
During this process some women first lost and then gained the right to vote.
At common law married women were excluded from the vote along with many other privileges that were open to men.
‘The position of single women was less clear…in some boroughs they voted on an equality with men’ and although there was no general rule women could vote in many parish vestries (Keith-Lucas 1952: 165).
The Municipal Corporations Act 1835 specifically excluded all women from the local borough franchise, but single women continued to enjoy the vote and even the right to be elected in many parishes and important local bodies, such as the Poor Law Guardians, associated with them (Hollis 1987).
The emphasis on property-holding, and hence liability for rates, as the basic qualification for the franchise in local elections was thus an advantage for some women in the struggle for the vote.
Several Acts of Parliament in the latter part of the nineteenth century extended the right of women to vote in local elections if they were otherwise qualified.
By 1911 the size of the local electorate in England and Wales excluding London was 3,265,000 of which about 419,000 were women (Sheppard 1982:20).
These precedents contributed to the campaign for the parliamentary franchise although full equality with men was not achieved in either local or national elections until 1928 (Keith-Lucas 1952: 165 — 9; Keith-Lucas and Richards 1978:18 — 19).
The qualifications necessary to enable a person to stand in a local electionaire more extensive in some instances and more restrictive in others than those which enable a person to vote.
A registered elector over the age of twenty-one may be a candidate if not disqualified, but in addition people may stand for election if they have occupied property, been resident  or had their main place of work in the area for at least twelve months.
In addition to the disqualifications that apply to voting, a person may not be a candidate if he or she has been declared bankrupt within the previous five years, has incurred or authorised unlawful expenditure by a local authority above £2,000, or is a paid employee of the local authority in question or the holder of a politically restricted post in another local authority (see pages 88 — 9).
COUNCILLORS
Three national surveys have given details of the types of people who are elected as councillors.
The field-work for the first was conducted in 1964 as part of the research for the Committee on the Management of Local Government.
The terms of reference of this committee referred to the need for local government to ‘continue to attract and retain people…of the calibre necessary to ensure its maximum effectiveness’(Maud 1967, Vol. l:iii).
The second survey was conducted in 1976 for the Committee of Inquiry into the System of Remuneration of Members of Local Authorities (Robinson Committee).
The third survey was conducted in 1985 for the Committee of Inquiry into the Conduct of Local Authority Business (Widdicombe Committee).
The question of payments to councillors will be considered below, but first we shall look in more detail at the results of the three surveys.
The surveys were conducted in the context of a perceived need to encourage able people to put themselves forward for election.
This concern about the calibre of councillors has a long history.
George Jones has quoted from The Times of 1880 to show that it existed before the creation of the present local authorities (Jones 1969: 150).
John Dearlove in his critique of the reorganisation of British local government reviews a literature that consistently points to a decline in the standards of councillors.
He quotes Hennock who wrote, ‘It seemed to many observers that there had been a change for the worse since 1835!’
(Dearlove 1979:80).
The view that the concern about the declining calibre of councillors has much in common with the opinion that Punch is not as good as it used to be, and the well-known response that it never was, can be supported from the details given in Table 7. 1.
Councillors have better educational qualifications and are more likely to work in non-manual occupations that the population at large.
Of course, we cannot draw conclusions about the calibre of a person simply from his or her occupation or education, but these figures do not support the view that councillors lack either the education or administrative experience to perform their duties.
Table 7.1 shows several other changes between the surveys.
The proportion of owner-occupiers among councillors increased in line with the general growth in this form of tenure and they continued to exceed the general population in this regard.
Council tenants are substantially under-represented on local authorities.
The proportion of female councillors increased from 12 to 19 per cent, and the average age of councillors declined.
A thumbnail sketch of the average councillor would present him as white, male, middle-aged, middle-class, and with a higher than usual level of education.
This profile does not differ either from similar sketches of Members of Parliament or of those who participate in other forms of local public life (Boaden et al .
1980, 1982).
Indeed despite the small proportion of women councillors they are rather better represented in local councils than in Parliament.
Ethnic minorities are poorly represented on local councils: ‘the proportion of black councillors (i.e. both Afro-Caribbean and Asian)…is unlikely to exceed 1 per cent’(Gyford et al .
1989:48).
PAYMENTS TO COUNCILLORS
The surveys of councillors show a majority in full-time employment.
Such councillors face two problems.
First, they may have difficulty in obtaining the permission of their employers or colleagues to absent themselves from work while on council business.
Second, they may suffer financially through loss of earnings during their absences (Robinson 1977, Vol. 1:26; Widdicombe 1986, Vol. 11:58).
These two problems may merge to produce even greater difficulties for prospective councillors.
Employers may be expected to allow reasonable opportunities for their employees to engage in public service, but substantial demands for time off may either be refused or constitute a block to career advancement.
When a person is seeking employment, council membership and the demands it imposes are unlikely to recommend him or her to prospective employers.
There may be many councillors, therefore, who suffer substantial though undefinable loss of job opportunities through their council membership.
Two remedies for these difficulties have been advanced.
First, the payment of various forms of allowances to council members, and second the transforming of the role into a full-time occupation similar to that of a Member of Parliament.
The Robinson Committee reviewed the historical background to the remuneration of councillors: The 1948 Act established two new principles: council members should be eligible to receive payments for loss of earnings or necessary expenses; and these payments should relate to the performance of ‘approved duties’.
The allowances were varied over the years to take account of inflation, but were never particularly generous.
The loss of earnings allowance approximated to the average male industrial wage.
‘Approved duties’ included council and committee meetings and other duties approved by the council in accordance with its functions.
With only slight amendments these arrangements continued until the reorganisations in the 1970s.
Following the legislation in 1972 (England and Wales) and 1973 (Scotland) councillors were ‘entitled to receive an attendance allowance as of right, without the need to demonstrate financial loss, for the performance of duties approved by his local authority’(Robinson 1977, Vol. 1: 15).
Both the maximum daily amount paid and the limits of discretion in defining approved duties were subject to central government advice or regulation.
Co-opted members of council committees continued to be entitled to a financial loss allowance if they could show loss of earnings resulting from council work.
Later legislation, the Local Government Planning and Land Act 1980, gave councillors the choice between the two systems of allowances: loss of earnings allowance or attendance allowance.
The Robinson Committee were very critical of the attendance allowance system which they considered was ‘widely misunderstood’ and ‘distributes the money available on a wholly wrong basis’.
A system based solely on attendance does not take account of the range of a councillor's duties; leaves some councillors better off than others (depending on their employment situation); and does not adequately reflect the added responsibility carried by senior councillors.
For these reasons the committee recommended the abolition of the attendance allowance and its replacement by a combination of a basis payment, a financial loss allowance and a special responsibility payment for councillors occupying certain senior positions (Robinson 1977, Vol. 1:45 — 8).
The government did not accept fully these recommendations but as we have seen they gave councillors the choice between claiming an attendance allowance or financial loss allowance.
The same legislation Provided discretionary powers for local authorities wishing to pay special responsibility allowances to councillors holding such positions as committee chairs.
The total amount available varied with the size of the local authority.
The Widdicombe Committee proposed a simplification of the existing system by the replacement of the attendance allowance and financial loss allowance with a basic flat rate allowance paid as an annual sum.
The special responsibility allowance would continue (Widdicombe 1986: 131).
The government accepted some of the arguments of the Widdicombe Committee, but subsequent legislation scarcely led to a simplification of the system.
Under the Local Government and Housing Act 1989 (Section 181, the Secretary of State by regulations may authorise a local authority to  make a scheme providing for the payment of councillors.
The scheme may include a basic allowance for every councillor, an attendance allowance in relation to specified duties and a special responsibility allowance for members who have such responsibilities.
A separate scheme may provide for the payment of expenses and a loss of earnings allowance.
The aggregate amount paid out under these schemes may be limited to an amount specified in the regulations.
One alternative to the present system of allowances would be to pay councillors a full-time salary.
The Wheatley Commission were in favour of this approach (Wheatley 1969:224 — 5) but councillors generally have not been in favour and both the Robinson Committee and the Widdicombe Committee rejected the possibility (Robinson 1977, Vol. 1:45; Widdicombe 1986:127).
The objections are of both a constitutional and a financial nature.
If all councillors became full-time politicians then this would restrict the range of people coming forward for election and could alter the balance of the relationship between them and the officers of the council.
It would also be expensive if realistic salaries were paid and the existing number of councillors retained.
In countries such as Japan and the USA where salaried councillors exist there are typically far fewer seats available.
Despite these objections to creating full-time salaried councillors, the demands placed on those elected can be considerable.
In 1985 councillors spent an average of seventy-four hours a month on their duties, a slight decrease on 1976 when it had been seventy-nine hours (Widdicombe 1986: 126).
This figure had increased substantially since 1964 and, of course, conceals considerable variations for individual councillors.
A senior position on a major local authority is virtually a full-time job.
There is a growing number of councillors, particularly in the larger cities, who have no other paid employment and who rely on allowances for their livelihood.
The recompense is meagre, but when combined with ideological enthusiasm it helps sustain a new type of local politician.
COUNCILLOR TYPOLOGIES
Councillors differ in their attitude to their role and this has led to the development by political scientists of typologies to describe the variations.
The most elementary division is between those who concentrate on the representative function of a councillor by looking after the interests of individual constituents and those who prefer the managerial function of determining policy and ensuring its implementation.
In both 1976 and 1985 councillors spent on average thirteen hours a month on electors' problems.
For the rest of the time they were concerned with broader matters (Robinson 1977, Vol.
II:20; Widdicombe 1986, Vol.
II:42).
Unlike Members of Parliament, all councillors are formally responsible for policy decisions through attendance at full council or committee meetings.
The 1964 survey showed about a third of councillors preferring to deal with  the problems of individuals with 43 per cent preferring broad policy matters.
The remainder would not or did not distinguish between these two aspects of their work (Maud 1967, Vol. 2: 1 39).
The preferences were shown to relate to various characteristics.
Men and people in managerial or professional occupations preferred the policy-making aspects, while women and people in manual occupations preferred dealing with the problems of individuals.
A later survey in Sheffield showed how membership of a majority party, and consequently the opportunity to implement policies one agreed with, could influence these preferences.
Women with power, for example, were much less likely to conform to their role stereotypes than those without (Bampton 1970:193).
A more sophisticated analysis is presented by Kenneth Newton in his study of Birmingham.
He examines six different dimensions of the councillor's role:
(1) attitudes towards the nature of representation,(2) behaviour within council groups,(3) preference for governing the city as a whole or looking after the interests of a ward,(1) preference for dealing with general policy issues or with individual problems,(5) preference for specialisms in one aspect of council work or generalizing over them all, and (6) attitudes towards the involvement of community organisations in the government of the city (Newton 1976a:114).
From their attitudes to these six dimensions, Newton constructs five role types among Birmingham councillors.
The parochial is concerned exclusively with individual problems arising in the ward he or she represents.
People's agents extend this concern for individuals to a more generalised opposition to injustice and oppressive bureaucracy.
Policy advocates are concerned with running the city as a whole in line with policy preferences expressed, for example, in a party manifesto.
policy spokesmen are less ideological than policy advocates .
They are more likely to perform the classical political role ‘of mediator and reconciler of different interests’.
Finally, the policy spokesman speaks ‘on behalf of his constituents on general policy matters’.
He is a generalised parochial (Newton 1976: 137 — 42).
The new urban left
Such abstract typologies help us to understand the behaviour of councillors as a group but they do not necessarily apply to individual councillors who may exhibit characteristics drawn from several of the main types.
Moreover, different configurations may arise at various times.
One such development was the councillor associated with the ‘New Urban Left’(Gyford 1983b; Gyford 1985).
From the early 1970s a new attitude towards local government was introduced by sections of the left-wing of the Labour Party.
Their disillusion with the reformist nature of the Labour governments of the 1960s, and the excitement generated by the world-wide social unrest of 1968, led them to look for the possibility of social change in local protest movements.
By the early 1980s this strategy had been  linked to the idea of local government acting as a mobilising force for working-class organisations and radical action groups of various kinds (Blunkett and Green 1983; Gyford 1983b; Boddy and Fudge 1984; Seyd 1987:Ch. 6).
Using Newton's typology, the New Urban Left councillor showed some of the characteristics of both the policy advocates and the policy spokesman .
There was a strong commitment both to a detailed election manifesto and to decentralising policy discussions throughout the local Labour movement (Fudge 1981, 1984).
These attitudes led them to adopt an interventionist style in the management of local authorities that differred in many ways from the more orthodox approaches discussed in Chapter 5.
In some places policy units were established staffed by known sympathisers with the views of the councillors.
The councillors themselves often had professional expertise in the detail of local government services.
A survey in 1982 found that a third of the left-wing Labour councillors either worked for another local authority (including teachers) or were full-time councillors living off their allowances.
None of the Conservative councillors worked for a local authority in any capacity (Gyford 1983b:9).
The New Urban Left councils aroused considerable hostility from the government, and some anxiety from the leadership of the Labour party.
Much of the legislation affecting local authorities introduced in the late 1980s was drafted with the spectre of the New Urban Left hovering in the consciousness of government ministers (Lansley et al .
1989).
The legislation had its intended effect.
The collapse of the campaign against rate-capping marked the end of a co-ordinated New Urban Left (Green 1987: 220–1).
Of course, the degree of co-ordinated New Urban Left hovering in both Right and Left during the disputes.
There was little in common between Liverpool with its strong Trotskyist influence, the rainbow alliance politics of the GLC, and the more homely left-wing approach of Sheffield and some Northern cities.
Nevertheless, the New Urban Left councillors succeeded in changing the nature of the debate about the role and purposes of local government (Gyford 1985; Blunkett and Jackson 1987; Green 1987).
The efforts by the New Urban Left to encourage economic regeneration in their areas is discussed in Chapter 12.
Even more controversial were attempts to challenge the prevailing white male hegemony within local government.
Local government services for black people had been developed in the context of urban deprivation (page 218) with the implication that black people constituted a ‘problem’ requiring additional specific provision such as language tuition.
This approach effectively placed services for the black communities on the margin of mainstream service delivery and turned collective issues concerned with race into individual case work (Ben-Tovim et al .
1986: 163 — 4).
The New Left councillors, on the contrary, placed services for black people in the context of equal opportunities.
This had implications both for service delivery and for the recruitment of black staff — not to mention the encouragement of  black people to stand for election to the councils.
By 1987, ‘three London boroughs had black leaders’(Lansley et al .
1989:126) and many councils had established race relations units or similar structures to implement their policies for equal opportunities.
Local authorities introduced
a wide array of intermediate reforms…including anti-racist and race equality policies and programmes, ethnic record keeping and monitoring of jobs and services, establishment of race equality targets and timetables, appointment of specialist race relations staff across the authority departments, equal opportunity clauses in contracts and contract compliance policies, race training, positive action training, racial harassment procedures, and many others (Butcher et al , 1990: 124; cf.
Ouseley 1984:157–9).
These various developments led to considerable controversy both within local authorities and in the wider disputes between central government and the New Left authorities (Ouseley 1984; Lansley et al .
1989:Ch. 7) They also encouraged more positive attitudes towards racial equality in many local authorities far removed from the general philosophy of the New Urban Left.
The role of women in local government was another aspect of equal opportunities highlighted by the New Urban Left.
Sue Goss, chair of Southwark's Women's Committee between 1982 and 1986, claimed that because ‘of the specific roles to which women are constrained, they have a specific relationship to local government service provision, employment and political representation’(Goss 1984: 122).
Women continue to accept major responsibilities for managing the home and bringing up children.
These responsibilities are affected by major local government services such as housing, education and welfare.
Despite these close connections with many of the services provided by local authorities, women are poorly represented both among councillors and senior officers.
The result is local services that ignore many of the needs of women (Lansley et al .
1989: 143).
the establishment of women's committees in some local authorities in the 1980s was an attempt to counter the male bias within the system.
As with the race relations units and committees, the raising of issues concerning gender was controversial (Lansley et al .
1989:Ch. 8), but their commitment to equal opportunities policies was undoubtedly to the credit of the New Left local authorities.
POLICIES AND PARTIES
The incursion of party politics into local government is sometimes deplored but it is not a new development (Widdicombe 1986, Vol.
IV:81 — 105).
The vestries that pre-dated the modern system of local government were sometimes centres of party political activity at the beginning  of the nineteenth century, and this activity was carried forward into the town councils and other local bodies in Victorian England.
As Derek Fraser points out, ‘whether the pavement was drained and swept, whether the poor should be incarcerated in workhouses, whether Dissenters should pay church rates depended upon the exercise of power….
Politics intruded into the whole urban experience…’
(Fraser 1976:9).
The major party contests of the time were, of course, between the Tories and Whigs or, in the latter part of the nineteenth century, their successors the Conservatives and Liberals.
The emerging Labour movement also threw itself into local politics with enthusiasm.
Indeed for a short while in 1849 the Chartists obtained a majority of the elected members of the Sheffield council (Salt 1971:38).
Later in welcoming the new county councils in 1888 the Fabians argued that a ‘democratic State cannot become a Social- Democratic State unless it has in every centre of population a local governing body…’
(Shaw 1889:188).
The impact of the Labour Party on local elections in the years after 1918 (cf.
Goss 1988) caused the formation of many ‘anti-socialist’ coalitions under such names as ‘progressives’, ‘citizens’or ‘ratepayers’.
The conclusion is sometimes drawn, therefore, that the rise of the Labour Party was responsible for introducing national party politics into local government.
Such a view ignores the history of nineteenth-century local government and has been challenged for the twentieth century by Ken Young.
He argues that some Conservative leaders were predisposed to fight local elections on party lines from the moment that the modern system of local government was introduced.
He documents the influence of the national Conservative Party through the London Municipal Society and suggests ‘the reader may draw his own conclusions as to the degree to which the Conservative and Unionist party shares with the Labour and Liberal parties a responsibility for the decline of local politics’, and the ‘nationalisation’ of local political contests (Young 1975:33).
Whoever bears the responsibility, the domination of local government by party politics is now almost complete.
The metropolitan areas in England were contested on party lines from the first elections in 1973.
In the shire counties two at first remained non-party or dominated by independents, but by 1985 ‘the process of formal party politicization was completed’(Gyford et al .
1989:27).
In the rural areas of Wales and Scotland the tradition of non-partisan elections continues in some areas, but even so the role of the parties has been growing consistently since local government reorganisation (Gyford and James 1983:2; Keating and Midwinter 1983; 107 — 13).
The Labour Party gains its most consistent successes in London and the other major cities.
The former LCC was a Labour stronghold.
Although its larger successor, the GLC, changed hands regularly — from Labour in 1973 to Conservative in 1977 and back to Labour in 1981 — London remains the strongest source of Labour support in the South-East of the country.
The GLC, of course, was abolished in 1986 (see pages 44 — 5).
The Greater London boroughs have been divided in the past between the Labour Party which predominates in the inner-city and the Conservative Party which controls most of the outer suburban area.
In more recent elections the emergence of the Liberal Democrats has produced a number of councils without a clear party majority and a few with Democrat control.
The actual number of Greater London boroughs controlled by each party naturally varies from election to election and is strongly affected by the national political climate.
For example, the balance switched from Labour to Conservative in the majority of the thirty-two boroughs between 1974 and 1978.
Labour lost further seats in 1982, but regained a lot of ground in the late 1980s.
The Labour Party controlled all six metropolitan counties when they were formed in 1974.
Control was lost in four of them in 1977 but the Labour Party regained its monopoly of these strategic authorities in 1981 before they were abolished in 1986.
In most years, the Labour Party also controls most of the metropolitan districts.
Elections take place for a third of the councillors in each year that there is not a county council election.
In contrast to the Labour dominance in the larger cities, the Conservatives, sometimes in alliance with groups of independent councillors, have traditionally controlled most of the non-metropolitan or shire counties in England and Wales.
The major exceptions have been counties in the mining areas where there has been a basis for Labour support.
From the early 1980s, the position began to change as first the Labour Party and then the Democrats increased their vote at the expense of the Conservatives.
By 1985, over half the forty-seven counties were without a clear overall majority.
In Scotland, independent councillors still retain their position on some local authorities.
The three Islands Authorities have been controlled by Independents since their formation in 1975.
Of the partisan councils, most are dominated by the Labour Party with some nationalist presence on occasion.
The Conservative Party is very weak in Scotland.
Unionists of one grouping or another control most of the twenty-six district councils in Northern Ireland.
The elections are complicated, however, by the large number of small parties who contest a system of proportional representation.
Moreover, the councils are sometimes used as ‘weapons’ in the wider political controversies in Northern Ireland.
In 1986, for example, the Unionists suspended the normal working of seventeen local authorities they controlled as part of their opposition to an agreement reached between the governments of the United Kingdom and the Republic of Ireland.
Under pressure from the High Court some of the councillors subsequently voted to resume normal working but the action was undoubtedly a severe embarrassment to the central government.
Electoral behaviour
The influence of national political considerations on local electoral behaviour is so marked that Newton considers that ‘the term ‘local election’ is something of a misnomer….
Local elections are a sort of annual general election’(Newton 1976a:16).
He estimates that no more than 10 Per cent of the variance between the local election results in Birmingham and the national averages can be attributed to local factors (Newton 1976a: 14 — 15).
A rather different result was obtained by Geoffrey Green when he examined election results in Sheffield and Leeds for the years between 1951 and 1966.
He identified three components of local voting and attributed 73 per cent of the swing between party support to national factors, 6 per cent to city-wide factors, and the remainder to purely local factors at a ward level (Green 1972:51).
His results have been criticised by Newton for underestimating the effects of city size on the proportion of Labour voters.
These effects may express themselves differentially locally depending on the size of the city, but they are essentially national in character and reduce the influence attributable to local factors (Newton 1976a:17).
Following a survey for the Widdicombe Committee, Professor Miller concluded that ‘very few respondents declared a willingness to vote in a local election for the major party they opposed nationally’(Widdicombe 1986, III: 106).
Nevertheless, local influences continued to affect voting behaviour, while about four-fifths of the voters appeared to vote according to national party preferences, the remainder did not.
Miller considered that ‘local effects seem to move about one tenth of local voters away from their national preferences and towards ‘less political’ candidates….
And local influences may determine the local choice of another tenth of local voters who have no national preference’(Widdicombe 1986, Vol. 111:106).
There remains a local component in local elections.
The dispute is about its importance (Bruce and Lee 1982).
Moreover the smaller scale of the local political system allows minor parties and independents more opportunities than on the national stage (Gyford et al .
1989:29 — 34).
These are likely to be more important in rural than in urban areas (Stanyer 1975) but Green himself once obtained 773 votes as an independent candidate supported by a residents’ association in a ward election in Sheffield (Hampton 1970:291).
A major local issue, such as a redevelopment plan, or a sudden increase in the rates, as occurred in many areas in the mid-1970s, can cause the formation of a purely local party that enjoys some success at the polls (Grant 19771.
Such successes may be short-lived, but the possibility of it happening at all is a dimension to be considered by the major political parties.