

INTRODUCTION
There is normally more than one way of writing about a particular historical subject or period.
A book with a title such as this one could have concentrated on narrative and analysis of the political, military, and diplomatic aspects of the Hundred Years War.
The task was carried out, in remarkable circumstances, more than forty years ago by a good friend of England, the French historian, Edouard Perroy.
With justice, his book is still regarded as the soundest narrative account of the war available to English-speaking readers.
For all the criticisms which can be levelled against it, the work remains a successful attempt to make sense of the complicated relationship which existed between England and France over a period of more than a century at the end of the Middle Ages.
But the demands of modern approaches to the teaching of the subject, as well as the influence of research, have tended to move the writing of history away from narrative towards that of the study of themes.
The influence of the ‘Annales’ school of historical writing has been largely to place the study of war in the wider social, economic, and cultural background of the societies in which it was fought, to make war part of ‘total’history.
Such an approach has been characteristic of much of the best historical writing of the last generation or so.
In 1962 Piero Pieri addressed a Parisian audience on how he saw military history ‘spilling over’ into other aspects and specialisms of history, creating chain reactions which would bind them all together.
Three years later Dr  H. J. Hewitt published his influential book,The organization of war under Edward III, 1338–62 , in which, rather than describe activity of a narrow, military kind, he wrote about the relatively unglamorous background and preparation needed for war at that time and, indeed, ever since.
Others have now followed in placing war in its widest context, not only social and economic, but political, administrative, and legal.
Philippe Contamine's long study,Guerre, état et société à la fin du moyen age.
Etudes sur les armées des rois de France, 1337–1494 , includes all these elements and many more.
As a book on the history of men who went to war, it takes up Pieri's challenge, and meets it handsomely.
One day, perhaps, somebody will attempt to do for English armies what Contamine has done for French ones.
In writing this book, it has been my intention to try to see how war, over a period of 150 years or so, affected developments and changes in two of Europe's leading societies, those of France and England.
The purpose of a book of this kind is to distil the essential from modern specialised scholarship and to present the whole in some recognisable form.
In this case, much of that scholarship has come out of France.
Inevitably, therefore, the English-speaking reader will find that in some sections of the book the emphasis is on France and on how that country, in particular, reacted to the war.
In other places, the stress is more upon England.
In general, however, I have had it in mind to try (but not slavishly) to compare and contrast the effects of war upon England and France, in the belief that this approach can provide a thought-provoking approach to the subject.
This book begins with a narrative account of the main events and developments of the war.
Even so apparently straightforward a task is not carried out without difficulty.
The historian may relate what happened; but when it comes to explaining why events occurred as they did, and why decisions were taken as they were, he cannot always fulfil his role as he would wish.
He must be ready to speculate, for the sources (in this case the chronicles and records of government which provide him with much of his material) do not always come up to expectation.
By comparison with what is available to the student of more modern times, the medievalist's sources are often of very thin quality.
There are, happily, notable exceptions to this generalisation.
Financial records, for instance, when they survive at all , often do so in large quantities.
This is the case for the English king's financial archives which provide us with much information on the sums collected, how they were spent, and the organisation which lay behind that expenditure.
In a word, even from accounts we learn how administration functioned.
If  France's surviving financial records are not as good as English ones, her legal archives, particularly those of that great central institution, the Parlement of Paris, have left us with a remarkable human record of the effects of war upon society in France in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries.
By using such evidence the historian can come to terms with some of the everyday reality of the war, and how it touched the lives and outlook of men and women, famous and not so famous, rich and poor, whose experiences are described in the proceedings of civil and criminal cases which have come down to us in some number.
The pleadings of advocates contain much valuable information of an economic and social nature; we can learn much, too, about human motivation which made men go to war.
Legal records are unique in giving us an inkling of how people of the age saw the world about them.
Important, too, although not always easy to evaluate, is the evidence which we may call literary, not merely the chronicles, but rather the tracts, pamphlets, newsletters and even poetry through which people expressed their ideas and views, as well as their emotions, on contemporary issues and problems, which might be the need for government to be better managed, hope of peace, or the criteria according to which society's military leaders should be chosen.
Some of these texts are the work of writers whose literary fame and ability have merited the close attention of scholars of literature.
Christine de Pisan and Alain Chartier are two such who also attract the attention of historians for a different reason, namely that they were observers and critics of the world of early fifteenth-century France, both of them having things to say which, they hoped, would turn it into a better world.
It is in their observations and criticisms that the historian has an interest, for they enable him to judge what was important at the time, and how intelligent contemporaries reacted to the difficulties and dilemmas which faced men and women of the age.
What the historian is trying to do is not merely to record the events and happenings of war, but to study them against the background of the world in which the long Anglo-French conflict was fought.
We need to know why there was a war, and what factors in the early fourteenth century were influential in encouraging it.
Something, then, must be said of how men of that time regarded war, and how commonly-held attitudes may have encouraged them to take an active part in it.
The conflict under way, the significant questions are those which concern its  conduct.
Far from being unimportant, the study of administration and institutions has much to tell us about the increasing effectiveness of the state and central government in an aspect of government growing more important with every passing year.
Not all will necessarily agree with the suggestion that those who fight in wars are historically more important than the wars themselves.
War should be studied through those who take part in it, so that the attitudes and human reactions of those involved may be appreciated, and the phenomenon of war may thus come to be better understood.
Much recent research has centred on these broader aspects of war.
Few who have read Professor J. F. Verbruggen's The art of warfare in western Europe during the Middle Ages from the eighth century to 1340 will forget this vivid approach to the subject including, for example, his description of the very human fear experienced by men about to face battle, an emotion also vividly described in the more popular, but no less serious work of John Keegan,The face of battle .’
In these, and other works, the soldier as an individual occupies the centre of the stage.
Since wars involve others than those who face battle, that overwhelming majority who may prefer to have nothing at all to do with war, they cannot, and should not, be omitted from any modern consideration of the subject.
For the non-combatant was not to be merely the quiet underwriter of his country's military undertakings.
He had an active part to play, too, behind the scenes and, particularly in France, he was to be one of the main targets of the enemy's attacks.
Increasingly, historians have come to appreciate his role, and have sought in sources, often of a literary character, to understand how he faced war and reacted to the situations which it created.
Finally, war served to bring all members of a society, soldier and civilian, under the umbrella of national consciousness.
How that consciousness should be studied, what forms it took, how it expressed itself, are questions which those who study the subject, at whatever period, must be ready to answer.
In the late Middle Ages, symbolism was widely used to express a feeling of belonging to a people; likewise institutions, such as monarchy, played an important part in creating a sense of national identity; while the writing of history was deliberately fostered to encourage a feeling which the single word ‘roots’ will convey to a twentieth-century reader.
Since the quarrel which put the  kingdoms of France and England at odds with each other was based upon historical differences, it was only reasonable that history should also have been used both to emphasise the differences between them, and to allow each to show itself how its own history and its own characteristics had developed.
By treating his subject as widely as possible, by seeing it in terms of the history of war, rather than as the more narrowly defined military history, the modern student will come to understand it in its many facets and complexities.
In so doing he may come as near as he can ever hope to an understanding of war as people of the late Middle Ages knew it, no easy task even in the most favourable conditions, but one which cannot be attempted with any hope of success without a proper appreciation of the many threads which make up history.
Not the least is the role which individuals played in war.
Without them, there can be no history.
THE CAUSES AND PROGRESS OF THE HUNDRED YEARS WAR
Generally speaking, the Middle Ages accepted war with fatalism.
It was part of the divine plan, linked with famine, flood, and plague as a manifestation of God's punishment for sins committed.
A nation which experienced years of defeat and disaster (as France did in the mid-fourteenth century) beat its breast in self-reproach and accepted war's afflictions.
Since few questioned such a view, those of pacific leanings met with little sympathy.
While war's excesses were often condemned, war itself was taken for granted.
In a society whose social and economic system had originally been, and to a certain degree still was, organised to provide for such eventualities, this was scarcely surprising.
A world geared to war was unlikely to question why it should break out.
It formed part of the accustomed and natural order.
In more questioning times, with the historian seeking to exercise his right to examine the past, people have tried to explain why wars occur.
Attempts to do this are far from new.
Long ago, Thucydides distinguished between causes and occasions of war.
In modern times, people have looked to many different aspects of human activity as sources of conflict, not all of which may be seen as appropriate to medieval societies.
But some are.
The Crusades may be regarded as wars fought in the name of ideology and religion.
The Italian city states, and others, were for centuries in conflict in the Mediterranean over sources of, and outlets for, trade.
The movement of peoples, associated with the great increase in population of the thirteenth century, led to wars which, for example, in Spain were associated with the Christian reconquest of the Iberian peninsula from Moorish control, but which were also waged to satisfy the urge to find new lands, as was to happen in northern and eastern Germany under the rule of the Teutonic Knights.
In France and England it was the breakdown of the historic feudal order, no longer able to meet the demands of changing times, and its gradual replacement by an order of nations increasingly aware of their growing national characteristics, which was the fundamental cause of the long conflict which forms the subject of this book.
In all these cases, war was the result of major changes in the development of societies.
In some, the need for land was important, if not paramount; in others it was the search for markets.
In the case of the Hundred Years War, the causes of the conflict were to be found both in the long historic links between England and France, links which were gradually becoming weaker, and in the need to express in new terms the relationship between the two countries (arguably the two most powerful in western society in the late Middle Ages) taking into account elements such as national consciousness and diverging methods of government (to name but two) which historians recognise as being characteristic of late medieval European society as a whole.
THE CAUSES OF THE WAR
Where have historians sought the causes of the so-called Hundred Years War?
Traditionally, the answer has been found in the study of the two main factors which were at issue in the years leading up to what is regarded as the moment of outbreak of war, the confiscation of the duchy of Aquitaine by King Philip VI of France in May 1337 .
This act brought to a head problems of long standing whose roots were to be found in two factors.
The first was that, since the eleventh century, the kings of England had been lords of much of north-western France, an area extending from Normandy (in the time of William the Conqueror) through Maine, Anjou, Touraine, and Poitou to the duchy of Aquitaine which, a century later, Henry II had come to control through his marriage to the duchess, Eleanor, previously the wife of Louis VII of France.
There thus stretched from the Channel to the Pyrenees an ‘empire’(termed Angevin), ruled by one man who was also king of England.
At the same time there had grown up, mainly during the twelfth century, the extension of the authority of the royal house of France, the dynasty of Capet, through the insistence that the homage  due from the great feudatories to their king should be ‘liege’.
Then, when King John took over the French lands which he had inherited in 1200, he was allowed to do so only on condition that he should recognise them as being fiefs held of the king of France.
The power of that king, Philip-Augustus, over his vassal was further increased when, in 1203 and 1204, he conquered Anjou and Normandy which John, in spite of an attempt to do so in 1214, never recovered.
Nor was his heir, Henry III, any more successful, although he took part in an enterprise in western France in 1230.
In October 1259 Henry sealed a peace treaty with Louis IX (St Louis) of France whereby, in spite of his son's objections, he renounced his claim to Normandy, Maine, Anjou, Touraine and Poitou, while the French king, recognising Henry as his vassal in Aquitaine and other territories in the south-west, created him a peer of France.
The terms might appear generous to the English.
In reality, since they established a new feudal relationship between the kings of France and England, they sowed the seeds for much future trouble.
The sources of that trouble were twofold.
The first was the liege homage owed by Henry III (and, in future, whenever there might be a change of king in either England or France) to the kings of France, a kind of ‘priority’ homage which could involve the giving of military aid against any enemy of the French crown whenever it was demanded.
Equally, the giver of homage could not act in concert with, or give help to, any of his lord's enemies.
By creating a peerage for Henry III, Louis IX was only emphasising further the closeness of the allegiance which bound the two men.
Secondly, and in this case a matter of particular importance, was the fact that the duchy of Aquitaine was held by a king who, for purposes of this treaty, had become a vassal of another king.
Such a situation was likely to make for untold complications.
Thus, for instance, there were places within the lands held by the king-duke which were subject to a hierarchy of courts ultimately controlled by the Parlement, the supreme court of France which sat in Paris.
The sovereign legal rights of the French crown could, if and when required, be put to good political use in undermining the authority and prestige of the king-duke within his duchy.
Appeals could be heard and judicial enquiries set in motion by bodies outside the duchy.
And all the while such actions lessened the actual legal powers and authority of the king-duke, serving to encourage factional dissension within Aquitaine and, in particular, within its capital, Bordeaux.
It was soon recognised that unity of interest between lord and vassal  did not exist.
In Flanders, an area in which French and English interests clashed over issues which were strategic, economic and legal, Edward I intervened in 1294 as king of England in defence of the count, Guy, then in dispute with Philip IV of France.
But this intervention was more than a defence of English interests in north-eastern France.
In the previous year Philip IV had summoned Edward I, as duke of Aquitaine, to answer for an allegedly illegal act at sea off the coast of the duchy, and for the capture of La Rochelle by men from Bayonne.
Attempts to find a solution having failed, Philip announced the confiscation of the duchy of Aquitaine in May 1294.
In the following month, Edward broke his feudal links with the French crown, and the two countries soon drifted into war.
Although the fighting effectively ceased in 1297, peace was not established until 1303, when the duchy was returned and the status quo of 1294 was restored, Edward agreeing to marry his heir, the Edward II to be, to Isabella, daughter of the French king.
If, at least for some years afterwards, there was no real war, there was none the less plenty of tension in south-western France.
The war just ended had shown up the divisions between the pro-French and the pro-English factions within Bordeaux.
In the summer of 1306 there took place at Montreuil the first of a series of meetings (‘processes’) between French and English representatives to try to work out the legal position of the lands held by the English in Aquitaine.
The meeting was a failure, and was followed in 1307 by civil disturbances in Bordeaux and an appeal to Paris regarding the English appointment to the mayoralty of the ducal capital.
In 1311, further discussions were held at Périgueux: but, like its predecessor, this ‘process’ also failed to resolve fundamental differences between the two sides.
The only way now open to the English, in these years deeply involved in war against the Scots and in a domestic situation turning more and more violent, was retaliation.
When Vigier de la Rousselle dared to advocate the continuation of appeals to Paris in 1312, the whole matter was taken up in a very ‘political’ way by the authorities in Bordeaux, who accused Vigier of contempt of ducal authority and had him executed on a charge which was, in effect, that of treason.
Likewise when, in 1323, King Charles IV ordered a new fortified town, or bastide , to be built at Saint-Sardos, this was ineptly taken as a physical and legal attack upon the authority of the English who, probably without the knowledge of Edward II, attacked and burned the town in November 1323.
In its turn, such an act provoked French retaliation: the duchy of Aquitaine was again declared confiscate to the French crown, and an army was sent to take possession.
Within a short time a truce had been arranged, and in September 1325 Prince Edward, soon to become  Edward III, did homage, paid a relief (or fine), and thereby secured the return of much of the land which the French had overrun.
But not all.
The Agenais and other territories were not restored immediately; it needed a further war in 1326 and an agreement, concluded in March 1327, to secure the restoration of those lands.
At this stage, it is unlikely that the French were anxious to carry out a conquest of Aquitaine.
All that they wanted was the full recognition of their king's sovereign rights in the duchy, a moderate enough approach in which they had the support of the papacy, now becoming increasingly aware of its obligation to help in the diplomatic negotiations between the two countries.
So far the issues had been largely feudal.
By 1327, however, a second matter was poised to sour relations between England and France.
In January 1327 Edward II was deposed and succeeded by his son, Edward III.
Little more than a year later Charles IV, uncle (through his sister Isabella) of Edward III, also died, leaving no direct heir as king of France.
As nephew of the late king, Edward appeared to have a good claim, indeed perhaps the best claim, to succeed him.
His right, however, had been transmitted to him through his mother, and it was this transmission through the female, later explained as the inability of a woman to pass on a claim which, as a woman, she could not herself exercise, which worked against Edward's ambition.
When the French nobility, in whose hands the resolution of such a crisis lay, made its choice, that choice was to make one of their number, Philip, count of Valois, king.
The grounds were essentially those of suitability: Philip was French; he was eighteen years older than his English rival (then aged only fifteen); and he had always lived in France.
Although not, as Edward III was, a direct descendant of Philip IV, he was at least his nephew through his father, Charles of Valois.
In the circumstances the degree of kinship was sufficiently close to secure him the support he required.
Yet, in the context of the long-standing dispute of Aquitaine, Edward III's claim was strong enough to persuade him that he ought to pursue it, if only as an alternative means of achieving sovereign rule in Aquitaine.
Certainly, the claim was there to be used to Edward's advantage.
None the less in 1329 he did simple homage (all that was asked of him for the moment) at Amiens, following this up with liege homage in 1331.
In this mood of optimism negotiators met for another ‘process’, this time at Agen, in 1332 and 1333.
In their discussions the fundamental differences between the two sides slowly emerged: the legal position of the king-duke and the lands held by him; and, secondly, the problem of which lands the French were to control.
At the same time a polarisation of opinion in Aquitaine was gradually taking place, largely in favour of English rule, and by 1337 tension had reached a high level.
On 24 May  Philip VI declared the duchy confiscate to the French crown because of Edward's many acts of disobedience and rebellion.
It is this decision which is taken to mark the beginning of the Hundred Years War.
The medium and short-term causes of the outbreak of the war were, as we have seen, the problem of the feudal relationship of the king of France with his most important vassal, the duke of Aquitaine, otherwise the king of England, and that of the disputed succession to the crown of France.
By changing the historian's focus, these problems can be put into another perspective.
Traditionally the period of the Hundred Years War has been regarded as the time when the crown of France made great steps forward towards the achievement of a policy of centralisation begun under the Capetians some two centuries earlier.
While the differences between the crown of France and its vassals were expressed in a language which was essentially feudal (a new political vocabulary more suited to developments had not yet evolved), what was really happening was something remarkably ‘modern’, the laying of the foundations of a national state under one monarch whose territorial authority could only be effectively exercised through annexation or conquest.
Such a view tends to place less emphasis on the war between two countries and more on the internal conflict between the king of France and the duke of Aquitaine, a struggle between two blocks of territory and two rather different legal traditions: the ‘Angevin empire’, once ruled by the English, representing the area of customary law and local independence, the other part of France the more centralising tradition based on Roman law.
The alternative and, in the last resort, not so very different view is that which sees the Hundred Years War as a wider civil war in which a policy of royal centralisation, based on Paris, was opposed not only by the dukes of Aquitaine and Normandy (in both cases king of England), but by those of Brittany, and (late in the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries), Burgundy.
On the one hand was the development of the French state, its administration, its budget, its army, together with its emphasis upon the attributes of monarchy.
Pitted against it were the great princes, some with ambition to achieve political and legal independence of the crown.
To a slightly later age, the idea of France as a geographical unity, with Paris as its capital, seemed self-evident.
But men of the late Middle Ages did not always see things that way: for reasons of history, language, sentiment, as well as political expediency, their own independence and, consequently, the continued fragmentation of France, ought to be maintained.
Yet another view would see the war in terms of the relative geographical positions of France and England, and of the influence of these  upon economic interests.
On the one hand, France needed to bring her ‘natural’ maritime provinces (which included Aquitaine, Normandy, Brittany and Flanders) under royal control in order that the ports might be used for both commercial and military purposes.
On the other, England's best interest lay in denying the French king the use of ports and access to other coastal activities such as fishing, so that English trade, whether with Flanders or Aquitaine, might be conveyed in greater safety.
Aquitaine, with her valuable wine trade, was a major trading partner.
Flanders, at the beginning of the war, was still the principal manufacturer of cloth made from English wool, although from the mid-fourteenth century more and more cloth was to be made in England.
The loss of trade in either case (and there was the matter of England's wider markets to be considered, too) would mean a grave financial loss to the country, not to forget the crown which, since the reign of Edward I, had been taxing certain commodities, such as wool and cloth, as they left and arrived in the country.
The ability to do this must be defended, by war if need be.
1337–1360
Was a long war inevitable in 1337?
The hostilities which had followed upon the previous confiscations of 1294 and 1324 had not been long-lasting.
Now, however, matters were more complicated.
For giving moral support to Robert of Artois, who had been condemned by the French as a traitor and a declared enemy of the king of France, Edward III could be regarded as having acted against his oath of fealty through such a serious act of defiance.
But the French were capable of playing a similar game.
In July 1333 the Scots had been defeated at Halidon Hill, near Berwick, and Edward Balliol had done homage to Edward III for Scotland, while King David II retired to France, there to seek the support of Philip VI against England.
Almost immediately Philip, realising what an opportunity such an appeal for help gave him, declared that he would make no lasting settlement with England unless the Scots were included in it.
Edward had met this challenge by invading Scotland, but he was unable to bring the enemy to battle.
Nor could he get the Scots and their French allies to the negotiating table; the French publicly declared for the Scots, and promised them military help if they needed it.
As ‘man-in-the-middle’ Edward III was in a delicate and unenviable position.
His opportunity to counter the French threat came in the Low Countries, an area which had witnessed English intervention against France almost half a century earlier.
None the less, Edward's task was difficult.
Louis, count of Flanders, was pro-French; his subjects, however, dominated by the great cloth-weaving towns of Bruges, Ghent, and  Ypres were more likely to turn to England, the source of the wool upon which their industry and wealth depended.
In Hainault the count, William, was father-in-law to Edward III and brother-in-law to Philip VI; he might support either in his quarrel with the other.
It was upon such insecure foundations that the king had to build.
In May 1337 a splendid embassy left for the Low Countries; by a mixture of economic bribery (in the form of direct subsidies, the promise of wool, or important trading concessions) it won Edward some allies.
In September 1338, the emperor, Lewis IV, was prevailed upon — at a price — to appoint Edward imperial vicar in Germany and France, giving him rights to demand military service against France from subjects of the empire.
Could Edward make proper use of such advantages?
Even more important, could he afford the debts which he had contracted?
The fact was that Edward could not.
Nor did the Flemings feel that he was really supporting them; he had appeared to be using them for his own ends.
Thus the military activity which began in Flanders in 1339 had little effect.
In January 1340 Edward formally assumed the title of king of France (to which he had already laid claim in 1337), perhaps to make his Flemish allies feel that they were legally entitled to help him oppose their traditional lord, the king of France.
On 24 June Edward won the first notable victory of the war in the naval battle fought off Sluys (Fr L'Ecluse) at the mouth of the river Zwyn, at which a larger French fleet was decimated by superior English tactics and the better use of prevailing conditions.
Yet, although it broke the threat of a possible French invasion of England, the victory in itself brought little immediate advantage to the English.
Nor did the war on land make any progress, while those who earlier had been promised English largesse demanded what was due to them.
When Edward failed to pay, they abandoned him, forcing him to seal a truce with the French at Espléchin, near Tournai, on 25 September 1340.
Although the victor of a battle at sea, Edward returned home a bitterly disappointed man.
In 1338 he had issued the so-called ‘Walton Ordinances’ to help make the raising of supplies more efficient.
Once home, he sought scapegoats for his evident failure by dismissing his treasurer and chancellor, who had not, he argued, provided the backing he needed and deserved, and by turning on John Stafford, archbishop of Canterbury, whom he suspected of having been responsible for the lack of success.
At an early stage Edward III had come to realise that war was expensive and that his policy of subsidising princes to act in his interest against the French was not the way forward.
Other methods had to be found.
This process of discovery did not take long.
The dependence on allies  was soon dropped.
In 1341 England and France found both a cause and a theatre of war in which they might meddle further.
In April, John III, duke of Brittany, died, leaving two possible heirs, his half-brother, John de Montfort, and Charles de Blois, whose claim was through Jeanne, a niece of the last duke.
Each party sought assistance of one of the rival kings.
Montfort was promised the earldom of Richmond and sought active English intervention in Brittany on his behalf, while Blois obtained the support of Philip VI.
The war between them was to drag on until 1364, a period of some twenty years.
If its details are largely peripheral to the main story which we are tracing, its significance was considerable.
Here, less than a year after the ending of the ‘phoney war’ in the north-east, was a proper casus belli which was important to each side in the wider conflict.
For the French king, the opportunity of exercising a greater measure of control over Brittany, with its maritime outlets, was not to be missed.
For Edward III, the possibility of establishing a ‘client’ ruler in a strategically placed duchy (off whose shores all English military and commercial traffic bound to and from Aquitaine and western France had to pass) was also a highly desirable political end.
Furthermore, it gave the English a door into France: soldiers might land on the Breton peninsula on their way into the interior of France, and the possibility of a more co-ordinated attack from different directions came a step nearer.
Both France and England had positive reasons for intervening in Brittany.
In the autumn of 1342 Edward III himself did so, winning over parts of the duchy and leaving Englishmen in many of the castles and garrisons, including Brest, the port destined to remain in friendly hands for much of the next half century or so.
The war was slowly escalating.
To counter this development, Pope Clement VI called the main parties to a conference at Avignon in October 1344.
But it soon became apparent that the divisions between the French and English ran very deep.
To the English, no settlement could be envisaged without consideration of their king's claim to the crown of France, a claim which might be compensated for by the grant of other territories in France, to be held in full sovereignty.
The French, on the other hand, would only see developments which took account of the most recent feudal settlement of 1327.
If they gave up territories in exchange for the surrender of Aquitaine, these would have to be held feudally in dependence of the crown of France.
Not surprisingly, the talks broke down.
No wonder that the winning of the French crown became so important a part of Edward III's war policy.
Before long the king was back again in France.
In July 1346 he landed in Normandy with an army of perhaps some 15,000 men.
In this enterprise he had the support of one of the leading Norman ‘dissidents’, Geoffroi d'Harcourt, who represented the dissatisfaction of the duchy at the way it was being ruled by the Valois king.
On this expedition Edward met little opposition.
The most notable capture was that of Caen which fell at the end of July, and which, according to the chronicler Froissart, was the source of much material gain which was taken down the river Orne to the coast for shipment back to England.
Continuing his march eastwards, Edward came to within not many miles of Paris before swinging northwards in the direction of the Channel.
It was while he was on his way that he was overtaken by the French army at Crécy-en-Ponthieu where, on 26 August 1346, the first of the major land battles of the war was fought.
Had Edward in fact planned to meet the French army?
It is possible, although we cannot be sure of it.
There can be little doubt that his tactics constituted an invitation to the French to catch and challenge him.
Yet in 1340 Philip VI was already showing himself to be master of the tactic which the French were to employ in the years to come, that of avoiding direct contact with the enemy.
The question was, for how long could such a policy of inactivity be allowed to continue?
The English manner of waging war, that of the chevauchée , the raid carried out largely by mounted soldiers (who were thus fully mobile) through the enemy's countryside, with the intention of pillaging enemy property, destroying crops, and thereby creating an air of insecurity, could not be allowed to continue too long unchallenged, since such an exercise undermined (as it was intended to do) the authority of the king of France, who was responsible for the defence of his people.
How long could the French king continue to ignore the thief in his back garden?
Thus it was that Philip VI, who was not without military skill and experience, felt obliged to seek out and, if possible, defeat the English king and his Norman supporters.
The attempt was to prove disastrous.
Although tired and running out of provisions, the English had several advantages: a good defensive position; a united command; and the use of an army which had already proved highly successful against the Scots, a combination of archers and dismounted men-at-arms for which, in the conditions prevailing on the day, the French cavalry and the crossbowmen of their Genoese allies proved no match.
In the event, Philip VI fled the battlefield, with both his personal and his royal reputation tarnished.
The same day, however, was to make the reputation of another man, Edward, eldest son of the king of England, known since Tudor times as the Black Prince, whose courage and  chivalric conduct won him general admiration.
Nor was Crécy the end of the campaign.
The English, fresh from their victory, went on to Calais, at that time still French.
The place was besieged, and over a period of months, including a winter, the English grip tightened.
French attempts to relieve the pressure failed, and on 4 August 1347, after almost a year of blockade by both land and sea, Calais fell to Edward III.
This was the first of many long sieges which were to be characteristic of the war.
As a result, England now had its own foothold upon France's northern coast through which trade and armies might enter; or, as the emperor-elect, Sigismund, was to express it in the next century, a second eye to match the other, Dover, in guarding the straits.
While the siege of Calais was in progress, in answer to a call from the French, the Scots attacked the north of England.
In October 1346, at Neville's Cross, near Durham, they were met and defeated by the defensive forces of the region, the king of the Scots, David II, being taken prisoner.
Further, in June 1347 Charles de Blois, the French candidate to the duchy of Brittany, was taken in battle by Sir Thomas Dagworth; like David II he, too, was sent to the Tower of London as a prisoner.
The fighting season 1346–7 was one for the English to remember.
It proved a fitting finale to what had been the first period of sustained fighting in the war.
A factor which could be regarded as an act of God now intervened.
In 1348 the bubonic plague, known as the Black Death, struck Europe for the first time and, in conditions of poor sanitation, famine and undernourishment, made rapid progress.
Spreading through France, it made a dramatic impact upon England and Wales in the following year, and reached Scotland in 1350.
Then, for a decade or so, its effects diminished considerably.
None the less these had been sufficient to bring the war almost to a stop.
When it is recognised that England may have lost about one-third of her population in these critical years, the lull in military activity becomes understandable.
Nor was there much inclination in France to pursue an active military policy.
In the midst of this, in August 1350, Philip VI died.
If, at first, his rule had appeared to be to the benefit of France, in the last years it had suffered considerable setbacks.
Could his son, John, who had so far had no success against the English in the south-west of France, do any better?
It seemed not.
When, in 1353 and 1354, the negotiators got down to their work again, this time in Guines, near Calais, the English made demands which the French at first seemed willing to concede: Aquitaine, Maine, Anjou, Touraine, as well as other lands would be ruled by the English in full sovereignty.
At the last minute, however, when the terms were being finalised at the papal court, the French withdrew: the  making of such concessions, which involved so much principle as well as territory, could not be countenanced.
The French, however, were on the defensive.
In Normandy opposition to the crown (already seen in the help given by Geoffroi d'Harcourt to Edward III in 1346) was increasing.
The trouble was being fanned by Charles, king of Navarre, count of Evreux, son-in-law of King John II, who, like Edward III, had a claim to the crown of France through being a descendant of the house of Capet through the female line.
King John was now faced by two rivals who, for the next few years, acted together with the possibility of partitioning the French kingdom between them.
In the autumn of 1355 the Black Prince led an expedition from Bordeaux towards France's Mediterranean coast.
This chevauchée was an outstanding success: the loot taken was considerable, and the king of France was again challenged on his own ground.
In the following April John II, fearing that the dauphin, Charles, who was duke of Normandy, was plotting against him with members of the Navarrese party and others, went secretly to Rouen and, as the dauphin was entertaining his guests to dinner, arrested some and had them led away to immediate execution.
The political tension, both between the king and heir and between the political groupings, rose rapidly.
In the summer of the same year (1356) the English planned a threefold attack on France.
The Black Prince was to march from Bordeaux into the north-central areas of the country; Henry, duke of Lancaster, planned to attack from Normandy; while Edward III himself was also to come from the north.
Such a multiple attack had been a possibility for some time.
In the event it failed, leaving the Black Prince alone, at the head of an army heavily laden with booty, in central France.
For the second time the French set out to catch the English.
This they did near Poitiers in mid-September, and for two days papal representatives went to and fro between the forces in the hope of securing an arrangement.
But their efforts were unsuccessful, and on 19 September the two armies met.
By the evening the French, who lacked archers, had been defeated by an army which, although numerically inferior, had once again(as at Crécy) enjoyed a sound defensive position and what seemed like an unbeatable combination of longbowmen and dismounted men-at-arms.
To this the French contributed their own mistakes which soon lost them any advantage they may have enjoyed.
To crown it all their king, John, was captured in battle.
A second king now took up residence in the Tower of London.
No wonder the people of the capital cheered.
In France, the authority and prestige of the crown were in crisis.
Two major defeats in ten years, followed now by the capture of the king, led  to rebellion in Normandy and civil troubles in Paris which were to end in violence.
The royal authority was being challenged not only by princes but by a growing menace of another kind, the increasing number of freelance soldiers, or routiers , who were gradually becoming a characteristic force in French society, reflecting the faltering grip of lawfully-established authority.
Although the dauphin, Charles, who assumed power in his father's place, showed himself to be a fine leader and a man of courage, he appeared in the circumstances to have little choice but to negotiate without giving away too much.
What terms would the English try to impose, and what could the French hope to get away with?
Negotiations were protracted, lasting, on and off, from 1358 to 1360.
In May 1358 the French agreed to cede Aquitaine with other territories amounting to about a third of the kingdom, in full sovereignty, and to pay, in addition, 4,000,000 crowns (£666,666) for the ransom of their king.
A year later, having received only part of the sum owed to him, Edward III demanded and got more: all that he had been ceded in 1358, to which were added Normandy, Maine, Anjou, and Touraine, also in full sovereignty.
The implementation of these concessions, made by the captive King John in London, was refused by the council in France, and late in 1359 Edward set out with a large army for France to see how persuasive a strong show of force could be.
The expedition was a military failure, but it led to the treaty of Brétigny of May 1360, which gave Edward the lands ceded to him in 1358 with a ransom reduced to 3,000,000 gold crowns.
Two other clauses were to have a vital significance.
Edward agreed to renounce his claim to the French crown, while John was to abandon his demand for sovereignty over the lands ceded to the English.
Later, at a meeting held at Calais in October, the two clauses were removed to form a separate treaty whose implementation was to depend upon the clauses concerning the cession of land having been properly carried out.
Only then were the Calais clauses to have their full effect.
With justice the treaty of Brétigny is often regarded as the moment at which, for the first time, both sides decided to call a halt and have their willingness to do so formally recognised in a treaty, one of the most important of the whole war.
In terms of the concessions made by the French, the treaty can be interpreted as a success for the English, although historians have not always agreed about this.
True, Edward's failure on the expedition of 1359–60 (when he had not been able to capture either Reims, where kings of France were crowned, or Paris, the capital) meant that he had to forego the important territorial concessions made to him in 1359, including Normandy and the Angevin lands in central-western  France.
On the other hand he would have a much enlarged Aquitaine, to be held in sovereignty, the ‘perpetual liberty’ which he had instructed the Black Prince to demand of his royal prisoner in 1357, and which would remove at a stroke the threat of confiscation.
The fact that he had agreed to surrender his right to the greater claim — that of the crown of France — in return for concession on the sovereignty issue shows where, in 1360, Edward III's priorities lay.
In the event, however, the renunciations removed from the body of the treaty's main text were never made.
As a result it would be possible for the French at some future date to renew their claim to sovereignty over Aquitaine, and for the English to do the same in respect of the crown of France.
The significance of this could not be ignored.
What had been some of the main characteristics and development of this, the first period of the war?
Not unnaturally, it has always been traditional to see the years to 1360 as constituting a period unfavourable to France: the initiative lay largely with the English, and it was mainly the French who were on the defensive.
So it was that Edward III was able to extend the areas directly involved in war and to benefit from this by using landing points on different parts of the French coast.
The theatre of war slowly became enlarged, a fact which, paradoxically, was to prove something of an advantage to the kings of France as they tried, if not always with success, to unite their entire population in a common war effort against the English.
For as the war spread, so the fiscal demands of the French crown to meet it could be extended with justification.
By the second half of the fourteenth century, few in France could claim not to be involved in it in one way or another.
The effects on domestic politics were considerably and predictably different.
In England, the needs of war (in terms of money and provisions) provoked a considerable crisis in the years 1338–41.
Thereafter Edward III, having learned some valuable political lessons, was able to develop a far greater degree of co-operation with his people, in particular with the fighting nobility, a spirit fostered by the two outstanding victories won at Crécy and Poitiers.
In France, by contrast, in spite of what seemed like early successes, the personal fortunes of both Philip VI and John II sank very low.
Both met defeat and one suffered capture, thus becoming, in a very real sense, a national liability.
The lack of strong leadership served to exacerbate these disasters, and the nobility of France was obliged to endure strong criticism for its failure to protect the kingdom and its people in their hour of need.
The crisis in the royal authority was underlined by the activities of Charles of Navarre in Normandy.
As much as Edward III, he was a challenge to the civil and military authority of successive French kings, whose power, for the  moment, was too weak to do much about him.
The existence of the routiers was a further aspect of the same problem.
The kingdom of France was becoming the playground of Europe's footloose soldiers.
1360–1396
Yet there was no good reason why it should not recover.
The treaty of Brétigny brought a measure of peace to both England and France.
Open hostilities, at least, were at an end.
But there were problems to be resolved.
One was that, arising from the transfer of lands from one allegiance to the other, many found themselves under a new lord; and some did not like it.
A more serious problem was what to do with the soldiers who, now accustomed to fighting and to war's many attractions, were finding themselves without an occupation.
The 1350s had seen relatively little fighting at an ‘official’ level, but the decade had witnessed the growth, in both numbers and size, of bodies of soldiers who, although sometimes finding local employment, more often than not roamed the countryside in search of adventure and the easy pickings of war.
Peace made it more likely that their number would increase.
Certainly, returning soldiers gave the authorities in England many a headache, the country's justices being ordered in 1360 to see that the peace was not broken.
Many Englishmen remained in France and joined the bands of soldiers who made their services available to whoever would lead or employ them.
The significance of the danger which they constituted soon became apparent.
On 6 April 1362 these routiers met and defeated a royal army at Brignais, in the Rhône valley.
Some, too, entered the services of Charles of Navarre and helped to spread disorder in Normandy and the surrounding areas.
On 16 May 1364, however, another army under Bertrand du Guesclin, a Breton who had himself led such troops before entering the king's service, defeated the Navarrese army, helped by some English, at Cocherel, in south-eastern Normandy.
The event was significant, for it followed hard upon the death in April of King John II in England, where he was still a prisoner.
Cocherel witnessed an important blow struck for royal authority by an army under a commander of undoubted skill and experience.
With the defeat at Brignais avenged, Charles V, who had just succeeded his father as king, could go to his coronation a satisfied man.
Cocherel was a move in the right direction.
But it was soon partly cancelled by the victory of the English-backed Montfortists at the battle of Auray, in southern Brittany, on 29 September 1364, at which Charles de Blois was killed and du Guesclin, not for the last time, was taken prisoner.
This event led to a  after more than twenty years of intermittent war.
It also released more soldiers who were free to seek a living by fighting elsewhere.
However, some sort of a solution to what was becoming an endemic problem was soon found.
At the request of Henry of Trastamara, then seeking to wrest the succession of the kingdom of Castile from his half-brother, Peter, known as ‘the Cruel’, French troops, under du Guesclin, recently ransomed, crossed over into Spain to help bring about the defeat of Peter.
Feeling himself threatened, Peter appealed for help to Edward III who authorised the Black Prince, since 1362 prince (and effective ruler) of Aquitaine, to intervene.
The threat of alliance between the king of France and an unfriendly ruler of northern Spain was one which must have worried the English in Bordeaux.
There was, in addition, an important prize at stake, the use of the Castilian galley fleet, perhaps the finest in Europe, with which the French, in particular , could give a much-needed boost to their war efforts at sea.
This was something which the English would do their utmost to prevent happening.
Responding to the call, the Black Prince raised a force, and, in the early spring of 1367, crossed into northern Spain through Navarre, whose king, Charles, had only recently received English help in Normandy.
On 3 April his army, linked to that of King Peter, met the French and Henry of Trastamara's force at Nájera (Fr .
Navarrette).
For a second time du Guesclin found himself a prisoner of the English, who routed his army.
The Black Prince had just achieved the third, and final, great victory of his career.
Contrary to what some historians have thought, the campaign in Spain was not a mere side issue.
It reflected the growing problem of how to deal with surplus manpower once peace had been made in a major theatre of war.
It also served to show that the Hundred Years War was no longer simply a conflict between England and France: others were being caught up in it, too.
But although it brought victory to the Black Prince, the battle of Nájera was to be the cause of the renewal of the war which had been halted in 1360.
The English had agreed to fight in Spain if paid to do so.
Yet the money had never come.
Nor did Peter regain effective control of his kingdom as Henry, although defeated at Nájera, staged a political comeback.
In March 1369, the armies of the two men met at Montiel, where that of Peter was defeated and the king himself was murdered by his half-brother and rival.
By this time, however, the Black Prince was in difficulties.
Heavily in  debt to certain members of his nobility and to routier captains, and let down by his Castilian ally, he had had to seek the financial resources with which to pay for his Spanish expedition.
His requests for money in Aquitaine met with resistance, for in a real sense the expedition had brought little or no advantage to the duchy.
Jean d'Armagnac, following on the reluctance of the estates, meeting at Angoulême to contribute their share of a tax, refused to allow it to be collected in his lands, pleading ancient privileges which had always been enjoyed locally.
When the Black Prince announced measures against him, Armagnac first appealed to Edward III; on receiving an unfavourable response, he took the matter further and appealed to the king of France, Charles V. In this he was joined by his nephew, the lord of Albret, who lodged a similar grievance against the Black Prince.
Charles V could scarcely avoid having to respond to the appeals lodged by Albret and Armagnac.
In legal terms it seemed that he was free to intervene; his claim to exercise sovereignty in Aquitaine had not been renounced in 1360.
Anxious to do things properly, however, Charles sought the best specialist advice which he could get; he found it by consulting eminent jurists of the legal centres of Bologna, Montpellier, Orléans, and Toulouse.
Their opinion was that Charles was entitled to receive the appeals made to him.
In December 1368 he announced that he would do this.
In June 1369, in retaliation, Edward III resumed the use of the title ‘king of France’.
Towards the end of the year, in November, the French king confiscated Aquitaine.
The two kingdoms were once more at war.
The nature of the conflict fought in the 1370s was to be very different from that of earlier decades, and its effects more dramatic.
The French were not unprepared, and almost immediately took the offensive.
A glance at the map on p. xii will show that the enlarged Aquitaine which the English had to defend had very long frontiers, vulnerable to small mobile forces which the French now used to excellent effect.
In 1371 the Black Prince, a sick man, retired from the thankless task of ruling Aquitaine, and the English command now became fragmented.
Nor did English forces, when sent to France, properly encounter the enemy.
The use of Fabian tactics by the French frustrated the English who spent large sums on the war, but to little purpose.
The 1370s saw England neglect the serious implications of this essentially defensive war, so that the chevauchées led by Sir Robert Knolles in 1370 and John of Gaunt, Edward III's third surviving son, in 1373 achieved little military advantage.
The days of Crécy and Poitiers were over.
Little by little, the French initiative paid off, as their armies ‘reoccupied’ first those parts ceded by treaty and then much of the duchy  of Aquitaine itself.
In 1371, Charles V and Charles of Navarre came to terms.
In Brittany, in spite of the English success of Auray, opponents drove out Duke John IV from his duchy.
At sea, the Franco-Castilian alliance, which had sprung from the events in Spain between 1366 and 1369, began to have effect.
In the summer of 1372 an English fleet was defeated by Castilian galleys off the port of La Rochelle, and many Englishmen were taken as prisoners to Spain.
For some, the war was brought much nearer home when the French (with their Castilian allies) began once again to attack and plunder towns and villages on the south coast of England, the legitimate activities of English fishermen being among those which suffered from such raids.
Not surprisingly, this lack of success provoked an outcry in England, accustomed more to victory than defeat.
Protests in 1371 were followed by further outbursts in 1376 in the so-called ‘Good Parliament’, whose members suspected that the search for personal profit had, in some cases, taken precedence over the pursuit of the national advantage.
In the midst of these events, in June 1376, the Black Prince died.
A year later his father followed him to the grave.
As contemporary writing testifies, it was the sad end of a glorious period in English history.
In view of the lack of English success in the past years, the war was now being discussed in terms which suited the French, the emphasis being on the feudal interpretation of the treaty of Brétigny.
Once again, papal envoys took a leading part in the proceedings and, on this occasion, a possible way out was found.
John of Gaunt, it was proposed, would become a French prince and, through him, the link with England and its royal family would be maintained while at the same time the fundamental English objection that their king should not be a vassal of the king of France would be met.
If the plan failed, it was because of Gaunt's personal ambitions in Spain, rather than because of any objection of principle to the scheme.
For the while the war went on.
Other issues and events now came to complicate events.
In England the death of Edward III placed his grandson, Richard II, the surviving son of the Black Prince, upon the throne.
Richard was to prove one of the most enigmatic of kings.
Two factors about him concern this story.
He was young, only ten years old, when he came to the throne.
Further, as a result of his youth, he had not known the great days of English victories in France, although these had been concerned with the activities of his father, and he himself had been born in Bordeaux not long before his father had crossed to Spain to win his final victory.
The effect was  to make Richard more inclined to peace than to war: war, he was to tell Parliament in 1397, caused great harm and unnecessary destruction to both kingdoms, a view almost certainly shared by his near contemporary, Charles VI, who had succeeded his father in 1380, a year which also witnessed the death of du Guesclin.
Both kings came to be surrounded by uncles who sought to further war for their own ends.
Each, in his own way, reacted against avuncular pressure.
Both came to favour peace.
It is evident that many had come to feel like them.
Late in the 1370s and early in the 1380s the world order, already upset by long war, seemed set to suffer yet further disruption.
In 1378 a schism, occasioned by a double election to the papacy, split the western Church.
There were now not only two popes but two centres of papal authority, Rome and Avignon.
What was worse, England and France supported opposing sides on this issue, so that the Schism, one of the most important factors dividing western Christianity in the years 1378–1417, also accentuated the existing political divisions between the two countries.
It is open to debate whether the Hundred Years War helped to prolong the Schism within the Church, but that the Schism hardened the attitudes of the French and English nations to each other is undoubted.
The church councils which were called in the first three decades of the fifteenth century gave each side reason and opportunity to seek support for its own attitude to the war before the remainder of Christendom.
The Schism, we may say, tragically helped to polarise increasingly strong nationalist attitudes towards the war.
Domestic troubles also occurred.
The summer of 1381 saw the outbreak of the Peasants' Revolt in England, an uprising against the government of the day, to whose causes the financial demands of war and the inability (or unwillingness?) of the royal administration to defend adequately the coast of southern England against French and Castilian incursions of increasing frequency and intensity certainly contributed.
In June 1382 troubles in Rouen, caused partly by a reaction to the French crown's fiscal demands, were suppressed with some vigour; the events may have lost Charles VI friends and supporters in Normandy, still an area to be tended with attention by the royal authority in Paris.
In 1380 it had been the turn of Thomas, earl of Buckingham, uncle of Richard II, to lead what would prove to be the last English expedition to France in the fourteenth century, while in 1383 the religious divisions of Europe were underlined by the sending of a force led by Henry Despenser, bishop of Norwich, into Flanders under the guise of a crusade.
Neither produced any effects.
In 1386 England was fortunate not to experience invasion from France, planned by the king's uncle, Philip, duke of Burgundy, with support not only from Brittany and Flanders but from much of the kingdom of France itself.
Yet, in spite of the aggressive spirit found among many of the nobility on both sides of the Channel, and of Richard II's personal participation in an expedition in 1385 against the Scots, at that moment in receipt of French assistance, the idea of peace was now increasingly in the air.
In England the criticism of continued military activity by John Wyclif, the opposition to war expressed by men of Lollard sympathies such as William Swynderby, the lassitude provoked by so many years of conflict, mirrored in some of the works of Geoffrey Chaucer and John Gower, are indicative both of people's reflection regarding the morality of war and the ways in which it was being fought, and of the apparent futility of allowing it to continue along its present drift, no real advantage accruing to either side in spite of the great cost, both human and financial, to all.
This kind of sentiment was reflected in France, where the influential courtier, Philippe de Mézières, in works of a semi-polemical nature (one of them an open letter on peace addressed to Richard II) asked whether the long war should continue.
Other factors seemed to encourage a movement towards peace with which both kings appeared to sympathise.
For all its successes, the French military effort of the 1370s and 1380s had failed to dislodge the English hold in France, particularly in the south-west.
True, by the time that Edward III's long reign ended, only Bordeaux, Bayonne, and a coastal strip in that region could be controlled effectively by the English administration.
None the less the fact was that the English had hung on, and there seemed little chance that they would be dislodged.
So peace was formally sought.
The possible way forward, ‘the separation of England and Aquitaine and the creation of a separate English dynasty in the duchy’, had already been proposed in 1377.
In 1383, the proposal got as far as a draft.
Seven years later, in 1390, Richard created his uncle, John of Gaunt, duke of Aquitaine for life, an act of good intent, and a step in the right direction.
Then, in 1393, a provisional agreement was reached giving the English Calais (which they already held) and that part of Aquitaine south of the river Charente (much of south-west  France which was largely out of their hands at this time), all this to be alienated to Gaunt in the near future.
Yet whatever the hopes of kings and their legal advisers, they were not shared by the people themselves.
In April 1394 the population of much of the area rose in support of its attachment to the crown of England.
In spite of all efforts, the well-intentioned plan of the negotiators was spoiled by the people themselves.
The agreement had involved some radical thinking regarding the historic and legal legacy of Aquitaine.
A way of circumventing various objections had been found without offending too many interests.
Peace was clearly desired, and if it could not be arranged on these agreed terms, it must be found by other means.
Between 1394 and 1396 negotiations continued, and in March 1396 the two sides agreed to a truce of twenty-eight years and the marriage of Richard II to one of Charles VI's daughters, Isabella, who was to bring with her a large dowry.
Once again, even if the main points at issue had been side-stepped, the two countries were at peace, and had agreed to be so for a whole generation.
1396–1422
The problem of making a lasting peace had been postponed.
In the light of the experience of thirty years earlier, what were the chances for the temporary agreement?
Some may well have had their fears.
In France the rule of the dukes who sought to govern in the place of Charles VI who, since 1393, had suffered from the intermittent attacks of a mental illness which was to remain with him until his death in 1422, appealed to a rising sense of nationalism which tended to favour a vigorous defence of French interests.
Then, when the truce had run for little more than three years, Richard II was deposed and murdered, his place as king of England being taken by Henry IV, the son of John of Gaunt.
Richard's young wife, Isabella, no longer wanted at the English court, was despatched — without her dowry — back to France, where feeling turned sharply against Henry for his deposition of the French king's son-in-law.
In such circumstances it is not surprising that the truce of 1396 was never properly observed.
The French gave support to the Scots who, from very early on in the new reign, caused trouble in the north; while to the west, in Wales, where Owain Glyn Dŵr was to rise against English rule in 1400, French troops landed and at one time might have been seen in the Herefordshire countryside.
This was a game which two could  play, and the English were to raid the coast of Normandy several times between 1400 and 1410.
During these years, too, piracy in the Channel was rife, probably encouraged by both sides as a matter of policy.
Yet neither side, partly because of the very existence of the truce, partly because of its own domestic divisions (which were becoming more serious in France as the first decade of the new century progressed) wished to raise fundamental issues.
Henry IV appears to have had no burning ambition to secure the French crown, and during his reign Aquitaine suffered from relative neglect.
The war had moved, well and truly, towards more northern parts of France.
Or almost so.
In 1411, at the request of John, duke of Burgundy, a small English force took part in what was rapidly becoming a situation of civil war in France.
In May 1412 a treaty (that of Bourges) was sealed between Henry IV and the dukes of Berry, Bourbon, and Orléans which gave the English king much of what his predecessors had spent years fighting for: a recognition that Aquitaine was rightfully English, and an undertaking to help the king defend it; the cession of twenty important towns and castles; and agreement that certain lands, notably Poitou, were to be held by them of the English crown, and would revert to it when the present holders died.
Such concessions appeared momentous; yet they were made largely to secure English military help for one faction against another in a situation of civil war, and were unlikely to command lasting support, above all since the king, Charles VI, had had no part in this dismemberment of his kingdom.
When the French dukes made peace among themselves at Auxerre three months later, the only losers were to be the English.
When Thomas, duke of Clarence, second son of Henry IV, brought a force into France in August 1412 to fulfil the terms of the agreement made in May, he was met by a united opposition.
Unable to impose himself, Clarence allowed himself to be bought off before returning home through Bordeaux, plundering on the way.
Yet the text of the treaty of Bourges had made concessions which could be regarded as at least impolitic, at worst treasonable, to the French crown.
Henry V was to remind the world of what had been conceded when, in his turn, he became king of England in 1413.
Once king, Henry soon set about making heavy demands of the French.
In the following year these became even tougher: he demanded  the crown of France; then he reduced this to the territories of Angevin days, Normandy, Maine, Anjou, Touraine, Aquitaine (to include Poitou, part of the concession made by the princes at Bourges in 1412), together with the substantial arrears still due for the ransom of John II and, following the now well-established pattern, the hand of a daughter of the French king, this time Catherine, sister to Isabella whom Richard II had married in 1396, together with a dowry.
By 1415 he showed himself willing to accept a good deal less: he would settle for the legal and territorial terms agreed at Brétigny, now more than half a century earlier, and a smaller dowry.
That, for the moment, was as far as he would go.
When the French refused his conditions, Henry decided on the war which his diplomacy had given him time to prepare.
He would fight the enemy in a good cause: denial of justice.
In August 1415 an English army landed in Normandy and at once began the siege of Harfleur, at the mouth of the river Seine.
Six weeks later the town, which had suffered heavily from the bombardment of English cannon, capitulated.
The problem now was what to do next.
Probably against the advice of his commanders Henry decided to lead what remained of his army, decimated by illness contracted at the siege, to Calais, thought to be about a week's march away.
In fact the English were almost outmanoeuvred by the French army.
Yet, on 25 October 1415, although outnumbered, Henry and his force, relying on the traditional weapon of archers and men-at-arms, met and defeated the French at Agincourt.
The French, probably over-confident of victory, allowed themselves to be drawn into a cavalry advance, carried out under a hail of arrows, across recently ploughed ground made softer yet by the rain which had fallen the previous night.
The chronicles record the large number of French who, at the day's end, lay dead on the field, while, by contrast, very few Englishmen lost their lives.
Among the many notable prisoners taken was Charles, duke of Orléans, who was to spend the next quarter of a century an honourable captive in England, developing a considerable talent as a poet in both French and English.
In the meanwhile, England and her king were to live for many years on the reputation won on that autumn day.
Only too evidently had God given his judgement in favour of the English claim for justice.
In 1416 the French made a serious attempt to regain Harfleur, which they blockaded by land and sea.
The garrison suffered considerably, but on 15 August 1416 John, duke of Bedford, defeated the enemy fleet in the estuary in what has come to be known as the battle of the Seine.
The threat to Harfleur was now eased, and the value of being able to defeat the enemy at sea was once again proved.
In the following year, 1417, Henry returned to Normandy.
Harfleur  had taught him a lesson: he must be properly prepared for siege warfare, all the more so since he now planned a conquest which could only be achieved through sieges and the show of effective military might.
By the summer of 1419 all Normandy was his: the major walled towns of the duchy, Caen, Falaise, Cherbourg, and Rouen had all fallen to the English besiegers.
This marked an important change in English policy towards France.
The day of the chevauchée, or prolonged raid, was now almost over.
Henry wanted nothing less than military conquest.
With it went the need to govern and administer lands thus acquired, and the demand that the inhabitants of those lands should recognise the legitimacy of English rule by taking an oath of allegiance to Henry.
He went farther still.
Those who refused him their recognition were deprived of their lands and forced into a form of internal exile within France, into that area which the Valois ruled.
Lands thus confiscated were Henry's to do what he liked with.
Many, ranging from large estates to small-holdings in towns, were given by him to his French supporters and to those English whom he could tempt over to settle in northern France.
In this way, through a deliberate policy of conquest and settlement, Henry V extended the sharing of the profits of war (in this case largely im-moveable property) to many of his compatriots, both soldiers and civilians.
By so doing he changed the very character of the conflict, for through the creation of a wider involvement in its success he tried to ensure that he, and his successors, would have broad support for the continued involvement of England and Englishmen in France.
The presence of those Englishmen was the most convincing proof available that, in Normandy at least, war had secured justice.
Normandy won, where would Henry turn to next?
The divisions among the French, so much at odds with one another, helped him militarily.
Yet when it came to negotiation, who would speak to him in the name of France?
Faced by an enemy triumphant on their own territory, the French parties tried to make common cause.
At Montereau, south-east of Paris, the dauphin Charles met his great political rival, John, duke of Burgundy, on 10 September 1419.
At this meeting the dauphin may have implied that the duke, whose reluctance to adopt a strongly anti-English stance was generally recognised, had been guilty of treason to the French crown.
An altercation blew up, and in the ensuing scene Duke John was felled by a blow from a member of the dauphin's entourage.
This political murder only aggravated the political divisions within France.
It also gave Henry V the chance he needed.
The brutal death of Duke John inevitably pushed Philip, his son and successor, onto the side of the one man who could help him.
Henry grasped the opportunity; it could lead to Paris (which the Burgundian party at that moment controlled) and to much else, besides.
It may well have been at this moment, in the autumn of 1419, that Henry V decided that the crown of France, which none of his predecessors had achieved, might be his.
During the course of the coming months, the terms of what Henry could obtain in concessions from the French (or at least from that branch of the body politic which was, at that moment, dominant) were worked out.
The result was the treaty of Troyes of May 1420.
This was the most important treaty of the Hundred Years War.
It overtook in significance and ended the sixty-year domination of the treaty of Brétigny.
The reason is simple enough.
The treaty arranged between Edward III and John II had adopted a mainly feudal approach to the dispute which separated the two kings and their people; it had decided who held what, and how.
That arranged between Henry V and Duke Philip of Burgundy, imposed upon the sick king, Charles VI, and then formally registered (or approved) by France's highest judicial body, the Parlement, did not carve up the kingdom, at least not on paper.
Its aim was to preserve the unity of France, to arrange matters in such a way that, in due course (and, in view of the king's health, not before too long) a new dynasty might assume the crown of France.
That dynasty was to be the royal house of England.
The treaty of Troyes made Henry V heir to the crown of France.
Charles VI, now only occasionally lucid, was to remain king until his death, but in the meantime Henry would act as regent (in effect, in control of the government) succeeding to the crown when Charles died, a fact which was soon to be interpreted to imply English recognition of the legitimacy of Charles VI's rule as king of France.
To give the settlement greater weight it was also agreed that Henry should take to wife Catherine, Charles's daughter, whose hand he had sought in negotiation some years earlier.
The couple were married in the cathedral at Troyes on 2 June 1420.
What the treaty did not do was to make the two kingdoms of France and England one; they were to remain separate, each with its own legal and administrative identity.
The unifying factor between them was to be dynastic and personal.
How effectively the king of England could direct the government of France was the most important of a number of unresolved questions left by the treaty.
Translating a paper agreement into reality was likely to prove difficult; several major problems would need to be overcome.
The greatest was that the dauphin, Charles (he  was, in fact, the third dauphin, two elder brothers having died prematurely) had been deprived of his legitimate right to succeed his father as king.
Much play was made of the fact that, since he had been present at the murder of John, duke of Burgundy, at Montereau he could not properly and worthily inherit the throne, from which he was now excluded.
Yet, it was asked, was it possible to exclude him by treaty, so manifestly an arrangement between the king of England and the Burgundians (the dauphin's political rivals), and then imposed upon a sick king who was in no position to resist?
To many, loyal to the idea of direct succession within the royal family, this seemed wrong.
To such, the dauphin became the living symbol of resistance to English rule in the years to come.
A further complication was the undertaking given by Henry V that he would use every means at his disposal to bring under his control those extensive areas of France not yet according him their allegiance, an ambitious military plan which, it could be argued, was beyond his financial and military capabilities.
For not the least of Henry's problems was how to raise the money required for the accomplishment of such an undertaking.
Would his new French subjects pay to continue a civil war against their compatriots?
Alternatively, would Englishmen be willing to subscribe towards the accomplishment of this great task?
Henry must very soon have begun to have doubts on both scores.
The treaty of Brétigny had been termed the ‘Great Peace’; that of Troyes came to be known, at least in English circles, as the ‘Final Peace’.
One can see why; but was it really to be so?
Born out of a particular set of circumstances, the treaty did little to unite France, but served rather to underline the divisions which had existed for two decades or more.
The English had come to France encouraged to make the most of a lack of united opposition to them.
This they succeeded in doing.
But it cannot be claimed that the unity implied in the term ‘Final Peace’ was achieved, either then or later.
France remained a divided country.
This can best be seen in the demand made by princes who had subscribed to the treaty that those who lived in their lands should do the same.
Many refused; even the town of Dijon, capital of the duchy of Burgundy, only did so when ordered to do so by its duke.
Classified as ‘rebels’, those who would not recognise the new political order which the treaty represented suffered the confiscation of their property and were forced to move to the rival obedience where, over the coming years, some helped to foster opposition to English rule in northern France.
Henry, on his part, turned seriously towards the fulfilment of his new obligations.
It was while he was away in England, crowning his wife as queen and seeking further material support for the war, that his brother, Thomas, duke of Clarence, was defeated and killed at Bauge, in Anjou, by a Franco-Scottish force on 22 March 1421.
Had the French taken proper advantage of their unexpected victory, it is possible that they could have reversed the way the war seemed to be going.
But they failed to do so, and when Henry returned to France he was able to clear the enemy from strongholds which they still held near Paris, including the formidable town and fortress of Meaux, before which he spent some seven months in 1421–2.
It was while he was besieging that town that the king contracted a fatal illness.
On 31 August 1422, he died at Vincennes, just outside Paris.
His successor as king of England, Henry VI, was not yet a year old.
Henry V had given the war with France a new twist.
He had come to France (in which he spent more than half his life as king of England) and had, as contemporaries recognised, achieved considerable conquests, something which his predecessors had never done on that scale or within so short a period of time.
He had done better than they had in the sense that he had claimed the crown of France and, by treaty, had come close to exercising its authority.
He had done more, too, that would be of significance in the future.
In Normandy, that part of France which he had made peculiarly his, he had taken over everyday government, now exercised in his name by men appointed by him.
Furthermore, in an attempt to reward men for military service and to encourage others to serve in France, Henry had pursued a policy of granting lands and titles which had come into his hands, thereby creating an important interest, other than his own, in the extension and maintenance of the conquest.
Englishmen were given lands to exploit, but also to defend.
A number of them settled in France, took up what were essentially non-military occupations, and sometimes married French wives.
Before long they had become settlers; their children knew no other life.
If there were to be a failure in maintaining this conquest, the ‘livelihood’ of these people would be at stake.
Every effort must be made to keep them there.
1422–1453
It was precisely this that John, duke of Bedford, the elder of Henry V's surviving brothers, tried to do when he became regent of France on the death of the king.
Within less than two months, the ailing Charles VI followed his son-in-law to the grave, giving effect to the succession  clause of the treaty of Troyes.
Henry VI, still less than a year old, already king of England, now assumed the crown of France, a position which his father had never quite achieved.
In France Bedford, acting for his nephew, strove to reduce the area of the country still faithful to the Valois ‘claimant’, the dauphin, Charles, now regarded by many as Charles VII although, like his young English nephew, still uncrowned.
On 31 July 1423 an army representing the combined power of England and Burgundy defeated a Franco-Scottish army at Cravant, while a year later, on 17 August 1424, at Verneuil another army, led by Bedford himself, encountered and, after heavy fighting, convincingly defeated another such enemy army, this time reinforced by Genoese crossbowmen.
The outcome had considerable significance.
It marked the second French defeat in a year; it fully restored to the English their military reputation which was no longer seen to depend on one man, Henry V; and, most important of all, it opened the way southwards for further advance into central France.
In Normandy, the settlers could sleep more soundly as the theatre of active war moved south.
The future held considerable possibility.
For the French, on the other hand, the dark years of the war, not unlike the 1340s and 1350s, appeared to have returned.
By 1427, much of Maine and Anjou, names whose familiarity stems from their frequent appearance on the list of English diplomatic demands, were in the hands of the English, now advancing southwards.
It was the line of the river Loire which was to save the French.
The English could not cross it leaving behind them unconquered French outposts, of which Orléans was one.
In the autumn of 1428 the English, under one of their most notable commanders, Thomas, earl of Salisbury, besieged the town.
In November, Salisbury, a chivalric figure, was killed, the victim of a cannonball.
But still the English persisted, while all France looked to the siege.
In May 1429 the struggle was resolved.
An unknown peasant girl from Lorraine, Joan of Arc, persuaded the dauphin that she had been sent by God to raise the siege.
In spite of scepticism and outright hostility to her at the court (how could she achieve what professional commanders had failed to do?)
Joan received permission and active encouragement to attempt what she claimed she had been sent to carry out.
In the event, she succeeded.
On 8 May 1429 the English abandoned the siege; France, through Joan, had won a great moral victory.
As Christine de Pisan put it, ‘the sun began to shine once more’.
It was a victory which could, and did, lead to greater things.
Within a month or so the French, having won important skirmishes at Jargeau and Patay, could turn towards achieving the next logical step of their success story, the coronation of the dauphin as king of France.
On  17 July 1429, less than ten weeks after relieving Orleans, and having in the meanwhile brought back to French rule a number of towns, including Troyes where the fateful treaty had been sealed in 1420, Joan stood in the cathedral at Reims watching the dauphin as he underwent the rite of coronation, the rite by which his predecessors had become full kings of France.
A fundamental challenge had been levelled at the settlement made at Troyes which had altered the line of succession to the crown of France.
Could the challenge be maintained?
The English saw the coronation of Charles VII at Reims as a considerable threat to their authority.
In December 1431 Henry VI, now ten years old, was brought to Paris and crowned in Notre-Dame by an English bishop; the fact that the ceremony had not taken place at Reims did not escape the notice of contemporaries.
Yet in spite of the need to bring strong and immediate pressure to bear upon the English, the French were not able to follow up their successes of 1429.
In the following year, indeed, Joan of Arc was captured at Compiègne and in May 1431, after what was a political trial carried out under ecclesiastical rules, she was condemned and burned at Rouen.
The war was going the way of neither side.
The English defences held.
There was deadlock.
In the circumstances men turned to negotiation.
In the summer months of 1435 there took place at Arras, in north-eastern France, a great congress attended by the representatives of a number of European states and the Church.
After weeks of discussion, the sides failed to agree terms, either over the crown of France or over the lands to be held by the English, and under what conditions.
However the congress was the occasion of an event of some significance.
Having obtained a papal dispensation, Philip, duke of Burgundy, forsook his support of the settlement made at Troyes and, hence, too, his allegiance to the English as rulers of France.
From now on he either fought on the French side or acted as a neutral between the parties.
If, in the years to follow, he did relatively little to help the Valois war effort, his defection greatly angered the English who reacted in strongly emotional terms to what they regarded as an act of betrayal and treason against the English crown.
In 1439 a further attempt was made to secure a diplomatic settlement when the French, the English, and the Burgundians (but not the representatives of the Church, excluded by the English for their alleged partiality at Arras) met near Calais in the summer of that year.
The territorial offers were never really more than variations on others made earlier in the war.
Although the French offer of a ‘half-peace’(a truce for a set period of between fifteen and thirty years, in exchange for an  English undertaking not to use the French royal title during that period) was taken seriously at first, it was turned down when the English demanded a perpetual peace together with the grant of Normandy and an enlarged Aquitaine (as in 1360) in full sovereignty.
More significant, however, was the influence which the English settlement in Normandy came to exercise upon the proceedings.
When asked to restore those Frenchmen who had lost their lands for refusing to recognise the legitimacy of English rule in the duchy, the English negotiators refused point blank.
They could not give the impression that they doubted the validity of their king's claim to the crown of France, for by so doing they would have thrown doubt upon the symbolic and legal importance of Henry VI's French coronation, rendering illegal the very authority (the royal one) upon which the validity of the grants made to Englishmen (and others) in Normandy depended.
Further, to have made the concession over restoration of lands would have meant depriving their own people of their French interests, something which, for both moral and financial reasons, they were not prepared to do.
If diplomacy was bringing a settlement no nearer, military events would do so only very slowly.
It is true that in the late 1430s the English suffered some reverses and territorial losses.
In 1435 both Dieppe and Harfleur were taken by the French and in the next year Paris went the same way.
The loss of the two ports was serious, as the English now had only limited access to Normandy and to the capital, Rouen, which had come to replace Paris.
Yet they fought on, trying to defend the long line which was the border of their dominion in northern France, much as their predecessors had done in Aquitaine in the 1370s.
In such a situation the initiative lay with the attacker.
The English must have echoed the rejoicings of the people of Rouen when it was announced, in the early summer of 1444, that a truce had been agreed between England and France, and that Henry VI was to marry Margaret of Anjou, a niece by marriage of Charles VII.
Once again it was hoped to postpone a settlement and place faith upon a personal union between the royal families of the two countries to resolve the outcome of the old dispute between them.
The truce of Tours marked the beginning of another brief phase of diplomacy.
At the negotiations, the English made an important concession in saying that the claim to the French crown might be traded for a sovereign Normandy.
Then, in December 1445, Henry VI secretly undertook the surrender of the county of Maine, in so doing appearing to renounce sovereignty over it and implying, too, that the English might yield to further pressure, military or diplomatic.
If Henry had hoped for peace, he was to be sadly disillusioned.
From  1446 to 1448 the French spared no effort to bring about the surrender of Maine which those Englishmen holding Le Mans, its capital, refused to carry out until, in March 1448, they finally gave way.
Fifteen months later, under the pretext that the English had broken the truce, the French invaded Normandy from several directions.
The well-planned attack led to a campaign of less than a year.
By the early summer of 1450 the English, driven out of their lands and defeated in battle at Formigny in early April, had lost their hold on northern France.
Only Calais remained to them.
The issue had been settled by force of arms.
The final act was soon to follow.
Aquitaine, still English, had not attracted much attention from either side since 1413, the military emphasis since then having been on northern France.
Neither Henry V nor his son had placed the solution to the problem of Aquitaine (the old feudal problem) high in his list of priorities.
Yet the duchy was not entirely forgotten.
When Philip of Burgundy abandoned the English alliance and returned to that of France in 1435, he released French troops from eastern France whose services Charles VII could now employ in the south-west.
In 1442 both the king and the dauphin, Louis, went on an expedition into Aquitaine which greatly troubled the government in London.
Soon afterwards, the truce of Tours intervened.
None the less, once war had been renewed in 1449 and Normandy had been recovered, it was time to turn again towards Aquitaine where the English must have felt isolated and apprehensive.
In 1451 the French invaded, overran most of the duchy, and took Bordeaux.
In the following year, however, a plot was hatched by the English and their supporters, which regained for them control of the city.
The pro-English party must have realised, however, that neither they nor their masters in London were in a position to hold out for long.
Nor did they.
In 1453 the French returned in force and at Castillon, on 17 July, they defeated the English whose commander, John Talbot, earl of Shrewsbury, a man of long experience, was killed by the murderous fire of French cannon.
Although men of the day may not have known it, the Hundred Years War was effectively over.
APPROACHES TO WAR
What purpose did men think war should serve?
Many would have claimed that it served none, that it was but the result of the Fall and of sin, and that it brought only harm and hurt to the world.
This opinion, which had a long Christian ancestry, was still widely held and propagated in the fourteenth century.
It did not, however, go unchallenged.
As far back as the late fourth century two men had expressed the view that war should be fought in order to bring about peace and order.
One was Augustine, whose ideas were to be fundamental in forming medieval Europe's views on the subject.
The other was Vegetius, also a Christian, who likewise regarded war as a means of bringing about peace.
His work on war, the De re militari , grew to become the main expression of the ideas of late antiquity on the aims of war and how it should best be fought.
Cited in the writings of the Carolingian age, the De re militari began to enjoy a particular vogue during the renaissance of the twelfth century, being referred to as an authority on military matters by writers who had no first-hand knowledge of war.
By the late thirteenth century, when the first translations into the vernacular were commissioned (often at the behest of men of a military cast of mind, such as Edward I, who had one made in Anglo-Norman) Vegetius was beginning to enjoy a popularity which was to last until early modern times.
His view that war could be justified by the need to find peace, a view which won support from later philosophers, theologians and lawyers, was to be an influential one.
Implied in this idea was the notion that war was not, as some would have argued, the main cause of social disharmony, but rather the chief  means of attaining the restoration of an order which had been broken by other causes.
The influence of this view is clearly reflected in the works of the two thirteenth-century Dominican friars, Raymond of Peñafort and Thomas Aquinas, who, over a period of half a century, set out what was to become the orthodox justification of certain wars, the ‘just’ wars, as we term them.
War, argued Aquinas, was the defence of peace which, in practice, might involve the forcible protection of rights, lands, or honours under threat or attack.
This was its justification: ‘All who make war seek through war to arrive at a peace more perfect than existed before war.’
Such a view took account of the fact that war was likely to hurt some; for that reason every effort must be made to restrict it.
But this did not prevent the Dominicans from setting out that war could be justified as a means of restoring order in situations of political or social disharmony, for instance between territories (here we see the beginnings of the idea of the territorial unit and the defence of its justifiable rights) or between sovereign rulers and their vassals (if the vassal chose to rebel against his lord and thus fell into a state of disobedience).
Thus Aquinas, who stood in a long tradition which came to him through the teachings of the early canonists summed up in Gratian's Decretum (1140), was clear that every state had both the right and the duty to defend itself, its legitimate existence, and its rights when these could be legally proved (‘It is legitimate to oppose force with force’, as Justinian's Digest put it).
In this way of thinking war was seen as an attempt to pursue a ‘reasonable’ claim which was being forcibly threatened or attacked, which implied not merely the use of force but the means of persuasion (propaganda) and discussion (negotiation) as well.
As Sir John Fortescue was to write in the second half of the fifteenth century, ‘a King's war is a legal trial by battle [when]he seeks the right he cannot obtain by peaceful means’.
War was a means of restoring justice to society.
Legitimate war, however, was concerned not only with the defence of sovereign or historical rights to territory.
The stability of feudal society had always depended upon a relationship of trust between lords and vassals.
In a society in which the king was regarded as God's regent, rebellion was seen as rising against an authority divinely appointed.
The rebel or traitor was a destabilising influence, whose bad example might tempt others to emulate him.
In such circumstances, war was a necessary and final punishment imposed upon a recalcitrant vassal who had ignored all calls to obey his feudal lord.
It is for this reason that in so much of the literature and documentation dealing with the justification of a war emphasis was placed upon the enemy as a rebel who must be punished for his acts of infidelity or treason.
The French justified the war against the English in two main ways.
It was an act of punishment, or vindictive justice, against an arch-rebel, the king of England as duke of Aquitaine, who had broken faith.
It was also seen as a war of national self-defence against those who had invaded French territory and had incited loyal subjects into rebellion.
For the English kings, on the other hand, war was an attempt to assert historic and feudal rights to Aquitaine, Normandy, and other parts of France, as well as their legal claim to the French crown, which had been unjustly denied them by successive French kings.
The attentive listener present at the English coronation of Henry VI in 1429 would have heard the young king being exhorted to avenge injustices (‘ulciscaris iniusta’) and to be ‘the powerful defender of his country…triumphant over the enemy’(‘sit fortissimus protector patrie…triumphator hostium’).
The traditional way of doing this was through war.
The need for war, then, was fairly generally accepted, although it was widely recognized that it brought destruction and death.
Although the innocent might suffer, such tragedies were often accepted philosophically as part of the divine will or punishment.
In such a way of thinking, war was regarded as an invitation for divine intervention, carried out through the divine instrument, the soldier.
Yet it was not merely an appeal to the strength of God that was being made.
God was Goodness: He was Justice: Christ had shown himself humble even unto death.
God would reward good; his judgements in battle would be just; he would favour the humble who honoured him and recognised his strength by bringing down the proud.
Human power was as nothing compared with the strength of God.
Numbers on the field of battle counted for little.
When Archbishop Bradwardine preached before Edward III after English victories at Crécy and Neville's Cross in 1346 he claimed that God granted victory to whomever he willed, and he had willed to grant it to the virtuous.
Experience clearly showed, Bradwardine declared, that virtue, not numbers, triumphed over the iniquity of the enemy.
Similarly Henry V was seen as the Judas Maccabeus of his day who, faced by great odds at Agincourt, worried little about his lack of forces but trusted in the rightness of his cause, the piety of his people at home praying for him and for his army, and in divine strength.
The result of the battle showed how just was the cause of England's king.
In effect, God had declared himself for the English and against the French.
Had the French not been so proud, the anonymous chaplain of Henry V's household asserted, they would have recognised that earlier defeats which they had experienced (he was referring to the battles fought at Sluys in 1340 and at Poitiers in 1356), constituted a clear sign of divine arbitrament, and much bloodshed would have been avoided.
But what else could be expected from such a stiff-necked people?
How did defeat, even the possibility of defeat, fit into this pattern of thought?
Since it was to act against hope, it was wrong to assume that defeat was an explicit sign of divine condemnation of a cause from which there could be no recovery.
To think that way made it almost impossible to understand a pattern of battle results other than that which pointed consistently in one direction.
How, then, to explain defeat in a war which was regarded as just?
The answer lay in seeing such defeats as signs of God's temporary displeasure with a people, not with their cause, a displeasure which resulted from their sinfulness which was now being punished.
On more than one occasion French writers explained the defeats and set-backs suffered by their kings and military leaders by emphasising that these were divine punishments for civil disorder and pride.
Once the people had been chastised by God's flail (‘flagellum Dei’), with the English acting as the instruments of his punishment, then the days of victory would return.
Events were to justify such a view of things, and God was duly thanked, by the royal order that masses should be said to commemorate the defeat of the English at Formigny in April 1450, for the way he had turned his gaze towards the French cause which, for so long, had appeared to be lacking his support.
If Frenchmen had doubts, Englishmen had them, too.
What if the arguments conjured up to justify a war were false, or a king's motives reflected factors (naked ambition, for instance) less worthy than a seeking after justice?
The lingering doubts were probably always there, even if a war received the approval of the Church that it was being fought for a good cause.
For men were worried not only by the fact that the cause for which they fought might not be morally sound.
A more important matter concerned them: the fate of their souls in eternity if they were to die fighting for an unjust cause.
Would men, misled into fighting for a cause which, in spite of claims made on its behalf, was a war fought for the wrong motives, be eternally damned if they met their death suddenly in battle, even if they were fighting out of loyalty to their king?
In such a case it was argued, following St Augustine, that since the soldier was in the service of his lord, it was the lord who must accept responsibility.
A different answer, however, might be given to a soldier who followed a leader of his own choosing — for pay; he could not plead obedience if his conscience left him uneasy.
St Antonino of Florence felt that the professional soldier could not fight in a war the justice of which was not above doubt, nor could he be given absolution as long as he continued to fight in that cause.
The whole problem was one which drew some fine theatre from Shakespeare in Henry V .
The playwright was only reflecting, dramatically, upon one aspect of the problem of death, and its consequences, which soldiers of the later Middle Ages had constantly before them.
To the knighthood, or chivalry, of the Middle Ages war had long given a sense of purpose.
For the Christian, as we have seen, wars were acts of pacification since they were fought to secure peace which depended upon justice.
Had not St Augustine written: ‘There are two friends, justice and peace’?
The Crusades, in one view, had been an attempt to restore Christ's inheritance (into which he had entered in triumph) both to him and to his heirs, the Christian community.
Seen in feudal terms, the Crusades were a defence of the Lord's rights to which, in all loyalty, all Christians should contribute, either personally or in other ways.
Or, again, the Crusades might be seen, as they were in much propaganda, as wars fought to defend fellow Christians suffering physically at the hands of the Muslim world — those who took part being ‘fired by the ardour of charity’ towards their brothers.
Such ideas might be translated into a more secular context nearer home.
As Bishop Thomas Brinton of Rochester said when preaching at the time of the Black Prince's death in the summer of 1376, it was part of a knight's duty to help his king in time of war; failure to do so meant loss of the right to be called a knight, which was both a sign of honour and a mark of responsibility which had to be lived up to.
The knight must be ready to fight hard when his prince required it of him; he must never desert; nor must he refuse to fight for the common good; and, above all, he must fight fearlessly.
Particularly influential were the ideas of serving the feudal overlord, of fulfilling the obligation inherent in fidelity, and of helping to restore justice when the lord or his ally was deprived of what was justly his.
As Bishop Brinton said, it had been to restore a rightful heir to his kingdom and to defeat tyranny that the campaign in northern Spain had been fought in 1367.
Without justice there could be no peace; a knight was in honour bound to strive for justice, and at the ceremony of his dubbing his sword had been blessed  so that, with the approval of the Church thus clearly implied, it might become a sword for justice.
War gave to the chivalry of medieval Europe a sense of purpose and of justification for their existence and privileged state.
It gave, too, a chance of winning merit.
Essential to the ethos of chivalry was the earning of fame, which enabled the knight to hold his head high in the world, and was complementary to lordship, inheritance, or manor house as signs of his position in society.
Honour, the esteem of both peer group and others, was something to be won in war.
To be the first over the wall of a castle or town which was being stormed; to be encamped close to the wall of a besieged city and thus within range of missiles fired from its walls, these were acts which merited honour and respect.
Martial acts might also be more dramatic or better recorded for wider public esteem.
The account given by Froissart of the manner in which the Black Prince won his spurs at Cŕecy in 1346 shows this clearly.
The young man (he was but sixteen years old at the time) was fighting for justice, for the claim of his father, Edward III, to the throne of France.
By the end of the day he had not only helped to further that cause; by showing outstanding courage and skill in arms in the thick of the fighting he had shown how the knight could use situations of war to win personal renown for himself.
The importance of this was considerable.
When members of the French royal order of chivalry, that of the Star, met for their annual feast, a special table was reserved for those princes, bannerets, and knights, three from each group, who were judged to have performed the most valiant deeds of war during the past year.
In some orders, special books of adventure were kept so as ‘to give valour its due ‘.
The words used by Froissart to express his aim in writing his great chronicle, ‘that the honourable enterprises, noble adventures and deeds of arms which took place during the wars waged by France and England should be fittingly related and preserved for posterity’, fit admirably into the pattern of thought and practice which regarded war as a noble way of life.
‘Qui plus fait, mie[u]x vault’(‘Who does most is worth most’), the refrain in the Livre de chevalerie written in the middle of the fourteenth century by Geoffroi de Charny, the standard-bearer of King John II of France at the battle of Poitiers, who preferred to stand and die  rather than run away in the moment of defeat, aptly sums up the chivalrous attitude to war.
War was also a means of finding and experiencing companionship among like-minded persons.
Tournaments provided opportunities for practising some of the arts and skills of war in common.
It is clear that such occasions brought together, often from many countries, knights who were brought up and trained in the same martial traditions.
Knights also went to war in company; a number, sometimes from the same lordship, would serve in the retinue of a great lord.
It is not fanciful (we have the evidence of the fifteenth-century French lord, Jean de Bueil, to show it) to see them discussing war, its dangers, its ‘occasions’ rather as men today recall political or sporting occasions over a drink.
The physical thrill of war and its perils, and of the intense satisfaction of a deed nobly done, is what emerges from Bueil's work.
Essentially based on war, too, were the martial associations, the orders of chivalry, election to which was itself an honour and a sign of good military reputation, whose members vied with one another in the stakes for further recognition born out of daring and courage shown in war.
Associated with the orders were the colour and the pageantry of war: the richness of the apparels; the emphasis on the outward trappings (say of the heralds); the sense that going to war was an occasion, just as tournaments or jousts were occasions.
Some descriptions of armies on the move, left to us by writers of the chivalric tradition, notably Froissart, glow with light and colour.
War was never intended to be a drab affair.
Prestige, if nothing else, demanded that it be entered into with due pomp and circumstance.
Writing soon after the expulsion of the English from France in the mid-fifteenth century, the author of Le débat des hérauts d'armes could underline the importance of the nobility, in particular the great nobility, in French society.
Their role as supporters (‘pilliers’) of the monarchy he regarded as specially significant.
Had it always been so in the period of the conflict with England?
The answer to this must be negative.
On a number of occasions during the war, the role of the nobility had come under attack, in particular at moments of severe crisis.
In 1357 the clerical author of the short De miserabili statu regni Francie , reflecting upon the disaster of Poitiers, praised the courage of the king, John II, who had fought bravely up to the very moment of his capture, but condemned in strong terms the failure and lack of heart of the nobility, the ‘duces  belli’ who had failed in their obligation to the French state.
The author's indignation was expressed ironically.
Those who liked to regard themselves as heroes (‘milites delicati’) must show a change of heart and a will to win before any victory might be theirs.
Further, and more important, it was open to doubt whether the nobility was properly trained for war.
Without training, all its efforts were doomed to failure.
The criticisms of the luxurious life led by the nobility (with its attendant implications of better diet and better health) were not limited to the writers of such political pamphlets.
Criticisms of the same kind were also to be made by such as Philippe de Mézières, whose long reflective work on the state of French society, the Songe du vieil pèlerin , was written towards the end of the fourteenth century.
In England, an attempt was made in 1316 to cut down the amount of luxurious food which the nobility might consume.
Such may appear like attacks on the wealth and privilege of the ‘haves’ by the ‘have nots’.
In reality, it was part of a wider problem, perhaps best expressed in the Quadrilogue invectif of the Norman, Alain Chartier, written in 1422 when his homeland had been overrun by the English.
Chartier was reluctant to place all responsibility for this disaster upon the nobility alone.
Like the clerical writer of 1357, he saw the English victory as a sign of divine displeasure and punishment for divisions within France.
Where Chartier went further was in asking whether nobility was something which came to a man by virtue of his birth (and could therefore be inherited) or whether it was accorded in recognition of merit?
Did nobility derive from birth, function, or attribute?
The debate was an old one: ‘does gentilesse proceed from birth’, John Gower had asked a generation earlier in his Confessio amantis .
Its significance in 1422 lay in the way it questioned whether birth was a sufficient warrant for high military office, or whether the responsibilities of leadership in war time should only be accorded (and it was the king who accorded them) to those whose experience and reputation in military affairs merited them.
Society had a right to expect the best from those with responsibility for its defence.
War, indeed, caused questions to be asked about the nobility's role in it.
Traditionally, war had given men opportunities to achieve honour through individual acts of valour and courage.
Times, however, were changing.
By the early fourteenth century Ramon Lull could stress the need to fight not merely for self-glorification but for the common good.
The didactic works which the nobility used to educate their children stressed, in the words of the Burgundian, Ghillebert de Lannoy (himself a nobleman), the obligation to ‘expose themselves to death for the good of the land’, an ideal which many would have been able to read about in the works of classical authors such as Valerius Maximus, Livy and Caesar.
Chivalry was coming to mean life in the public service under the ruler's direction.
When Charles de la Tremoille was mortally wounded in the battle of Marignano in 1515, his death brought pride for his family since he died fighting for the public good in an engagement at which the king of France himself had been present.
In a word, the nobility was being restored to its former role as the protector of society, a role which, far from contradicting the true spirit of chivalry, corresponded exactly with it.
But although the spirit might be willing, there were difficulties, chiefly economic ones, to be overcome.
Whether the owners of large or small estates, noblemen were members of a caste which was expected to live nobly with a certain liberality and panache (‘vivre noblement’) as befitted their tank.
Yet to do this was proving increasingly expensive, for articles of luxury were fast rising in price.
But none could deny that a fine house was a symbol of status and wealth.
In border areas, dwellings which incorporated architectural features concerned with defence (the ‘maison-fortes’ of France) were both dwellings for a family and, in certain circumstances, they might provide some measure of protection for local people, in so doing underlining the nobleman's responsibility for the defence of the people.
The expenses incurred in participating in campaigns were, by the early fourteenth century, already considerable.
Furthermore, they were rising.
There was the war horse to be thought of: a fine animal might be worth the value of a small lordship or, put differently, in the mid-fifteenth century a charger could cost a French man-at-arms the equivalent of anything from six months' to two years' wages.
The higher a man's rank, the better the mount he was expected to have, so that the horse of a knight could cost twice that expected of an esquire, while a banneret might, in turn, pay double the price a knight-bachelor could pay for his.
In addition, the cost of equipment and armour, the quality of which could vary considerably, added greatly to the expense of going to war.
It was the matter of cost which played an important part in changing noble attitudes towards the practice of war.
In the summer of 1297, the earl of Arundel may not have wished to accompany his king, Edward I, on an expedition to Flanders.
But the excuse which he gave had a genuine ring about it: he could not afford to go, for none would serve in his retinue unless he rewarded them with revenues from his own lands, which would entail a loss of status (‘grant abesement de mon estat’) which the king would not wish.
Nor could the earl find anyone who would lend him money to be secured on his landed revenue.
Arundel's predicament was an early warning of difficulties to come.
The economic boom of the thirteenth century, accompanied by an expansion in the population of Europe, was beginning to tail off.
By the late thirteenth century, those for whom landed income was the chief source of revenue faced an uncertain future.
A century later the French nobility would be among the worst affected victims of the activities of the routiers , often called Companies, whose particular style of war entailed the destruction of a wide variety of noble revenues.
The hazard of confiscation by Frenchmen of opposing loyalties in times of political turbulence, or at the hands of the English during the occupation of much of northern France between 1417 and 1450, could also lead to greatly diminished revenues.
The need to pay ransoms could be ruinous since, to raise the cash required, land often had to be sold.
The trouble was that it did not necessarily sell well so that in some cases, such as that of the Burgundian lord, Guillaume de Châteauvillain, both he and his family, who acted as guarantors for the payment of 20,000 saluts which he had agreed to pay when captured by the French in 1430, faced financial ruin.
The French and English kings sometimes had to help those who had served them to regain their freedom: in 1444 Sir John Handford, who had been in France for more than twenty years, received 15,000 livres from Henry VI as a contribution towards the purchase of his freedom; while Jean de Rodemack got a substantial sum towards the payment of his ransom from René d'Anjou, and Georges de la Trémoîlle received a seigneurie in Poitou from Charles VII in lieu of ransom promised but not paid.
Similarly, the insistence of lords that their tenants perform their feudal duty of watch and ward (guet et garde ), or carry out necessary repairs to castle wall or ditch, as their predecessors had customarily done, was an insistence which reflected economic necessity.
It  was that same necessity which forced tenants to refuse their service or, as in the case between Guy le Bouteillier, as lord of La Roche-Guyon, and the people of the town, to have the dispute between them on these matters heard before the Parlement of Paris.
Few could resist pressures which were making the waging of war, never cheap, more expensive than ever before.
The fourteenth century was to see a change among the natural leaders of military society from free service in the fulfilment of obligation to service in return for pay or reward.
In a very real sense war was becoming an important supplementary source of livelihood, for which the nobility increasingly sold their services to the king in return for wages and promises of opportunities of obtaining what were euphemistically known as the ‘advantages’ of war: the profits of ransoms; booty; and grants of land seized from the conquered.
As in the case of war presenting the knight with a chance of achieving reputation, so in this different context the key word was ‘opportunity’.
War gave to men of initiative many such opportunities.
Sir John Fastolf, involved in a long drawn-out lawsuit in Paris between 1432 and 1435, could remind the court that he had been the first to jump into the sea when Henry V had come ashore in France in 1415, and that the king had rewarded him with the grant of the first house which he had seen in France.
Being the first ashore was an honourable achievement which brought its own reward; respectability was what Fastolf was claiming.
Some of the books which he is known to have possessed, which included Christine de Pisan's Letter of Othea to Hector , a didactic work for knights, reinforce this view.
At the same time Fastolf s attitude to the practicalities of war reflect a hardheadedness which was essentially of this world: the plan which he drew up in 1435 favouring a ‘tough’ approach to the war made little concession to romantic ideas of chivalry which would influence a knight's conduct in war.
His long career in France which led him to hold high military and administrative posts, as well as amassing a fortune through the capture of prisoners in battle, the seizing of property and the exploitation of estates, shows him to have been a ‘realistic’ person in all that he did.
As often the case, Froissart had a story which illustrates this point.
Describing Edward III's arrival at Calais in 1359 with a sizeable army, the chronicler recalled that a large number of men, of different backgrounds and nationalities, were there waiting in the hope of being allowed to join him, some, he added significantly, wishing to advance  their honour, others intent upon pillaging the kingdom of France.
In many cases, those who had come had spent large sums preparing themselves adequately to join the English ranks, such was their keenness to serve under a commander of high reputation.
Their motives, at least as described by Froissart, indicate that the profit motive was increasingly important in attracting men to war, and that mundane, as well as idealistic, motives provided a double purpose for the achievement of skill in arms.
Society was faced with two images of the soldier.
On the one hand was the traditional knight of chivalry, the figure of the romances, and, more recently, of the new chivalric orders, one of whose social functions was the defence of those in physical need and danger.
Not surprisingly, St George and St Michael were the patrons of new orders: both were depicted in art as the defenders of the innocent against the forces of evil.
On the other hand was the image, conveyed with increasing frequency by the chroniclers, of the common soldier as a symbol of something to be feared, the perpetrator of violence and destruction, whether this took the form of attacks on property (pillage and arson) or on people (murder and rape).
The image of the drunken and ill-disciplined soldier, a figure who aroused an emotional response, more often that of fear than that of respect, was nothing new in this age.
Mercenaries, like the hireling of the bible, could not be trusted: the bells which warned the inhabitants of the villages and towns of southern France of the danger of the approaching Companies reflect society's fear and mistrust of such men.
If soldiers could find a defender from outside their number (as they did in the poet Thomas Hoccleve, who pleaded that greater respect be paid to their economic predicament in old age), more often than not they suffered from the verbal and literary lash of preachers, moralists and other writers.
The mid-fourteenth-century English Dominican, John Bromyard, launched into what he regarded as the increasingly  unChristian spirit of those, both knights and common soldiers, who went to war with the vilest of intentions and ‘oaths and curses in their mouths’.
The views of his French contemporary, the Carmelite, Jean de Venette, corresponded almost exactly; not without reason did the poor people of France have little trust in the nobility who abused them and their property and virtually held them to ransom in the most disgraceful way.
The remark of Honoré Bouvet, a Benedictine who was a contemporary of both Bromyard and Venette, that no man who did not know how to set  places on fire was worthy of the name of soldier, might be cynical, but it was not entirely unmerited.
The gamekeeper, it would seem, had turned poacher, leaving much of society undefended.
If war was a means of achieving peace, or social and political harmony and order, how compatible were the activities of many soldiers with that aim?
Were not soldiers, and their activities, the enemies of peace?
It was for reasons such as this that every attempt was made to bring a measure of order to war.
Although it was difficult, in practice, to stop war from breaking out, serious attempts were made to control it by emphasising that only a war duly and properly declared by a  soverign authority could be regarded as just.
The causes lying behind such a declaration had to be serious (the denial of rights, the breaking of the feudal bond), and every attempt to resolve a possible conflict by negotiation had to be made.
War was only to be a last resort.
There was, too, the matter of the methods used by the soldier in war.
They had to be reasonable (no sledge-hammer to crack a nut), controlled, and moral.
Were all weapons moral?
The Church certainly had doubts about the crossbow, with its deadly bolt or quarrel, a reaction which was about to be extended among certain circles to the use of cannon in its early days.
Should all members of the enemy's population be equally at risk in time of war?
An unarmed cleric must not be harmed; but no more should women, children or old men, and even students travelling to their place of study should not be molested or put to ransom.
But what of the farmer who grew crops to feed the enemy's army, or who paid taxes to the enemy king (and more and more people were now doing this, in one form or another), or whose farmyard provided feathers for enemy arrows?
The maker of weapons, the fletcher or the bowyer, might not so easily claim immunity from war.
The problem was to know where to stop.
And who would say that enough was enough, and would take on the task of punishing those who transgressed the rules of the game?
At this stage, the need to control war to prevent it becoming a tragic and self-defeating activity demanded strong action.
War had its rules and conventions, the so-called laws of war (‘jus in bello’), which, internationally understood, bound military society together by providing a common code of practice and a moderating influence upon its conduct.
There were ways of treating prisoners properly, and of recognising that they had certain claims upon their captors; there were  also rules about the taking, sharing, and disposing of booty and pillage; there were signs of formal war, such as the unfurling of banners or the setting off of a cannon at the start of a siege, which informed all those present that a certain legal situation now existed, hostilities having been formally declared.
Indeed, as the study of the law emerging from the application of these laws makes clear, it was the formalisation of war, bringing a set of rules to apply to its conduct, which men were trying to achieve.
The parallel with the tournament or the joust, where the constraints imposed by space and regulations applied, cannot be ignored.
The free-for-all of war had to be curtailed.
The formulation of rules, however, was not sufficient.
There must be people officially appointed to apply them.
Heralds were an essential aspect of the waging of war, just as they were of chivalry.
Their task was not limited to the granting of coats of arms; they had to be experts in recognising such armorials to identify both the dead and those who performed noble (and base) deeds in war.
It was in their power to make and break military reputations; men gave of their best in front of them.
Equally, however, the constable and marshal of the army had authority delegated to them to try in their courts (in which the military law was applied) men such as deserters and those who broke the rules of discipline.
Unlike the herald who sought to observe and note the outstanding (the chroniclers, notably Froissart, made good use of the reports of battle given to them by heralds), the constable and marshal were more concerned with maintaining order.
They shared a common aim, however, for each was trying to keep the standard of soldierly behaviour up to at least that of an acceptable minimum.
The heralds and the disciplinary officers could achieve much; but it is clear that no factor could ensure a greater respect for the rules of war and for the interests and property of the non-combatant than could firm leadership.
To the outstanding leaders, the chroniclers and others gave unstinted praise.
One can readily understand why.
The ability to lead was a characteristic once associated with nobility, an attribute of social rank.
As the period wore on, leadership became increasingly associated with personal qualities and skills which earned nobility, thus bringing renown to the man blessed with them.
The application of such skills led to the greater control of an army and, as a consequence, to its more effective use as a military arm.
At the same time it assured that those who, under weaker leadership, might have suffered at the hands of  armies, could live in greater security.
From this stems the historical importance of the ordinances of war issued by kings on campaign: by Richard II during the Scottish war of 1385; by Henry V in France in 1419; and by his brother John, duke of Bedford, in Normandy in 1428, all three attempts to control the illegal or ‘un-peaceful’ activities of soldiers, in particular in their relationships with non-combatants.
That relationship, an uneasy one in all societies, was best served by personality.
The praise lavished upon Henry V by his contemporaries, by no means all English, is indicative of the admiration accorded to one whose hold upon his men was such that, for a while, those parts of France under English control were freed of the worst excesses committed by soldiers.
To the anonymous writer of the Parisian Journal the Armagnacs (‘faulx Armignaz’) were like Saracens, as they hanged, burned, ransomed and raped at will.
He might have reservations about the English but, generally speaking, under their rule both military and civilian knew where they stood.
That was something to be thankful for.
It was not so much the existence of war as the manner of fighting it which aroused the criticism of an increasingly outspoken body of persons who reflected the views of society in the growing vernacular literature and poetry of the time.
Honoré Bouvet, whose Tree of Battles , composed in the late fourteenth century, was soon to become a kind of handbook on the conventions of war, was deeply influenced by the many human tragedies caused by war.
As a result, he was inclined to take a view which favoured the rights of the non-combatants against those of the soldier.
The least that can be said for him was that he convinced many that the non-combatants' interests were worthy of consideration.
Bouvet's writings reflected the opinions of many chroniclers of the period who wrote as vociferous critics of the excesses of the soldiery.
When Jean de Venette, whose native village of that name had been destroyed by English troops, described the activities of armies, both regular and irregular, he condemned their excesses and bestowed his sympathy upon the victims.
Similarly, if in a much more restrained manner, the Englishman, John Page, himself a soldier in Henry V's army, described in detail and in passages of considerable emotion the sufferings of the helpless civilians during the six-month-long siege of Rouen which ended in January 1419.
If Venette attacked the soldiers, Page did not, perhaps because the man in charge of the operation was his own king who put the blame for the fate of the civilians firmly upon the shoulders of the French.
Yet the sensitivities of both for the sufferings of men, women, and children drawn unwillingly into the war reflect something of the way in which thinking men asked themselves whether  war was, in fact, not so much a way to peace as the prolongation of bitter conflict.
Like all ages, the late Middle Ages had its critics who took swipes at the activities of soldiers.
We should not leave this brief consideration of how war was regarded by people of the time with the impression that greed and anarchy prevailed.
What emerges from recent study of this important period is that war was increasingly coming to be seen as an instrument of state, to be organised by the king for the common good of his people and country.
Gradually the idea of serving the king in his wars was being replaced by the need to serve the res publica , a less particular and more all-embracing higher good.
We shall see later how, in the fourteenth century, taxation came to be voted in ever larger sums for the purpose of war; this was, indirectly, the contribution of communities towards their self-defence.
Out of the monies voted from this public purse wages were to be paid to soldiers to carry out that work of defence.
The soldier, of whatever rank, thus became a public servant whose task it was, under the command of the king, to defend the community's interests through war.
To do this successfully, the soldier had to be ready: he had to train in military skills which he might be called upon to use.
This no longer applied only to the knight who took part in tournaments.
In England, the obligation to own arms and to train in the use of them was shared by all male adults, as the Assize of Arms of 1181 and the Statute of Winchester of 1285 made clear.
The fourteenth century saw the matter being taken further.
In 1363 Edward III ordered that regular training at the butts should take the place of football; a century later, in 1456, the difficulties experienced in Scotland in summoning and arming a proper fighting force were recognised in the proscription of football and golf in favour of archery practice.
Training in arms on an increasingly wide scale was a characteristic of the period.
The philosophical message of Vegetius's De re militari centred upon the need to defend the common good, and for that need to be met not by the employment of mercenaries but by members of the community adequately prepared to fight.
The matter of leadership, and who should be entrusted with it, was much discussed.
These were far from sterile debates.
Fundamentally, what was at issue was whether the army, now ideally composed of men with at least a modicum of training and military skill, should be led by men who merited their responsibilities, awarded to them on behalf of the community by the king who paid them from public funds (‘la peccune publique’).
If, as Honoré Bouvet wrote, the soldier who acted qua soldier did so as the king's deputy, all the more so did war's new leaders act in his name.
These leaders were now slowly becoming officers.
Before long, in the sixteenth century, the age of the military academy, where soldiers (and above all officers) were to be trained, would arise.
A new attitude to war was being developed.
The academy was for the future.
Yet at the time of the Hundred Years War, with the concept of the nation state, and of the need for its interests to be defended, taking root, the raison d'être of war was slowly changing.
It certainly continued to give opportunity for glory, for self-advancement, and for material gain; in that respect it has not changed much to this day.
None the less war was coming increasingly to be regarded as a form of activity to be carried out by the whole community, which would endeavour in common, under the leadership of the king, to defend its honour and safety.
If men had accepted the likelihood of death in war as a means of achieving honour, war fought in defence of a greater good, that of the community, was becoming just as honourable, if not more so.
‘Pugna pro patria’, ‘Fight for your country’, was a call which Bishop Brinton could make from the pulpit in the 1370s.
By the middle years of the fifteenth century litigants in civil suits before the Parlement of Paris could send word that they would not appear in person because they were engaged in war for the public good (‘in expedicione causa rei publice’) or were being detained as prisoners by the enemy.
Both excuses were practical ones; it is evident that they were honourable excuses, too.
‘Pro patria mori’, ‘Die for your country’, would be the next step.
Death on the battlefield, fighting for a just cause and, preferably in the presence of the king who led and represented the community, was, for the fighting man like Charles de la Tremoille, the supreme accolade.
A new view of war, albeit one which had close links with past ideas, was gradually emerging.
THE CONDUCT OF WAR
MILITARY OBJECTIVES
What were the main military objectives of the participants of the war and, in particular, what were those of the English, the aggressors?
The names of the battles are known, some better than others; for most these are the moments in the war which stand out.
A rather closer look at the diary of military events easily conveys the impression of times of intense activity, followed by periods when little or nothing seemed to occur.
If military methods were as aimless as they may appear, should we not concentrate on those moments, perhaps the decisive moments, of violent action when the armies of the two sides clashed in battles which have become part of national myth?
It takes little knowledge of history to appreciate that relatively few of the battles recorded in history have had a decisive effect upon the future of those involved.
This is certainly true of the Hundred Years War, and it is as well to remember that at Crécy, Poitiers, and Agincourt, although the English emerged as victors, on each occasion they were not entering the French kingdom to attempt its conquest, but were actually leaving it, heading for the coast in search of transport to take them back to England, the main aim of the expedition already fulfilled.
If each success brought reputation (as it did) to the victors, and loss of men and morale to the vanquished, none brought immediate territorial advantage.
Was an army's main aim, then, not to draw the enemy to battle?
The chevauchèe may have been seen as a challenge to the enemy's pride and ability to defend his territory, but it is doubtful whether the leader of a  chevauchèe , often at the head of but a few thousand men, and needing to make the expedition profitable through the taking of booty and prisoners, was seeking battle.
In fact, the opposite was nearer the case.
Vegetius's teaching on war was not likely to have been interpreted in terms of trying to draw the enemy onto the field so that he might be met and defeated.
Furthermore, a battle was regarded by many as an invitation to God to intervene in human affairs, and God had the disconcerting habit of bringing defeat upon those who faced the prospect of victory with overconfidence.
In a word, rather than seek battle, it was better to avoid it.
Such a doctrine would be formally expressed late in the fifteenth century by Philippe de Commynes who displayed an unheroic attitude to war and a marked preference for diplomacy.
In the meanwhile, we may perhaps see here a reflection of a decline of noble and, possibly, of literary influence on the place accorded to the battle in war, in which it was no longer regarded as the great opportunity for individual acts of courage, but more as the culmination of a military process whose aim was the achievement of a particular political goal.
If battles, in themselves, did not usually lead to the achievements of such goals, what would?
What were the enemy's weaknesses (not necessarily military ones) which could be attacked?
In the middle years of the fourteenth century French kings had such weaknesses.
For instance, how widely were they accepted as the legitimate kings of France?
Propaganda could be used to undermine their subjects' faith in their legitimacy, while a war of successful raids (or chevauchèes ) might shake that confidence yet further by showing that, as kings, they lacked the power to fulfil one of their prime roles, the defence of their people against the English.
In this way their credibility would be undermined and their power weakened.
The chevauchèe , then, had as its prime aim the undermining of the enemy king's authority by challenging his military effectiveness.
The campaigns of the Black Prince in 1355 and 1356, the defeats of French armies at Crécy and Poitiers (not to mention that at Brignais in 1362) served to underline that lack of effectiveness and to increase the fears of the doubters.
French weakness could be emphasised still further by taking the war to the non-combatant population.
The civilian became the soldiers' main target.
Eventually, it was hoped, this would lead to a demand for peace which could not be ignored, at which moment the stronger party would be able to dictate the terms it wished.
Secondly, wars which involved civilian targets were less dangerous and cheaper to organise, but very costly for the defender.
Not only was there an imperative to respond to threatened attacks by diverting much time, energy, and, above all, money into defence, principally into the building of urban  fortifications and castles; when the raids occurred the defenders' means of production (crops, fishponds, mills, barns) were among the prime targets for destruction, so that their economic capability was seriously undermined.
With their material resources diminished, and fears for their physical safety dampening such vital initiatives as rebuilding and continued cultivation (for who would carry out such tasks when the risks of further loss and destruction were high?), civilians became a political, and even a financial liability to their king.
What was more they could not, or claimed they could not, pay taxes, direct or indirect, so that the king of France soon came to feel the impact on his fiscal policy of English raids into certain parts of his kingdom.
That was what the chevauchée was intended to achieve.
What of the French response?
Failure to react would allow the English to think that they could do as they wished.
Inaction would likewise be taken as a sign of weakness by the French people themselves.
At a time when neither the French army nor fiscal arrangements to meet its needs had been sufficiently developed to respond to a new military situation, the only possible response was none the less to call traditional forces together to form an army with which to intercept and, it was hoped, to defeat the English.
By 1356 such a way of approaching the problem had clearly failed.
Less than twenty years later, however, things had changed.
The French army had become relatively small and manageable; it was now comprised of picked men; its leaders, too, were the best available; and its task was the specific one of taking the initiative and winning back the areas of land ceded by the terms agreed at Brétigny — and more, if possible.
Instead of trying to confront the English in pitched engagements, the French tried the tactic of clearing towns and castles of their garrisons, employing units of mounted — hence mobile — troops to do this.
The system worked well.
In the 1370s the English, lacking good leadership and the necessary commitment of men and money to defend a long frontier (available money might have been better spent on defence than on more popular campaigns through France), soon lost the ground which they had gained by treaty.
Treaty.
The word serves to remind us of the importance of that element so far not introduced into the discussion: diplomacy.
Its role could have been vital, for in theory skilful negotiators might have made the most of military situations which, at a given moment, greatly favoured one side rather than the other.
In 1360 French weakness (and in particular the capture of King John) gave the negotiators reason to make some fairly radical alterations to the map of France.
In 1420, French weakness and Anglo-Burgundian strength were to settle the question of the succession in favour of the English king.
At no other  time, however, did the current military situation make its impression deeply felt upon diplomatic bargaining.
Yet even in 1360 the French royal council did not feel weak enough to be obliged to accept the terms ceded by the captive king in London.
The use of the ‘half-peace’(with each side making a major concession which left neither side fully satisfied) and of the truce were proof of the failure of military pressure to force a final settlement of the war, one way or the other, through diplomatic negotiation.
Such, briefly, was Henry V's inheritance from the fourteenth century.
How did he change it?
Of Henry, as of Edward III, we must admit that we do not know what his precise political ambitions in France were.
Yet no doubt exists about the different approach of the two kings to the conflict with France.
From the first, Henry V set out to conquer, and then to maintain, that conquest.
Harfleur was taken by siege and in the year which followed, everything was done to ensure that it should not be lost.
In 1417, Henry began the more systematic conquest of Normandy.
Places which felt they could resist did so, were besieged, and were taken.
Henry's new subjects were asked for their loyalty on oath; those who refused were expelled, and their properties confiscated.
An administration to rule in his name was also set up.
Garrisons were established to police the conquered area and to act as islands of English authority, attempts being made to keep the soldiery under some discipline.
Castles also acted as bases for field armies which were used to extend and defend the frontier with Valois France.
In every way, Henry V acted as if all that he did was to be lasting in its effects.
It was from this position of moral and physical strength that he negotiated the treaty of Troyes, whose terms suggest that he wanted to change as little as possible.
Only the dynasty would be new.
Normal life would go on as usual if people accepted him as heir to the French crown.
He was using the treaty not so much to conquer as to acquire legitimately what he regarded as his own by right.
Once again, we ask what was the French response?
We need scarcely remind ourselves that the 1420s marked the nadir of French fortunes.
A flash of hope after the unexpected success at Bauge in 1421; but Cravant and, in particular, Verneuil put paid to hopes of a quick revival.
As the English moved southwards into Maine and Anjou, so French prospects grew bleaker.
Reconquest would take time, in particular if diplomacy did not come to their help.
In the end, it was geography (in the form of the river Loire) and Joan of Arc that saved them.
Charles VII's rule was legitimised by his coronation.
Valois morale slowly began to rise, while English morale, in particular after the loss of the Burgundian alliance, declined.
The French were to win the final set by a combination of factors.
They appealed increasingly to popular opinion: Charles VII was now the true king who should be supported by all loyal Frenchmen.
Then his military successes, modest at first, increased in number.
The career of John Talbot, earl of Shrewsbury, shows that in the late 1430s and 1440s the English were waging an increasingly defensive war: now a stronghold here, now a castle there was coming under attack and being lost.
Over a decade (so reminiscent of the 1370s in the south-west) English military power, together with its dependent legal and administrative authority, was eroded away.
English morale sank further, and both its political and military commitment to the war declined.
It is notable that, on the final French campaign of 1449–50, carefully and confidently organised by the king, and carried out by a much-reformed army, the majority of fortified places did not resist, preferring to open their gates to the side which not only controlled more firepower but claimed with greater vigour to represent legitimate and effective rule.
In Aquitaine, between 1451 and 1453, French armies did indeed meet with resistance: but the fact remains that the battles of Formigny (1450) and Castillon (1453) only finished off in dramatic fashion processes which were all but complete when the opposing armies met.
It had been shown that the essentially non-dramatic tactic, slow as it might be, was in the last resort the one which brought results.
And results were what war was increasingly about.
LAND FORCES
A late-medieval army was, essentially, composed of two groups, those who fought on horseback and those who fought on foot.
In itself, the horse was both an arm and a sign of social distinction, as well as a means of transport.
In the English civil wars of the mid-thirteenth century the cavalry had been in command; but fifty years later, things were beginning to change.
If the cavalry were still, in every sense, the army's natural leaders, the victories of the Flemish burgher forces and militia over French knights at Courtrai in July 1302, and that of the mountaineers of Schwyz and Uri over the formidable feudal array of knights and footmen belonging to Leopold of Austria at Morgarten in November 1315 had shown what could be done in conditions and terrain unsuited to the effective use of cavalry.
Not surprisingly, some saw these victories as signs that the days of the mounted knight as the dominant military arm were coming to an end.
Yet care must be taken not to dismiss too readily the value of cavalry as an arm — or worse, as a relic — of the past.
The mounted soldier still had a long way to go and his influence was very considerable in the whole period covered by this book.
None the less, as has been argued, the Hundred Years War would never be settled by a major engagement in which the cavalry alone played the decisive role.
It is important to recognise this, for an acceptance of this fundamental point leads more easily to an understanding of the reasons which caused an increase in the military significance of those who did not fight on horseback.
For what sort of wars are we concerned with?
Those of the first two Edwards were fought against enemies whose common aim was to rid their countries of the English aggressor, but whose methods of doing so differed.
In both cases the leaders did their best to avoid full-scale confrontation.
In Wales (under Edward I), in Scotland (under the first three Edwards) and in France (from Edward I to Henry VI) England fought a succession of wars in which she was, in fact, the aggressor.
In spite of this, how far did the initiative really lie with England, and to what extent was she able to dictate the kind of war which she wanted to fight?
In all cases English kings had to come to terms with the conditions which they found in these three different countries; and in all cases they had to show an ability to adapt themselves and their armies to new conditions, military, social and economic, as well as to new thinking in the ways that armies were formed and war was fought.
The English were faced by the different physical conditions and social organisation of the countries which they invaded.
The army which Edward I led against Llewelyn ap Gruffydd in north Wales in 1277 consisted of less than 1,000 feudal cavalry and some 15,000 foot soldiers; in 1282 the king had only some 750 cavalry as against 8,000 or 9,000 foot soldiers, including archers and crossbowmen, most of them paid troops.
In Wales the nature of the war was largely dominated by physical factors: in mountainous territory foot soldiers were of greater use than heavy cavalry would ever be.
Ideally, a way should be found to employ both arms together.
At Maes Moydog, near Montgomery, in March 1295 that way was found.
The cavalry, combined with archers and crossbowmen, played havoc among the Welsh.
A new weapon had been discovered.
That weapon may have been used to good effect against the Scots who were defeated at Falkirk in July 1298.
Here, in a major battle, two factors were emphasised.
One was the effectiveness of the longbow in the hands of the Welsh archers of whom Edward I had over 10,000, all of them paid, on campaign that summer.
The other factor was the  importance of the formations which allowed the archers to act in liaison with the cavalry, of whom some 2,500 served that year.
Here were the two developments, the use of the longbow and the adaptation of the traditional use of cavalry, which were to bring victories to the English in a number of foreign fields in the coming century or so.
It was the willingness to adapt which was important.
The process begun under Edward I was continued in July 1333 when, at Halidon Hill, outside Berwick, the English showed that they had learned to coordinate the use of ‘traditional’ cavalry with the ‘new’archer force, the combination on this occasion being that of archers and dismounted men-at-arms drawn up in a defensive position which showed what successes a measure of flexibility could bring to an army led by men willing to experiment.
Yet, in the immediate future, the success of English arms would be limited.
The Scottish leaders, notably Robert Bruce, understood well the need to approach the enemy with care.
Bruce, therefore, became a kind of guerilla leader whose main means of harming the English was to harass them rather than seek a formal confrontation with them.
Using highly mobile soldiers to avoid battle, Bruce used the physical geography of Scotland to make conditions as difficult as he could for the English who, risking starvation and ambush, had to be very careful not to overstretch themselves and to keep open their lines of communication as best they could through the control of castles, in particular the vital one at Stirling, which dominated the lowest point at which the river Forth could be crossed by bridge.
It was with this kind of experience of rapidly changing war behind them that the English began their long conflict against France.
There they were to face yet another situation, a large country whose main physical characteristic was open countryside (‘plat pays’) broken up by rivers, with the social and economic characteristic of castles and towns (some already fortified) which helped society to defend itself against enemies from both within and without.
In practice the countryside was easy to conquer; but it could only be controlled properly if the fortified places upon which it depended for its economic well-being and defence were also in friendly hands.
Control of the towns and castles of France, therefore, was the first objective which the English needed to achieve.
As regards the French, their aim must be to harass the English as best they could, to make their task of governing those parts of France which they controlled, and of conquering those not yet in their hands, as difficult and as expensive as possible.
In this process, battles did little to help either side achieve its military aim, and were not to be an important  part of the strategies pursued by the two main protagonists in the Hundred Years War.
If battles were to assume a role of secondary significance, then the cavalry, who might play a vital part on such occasions, were likely to become less important.
A further — and connected — factor contributed to this change: the expense which the individual cavalryman had to incur in order to fulfil his proper role in war.
There can be little doubt that this fact proved influential in reducing the strength of the cavalry (a strength which, as we have seen, was contracting because of the new requirements of war) and of turning many who might have fought on horseback into men-at-arms who rode into battle, dismounted, and then fought on foot.
In such circumstances, the armour needed by each individual provided less cover and was less cumbersome and cheaper than that required by the mounted knight.
In these conditions, too, the mount required either to give a force mobility or to approach a battlefield could be of inferior breed, and consequently cheaper, than a cavalry horse capable of carrying a fully armoured knight, in addition to its own armour.
Thus the hobelar, a form of light horseman, came to provide the mobile and versatile force which was to be characteristic of so much war on the Anglo-Scottish border in the early fourteenth century.
For a few decades, too, the English also used hobelars with success along the borders which separated them from the enemy in France, and in particular at the siege of Calais in 1346–7, where they had some 600 or so to help them keep the French at a distance.
Nor was the lesson lost upon the French whose army, which harassed the English borders in south-western France in the 1370s, contained a preponderance of mounted soldiers.
The weapon of the day was to be the bow.
The crossbow, most useful in defence when the crossbowman, who needed protection for the time required to wind up his weapon, could hide himself behind a wall, was an elitist weapon, most effective in the hands of Gascons, who fought in Wales for Edward I, and of Genoese, a large contingent of whom fought on the French side at Crécy.
But it was the longbow, with its range of up to 200 metres, its power of penetration which was to compel the development of more effective plate armour in the first half of the fourteenth century, its rate of fire which was easily twice that of the crossbow, and which, held vertically,(earlier bows and crossbows were held horizontally) could be aimed more accurately along the line of the bow, which was to give the archer, above all those serving in English armies, so important a role to play in every form of war at this time.
The  bow's greatest asset was its versatility.
It could be used in sieges; it was valuable when used in the open by a lightly armed foot solder; likewise, a mounted archer, who did not need a first-class horse to ride, could prove to be a very mobile and effective combatant.
In the early thirteenth century Gerald of Wales had advocated the combined use of archers and knights; it was precisely this combination which, as shown above, was to be employed to such good effect in defensive positions against the Scots in the first half of the fourteenth century, before being used, in broadly similar conditions, against the French at Crécy, Poitiers and, later, at Agincourt.
What essential changes did this new combination of archers and men-at-arms, some mounted, others on foot, bring about?
In attack, the archers could break up either those massed in defensive position or, as at Agincourt, they could disperse cavalry which had begun to charge, leaving the frightened and wounded horses to turn upon their own side.
In such conditions, concentrated fire from the archers on the wings wrought such havoc that the French could provide but little resistance to those English who set upon them.
In defence, the dismounted men-at-arms and archers (the archers being either in ‘wedges’ or set out before the men-at-arms) provided density of resistance, giving each other support, the men-at-arms being all the better protected, since the archers were able to fire their weapons a considerable distance against an advancing enemy, thus disrupting them before they reached the defending men-at-arms who, with their own cavalry, could then mount a counter-attack.
The ability of each group to fight alongside the other (something which depended upon a very disciplined approach) was undoubtedly one of the main tactical developments of the fourteenth century, and was to play an important part in helping bring about a succession of English victories in battle.
The other important development was that of the use of the mounted archer, who, paid twice the wage of the foot archer, was first found in English armies in 1334.
By the time of the war in Brittany in 1342 there were already more than 1,700 of them in service.
Not all may agree with one critic who termed these ‘the finest fighting men of the Middle Ages’.
None the less, their ability to achieve rapid movements not only in battle but, more important, before it, and to act in unison with the men-at-arms (who were also mounted) made them into ‘by far the most important element in the armies which fought in France’.
By the time  of the Crécy campaign in 1346 men-at-arms and mounted archers, who would fight on foot in positions chosen, as far as possible, for their defensive possibilities, were being recruited in broadly the same numbers.
In both England and France the need to make armies mobile was perhaps one of the major developments of the period, and shows how important versatility was coming to be regarded by the leaders of the day.
It was this factor which contributed heavily to the successes achieved by the French army in the 1370s.
Yet we should not forget another: the significance of the noble contribution to the relatively small army of some 3,000 or so men (increased by half for part of the year), drawn largely from local men, all of them volunteers, all regularly paid and reviewed.
These were factors of telling importance as the army sought to fight a war which would rely on its mobility to achieve success, a war in which confrontation on a large scale would be avoided.
Well organised and well led, the small French army fulfilled these important, if un-dramatic, military objectives with complete success.
For the French the peace of the last years of the fourteenth century led to little more than the need to garrison their frontiers.
But then the civil war of the first years of the new century caused what was virtually the collapse of the French army, a collapse confirmed by the defeat at Agincourt at the hands of English men-at-arms and archers.
For much of the next generation there could scarcely be said to be such a thing as a French army, for a sizeable proportion of Charles VII's soldiers came from Scotland.
On the English side, what was needed was an army to fulfil two essential functions: conquest and maintenance of that conquest, requirements which demanded both field armies and garrisons.
Partly because those who served in garrisons had to be ready to serve in the field when required (for a castle acted as a base where soldiers could remain when not in the field, and from which they could control the countryside around by mounted raids within a radius of, say, a dozen miles), partly because of an increasing difficulty in securing active support from the nobility and gentry for the war in France, English armies at the end of the war sometimes included a greater ratio of archers to men-at-arms than ever before, sometimes 7:1 or even 10:1, rather than the more usual 3:1 under Henry V and the parity of archers to men-at-arms normally found in the second half of the fourteenth century.
We should also recall that the nature of the war, sieges pursued by both sides and the defence of a long frontier stretching from Le Crotoy in the east to Mont-Saint-Michel in the west, dictated a kind of war in which heavy cavalry played relatively little part other than in defence.
An important change was coming about.
As already suggested, it was paid participation in war which saved a  large number of the nobility and, in certain cases, helped them improve their social status.
Fewer of the French nobility were drawn to looking after their estates.
Rather they preferred to farm them out at a fixed rent, at leases which, in the fourteenth century, became progressively longer, and to enjoy the freedom to take up offices or to serve in the army.
To a certain extent, it could be argued, taxes paid on their lands and its products could be recouped from the crown by entering royal service.
Thus, instead of raiding the countryside under cover of defending it, or stealing money to pay for horses and their harnesses, the nobility entered the royal service in large numbers in both England and France so that, ironically, ‘the budget of the State was to some extent a budget of noble assistance’; used by kings on both sides of the Channel to pay the nobility, among others, for their services in war.
In France many noblemen, especially those of middling to lower rank, were so impoverished that they needed the king's wages, which provided them with a better and surer income than did their lands.
In the period of the reforms carried out under Charles V, much of the French army was composed of members of the lower-ranking nobility.
Being a soldier, they found, could be profitable.
In the England of Edward I, if the great feudatories had refused payment for fear of losing caste, by the reign of Edward III all were ‘now prepared to accept wages for military service’.
The king himself was not paid (although Edward Balliol, ‘king’ of Scots, drew payment both in times of war and peace) but dukes received 13s. 4d; earls 6s. 8d; knights-baneret 4s; knights-bachelor 2s; and esquires 1s; these last sums corresponding proportionately to the amount each might expect to spend on a horse (as outlined above) whose value was agreed in advance, so that compensation for its loss could be paid by the crown.
Both the great nobility and the armigerous gentry, whose influence was more local, played a significant role in the organisation of military service, the gentry acting as sub-contractors in the work of raising forces.
Together they acted as recruiters responsible for bringing together the large numbers of men who constituted the armies of the day.
In this role the importance of the nobility in enlisting not only their feudal tenants but, in some cases, members of their households or those bound to them by indenture for service in war and peace, is considerable.
As captains, they served sometimes as leaders of small expeditions, sometimes under the personal leadership of the king; as lieutenants, they exercised authority in castles and garrisons; while others still served as men-at-arms in the armies of both sides.
However, not all chose the way of active service in war, for other outlets, appropriate to their ranks and talents, could be found.
War policy was settled in the councils of kings; many members of the nobility made the giving of counsel their contribution to war.
Not far distanced from the council, in England at any rate, was Parliament, dominated for much of the fourteenth century by the peerage; and in that body, too, matters of policy and national finance were frequently discussed, for it was there that kings liked to benefit from the practical experience of men who had taken an active part in war.
For others still, the administration which war inevitably brought in its wake provided further opportunities to serve their country's cause.
Did the nobility, however, keep up with the changes in war taking place in this period?
There has been (and there may still be) a tendency to run down the role of the European nobility in the wars so characteristic of the late Middle Ages.
To many, the world in which they appear to have lived seems to have been distanced from reality.
Changes in social status; changes in the technology of war; changes in the geographical and temporal scale on which it was fought are seen as having led to a decline in noble influence upon its conduct.
Some of these observations are well founded.
The long occupation of northern France by the Lancastrian kings could never have been carried out without the active participation of men, many of them not yet noble, performing the tasks of their captains who, as noblemen with lands in England, had to return every so often to their estates to see to their upkeep.
In this case it was the prolongation of war which gave an opportunity to men lacking landed ties in England to show how important their presence in France could be.
For if the majority of the great nobility joined Henry V on his first expedition to France in 1415, such support could not long be maintained.
By the end of the reign it was already falling off, and while Henry VI had much noble support for his coronation expedition in 1430–1, those who continued to serve him in the French war in the years to come constituted a relatively small group of men.
In allotting commands, both English and French kings had to recognise that the extension of war was making considerable demands upon the nobility, and that changes were being forced upon them.
It is sometimes argued, too, that developments of a technological nature eventually forced the decline of the nobility as a fighting force.
The successes of the English archers at the great battles of the Hundred Years War appear to point to that conclusion.
Froissart's account of the way in which many of the leading French nobility, by going forward at the battle of Crécy, in effect chose the likelihood of death to a dishonourable flight, suggests to the modern reader a group more intent  upon self-immolation than upon the serious business of achieving victory through order and discipline.
But the protective armour upon which a mounted knight and his horse, both very vulnerable in battle, depended did not remain undeveloped.
The middle years of the fourteenth century saw the change from mail armour to plate, while the coming century or so witnessed many improvements in design, so that arrows, bolts, and pikes were met with glancing surfaces which, like the changes in architecture intended to counter the effect of the cannon ball, caused the deflection of the missile away from its target.
Such developments, to which can be added improvements in the quality of steel used in the making of armour; the ability, as a consequence, to abandon the use of the shield, thereby freeing the left arm; and the development of special rests which permitted the use of a much heavier lance, meant that the cavalryman, far from being an outmoded liability on the field, remained an indispensable element of the army, one whose value was, as we have seen, enhanced by training and by association with men using other weapons.
The long-lasting value of cavalry as a ‘follow-up’ force after a battle was shown on several occasions: at Verneuil in 1424 and, half a century later, in the battles involving the French, the Swiss and Charles the Bold, duke of Burgundy.
It is arguable that a decline in the traditional role of the military nobility in war was presaged by the ever-greater use made of artillery, that most ‘un-noble’ and indiscriminate causer of death, which claimed among its victims several great noblemen, among them the Bastard of Bourbon, killed at Soisson in 1414; Thomas, earl of Salisbury (‘a worthi werrioure amonge all Cristen men…slayne at the sege of Orliaunce with a Gonne’, as the author of the Brut reported the event); John Talbot, earl of Shrewsbury, killed at Castillon in July 1453; and Jacques de Lalaing, ‘le bon chevalier’, killed in the very same month at the siege of Poeke, near Ghent.
It is undeniable that artillery was making progress, and that its development was one of the major changes associated with the conduct of war at this time.
But a sense of proportion must be maintained, and to regard artillery as an alternative to cavalry would be a mistake.
The vision of Talbot and his mounted companions being mown down by an enfilade of artillery (as they were) was not typical of the time.
The action smacked too much of the grandiose, if futile, gesture of the French nobility at Crécy just over a century earlier.
By and large, the occasions when the nobility might exploit a situation as cavalry and those when artillery could be used to best effect were not the same.
One arm was valuable in certain circumstances, the other in  different ones.
It would be more profitable to relate the temporary decline in the use of cavalry to other factors.
The wars of this period presented little opportunity to shock troops fighting on horseback.
In the fourteenth century the Fabian tactics of the chevauchée found greater favour on both sides, although there were notable exceptions when the heavy cavalry did play a major role.
Above all, it must be recalled that, at least in the fifteenth century, military objectives could best be achieved through siege warfare, which gave the cavalry less opportunity than it had enjoyed before.
It is to these factors, rather than to artillery itself, that we should turn if we wish to see which arms were proving to be of the greatest significance in the war.
But one thing is clear.
Knightly warfare, if it no longer enjoyed the supremacy of past centuries, was far from dead.
It was still there, and would be used to good effect in the relatively near future when the pitched battle returned as the more usual way of deciding the outcome of wars.
In 1494, it is as well to remember, at least one half of the army which Charles VIII led into Italy was composed of heavy cavalry.
LEADERSHIP
It is evident that the success achieved by any army depends very much upon the quality of its leadership, a subject much discussed by writers of the day.
There were two closely related matters which concerned men of the late Middle Ages.
One was the recognition that leadership was of prime importance if discipline was to be maintained and armies kept together as teams rather than as collections of individuals.
The other was to ask who were to be the leaders of armies, and by what criteria they might claim to lead.
On the first of these the influence of the ancient world was to be considerable.
Ever since the twelfth century a particular form of didactic literature, an instruction manual written for princes giving them both moral and practical advice on how best to rule those under their care, had been developing.
Reasonably enough, princes required to be taught how to make war, and since many of the authors of these works were clerics, they turned to what were the standard handbooks on war to find the information they needed.
Broadly, such advice came in two forms.
One was the collection of anecdotes, culled from Greek and Roman history, which made points of military importance: armies should avoid having their backs to a river when confronting the enemy in battle (Bertrand du Guesclin ignored this advice, with fatal results, at Nájera in April 1367); or, attempts should be made to manoeuvre armies so that the sun shone in the enemy's eyes.
These maxims, many of them  reflecting nothing more than common sense, and taken from the recorded experience of the past, were to be found mainly in two works: the Facta et dicta memorabilia of Valerius Maximus, written in the first century AD, and the Stratagemata of Frontinus, composed in the same century by a man who had been for a short while Roman governor of Britain.
Both works were to be translated from Latin into the vernacular languages in the course of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries; both were known in military circles; and both may have had some influence on the formation of changing attitudes to leadership.
More important, however, was the most read handbook on the military art, the De re militari of Vegetius, compiled in the late fourth century AD.
It was to this work that most writers of manuals on the exercise of princely authority turned if they wanted to learn how war should be fought.
Vegetius was important less for his technical advice than for the general philosophical message on the conduct of war which his work contained.
For, like Frontinus, he set great store by leadership, the moral qualities required of those who aspired to it, and the experience of war which they required to achieve it.
In brief, the good leader, the man who could inspire his army, not merely he who could avoid the obvious pitfalls of generalship which Frontinus had pointed out, might be born with certain inherent qualities, but these had to be developed in the only way that could lead to success, through practice and experience.
There was implied, in what Vegetius wrote, a most important message: leaders did not choose themselves, but had to be chosen.
Put into the social context of the late Middle Ages this meant that the class which had traditionally provided the leadership of armies was having its position, founded largely on social factors, questioned if not undermined.
For the drift of the argument was essentially that men did not assume leadership, but that it was granted to them according to criteria which took merit and experience, as well as birth and social standing, into consideration.
We may see this idea reflected in a number of ways.
When John Barbour, archdeacon of Aberdeen, wrote his long verse account of the career of Robert Bruce, king of Scots, about 1380, he emphasised that his hero's successes against the English stemmed from his military qualities, his understanding of his men, his appreciation of the tactics required for victory, in a word his ‘professionalism’ as a man in arms.
Likewise, the lives of other soldier-heroes of the period, the Black Prince, du Guesclin, even that of Henry V, although written in the chivalric vein, stress that these men were successful largely because their inherent qualities of leadership had benefited from training and experience.
Similarly we may note that the feeling which was so openly  exhibited against the French nobility after the battle of Poitiers reflected something of a growing opinion that, in spite of tradition, the nobility had no absolute right to assume positions of responsibility within the army.
If they exercised them, it should be because they had earned them.
The historian is entitled to regard the matter of leadership as an ‘issue’ in the minds of the men of this time.
We cannot ignore the fact that long-held attitudes were in the process of change.
War was too important to be left to those who, by tradition, had been charged with supervising it.
This discussion if we may call it that — was part of a wider, on-going debate of what constituted true nobility.
Was it birth and lineage, or could a man acquire nobility, and if so, how?
Was it something which could be conferred, by means of an act of dubbing, or by the issue of a patent?
And, if so, did the assumption of nobility mean that a man must act nobly to merit his new position?
Such problems received considerable attention at this time; it is clear that nothing was being taken for granted.
How far was reality influenced by such ideas?
Certainly, the decline of the feudal force did not lead to the demise of the traditional leadership in war.
In both England and France, at the beginning of the Hundred Years War, the command structures were broadly similar.
At the head of each were the kings, advised by men of martial experience who might be their kin or, at least, members of the nobility who frequented the courts.
Beneath them, in France, there existed an ordered and fairly hierarchical structure which saw to the day-to-day defence of the country, from those with wide territorial jurisdictions to those who might be sent to a particular area, town or castle to organise its defence in time of crisis.
By and large, the more important a command (importance being judged by the size of territorial authority, or, more appropriately in time of peace, by the numbers of men involved) the more likely it was to be given to a man who had achieved it as a result of attendance at court.
For it was at court, as the more astute realised, that positions of power and wealth were to be found.
In time of war the presence of a king on campaign was an asset to be exploited.
Not only did it give prestige and add a sense of urgency to an undertaking, it also exerted the pressure of old feudal practice upon vassals to join their lord in person.
Expeditions led by a king were regarded as being of greater importance and were invariably larger than those led by others, however exalted in rank a royal lieutenant might be.
There are numerous examples of kings themselves leading in battle.
Philip VI did so at Crécy in 1346; John II was captured at the battle of Poitiers in 1356; Charles VII personally led the assault on Pontoise in  1441; while on the English side Edward III and Henry V provide us with excellent examples of the martial qualities demonstrated by certain kings.
The command structure, then, began at court and centred around the king.
This fact, and the importance of royal patronage in the granting of military authority, gave a considerable advantage to those whose birth gave them natural access to kings.
In France the brothers of Charles V, Louis, duke of Anjou, John, duke of Berry, and Philip, duke of Burgundy, all gained military advantage for themselves, their clients and dependants from their close relationship with successive kings.
In England, Edward III was to make the fullest use of the military capabilities of his sons, in particular of Edward, Black Prince, whose employment in the war stressed the importance to the family of their father's claim to the French throne.
Such a policy of employing royal sons or brothers continued under the Lancastrians, as all four of Henry IV's sons fought in France, and three were to die in that country.
Beneath the very greatest in the land, others were ready to act in positions of command when circumstances, such as war on a number of fronts, demanded it.
In France whose who held high command, sometimes as lieutenants du roi , were usually princes or men who had achieved the rank of banneret, those senior knights whose swallow-tailed pennons had been cut to the square banners of their new rank.
In England, too, the members of the highest nobility, from dukes to earls, gave service and exercised commands throughout the war.
Edward III always recognised the importance of noble support in his wars, and, both in his reign and in that of his grandson, Richard II who succeeded him in 1377, the nobility led from the front.
We should be careful, however, to emphasise that the nobility (or noblesse , as we would term it in a French context) also had its high, middling and lower ranks.
The highest nobility were only very few in numbers, so that when we speak of their hold upon military commands we must, consciously or not, include those who had inherited relatively low noble rank or who had only risen that far through their own efforts.
These men were, largely, in a class apart, for even the English knight could be a man of importance in the county society in which he mixed.
As war developed and the need for multiple commands increased, it was to such men that the monarchies of both England and France turned.
They proved to have a vital, if at times unspectacular, role to play in the organisation of war.
If the great aristocracy was responsible for providing large contingents for the war (and, in England, at least, it was  they who, after the king, provided the largest) the work of raising these soldiers was often done by men of local knowledge and influence who subcontracted with the royal captains to raise the troops required.
For the raising of armies depended upon networks of connection, based upon bonds of vassalage, regional influence, family and office.
In this matter the lower nobility had a crucial role to play.
It went further than that.
Because of its sometimes precarious economic position, no rank would refuse to accept the king's wage.
Many turned to war as a serious, full-time occupation, while others, constituting a large proportion of the lower nobility, saw military service at some time or other.
As a result of this, their professional commitment to arms grew: in France, in the second half of the fourteenth century, some esquires (men on the very fringe of noblesse ) were promoted over the heads of knights, whose numbers in the French army declined anyhow after about 1380, a suggestion that professionalism was coming to be well regarded.
And in the persons of men such as Bertrand du Guesclin, Sir Thomas Dagworth, Sir Robert Knolles and Sir Hugh Calveley, the lower ranks of the aristocracy asserted themselves even further.
For these were the real ‘professionals’ who, at certain times in the war, took over either as commanders appointed by the crown or as leaders of groups of freelance soldiers who could ignore royal orders and get away with it.
Such men depended upon success for support: for while du Guesclin might play upon his Breton origin to gather a force (or route ) around him, the English could not do so with the same ease, and therefore came to rely upon their reputations to draw men to their service.
These were the first men of less than fully aristocratic background to gain prominence through their merit.
By the fifteenth century the higher ranks of the nobility had taken over again.
In France the factionalism from which the country suffered was largely inspired by the nobility, so that command of the army, as the tragedy experienced at Agincourt in 1415 demonstrated, was chiefly in the hands of noble leaders who gave the army a character as noble as it had had in the 1330s.
If the same could be said of the English army (with this difference, that the nobility was totally committed to Henry V, who had complete control over it) matters were to change under the rule of the duke of Bedford, acting in the name of the young Henry VI.
First, a rift grew between the royal council in England and those whose daily task it was to face the French in France.
Secondly, as the war became less lucrative (with fewer expeditions into enemy territory) and the needs of defence came to dominate military activity, so the glamour of war which had undoubtedly existed both in the previous century and under Henry V, began to diminish.
Members of the high aristocracy  took turns to rule Normandy, with mixed success.
The number of places which needed guarding and which required the presence of a person of authority meant that, in some cases, men of military talent and experience, but not necessarily of high birth, were given positions of considerable responsibility.
The exigencies of war were such that those with long years of service to their name (and there were probably more of them in the fifteenth than in the fourteenth century) almost inevitably found themselves in positions of command.
And because of a decline in the number of knights in the English army by 1450, it was upon those of lower social status that many of these commands devolved.
In the mid-1440s, Charles VII organised major reforms within the French army.
The aim appears to have been two-fold: to reassert the authority of the crown to appoint to military commands and, by a ruthless dismissal of the majority of commanders who had come to assume such commands, to make the army once more an efficient weapon of state in royal hands.
The exercise was remarkably successful.
Most of those whom the king preserved in office were men of the middle nobility, men whose experience would enable them to take effective charge of those placed under them.
The king was fortunate: he had plenty from whom to choose, and he could afford to take only the best into his service.
If, then, we recall that there were degrees of nobility and aristocracy, we can admit that the leadership of French and English armies during the Hundred Years War was very largely noble.
Both in the giving of counsel and in the recruitment of forces and, later, on campaign and in battle, the nobility played a dominant role as the servants of their respective kings.
This was the traditional pattern which one would expect to see continued, as indeed it was, into the sixteenth century.
Yet, as was suggested earlier in this section, new ideas were being bandied about.
In a climate of opinion which laid greater stress upon collective success than upon the fame or reputation of any one individual, could the desire for fame, which might impair the effectiveness of the army, survive?
The answer lay not in trying to play down the search for glory in war, but in channelling these energies towards the service of the king who represented the public good and honour of a nation or people.
After 1400, it has been noted, lawyers in the Parlement of Paris consistently tried to show the respectability of their soldier-clients by underlining their service to the king and the public good: ‘…a longuement servy le roy’; ‘…tient frontier contre les enemis’; ‘…il a esté grevé car lui estant en expedicion pour la chose publique’ are phrases which, when used regularly, tell us something of the values of the society in which they are uttered, and of the soldier's role in it.
The emphasis was now to be increasingly on service, given to and paid for by the state, which assumed the right to appoint its commanders (this was made easier by the fact that all accepted the state's money for service in war) and to demand that it got the best available in return for its money.
The leaders of its armies, appointed by commission (as Charles VII appointed his chief lieutenants in 1445) rather than by the ‘natural’ right of birth, were to become its officers for whom advancement would be a recognition of merit.
The logical outcome of this slow change of direction was to come later, but not much later.
By the sixteenth century, no longer assuming that it had a right to positions of leadership in the armies, the aristocracy began to attend military academies where it learned the art of making war.
This is what the work of Vegetius and others was destined to achieve.
MERCENARIES
Into a pattern of military administration which may appear deceptively well organised there stepped a class of soldier, the mercenary, whose presence to people of the late Middle Ages meant destruction and disorder.
While they made a deep impression upon French society in this age, it should not be forgotten that mercenaries constituted a phenomenon encountered elsewhere, in Spain, in Germany and, in particular, in the country dominated by merchant states, Italy.
In that country they first appeared in the mid-thirteenth century, groups of men who, under the leadership of enterprising leaders, contracted (hence the name condottiere which they were given) with individual city states which lacked their own armies but had the funds necessary to pay them, to guard their territory and maintain a measure of order.
From such relatively peaceful origins they came, by the end of the century, to undertake external war for their employers, pitting themselves against other such groups (the Companies or routiers ), in which might be found not only Italians and Germans, but Flemings, Spaniards, Frenchmen and, at times, a few Englishmen.
By 1300 such men were coming to form an essential part of the Italian military and political scene.
For us, their appearance elsewhere in Europe constitutes an early example of the principle of payment for military service which, as we have seen, became an integral element of the formation of royal armies in England and France in these years.
Such mercenaries were specialist fighters, owing no firm allegiance, men who fought for pay and what they could get out of war.
They were  specialists in that they were full-time soldiers; war was their life.
They were specialists, too, in that they favoured one type of war, that of surprise in which the dawn raid was more effective than the siege.
Since their success depended upon their mobility, they could not take cumbersome engines with them; instead, they developed military skills sometimes rather different from those employed by more conventional soldiers.
Nor were these men, like their predecessors in Italy, always concerned with the niceties of loyalty.
John Hawkwood, as leader of the White Company, spent years fighting against the interests of Florence before entering Florentine service: changing sides did not unduly worry him.
What attracted men like him was the prospect of pay in return for war service.
It was, then, peace or truce which threatened their existence, and it was because of the termination of hostilities between England and France which resulted from the treaty of Brétigny in 1360, followed as this was in 1364 by the ending of the Navarrese challenge to the royal authority in Normandy and the war of Breton succession, that France, Italy and Spain were to be hosts to the Companies in the 1360s.
The problem arose again thirty years later, when their energies were channelled off on a crusade which ended in defeat at Nicopolis in 1396, and yet again in 1444–5 when, after the truce of Tours, the ‘Ecorcheurs’ who were, as their name implied, ‘skinning’France, were led off for a while to Switzerland and the imperial lands.
On all three occasions, peace had created unemployment among soldiers who were looking for adventure and pay.
No ruler, possibly other than in Italy, had the means or the wish to employ large forces when there was no war.
To no other group of soldiers functioning in this period was leadership a factor of such prime importance.
Freelance soldiers that they were, they depended upon their captains for recruitment, organisation, distribution of booty, and pay.
The form of ‘unofficial’ war which they fought was more characteristic of brigandage and open robbery, but it would be wrong to assume that those who constituted the Companies were all, of necessity, men of criminal background or low degree.
Indeed, the opposite was frequently nearer the truth, for their leaders were often members of the lower nobility, driven to making war in this way by economic factors and, in some cases, by being younger sons with little hope of inheritance.
The members themselves are more difficult to assess and describe.
But one important factor is clear: the English element was a considerable one.
By the mid-fourteenth century, the predominance of those of English origin was, indeed, so marked that the term ‘Inglese’ and ‘Les Anglais’became virtually generic names for these groups.
Yet many came from elsewhere, notably from Brittany and Gascony.
As Philippe de Mézières wrote in the late fourteenth century, some may well have come from those members of the lower nobility who did not normally go to war except when summoned by the king, but who, in certain cases, were now being forced to take up arms as a business.
Others were men of ‘petit état’ who, out of daring or a wish to commit pillage, took to this way of life.
Others still were from the very lowest ranks of the Church who preferred the more exciting life of the camp.
One of the most notorious, Arnaud de Cervole, was not known as ‘the Archpriest’ for nothing.
Generally speaking the Companies had a bad name among the populations for their greed, unscrupulous attitude to the law, and apparent contempt for the forces of order.
In Italy, it was said, an ‘Inglese italianato è un diavolo incarnato’, an Italianate Englishman is the devil in person.
Their methods were often far from respecting the chivalric norms of war.
Roamers of the countryside, surprise was their chief weapon, great daring being shown in what some regarded as the finest military feats of all, the capture of walled towns and castles which were then ransomed, having perhaps been used in the meanwhile as bases for military activity further afield.
Yet, for all that, many of these men, either singly or as members of a larger group, entered royal service and did well in it.
In the fourteenth century, for instance, Arnaud de Cervole was in and out of royal employment and was actually appointed royal chamberlain in 1363, while his son had the duke of Burgundy as his godfather.
Similarly, Amiel de Baux held office under the French crown, and was serving in the royal army when it entered Aquitaine in 1371.
On the English side Hugh Calveley, having at first sold his services in Spain to du Guesclin, changed sides and served the Black Prince there in 1367; later he was to join John of Gaunt, and he even worked for Richard II in France.
Sir Robert Knolles, likewise, fought both for himself and for his king.
In a similar way the French crown was able to make good use of the experience of such men, the Valois intervention in Castile in the mid-1360s, under the leadership of du Guesclin (who understood their mentality well), being based largely on the services of these mercenaries.
In the fifteenth century, the freelance soldiers had an important part to play in the war.
Henry V and his son employed some whose names can be spotted on muster rolls, not infrequently fulfilling a specialist capacity, especially in the artillery trains.
François de Surienne certainly showed himself capable of independent activity before throwing in his lot for some years with Henry VI, whom he served before being elected a Knight of the Garter.
But it was in the French army of the first half of the century that the mercenaries were most prominent.
In the decade 1420–30, a sizeable  proportion of Charles VII's army was composed of Scots who fought at both Cravant and Verneuil, a strong contingent of Genoese also taking part in this second battle against the English.
The king also depended to a considerable degree upon individuals who, like the leaders of the companies of the previous century, served in the royal army: Poton de Xaintrailles was for a period a ‘veritable routier’, pillaging in different parts of France before accepting office under Charles VII; Antoine de Chabannes, a captain of routiers , at one time had command of 1,000 horsemen before finding employment under the crown.
These, and others, like Hawkwood in Italy, fought against authority before joining it.
Some of them received high command in the mid-fifteenth century, and some introduced their own characteristics to the fighting of war.
Etienne de Vignolles, known by the name of La Hire which his Burgundian enemies had given him, brought off a spectacular stroke with the capture of Château-Gaillard, on the river Seine, in 1430, while in the following year Ambroise de Lore and his band travelled across much of Normandy to attack a fair near Caen, before retreating in good order with their prisoners.
Such coups gave the perpetrators of these daring acts something of a romantic image in the popular mind.
Some assumed, or were given, names other than their own: Jacques d'Espailly was known as Forte-Epice; La Hire had a cannon named after him, as did Guillaume de Flavy; while, in the eighteenth century, La Hire was to become the named knave of hearts on French playing cards.
These were the fighting heroes of their day, whose exploits lived long in the popular imagination.
FORTIFICATION AND ARTILLERY
We have seen that war leaders of the late Middle Ages sought the achievement of their military aims either through the devastation of the countryside or, in certain circumstances, by seeking to gain control of the towns and castles which dominated it.
Because an army's main aim may have been the devastation of land, the destruction of its produce, and the seizure of moveable property, there can be little doubt that war's chief victims were those who, if they did not live within reasonable distance of a defended town or garrisoned castle, ran great risk to their personal safety.
It is true that small local fortifications, sometimes churches adapted at great expense by the addition of towers, parapets, walls and even moats, might bring some measure of safety, at least against small bands of soldiers or evil-doers.
Yet since these cannot  have presented much of an obstacle, they were of little or no use against large and determined forces of men, against whom only walled towns and castles constituted reasonably sure places of safety.
We have also remarked how, at least in the fourteenth century, campaign leaders, often inadequately equipped as they were, commonly avoided attacking well-fortified towns and castles.
In a short campaigning season curtailed by either seasonal or financial considerations, or by both, the advantage did not lie with the attacker who, if he began a siege, risked being caught between the place he was seeking to capture and (a constant fear) a force coming to relieve the besieged.
Further, he would also require some very heavy and unwieldy equipment, including siege engines; even these might not bring the desired success.
It might require a stroke of luck, such as a shortage of provisions or water among the besieged, or an act of treason, to deliver the well-defended place into enemy hands.
In hostile territory a siege was not lightly undertaken; if certain reasonable precautions had been taken, those who sought refuge inside a town or castle could reasonably hope to survive, in particular if their refuge were a town which, with its generally greater size and more generous  ameneties which favoured the defender, presented a besieger with a greater challenge than did even the best defended castle.
In France the escalation of war in the 1340s (after some four generations of relative peace) led to a number of significant developments.
Before this time, as Froissart was to note and Edward III to experience, many towns had no proper defences other than what could be provided by ditches and water works, neither of which would cause a determined army much trouble.
Nor was there proper central control over the building and maintenance of fortifications, many of which were sadly out-of-date or in bad need of repair by the time that the English began to invade France.
But by galvanising men into action, the English invasions were to change all that.
On royal orders, the towns were directed to see to their defences, and they had to do so by finding their own sources of finance through local effort.
At first, much building was done on the cheap.
Where possible, material which could be salvaged from old buildings or walls was recycled into the new fortifications, while in many places no indemnity was paid to those who were forced ‘pro bono publico’ to surrender property on which walls might be built or to provide the open ground, outside a wall, vital for effective defence.
At the same time, it is evident that the bulk of the money needed to pay for urban defence had to be raised locally, although, from 1367 onwards, the king of France often allowed a quarter of the value of royal taxes raised in a town to be retained as a contribution towards it.
Land was often acquired for little or nothing; in many places  the citizens and those living within the jurisdiction of a town gave their services in the building of walls, the equivalent, it may be argued, of a tax intended to cover building expenses.
Loans and gifts were sought as contributions.
But the biggest and best-organised part of the exercise of fund-raising was undoubtedly the levy of an increasing number of local taxes on the trade of goods, including consumables, of which the most profitable were those imposed on drink, in particular on wine.
Always done with royal approval, which was sought beforehand, the collection of such levies emphasised two factors: that the crown's right to tax and to organise the general defence of France was recognised; equally, that, in practice, the responsibility for carrying out defensive projects was left to local initiative and energy.
The result, it now appears, was that local administrators, with important defensive budgets to collect and administer, took advantage of the experience thus gained to develop their own powers in particular when, over a period of some decades, taxes originally levied for short periods came to be collected for longer and longer periods, until they became all but permanently established as part of the regular income of a town or city.
Towns, therefore, were coming to assume greater importance as places of defence and refuge for the surrounding countryside.
At Reims, for instance, the process of fortification, begun early in the fourteenth century on the orders of Philip IV, was later abandoned, only to be reactivated after the English victory at Crécy.
Between 1346 and 1348, and again, after the visitation of the Black Death, between 1356 and 1358, the people of Reims completed the construction of their city's defence, with the gratifying effect that even the king of England, Edward III himself, could not force an entry in the early winter of 1359–60.
Elsewhere, too, in different parts of France, this period witnessed much building of urban defences.
The walls of Caen were constructed in the years following Edward III's capture of the town in 1346; those of Rouen were begun at the same time on the orders of Philip VI, making the city one of the few properly defended towns, or ‘villes closes’ of upper Normandy; Avignon's wall was started at the instigation of Pope Innocent VI about 1355; while the defences of Tours, in course of construction in 1356, were probably sufficiently advanced to deter the Black Prince from attacking the town on his chevauchée in the summer of that year.
Such building, multiplied many times over, provided France with a network of fortified towns (some of them very large by the standards of the day), impressive traces of which can still be seen today.
From the middle years of the fourteenth century, such steps were sufficient to keep all but the most determined attackers at bay.
Few commanders would  have wished to expend the time and energy required to overcome places so heavily defended.
Change, however, was not far away.
While the widespread building of town walls in the second half of the fourteenth century provided a measure of safety against marauding forces (even against the Companies), such fortifications could not be ignored by an enemy bent upon conquest.
To the English, when they returned in the fifteenth century, fortified towns provided both a military threat and a challenge which they could not ignore.
Paradoxically, therefore, instead of providing refuge for those fleeing from the countryside, the very existence of these fortified towns drew the attention of the invader to them.
As the narratives of the siege of Rouen, pursued by Henry V between July 1418 and January 1419, underline, the results, both for the civilians who had sought safety there and for the garrison who had led the resistance, could be devastating.
The existence of walled towns and castles created two problems.
Had the invader the means of taking these newly fortified places?
Conversely, had the defenders the means of effective resistance?
At the time when the Hundred Years war broke out, a defender had a more than even chance of beating off an attack.
By the time the war ended, the reverse was probably true.
This was in part due to changes and developments in weaponry.
Against an immobile target, such as a wall, even the early cannon could inflict quite considerable damage.
There are references to such ‘gonnes’ in accounts of the siege of Berwick as early as 1333, while it is likely that some form of artillery was brought across the sea by the English for the long siege of Calais of 1346–7.
During the next generation both old and new siege weapons were to be used in tandem.
In 1369 a trebuchet, used for slinging stones, was employed at the siege of La-Roche-sur-Yon, and in 1356–7 another was in evidence at the siege of Rennes; as late as 1378 another was in use before Cherbourg, having been brought there in pieces and assembled on the spot.
Yet three years earlier, at the important siege of nearby Saint-Sauveur-le-Vicomte, the French had used thirty-two cannons, gunstones for them having been conveyed there in carts and by packhorse.
These years clearly constituted a period of transition.
The siege of Saint-Sauveur can be regarded as something of a landmark in the development of the practical use of artillery.
When Henry V landed for the first time on French soil nearly forty years later, it was soon put beyond doubt that in his artillery he possessed a potential match-winner.
While the accounts of the siege of Harfleur in the late summer of 1415 refer to the time-honoured methods of mining and blockade used by the English, pride of place for effectiveness is given to  their artillery, which caused both fear and destruction to the beleaguered town.
The siege had shown that, with artillery, Henry V had the capability of fulfilling his military ambition.
Setting out for France again two years later, the king was described by the anonymous author of the Brut as leaving England with ‘ordynaunce gadred and welle stuffyd, as longyd to such a ryalle Kinge’.
Once again it was the towns and castles of Normandy which attracted Henry, bent, as he was, upon conquest.
Yet again the chronicles emphasise the part played by the artillery in the capture of Caen and Falaise and, a little later, in that of Rouen.
Thirty years later, the rapid reconquest of the duchy by the French owed much to the threat posed by the French king's artillery against the defences of towns which preferred to surrender than to make a fight of it.
Most, it had to be recognised, would have been unable to resist a heavy and sustained bombardment.
Could nothing be done to restore the traditional balance of advantage to the defender?
Was there to be no resistance to this ‘new’ weapon?
The suddenness of the increased use of artillery in the third quarter of the fourteenth century is evidenced by the fact that when Gaston Fébus,vicomte of Béarn in the Pyrenees, had a network of fortifications constructed between 1365 and 1380 (a period during which many castles were built in France) he must have been building some of the last fortifications to take no account of artillery, which was very soon to compel important developments in the art of defence.
For cannons could be fired not only at fortifications but from them, too.
As early as 1339, the town of Cambrai had begun to introduce firepower into its defensive system, an exceptionally early example of the use of such techniques.
When Henry Yevele designed the west gate at Canterbury in 1378, he included round gunports on the drum towers, gunports having been introduced into England some years earlier.
In the same year the town of Southampton, not infrequently threatened by attack from the sea, appointed Thomas Tredington, said to be ‘skilled with guns and artillery’, to take charge of the municipal armoury.
Such examples are taken from the English scene: German towns could provide many more.
But modern scholarship has made it clear that it was in France, more so than in England, that urban defensive requirements played a major part in securing the widespread acceptance of artillery as a means of deterring or countering a prospective enemy.
All over France, from Lille and Dijon in the north and east to Bordeaux in the south-west, artillery became an essential and accepted part of the growing defensive system  associated with towns.
Materials were collected in advance and stored in anticipation of their use; powder slowly got cheaper in the course of the fifteenth century; while many towns employed one or more men to supervise the effective use of artillery in case of attack.
As Christine de Pisan was to show in the first quarter of the century, the use of artillery for defensive purposes was now regarded as necessary and normal.
However, resistance to the increasing employment of artillery in the capture of walled towns and castles would be even more effective if it stemmed from a reassessment of architectural design.
Largely in the hope of preventing or deterring attempts at scaling, walls had traditionally been built high: thickness and solidity had been sacrificed to this need, for walls could not be both high and thick.
Yet, with the advent of cannon, thickness was precisely the main characteristic which the defender demanded of the wall which protected him.
The onus now lay upon the architect to come up with new designs and new ideas with which to counter the rapidly growing effectiveness of artillery aided, from about 1430, by the reversion to the use of cast-iron shot which, although more expensive than stone shot, did not shatter on impact, could be made more uniformly in greater quantities (the making of stone shot was, to say the least, laborious) and in smaller calibre, thereby increasing efficiency by reducing the need for very large and unwieldy cannon.
The architectural solution was ultimately to be found and perfected in Italy in the sixteenth century, but the contributions of English and French experience to these discoveries was not negligible.
By lowering the height of the wall, and thereby enabling it to be built more thickly, it could be made more effective in both defence and counter-attack.
To this could be added the possibility of building the towers only as high as the wall itself, thus enabling the cannon used for defence to be moved along its length (now on one level) to whichever part it was most needed.
Furthermore, as Yevele had shown at Canterbury, the defensive value of the round tower was becoming better appreciated; even if it did not always deflect a cannon shot aimed at it, such a tower could withstand an impact better than could a straight-facing surface.
In addition, the need to achieve both vertical and lateral defence was also dealt with.
Machicolations, usually regarded as a sign of nobility, had their practical value in that they permitted vertical defence against those who might have reached the dead ground near a wall, and might be setting about digging or mining under it.
At the same time the building of what were to become bastions, towers standing out from the line of the wall, enabled defenders to fire all round, and in particular laterally, against approaching men or machines, as the design for Bodiam Castle in Sussex, which, like Cooling Castle in Kent, was built at the time of the French invasion scares of the 1380s, clearly shows.
The building, about 1440, at the Mont-Saint-Michel, of a form of bastion not dissimilar to that to be developed in Italy, underlines how this matter of overcoming the defensive problems created by the development of artillery was being dealt with.
By the sixteenth century the initiative long held by the defender, surrendered in the late fourteenth century, had been largely regained.
NAVAL OBJECTIVES
Strangely, and certainly wrongly, the history of the naval war between France and England at the end of the Middle Ages is an under-estimated subject, its contribution not yet fully studied by historians.
The apparent ineffectiveness of naval forces, particularly when contrasted with the vital role which they came to play in the sixteenth century, may have turned students against the subject.
Yet, the fact remains that, although we are dealing with an age when history was not decided by battles at sea, the first major battle of the Hundred Years War was fought at sea in June 1340.
The subject has an importance in the history of war at this period which merits emphasis.
During the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, France developed what was nothing less than a long-term naval strategy.
In 1200 the king of France, ruling in Paris, was virtually land-locked, the county of Ponthieu, around Boulogne, being his only access to the sea.
With the conquest of Normandy, however, Philip-Augustus gained control of a long stretch of coastline opposite England, from which he could also ‘oversee’ Brittany, while access from the mouth of the Seine gave him a means of developing trade and a wider market.
It also meant that in 1213, and again in 1215–17, the French king was able to take the war to England, a thing unheard of only a generation earlier.
Ten years later the French, now ruled by Louis VIII, broke out in another direction, this time in the Bay of Biscay, with the capture of La Rochelle in 1224.
Twenty years later still, under Louis IX and with the needs of the crusade in mind, a port was built at Aigues-Mortes on the Mediterranean, to be used for commercial and, even more so, for military purposes.
The vessels used by the French had to be brought from Marseille and Genoa.
These were still days of innovation.
It is all too easy to see the development of France in terms of an inexorable and inevitable process of expansion from early beginnings in the Ile de France around Paris to the country we know today.
Yet it may  be argued that part of the process was a search for the open sea which France had been denied until the early years of the thirteenth century, and that the desire to win control of the peripheral duchies of Aquitaine, Brittany and Normandy was but an aspect of a wider policy which included an ambition to have access to, and control of, the ports on the Atlantic, Mediterranean and Channel coasts for military as well as for commercial reasons.
As the rivalry with England grew in the late thirteenth century, so the sea, which separated the two countries, took on added importance.
By 1294 there already existed at Rouen, on the river Seine, a shipyard controlled by the king and employing specialist ship-builders brought in from Genoa.
These were the signs for the future, but at the moment only signs.
When Philip IV tried to attack England in 1295, he still had to seek transport ships from the Baltic ports and from those which he could seize in French harbours, together with sailors from Flanders.
But, as the king found, he could not rely upon the Flemings; their links with England were too strong for them to act with determination against those who supplied them with the wool upon which their own economic prosperity depended.
The fourteenth century showed how valuable access to the sea, and in particular to northern waters, was to be for France.
The sea coasts provided sailors to man the vessels used in war, a large number of which were requisitioned fishing or trading vessels, as the records make clear.
The ports, such as Harfleur, at the mouth of the Seine, could develop ship-building facilities, and the control of the lower Seine effectively made Rouen into a sea port and a shipyard.
It was probably the success of these steps which, in 1337, caused Philip VI to decide upon the building of a naval base at La Rochelle, a base which was to be ceded to the English by the terms of the treaty of Brétigny, thereby underlining the significance of ports as pawns in international diplomacy.
In addition, we should not forget the value of the sea as a source of fish which provided an essential dietary element to people of the Middle Ages.
Many French people, not merely Parisians, benefited from fish caught in the Channel or nearby waters.
At the beginning of the war with England the French crown, denied the use of the ports and coastline of Brittany and Aquitaine, had to witness the English army enjoying access to both, and using them as bastions on the continental mainland from which to launch attacks into territories ruled by the king of France.
In the fifteenth century the problem became more acute.
Part of the strategic significance of the English occupation of Normandy, and of the alliance with the dukes of Burgundy, lay in the zone of control which was thereby created: for not  only did the English rule both sides of the Channel and the Seine below Paris, but their Burgundian allies controlled the upper reaches above the capital.
In terms of policy it thus became essential to try to weaken the English grip upon both the sea and the main rivers, such as the Oise, which flowed into the Seine, by seeking to detach the Burgundians from their English links.
The vital role (which contemporaries fully appreciated) played by such relatively small ports as Le Crotoy, at the mouth of the river Somme, in the period 1420–50, together with the fact that the ports of Dieppe and Harfleur were among the first places to be snatched from English control in 1435 (leaving them with Cherbourg as the only port from which they could maintain regular links with England between 1435 and 1440, a vital period in the military history of the occupation), shows how important the Burgundian connection was to both main protagonists as they struggled to acquire and maintain a measure of control over the sea.
The French crown, it is rightly argued, had a definite policy with relation to the sea which it had followed since the early thirteenth century.
Ports it must have, particularly in the Channel.
One of the last examples for this period was the conscious creation of a further naval base at Granville, in western Normandy, called the ‘clef du pays par mer et par terre’ by Charles VII in the charter by which he granted privileges to those who would come to settle there to keep it for the good of France.
But there must also be ships, and while France could not provide a sufficient number of them for herself, she was obliged (as the English were on some occasions) to seek them elsewhere.
Thus both Castile and Genoa became suppliers of galleys which often fought on the French side, notably in 1416 when the Genoese provided part of the fleet which suffered defeat at the hands of the English at the battle of the Seine, off Harfleur.
If one is seeking an example of a naval battle which was to have consequences, one need look no further than this one.
At stake lay more than the future of the English garrison in the town which the French were besieging and blockading by land and sea.
By sinking several Genoese vessels and taking others captive, the English made sure that the port remained in English hands, that (for some while) they would control the wide estuary of the Seine, and that they might, in the phrase of the day, ‘sweep’ the French off its waters by patrolling the sea.
This was not simply lucky, nor was it unimportant.
It emphasised that there were men, in both France and England, who understood the role of the sea in war and of the part which it might play in determining the outcome of future English expeditions to France.
After 1416, the English had reason to be optimistic.
Indeed, there is no doubt that control of French mainland ports was vitally important to the English, and that much diplomacy in the course of the war was concerned with securing and maintaining access to the use of their facilities.
In this respect England's relations with Brittany were likely to be of great importance, not only for the positive reason that a friendly duke of Brittany would allow the use of his duchy as a stepping-off place into the mainland, but for the negative one that a hostile duke might cause untold harm to English maritime interests, both military and commercial, by failing to stop the activities of Breton pirates and privateers whose ships gave much trouble at sea, as complaints in Parliament and in some of the political literature of the time, notably The Libelle of Englyshe Polycye , testify.
In the case of the Low Countries, England had a similar interest which was both military and commercial.
The capture of Calais by Edward III in 1347 had given England virtual control of the Straits.
But it was a control which required active defence, to which the Cinque Ports contributed a good deal, particularly in the late fourteenth century.
As a trade depot and naval base, Calais was to serve as an entrepôt for trade in and out of England, and as a back door, which armies might and did use, into France.
But so physically restricted was the Calais area, and so often was it under French pressure, that for long years at a time all the needs of the garrison, whether in provisions or materials, had to be shipped in from England.
In such conditions every effort had to be made to keep the sea passages open — and safe.
The military involvement of England in continental war meant an unusually high concern for achieving and maintaining some measure of control of the sea.
Trade was vulnerable to attack, and cases of piracy were common.
Fishing, too, required protection, for the activities of hostile seamen could easily lead to the loss of catches and vessels, for which there was no insurance provision.
The defence of the coastline had also to be seen to, and was not infrequently found to be wanting, most particularly when small forces of enemy soldiers attacked the English shore and ravaged villages and towns which they found undefended.
So important was this regarded that in the final quarter of the fourteenth century a system of coastal defence on land was developed, essentially a second line to carry the burden of defence once the enemy had managed to effect a landing on English soil.
Likewise, at the time when armies and their accompanying equipment were being shipped over to France, efforts were made (as they were by Henry V in 1417) to keep the sea-lanes  lanes clear by sending out other ships on patrol, thereby ensuring a minimum of safety for those going to fight abroad.
The appreciation of the growing role of the sea in war can be observed in the positive attitudes of some kings of France and England to this matter.
Kings neglected the sea at their peril.
In England, as has been shown, both Edward III and Richard II reacted to mercantile opinion expressed in Parliament by impressing large numbers of ships for purposes of defence, such fleets at times employing almost as many soldiers at sea as did field armies on land, all at great expense.
The development of the Clos des Galées at Rouen, under the patronage of the French crown (notably in the reign of Charles V), is matched by the steps taken by Henry V to develop a royal shipyard at Southampton, so much better positioned than the traditional one at the Tower of London, and by the appointment of royal officers to supervise its working and administration.
Historians have tended to ignore these important developments, which implied the growing need for a small supply of vessels specially built for war (like heavy artillery, these could only be afforded by the crown), the facilities for their maintenance, and the growing appreciation that England's commercial interests should be defended by ships built for that purpose.
Furthermore, sieges which were in effect blockades by both land and sea (Calais by the English in 1346–7; Harfleur by the French and their allies in 1416) show that an understanding of the value of the naval arm, used in conjunction with that of land forces, was developing.
The importance attached to the sea by more reflective Englishmen and Frenchmen at the end of the Hundred Years War may also be seen in two works:The Libelle of Englyshe Polycye , written about 1437, and Le débat des hérauts d'armes , composed about 1455.
The first, a vigorous piece of polemic written in verse, leaves the reader in no doubt about the strongly-held views of its anonymous author on the very positive policy which the royal council was urged to adopt towards the sea which, if England were not careful, foreigners from many nations would use for purposes, both commercial and military, detrimental to English interests.
Among those whom the author singled out for praise were Edward III, who recalled his victory against the French at Sluys in June 1340 by introducing a fighting ship onto the noble of England, and Henry V, who built great ships and dealt firmly with those who were causing trouble to English shipping.
Action for the good of England was something which the writer admired, and he demanded it to forestall the enemy.
The French tract, while not primarily concerned with the sea and the exercise of sea power, none the less tried to show not merely France's equality but its superiority over England in matters maritime.
No longer might the English call themselves ‘roys de la mer’, for France had not only good rivers but good ports, too, the list given including the new port of Granville.
Moreover, France had good ships in quantity and merchandise in plenty with which to trade.
To the author, French superiority in this respect was only one aspect of the more general superiority of his country over the other.
It was a conjunction of war and natural conditions which had brought this about.
It should not escape our notice that it was not only successes on land but those associated with aspects of the war at sea which had contributed towards the satisfactory situation which he described.
NAVAL FORCES
Unlike war on land, war at sea was not an occupation for which the nobility was trained.
Indeed, the author of Le débat des hérauts d'armes could state that the French nobility did not regard fighting at sea as being a noble activity: it is perhaps for this reason that naval warfare did not feature in the chronicles in the way that war on land did.
Nor did it seem apparent to all that the war fought at sea, the damage which might be inflicted upon enemy vessels and morale, and the consequences which victory at sea could have for those who lived in areas close to coasts, were all part of a wider war which could not be restricted to the fighting on land.
So it was that when the Hundred Years War began, although both the French and the English kingdoms had particular naval objectives which they needed to further for military reasons, neither could be said to have possessed a proper navy.
Up to that time the maritime needs of the two countries had not been very demanding.
Philip IV was the first French king to try to pursue an active naval war against England.
Before his time no king had needed many ships, least of all ships on demand; the great expense both of building and of maintaining them, procedures which required special and costly facilities, had deterred kings from shipbuilding on a large scale.
Furthermore, the organisation associated with the wide use of a major arm was lacking.
It was to the credit of Philip IV that he laid the foundations for a dockyard at Rouen, while only a few years later in England, Edward II, whose father had built some galleys, was to possess a small squadron of ‘royal’ ships.
Looking back, we may say that the years around 1300 were to attain some significance in this domain.
But to argue that such developments marked anything  more than a beginning would be to over-estimate the significance of what was done.
When required for use in war, large numbers of merchant vessels were impressed ad hoc .
The procedures were simple enough.
Royal officers, under the charge of admirals, were despatched to the ports with instructions to impress or requisition vessels for the king's use, whether this was to transport men, animals, or equipment across the sea.
The exercise of this right, whose origins went back many centuries, could not always be easily achieved.
As in the matter of purveyance (which, in a sense, the requisitioning of ships was protests and opposition were frequently met, for this kind of procedure disrupted trade and fishing, the two occupations which created a permanent need for ships.
Payment was never made for a vessel taken from its owner for royal service; nor was compensation for loss of a ship, or even damage to its equipment, normally given.
In brief, requisitioning was unpopular, not least since it was often carried out in the period between spring and autumn when trading and fishing conditions might normally be expected to be better than at other times of the year.
Nor was that all.
Once requisitioned, vessels originally built for commercial purposes had to be adapted for military ones.
A ship which was to be used mainly for conveying animals abroad needed work done to its hold: special hurdles, for instance, were required to accommodate horses.
If a ship was intended for patrolling the sea, it had to be equipped to take part in action against the enemy: the building of castles, fore and aft, and, in the fifteenth century, the possible installation of cannon on the deck (guns were placed below decks, to fire out of‘ports’, only in the very first years of the sixteenth century) had to be carried out.
The frequent complaint that ships, once requisitioned, were not actually used for several months, thereby denying their owners the use of them in between times, was not always the fault of the wind or weather.
Shortages of cash to pay soldiers and sailors, insufficiency of crews, and the slow assembly of retinues to be shipped across the sea often combined to delay ships assembled at ports of concentration.
The kind of ships needed on the two sides of the Channel differed a little.
For the English, the main need was initially that of transporting men, horses and weapons to and from the European mainland.
The vessels best equipped for this were ‘cogs’, ships of high sides well suited for commercial traffic from which, indeed, most of them were taken.
On the French side, with its needs which did not, generally speaking, include the transportation of armies or invasion troops, a different kind of vessel was more suitable: the galley.
This, a fast, flat-bottomed vessel propelled by oars or sail, or both, which could, because of its lack of keel, come  very close into land, was essentially a vessel of interception, intended to catch attackers off the coast.
But it did serve another purpose.
It could cross the open sea, and land on the enemy coast small groups of men who, in raids lasting perhaps a few hours or, at most, a day or two, could do much damage to both enemy property and morale.
The inhabitants of the southern coastal counties of England suffered considerably in this respect, in particular in the late 1370s, when several places on the south coast experienced attacks and, in the case of Winchelsea in 1380, virtual destruction.
The French, therefore, set about building galleys, their principal repair yard being the Clos des Galées at Rouen, which came to be developed in the course of the fourteenth century, and which saw its heyday during the successful wars waged by Charles V in the 1370s.
By contrast, the English seem to have had fewer ships at this period, although Edward III had some royal ships, and vessels were built for largely defensive purposes.
But for the English the system of requisitioning, together with a few ships which might be built in both inland and seaside ports, and those constructed at Bayonne, were sufficient to meet most of their needs.
The list of some forty ports which provided 146 vessels, crewed by 2,350 mariners and some 294 boys, to convey Henry of Lancaster and his army from England to Bordeaux in 1347, is impressive.
But it does not suggest that any basic change in the traditional means of taking large numbers of soldiers to the continent was yet being considered.
The beginning of the fifteenth century, however, was to see changes in attitudes and practices.
Although these had seen their origin in the reign of Henry IV, it was to be in his son's brief reign that something of a revolution (whose effects, however, were not to last) took place.
Henry V needed to achieve two things.
He had to take action against pirates and sailors who used the port of Harfleur as their main base, and who were encouraged by the French king to carry out raids upon English shipping in the Channel and the English coast.
He also needed ships to patrol the Channel and to transport his armies to France.
The first he achieved through military means: Harfleur was captured in September 1415 and later successfully defended by the naval victory won by the duke of Bedford in August 1416.
The second was achieved by the creation of the first significant royal fleet, an improvement on that of Edward 111, which, based in Southampton under the control of a clerk  of the king's ships, and enjoying easy access to the Channel, came to number thirty-five vessels, some bought, some captured, others still specially built.
With justice Henry V is credited not only with having understood, better than did any of his contemporaries, what were the naval problems which faced England in the early fifteenth century, but also with having done much towards the creation of a fleet of ships, some of them very large, almost ‘prestige-type’ vessels, which would make it possible for the English to take to sea quickly and thus try to wrest the initiative from any enemy who might be coming against them.
Unfortunately, when Henry V died in 1422, his fleet was already less useful than its royal founder had hoped.
In the years which followed, some of his ships (which belonged to the king personally) were sold to repay his debts; others were left so long that they eventually rotted.
Yet, writing half a century later, Sir John Fortescue recognised that Henry V had been right: ‘though we have not alwey werre uppon the see, yet it shalbe nescessarie that the kynge [Edward IV]have alway some ffloute apon the see, ffor the repressynge off rovers, savynge off owre marchauntes, owre ffishers, and the dwellers uppon owre costes; and that the kynge kepe alway some grete and myghty vessels, ffor the brekynge off an armye when any shall be made ayen hym apon the see; ffor thanne it shall be to late to do make such vessailles’.
Fortescue saw what the problem was: the defence of English interests both on land and at sea, which needed to be acted upon with a speed which only the existence of some form of permanent naval force would allow.
In so saying, Fortescue had all but admitted that Henry V had been ahead of his time.