

HOME MATTERS
Each month in this column I'll be looking at those quirky things that affect readers who care about their home.
If it concerns your home it concerns us
HIDDEN AGENDA
George Howard, Opposition spokesperson for Housing, has outlined a proposal for the introduction of housing logbooks.
Designed to speed up the purchasing process, a ‘logbook’ would set out the condition of a home and any work done to it, as well as listing surveys.
It could, for example, contain information about wiring and plumbing routes hidden from view.
Potential buyers would have access to the book which, it is suggested, would provide them with more meaningful information when they are ‘shopping around’ for a home.
Personally, I think it is an excellent idea.
I would welcome your views on the matter.
ON THE WRONG TRACK
Viewing a property for sale many years ago, I remember standing in the garden, close to the rear fence, looking back at the house.
Suddenly, behind the fence, an unseen train thundered past causing shock waves and temporary panic.
The house was clearly not as described by the estate agent: ‘House overlooking quiet, secluded garden.’
The proposed new law curbing this type of blatantly dishonest description given by some estate agents is not before time.
EXCISING CONTROL
I am indebted to our Home Improvements Editor, David Holloway, for providing me with the following information relating to the 2.5 per cent VAT increase announced in the recent Budget.
While the extra tax on goods and services is bad news for us homeowners, there is some hope.
David reminds us that the threshold for VAT registration is raised from £25,000 per year turnover to £35,000.
This should mean that many small firms of electricians, bricklayers, plumbers, etc, will be able to de-register, making their services 15 per cent cheaper.
Materials will still carry VAT, of course.
CUTTING REMARKS
When Bank of England supremo Robin Leigh-Pemberton suggested that mortgage lending should have an upper limit cut-off, he wasn't quoting official government policy.
Or was he?
Credit control, here we come!
SHOPPING IN STYLE
MEDITERRANEAN MOOD
Sizzling shades of terracotta teamed with cool blue make a simple but eye-catching statement on crisp white walls.
This month, Suzanne Ardley selects the vital ingredients for a stylish mediterranean look
Choose colourful fabrics to contrast with white walls and simple interiors for a truly mediterranean feel.
All these designs are from Lelievre.
From top:
Every aspect of life is pictured on Ceramica Blue's bright and busy pottery.
Each piece is hand-thrown and decorated with eye-catching designs.
Plates, from about £45; large floor vase, about £80
Shades of the Mediterranean are conjured up by the aquas and terracottas from Oneworld Trading's accessories.
The place mats come in three sizes, from £2 each; handsome bowls in assorted colours, from £6.95; verdigris candlesticks, from £8.95 each; candelabra, £35.
Handmade 30 cm sq terracotta floor tiles, £4.24 each
Do the continental with your interiors by keeping styles cool and simple.
Interior shutters, from a wide range to order, from about £70 for the natural finish shown.
Walls painted in Spectrum Abbey White matt emulsion, £7 per ltr.
Dining chairs with distressed finish, £150 each.
Provençal green tableware, salt & pepper mills, utensils and condiments, from a selection at Divertimenti.
Terracotta planter and dish.
At Nicholas Haslam.
Dwarf conifer, from a wide selection available at Sainsbury's Homebase
Reminiscent of Roman mosaics and epicurean feasts, the Limoge Havilland pattern porcelain is just the thing to serve your gourmet meals on.
Dinner plates, £27 each; side plates, from £19 each; a wide range of other pieces is available
These beautiful ceramics in bright colours are all from the Fenny Lodge Gallery.
The range includes jugs, plates, comports, storage jars, cups and saucers, mugs, candlesticks and bowls.
Plates cost from about £64; cake stand with pedestal, from about £38; lampbases, from about £42
Whether part of a dining room suite or used on its own, Montezumas' iron furniture makes a stunning feature.
Each piece has a subtle verdigris finish, prices start from £200 for the chair shown; matching candlestick; vase; pottery fish candlestick
Stay cool with iced drinks this summer and for entertaining look out for this attractive recycled glassware from Montezumas.
Large jug, £30; stemmed glasses, from about £6.50 each.
The handpainted dish would make a complementary tray and a good display item when not in use, £65
Made in Italy, this decorative bureau comes in a natural Provençale Pine finish, or Pickled Pine as shown here.
It measures 195 cm (H) by 107 cm (W) by 52 cm (D), £940.
Habitat's new range of rustic baskets includes this blue woven design that comes in three sizes.
So, whether you're looking for an alternative wastepaper bin, a planter or even kitchen storage, with prices starting at £18 you could use them for all these things and more
Give your potted plants some pazzazz with Habitat's Tropics planter and saucer, £20, available from all branches.
Dwarf conifer, from a selection at Sainsbury's Homebase
Luscious grapes on cool vines is just one pattern from Liberty's Italian Fruits range of fabrics.
It is 137 cm wide, £16.95 per m and only available in the colourway shown here
Souleiado captures the essence of French country life with colourful and pretty designs.
Clockwise from top left: Umbrella; cotton scarves, from £9.50; folding tray; large scarf; holdall, from £120.
Painted cupboard
Casa Fina's new range of furniture has a traditional design and a mellow antiqued paint finish.
Called Florentine, it is made in Italy and has a handpainted detail.
Upholstered chair; cupboard.
Interior shutters, available in a variety of colours and sizes, from about £95 for the deep blue set shown.
Framed picture.
Bird cage; wall bracket; jug and bowl set; small mirror; ceramic dishes, from £6.95.
Kelim, John Lewis.
Cache pot.
Azalea
Concealed within this attractive storage jar is a litre of the finest extra virgin olive oil from Chianti.
Available from At Nicholas Haslam, it comes in 0.5-ltr, 1-ltr and 1.5-ltr sizes, £20, £25 and £30 respectively
Vegetables add an eye-catching touch to this glazed black cotton fabric from Liberty.
It forms part of a strikingly different range of designs called Italian Fruits — though this is the exception.
The fabric measures 137 cm wide, £16.95 per m.
Provençal plates and bowls
With the Mediterranean's natural sponge resources nearly exhausted, Lesson has taken a step in the right direction by importing sponges from the Gulf of Mexico.
Here, the subterranean life is thriving and produces these wonderful underwater sponge sculptures.
The sponges make superb dishes for bathroom accessories.
Sponges start from about £2.99 to £15 for the large sculptures; toiletries cost from about £1.99 for the lime blossom soaps shown.
Gres de Mira Ivory tiles, £1.19 each; Blue Laurel border corner tiles, £2.93 each
Baskets can make an attractive display.
Clockwise from top left: Oval twig basket.
Wood basket.
Round wreath dish.
Round handled basket.
Shaker-style red basket, from £17.50.
Twig basket
Citrus yellow and sea blue are just two of the vibrant and very summery colours used in Debenham's latest range of tablelinen — a great and inexpensive way to brighten up any table.
Mats, £3.99 each; plain napkins, from £1.50 each; checked tablecloths, from £16.99; matching napkins, £1.99; cushion covers, £9.99.
Gres de Mira blue handmade tiles, from about £1.19 each
A MONTH IN THE COUNTRY
Create a homely touch with soft floral prints, country furniture and accessories.
This month, Tom Gadd reveals the secret of rustic charm
Breakfast in bed…what bliss, especially when surrounded by the sights of an English summer.
Quilted patchwork double bedspread, £224; cushion, £23; from a selection at The Sleeping Company.
Handpainted breakfast tray.
Cup, saucer and sugar bowl, from the Dorset Fruit collection by Poole Pottery.
Plant, from a wide selection at Sainsbury's Homebase
Tinware is having a well-earned revival at the moment, especially the painted decoupage variety shown here.
Rubena Grigg specialises in these timehonoured styles and shown here are a number of designs.
Platter; lidded bread-bin; large hot water jug with half-lid
Country-style interiors lend themselves to rich designs and colours.
To complement such styles, Belinda Coote has a lovely range of wall-hanging tapestries and cushion covers.
Prices for the covers start from £18; wall hangings
Ripe for the picking, this mouthwatering selection of strawberry tapestries was designed and made by Stella Edwards, from Casa Needlepoint.
Cushion; mini purse; pin cushion; spectacle case.
Bolero scarlet velvet, £16.95 per m
Sissinghurst is just one of eight furniture ranges from the new Terranova collection.
Made from rattan, the range comprises a two-seater sofa, chair, footstool, coffee table, side table and planter.
All available in the green finish shown here.
Handmade terracotta floor tiles.
Painted garden boxes.
Plants.
Dorset Fruit china.
Floral print
After a hard day in the garden, come in and relax on beautiful tapestry cushions designed by Kaffe Fassett.
Available from Ehrman, Cabbage and Cauliflower kits, £32.50 each; Plums, Cherries and Apple kits, £34.50.
Also shown, Rhododendron rug, £115, designed by Margaret Murton, Ehrman
Achieve a rustic style with Ducal's Bellamy range of pine furniture.
Two-door sideboard, £379.
China from Debenhams, Poole Pottery and Crabtree & Evelyn
Handpainted with leaves and trailing ribbons, this delightful parchment table has been given an antique crackle glaze finish, £245; matching balloon-back chair, £115; Rubena Grigg, Orchard wallpaper in Buttermilk colourway, £13.50 per roll.
Persian rug.
Lampbase and shade.
Fruit bon-bons.
Stationery.
Plant pot.
In the garden conservatory or even in the house, this highly decorative urn will be a hit wherever it is.
Available from Oneworld Trading, £220
Bring the scent from a summer garden indoors with Southampton Rose, a new fragrance from Scarborough & Co.
The range consists of 17 items with prices starting from £1 for a guest soap up to £9.95 for a pair of luxury coathangers.
Background paper, 60p per sheet, the Fresh From The Garden Collection by Hallmark
The deep rich woodgrain of antique furniture can be accentuated by using a pale but warm background colour, in this case soft peach.
Welsh cabinet; corner chair.
Handpainted firescreen, from Belinda Coote.
Wall plates, from The Dorset Fruit collection by Poole Pottery.
Castile fabric.
Decoupage jug.
Scarf
Lovers of cane furniture will be delighted to hear of eight new ranges by Terranova Designs: Charlcote is shown here.
Two- seater sofa; side table; coffee table.
Bracken Twist carpet in Ice Blue, £15.54 per sq m.
Also shown, handpainted wall units: Two shelves; three-shelf unit.
Pictures, £14.95 each.
Accessories 
Serve up a summer feast on Osborne & Little's Crocus place mats, and tray.
Available in either white or maroon, as shown here, a pack of six place mats costs from £38
Handcarved and painted, this unusual coat rack will add colour and interest to a simple cottage hallway.
Small size, £16.75; large size, £22.95.
Umbrella and scarf
If you would like to find out more about any of the items featured here, see our Address Book on page 146
STRIKING A BALANCE
OLD AND NEW BLEND TOGETHER IN GEOFF BROWN'S BEAUTIFUL HOME.
FAY GOODMAN EXPLORES THIS 19TH-CENTURY HOUSE THAT COMBINES MODERN PANACHE WITH TRADITIONAL GEORGIAN ELEGANCE
Set in a quiet Midlands suburb, Geoff Brown's home has all the style and sophistication of the Georgian era as well as cultural interest inspired by his travels round the world.
When he moved into this intriguing 19th-century house, he had a clear idea of how he wanted it to look and decided to design the decor himself.
His previous home had been completely refurbished by interior designers, so this time he took great pleasure in creating his own individual style.
Built in 1890, the house needed a lot of attention when he bought it.
But the high ceilings, airy rooms and appealing features were exactly what Geoff was looking for.
His first job was to modify the inside of the house to suit his needs.
Having always liked the idea of living in the country, Geoff decided to go for a country-style kitchen.
He started by knocking down an outhouse to create a lengthy, spacious room attached to an attractive breakfast area.
All the furnishings, including the light wooden kitchen  units and the warm terracotta tiles, combine to create a homely look.
This is continued in the breakfast room where a traditional-looking cast-iron stove has been installed in the old fireplace.
A garland of dried flowers has been draped above it, adding to the country look.
Other interesting features of this room are the brass pots and pans that hang from a brass picture rail.
Adding a decorative touch to the plain brick wall, they also give the room quite a Continental feel.
This idea was inspired by Geoff's round-the- world travels as a professional jazz musician.
‘I was with a band called Muscles until 1978,’ he explains, ‘and while we were on tour in Madrid I noticed the effect of hanging pictures from a brass rail in one of the hotels we stayed in.
Unfortunately, I couldn't get the pictures to hang correctly in my kitchen, so I decided to improvise and use pots and pans instead.’
As Geoff says, travelling the world and staying in so many different places — from châteaux in France to hotels in Bangkok — has certainly influenced his choice of decor and design throughout the house.
In the dining room, for instance, there's a strong Eastern influence.
Japanese handpainted pictures adorn the walls and set off the elegant porcelain figurines, while the walnut dining table is from Hong Kong.
‘There were two main items I wanted in this  room,’ Geoff explains, ‘Japanese art and bows.’
He certainly achieved this aim with bows incorporated into the curtains, seats, carpets and lace nets.
Geoff, who now runs a successful computer software company, is meticulous about the detail throughout his home.
In the living room, for example, the theme is pastel shades combined with stripes and textured wallpaper.
‘I bought the suite first and decorated the room around the colours of the fabric, using pinks and blues,’ explains Geoff.
‘There are five different wallpapers with a dado border in between them.
The dado complements the patterns and draws them together.’
Geoff has also had the window shutters in this room restored to their original glory and painstakingly handpainted with a red design that matches both the wallpaper and the colour of the suite.
Even the mirror on the back wall was designed specifically for this room.
‘I couldn't find a mirror I liked or that was even the right size, so I decided to have one handmade that would incorporate the colours and the theme of the living room,’ said Geoff.
Birds are the theme of the drawing room.
They appear in the suite fabric, paintings and other pieces of art.
‘Once again I bought the suite first and decided to decorate the room around it, this time taking birds and blue as my themes.’
When he moved in the house  had five bedrooms, so he decided to convert one on the first floor into an en suite bathroom.
Black and white is the theme here and a large white claw-and-ball bath is strategically placed in the centre of the room.
Green plants provide bright splashes of vibrant colour.
The master bedroom is equally charming with delicate lace draped across the archway to give an almost Eastern feel.
The luxurious cream decor is set off beautifully by the patterned curtains.
Again the attention to detail is very precise and the decorated miniature niche behind the bed is a delightful feature.
The attractive prints, elegant bedside lighting and pretty lace enhance the delicate charm of the room.
At the top of the house, one of the remaining two bedrooms has been turned into a studio where Geoff spends many hours playing music.
On the stairways Geoff has repeated the black and white theme of the bathroom.
‘Co-ordinating stripes and textured patterned paper was a gamble, but I feel it has worked.
I knew I wanted a black and white hall with marbling, and also metal runners across the stairs.
By thinking carefully about every detail, Geoff successfully created his own look.
‘Everything in the house is new except for the fireplaces,’ he says.
‘I think you can create an old but light feeling in a Georgian house with modern furniture if it's designed the right way.
I like to think I've got the balance right.’
Main picture: Birds are the theme of the drawing room, appearing on the furniture fabric, paintings and other pieces of art.
The effect is elegant but relaxing
Below right: Cranes in flight appear on the suite fabric
Left: The dado border in the pretty living complements the patterns perfectly
Above left: Striped pastel fabrics and textured wallpapers set the scene
I bought the suite first and decided to decorate the room around it
Main picture: An outhouse was knocked down to create this spacious kitchen leading to an attractive breakfast area
Below right: Brass pots and a garland of dried flowers lend a Continental feel to the breakfast room
Left: In the dining room, bows are incorporated in the curtains, seating, and carpets
Above left: Soft pink blends with Japanese art
Light wood and warm terracotta tiles create a homely look
Main picture: A large claw-and-ball bath is the centrepiece for the luxurious bathroom
Below right: A striking black and white colour scheme with marbled and textured wallpaper is used in the inviting hallway
Left: Cream fitted wardrobes in the master bedroom are decked with pretty lace curtains
Above left: Lace is draped across an arch to create a charming setting
I think I've now got the balance between old and new just right
COUNTRY Comfort
With its whitewashed walls and dark wood beams, this pretty home has all the charm of a country cottage.
But, as Jill Abraham discovers, it is a house with a working history
As shopkeepers, it seems apt that Sue and Reg Bass's house was once a village shop.
Not that they work from there though — this pretty, 100-year-old Essex village house is now very much a home despite its mixed history.
Originally a tearoom and a sweet shop, it has also been used as a billiard hall and a printers' shop.
Sue fell in love with the house long before it came on the market.
‘I used to walk past it and peep in through the windows and think how much I'd love to live there,’ she confesses.
‘Eventually, I wrote a note and put it through the letter box saying we would love to buy the house if it ever came up for sale.’
So it was something of a dream come true when, just a few months later, they moved into this whitewashed house in the centre of the village.
Inside, there's a country house atmosphere.
The main living rooms downstairs have low ceilings and are wood beamed.
And, in the drawing room, there's a big open fireplace with a brick surround and a beautifully renovated and polished mantelpiece taking pride of place.
The focal point for mealtimes is the large kitchen with its warm red quarry tiling and oak-fronted units.
In here, the couple like to sit at the circular polished pine reproduction table with matching chairs bought from a local shop in a nearby village.
For more formal entertaining, the dining room is cosy and intimate  with beamed walls and a traditional-looking Sanderson wallpaper.
The round dining table is dark rosewood with a matching set of chairs.
And hanging over both kitchen and dining room tables are colourful Tiffany-style lampshades.
Tablemats and napkins in deep red and mauve are from a range available at their own shop, Special Effects in Chelmsford.
Fortunately, the house was in excellent shape when they moved in.
The previous owners, one an interior designer, had renovated the whole place very much to Sue and Reg's taste.
They have done a little bit of redecorating, such as in the hallway where they put up a pretty floral paper with a wide matching border at dado level, and hung an original time recorder clock, made in Leeds and bought from an antique shop in Leigh-on-Sea.
The old pine settle is another treasured find.
The Basses have been very successful in combining the old with the new.
Their secret is mixing good quality reproduction pieces with carefully chosen antiques.
Among these is a Victorian chaise longue upholstered in rose red velvet in the main bedroom and a useful pine blanket box.
Sue and Reg both have a strong interest in furniture and furnishings.
They have two shops — a home accessories and gift shop, and an architectural ironmongery.
As shopkeepers themselves, Reg and Sue like to buy from local shops.
They  both love browsing in antique shops wherever they happen to be visiting, and appreciate good quality modern and reproduction designs.
One such find was the two Italian chairs they discovered when they were running a retail furnishing shop.
They are modern in a light, polished wood with curved arms and light blue upholstery.
‘We thought they were most unusual and attractive and couldn't resist them for our own house,’ says Sue.
The chairs now sit in the corner of a bedroom by a window, bringing a touch of Continental elegance to an otherwise very English interior.
Throughout the house, the Basses have used a traditional country style, but also taken inspiration from all over the world.
Touches from the Orient include the buddha figure seated on a bathroom windowsill and a colourful Indian cotton bedspread in the main bedroom.
It's the small details and unusual pieces like these that give their home its character and strongly individual style.
Left: A former tea room and billiard hall, the 100-year-old house is now very much a home
Top left: Sue and Reg Bass enjoy a cup of tea in the garden
A successful room combines elegant antiques with good quality reproduction
Main picture: A button-back antique chair and reproduction table offer a quiet spot in the living room
Right: Sue often sews in the living room, one of the lightest rooms in the house
Above: The antique pine settle in the hallway was bought from a dealer
Left: The beamed walls in the dining room are covered in a traditional-style Sanderson wallpaper
With its low ceilings and wood beams, the house has a warm, cosy atmosphere
Main picture: A circular polished pine reproduction table is the focal point in the large kitchen
Right: The dresser was left in the house by the previous owners
Main picture: The Italian chairs in the bedroom add a touch of Latin elegance
Left: The bathroom is simply furnished and uncluttered
Throughout the house, the Basses have used mainly a traditional country style
Right: A buddha figure presides serenely over the pine panelled bathroom
A CHANGE FOR THE BEST
Moving from a townhouse to a country cottage can create all sorts of problems.
But Helen Hallworth simply decided to keep what she liked best, as Judi Goodwin discovered
Moving house and experimenting with new furnishing styles is a challenging and exciting experience.
But frustration can often set in when you discover that the furniture so suited to your modern townhouse looks completely out of place in your Victorian terrace.
The sizes may be all wrong; the style may be inappropriate; and you could have just as many problems with your new colour schemes.
These were the kind of difficulties facing Helen Hallworth when she and her three teenage children moved from a large, elegant house into a smaller country cottage in a pretty village near York.
Helen has always loved old furniture.
She bought her first antique when she was just a teenager — an Edwardian bed for £8, slightly less than her weekly wage at the time.
She wheeled the bed home proudly in pieces with a friend.
Twenty years later, her collecting bug has paid off and she now has an unusual collection of antiques, most of which were bought for her previous home.
‘What I like about old furniture is that all the pieces are favourites,’ she says.
‘At first, I wasn't at all sure they'd work in the cottage.
But it was simply a case of ‘this is what I've got, I like it and I'm not going to get rid  of it’.’
It was in this frame of mind that Helen set about renovating the cottage and planning schemes to incorporate a wide range of colours, styles and woods.
From the outside, the 200-year-old cottage looks fairly compact, but inside there's a considerable amount of space.
When Helen first moved in, there were three bedrooms upstairs, with potential for a fourth.
And though the kitchen was small, it had an adjoining storeroom that provided Helen with the opportunity of creating a utility area.
When the builders started work, the kitchen was Helen's first priority.
‘Like some women want mink coats, I wanted an Aga,’ she admits.
Once that decision had been taken, the rest evolved by a process of elimination.
‘It was what worked, what would suit and what I could afford.’
Helen had set her heart on a country kitchen and chose an L-shape layout in units of light oak.
She also wanted a place to sit and enjoy the warmth of the Aga, so as well as a pine table and chair for meals, there is also a homely rocking chair.
Helen has no inhibitions about mixing woods, or making sure things match in style or period.
In the dining room, for example, a refectory table in oak, rustic spindle-back chairs and an elegant period fireplace in pine all blend together comfortably.
The result is a very friendly room without the formality so often associated with many dining areas.
The family eats here regularly — and the dining room is not kept exclusively for entertaining.
Helen chose a small-patterned carpet that stands up to the combined wear and tear of two dogs, two cats and three children.
The long, narrow living room had to accommodate an assortment of furniture — two navy sofas, a floral sofa, almond-green curtains and a TV set, not to mention a variety of side furniture in different woods.
A beige carpet and soft green walls made the room light and spacious as well as providing a sufficiently neutral background.
Some pieces  of carved driftwood, a few shells and stones are carefully arranged on the hearth and windowsills, adding an individual touch.
Helen's magpie instincts for collecting extend to her bedroom, home for her £8 bed, where a simple decorating scheme is enhanced by a nostalgic collection of old hats and hatboxes, a pair of kid gloves, some theatre posters, a china doll and a host of other pretty objects, many gleaned from local markets.
‘The pleasure is getting things that cost very little,’ she says.
The room is light and sunny with windows on two walls.
And as she couldn't decide what to do for curtains, she used white roller blinds and swathed white lace over curtain poles.
One early decision was sorting out where her 17-year-old son, Michael, was going to sleep as there were only three bedrooms for four people.
The tall storeroom on the ground floor, just beyond the kitchen, stretched high up to the rafters and Helen knew it would take a sleeping gallery.
When Michael eventually leaves home, Helen will use his room as a small den or study, and the sleeping gallery will be useful for guests.
In the meantime, Michael is happy with a mattress on the gallery floor and a desk for homework below.
It took a few bumps on the head for him to get used to the low ceiling and the prominent oak beams, but now they don't bother him at all.
The main part of the house is now complete but Helen still has plenty of ideas to work on.
Next year she plans to turn the garage into a games room for table tennis.
And there is still plenty to do in the garden where she is planting vegetables and some more varieties of fruit trees.
‘As a child I learned to love the countryside,’ she says.
And she is bringing up her own children in the same way.
‘They love cycling and swimming and all kinds of sport.’
And this charming cottage, with its eclectic and cheerful furnishings, provides the perfect base for a country-loving family.
Main picture: A blend of old and new keeps the mood casual in the dining room
Above: Helen at work in the garden
Top left: The 200-year-old cottage
Below: Quarry tiles in the back porch are especially practical in a house with two dogs
I love to mix woods and different styles of furniture
Main picture: In the long, narrow living room, modern light fittings mix with period furniture
Above: Light oak units give a country look to this cottage kitchen
Below: Installing an Aga was Helen's first priority in the kitchen
What I like about old furniture is that all the pieces are favourites
Main picture: Lace draped over curtain poles creates pretty and effective curtains
Above and below: Son Michael's split-level bedroom makes maximum use of space
Hats and hatboxes enhance the decorating scheme in the bedroom
at home with MONICA DICKENS
After spending many years in America, novelist Monica Dickens has returned to live in the English countryside.
Deborah Tapp discovered how a picture-postcard thatched cottage is rekindling some very happy memories
Home for novelist Monica Dickens has meant many things over the years.
Born into a wealthy family — Charles Dickens was her great-grandfather — she had no intention of being ‘married off’.
Instead, she took a job as a maid — the subject of her first book,One Pair of Hands .
Now, after living in a large house at Cape Cod on the east coast of America for 35 years, she has returned to England and settled in a small village in Berkshire.
Lavender Cottage is 400 years old and very picturesque.
The concrete garden path has been bricked over and vines adorn the white-painted exterior.
And inside, the beams and quarry tiles are all original.
Monica Dickens' new life began when her husband, Roy Stratton, died.
She decided to travel back to this country and make a fresh start.
And as she had no desire to house-hunt herself, she left the choice to her family in England.
Once her niece had found Lavender Cottage, however, Monica needed plenty of persuasion before she actually uprooted and transported herself and much of her furniture to Berkshire.
It wasn't love at first sight for  Monica.
World-weary and jet-lagged from crossing the Atlantic, she was not enthusiastic.
She particularly hated the small kitchen, which was little more than a passageway and had no worksurfaces or cupboards.
But after she moved in, the house began to grow on her and she already had plenty of ideas for improving what had originally been three farm workers' cottages.
Planning permission for a new kitchen was eventually granted for the listed building, and the wall between the dining room and kitchen has been partially knocked through to create a greater feeling of space.
Her house at Cape Cod had a huge kitchen that was the hub of the house.
Monica loves to entertain and cook for visitors, but dislikes spending all her time away from them in a separate room, so linking the two rooms was the perfect solution.
Much of the work was done before Monica moved in, while spending four months with relatives nearby.
With new bathroom fittings, a re-thatched roof and a fresh coat of paint, Lavender Cottage gradually began to regain a little of its dignity.
Now, the kitchen is charming yet functional, with fitted heavy duty cupboards, red-tiled worksurfaces and a window seat.
Although Monica was brought up in London, she has always been a country girl at heart.
Now in her seventies and embarking on her fiftieth novel, she revels in the peace of the countryside.
From the garden, no other property is visible and the only sound is that of birdsong.
The writing room is her favourite place in the house.
Originally a woodshed, the previous owners had converted it into a thatched extension that is now lined with books.
Her desk overlooks the typical English country garden, of which she is justifiably proud.
Numerous pictures and photographs fill every available space.
The grandfather clock standing against one wall was a wedding present to her parents.
‘This house reminds me of the cottage in Hertfordshire I had before I married,’ she explains.
‘I was extremely happy living there and realised that if I was prepared to leave my home to move to America with Roy it must be love.’
Before leaving America she gave away much of her furniture to family and friends and was able to enjoy letting them have the pieces they had always liked.
But some treasured possessions remain.
The Jacobean table in the living/dining room has crossed the Atlantic twice and was originally bought for the thatched cottage in Hertfordshire.
Looking around the house, her love of horses is evident.
A carving of a pair of riding boots was modelled on some from her Cape Cod tack room by a nephew, while paintings of two horses she once owned feature on one of the living room walls.
Above the brick fireplace, two bronzes of horses have pride of place.
There is a restful quality about this house.
Blue carpets and curtains against a backdrop of whitewashed walls give the bedrooms a peaceful and calming air.
The two upstairs bathrooms also have blue carpets with whisper grey suites.
Books, horses and a garden brimming with flowers are the lasting impressions of Lavender Cottage.
The feelings of contentment run deep; Monica Dickens has finally put down her roots.
Main picture: From the outside, Lavender Cottage looks every bit the country idyll
Top: The original concrete garden path was bricked over to complete the cottage garden scene
The house has a restful quality and Monica feels completely at home here
Left: With its large French windows, the living/dining room is light and airy
Main picture: The large Jacobean table in the dining room has crossed the Atlantic twice
Top: The cottage garden is a peaceful retreat filled with pretty flowers
From the garden no other property is visible and the only sound is that of birdsong
Left: From Monica's favourite spot — her writing room — she can look out at the garden while sitting at her desk
how to get that look
Each month, How To Get That Look brings you ideas and information on a particular room or furnishing style with hints on how you can adapt it to suit your own home.
As fewer homes today have a separate dining room, this month we're suggesting ways of linking dining and living areas.
Elizabeth Keevill explains how, with a little imagination, you can create somewhere inviting and intimate to eat and entertain
MAKING THE LINK
Here, a large living room has been divided by sliding doors to create space for a separate dining area.
To give a harmonious look to the room, the living and dining areas have been decorated in the same style.
This also makes the whole area appear more spacious.
A large pine table, with a collection of different chairs, is the focal point of the dining area, illustrating perfectly that a mix of furniture designs can work well together provided they are made from roughly the same colour wood.
Woodblock has been used for a beautiful, yet practical, floorcovering.
And with so much wood in the room, a natural colour scheme has been chosen to complement it.
This is also an easy scheme to continue through into the living room, linking the two areas.
The woodwork is painted a pale stone colour throughout to complement the finely patterned wallcovering.
Both halves of the room have curtains in a finely textured, natural-coloured fabric, which has also been used to cover the sofa.
The two rise-and-fall pendant lights above the table look stunning, as well as providing intimate light for dining.
Although they are a very different style from the furniture, they work well visually and provide an unusual contrast.
Furnished flair
Furniture for the dining area needs to complement that in the living section.
It doesn't have to be from the same range, but the pieces should have something in common— such as being in the same or similar wood or style, having the same upholstery fabric or the same colour.
For instance, dining chairs could have seat cushions in the same fabric used for the sofa.
If you are short of space, try using a round table as it will seat more people than a square or rectangular table of the same surface area.
At the window
If you're treating the living and dining areas as one room, curtains and blinds should be co-ordinated throughout.
If the windows vary in shape and need different treatments, you can always have curtains at one window and blinds from the same fabric at another.
Rectella will make up both curtains and blinds from a wide variety of designs in any of its fabrics.
If you choose a neutral colour scheme and natural wood furnishings, keep the curtain headings as simple as possible.
Poles look good, especially if you choose natural wooden ones that will complement the furniture.
Colour choices
It's important to choose a colour scheme that works well in both the living and dining areas.
As you'll probably be spending more time in the living area, this will be your starting point.
Natural and neutral colours are ideal because they can be used as a background for stronger colours.
They are also relaxing, help rooms look more spacious and work well with natural wood.
However, completely plain fabrics and walls can look a bit dull, so choose a wallcovering and fabric with a small pattern or some surface textural interest.
Small details
Details play a vital role in creating a particular look.
In a dining room, the table setting should enhance the decor, so choose china, linen and crockery carefully to complement the overall style.
As the room scheme in our main picture is based around a solid wooden table, it seems a shame to cover it with a tablecloth.
Table mats will protect the surface but also allow you to enjoy the natural beauty of the wood grain.
Down to earth
Using the same flooring for both rooms will give a spacious effect.
Wooden flooring is an excellent choice — smart enough for the living area (you could add a rug for cosiness) yet easy to clean, durable and won't harbour food smells.
If you prefer the softness and comfort of carpet, choose a stain-resistant version, such as one made from Du Pont's Stainmaster fibre.
You could also buy a carpet treated with Scotchgard.
An old carpet can be treated, but choose a reputable company to do it.
An alternative to covering the entire area with one type of flooring is to choose a smooth flooring (such as wood, PVC-coated cork, vinyl or linoleum) for the dining area and carpet for the living area.
Co-ordinating floorings will help maintain the spacious look.
Seeing the light
By focusing light directly on the dining table, you can create a warm, intimate effect.
Since the rest of the room is in shadow, you will light up the table and meal and not the rest of the room.
A pendant fitting immediately above the table will create a cosy glow and is especially flexible if you choose a rise-and- fall fitting.
Then, if you need to move the table out of the way, you can raise the fitting up so that people don't bump their heads on it.
Ideally, use dimmer switches with the pendants so you can alter their intensity to suit the mood.
A pendant fitting for use above a dining table should have a deep shade or one that is designed to avoid glare.
Adjust the height of the fitting so that it doesn't obscure your view across the table while you're eating, but isn't so high that you can look into the shade at the bulb.
While pendant lights give a pleasantly intimate light suitable for a dinner party, you will probably need some general lighting in the room for other occasions.
And, ideally, the general lighting scheme should be similar in both parts of the room.
Wall lights are a good complement.
You will also need some sort of task lighting for the serving area, if you have one.
These lights should be independently switched from any pendant lights for maximum flexibility.
Simple division
Being able to divide a living/dining room into two distinct areas means you can easily create an intimate setting.
Provided the room is big enough, room divider doors are a practical solution and can be an attractive feature.
Solid doors give privacy, while glazed versions allow light through, create a decorative screen and still give a feeling of space.
But a room divider doesn't have to be a permanent fixture, particularly if you don't have much space.
Often it's enough simply to suggest a division — perhaps by using a screen, or even a row of tall, leafy plants.
Above left: Vincent dining armchair in natural stained beech, £95
Above right: Sussex pine cottage chair, £85 to order, from the Marks & Spencer 1991 Home Catalogue
Left: Refectory table in pine, from 137 cm by 76 cm, from £725, also available in natural or limed oak and in various painted finishes; Peasant chair in pine, £110
Left: Wallpaper: Selwood SW225 wallpaper, £15.24 per roll.
Fabric: Trellis NF214, 88 per cent cotton, 12 per cent nylon, 137 cm wide, £23.50
Above: Limed ash pole, 1½ in diameter, with acorn finials, about £12 per 30 cm; finials, about £19 per pair; plain brass pole, 1½ in diameter, about £8 per 30 cm; finials, about £28 per pair; both poles come complete with rings and fixing brackets, both made to order
Above: Oak glass-door dresser top with open dresser base, £1,090
Left: Oiseau de Paradis china by Glen: dinner plate, £10.50; soup plate, £10.50; small side plate, £7.50; Derby Cream table fork, £2.50; table knife, £3.50; dessert knife, £3.50; dessert spoon, £2.95; Indian cotton place mat, £2.95; cotton napkin, £1.50;
Top left: Smooth flooring: Oak basket weave wood flooring, about £42 per sq m.
Carpet: Wild Grouse 7516, 80 per cent wool, 20 per cent nylon, £18.50 per sq m, Townhouse Heather collection, Tintawn
Centre left: Smooth flooring: Lucetta CS40 quality vinyl tiles, 12 in sq, £49.91 per sq m, the Verona collection, Amtico.
. Carpet: Moire Peony 3/8500, 80 per cent wool, 20 per cent nylon, £37.67 per sq m, the Lafayette collection, Stoddard Templeton
Left: Smooth flooring: Linoleum, colour 574, about £15 per sq m.
Carpet: 80 per cent wool, 20 per cent nylon, £22 per sq m Above left: The London Door Company will make room divider doors to measure in any style.
Here, hardwood doors are flanked by stained-glass side panels.
Prices start from about £1,500 including fitting
Above: Chester screen, oak with beech and pine frame, available in a wide choice of fabrics, £245
Left: Besso rise-and-fall pendant lamp, £43
If you would like to find out more about any of the items featured here, see our Address Book on page 146
NEXT MONTH Some great ideas for decorating on a budget
TAKING TO THE FLOOR
THE COLOUR OF FLOORING HAS A GREAT IMPACT ON A ROOM, SO IT'S VITAL TO GET IT RIGHT.
JULIE LONDON SHOWS YOU A SELECTION OF THE LATEST POPULAR SHADES
The colour of your flooring will set the tone and atmosphere for the rest of the room.
For example, cool colours like blue and grey convey a feeling of formality and elegance; while warm shades of red and orange radiate a cosy intimacy.
Pale shades reflect light, opening out small areas, while on the other hand, dark, rich tones will absorb light to make a room look smaller.
Naturally your flooring needs to complement the other furnishings in the room.
So take along swatches of fabric and paint colours when you're choosing — see our handy boxes for further tips and hints.
Flooring can also provide pattern; either by a design woven into a rug or carpet, or in an arranged pattern, formed by the way the floor is laid, like parquet.
Remember that a large pattern on a small floor will look overcrowded, and a simple plain floor increases the sense of spaciousness — pattern can always be added later with a rug.
Use pattern that is appropriate to the style and size of your home — a small sprig design looks far more at home in a Victorian cottage than a grand, formally patterned carpet that would be better suited to a large room.
PRACTICAL POINTERS
Buying a floorcovering is a major investment, so naturally you'll want it to last for a reasonable length of time.
This means choosing the right flooring for the purpose.
Most flooring can be laid anywhere in the  house but there are some obvious choices for certain rooms.
Vinyl flooring or smooth tiles are a good choice for a kitchen or bathroom — they are generally more durable and easy to keep clean.
Any smooth flooring supplied unsealed should be sealed for use in a bathroom — instructions are supplied by the manufacturer.
If you decide to opt for carpet in the bathroom, choose one specially designed for the purpose — like The Bathroom Bliss range from Lancaster that has a waterproof waffle backing.
It comes in 16 plain colours and costs £13 per square metre.
In areas of heavy traffic, like halls and stairs, it's best to lay a good quality, hardwearing carpet.
Choose 100 per cent wool or an 80/20 combination of wool and nylon, especially if it offers a wear guarantee.
Green and pleasant
Flooring: Spectrum Green DSP11 from The Designer Range is a latex-backed coir floorcovering that comes in 11 other standard colours but can also be custom dyed to complement other colour schemes.
Available in 4 m widths, it costs £11.45 per sq m, Crucial Trading Furniture: Steamer armchair, from £287.
Steamer footstool, from £118.
Tusser cushion cover, £45 Best for: Conservatories and hallways, but good in all rooms
Flooring: These Gaudi limestone tiles are ideal for a kitchen but should be sealed using a silicone impregnator (available from DIY stores) to make them waterproof.
Available in five other finishes, 40 cm by 40 cm by 2 cm, £58 per sq m Accessories: Fruit planter from a selection at John Lewis Best for: Conservatories and kitchens
Flooring: Ash 509 vinyl flooring is made from ash veneer sandwiched between a layer of cork and a vinyl wear-layer for comfort and durability.
Available in five natural wood finishes and nine coloured wood finishes, it costs £40 per sq m Accessories: Handpainted Blue Pheasant platter by Royal Copenhagen, £205; yellow glass dish, £40; glass fruits, £8.95 each Best for: All rooms except bathrooms, kitchens and stairs
Flooring: Soft Aqua 503/25 from the Mardi Gras range is a foam-backed carpet in 100 per cent Meraklon.
It is anti-static stain-resistant and very hardwearing.
Available in 24 colours, about £9.50 per sq m Accessories: Fish cup and saucer, plate and Cambridge white teaspoon, from a selection at John Lewis Best for: Most rooms, but especially halls and stairs.
Not suitable for kitchens
TINT HINTS
Green is a restful colour, so put it in a room where you want to relax
Yellow is more stimulating, so use it to brighten up a cold room
Create a dramatic impact with green flooring by complementing it with a red or pink rug
STAY SAFE
Your choice of flooring will be most restricted in kitchens, bathrooms and halls.
Kitchens need a wipeable surface to cope with spills and dirt.
Bathroom floors are more likely to get wet, and should have either a smooth surface that is well sealed, or a carpet that will dry out quickly and won't rot.
A synthetic fibre with a foam or waffle backing is best.
A short-pile carpet, such as a velvet or velour, is the most suitable choice of flooring for stairs.
This will give a firm footing and will stand up to the constant flow of traffic.
A longer pile carpet would flatten over time and might become slippery with wear.
In the pink
Flooring: Tapis D'Avignon 98 per cent wool felt floorcovering in Bois De Rose and Corail colourways, comes in 140 cm widths but can be sewn together to cover larger areas, or bound with linen tape to make rugs.
A very hardwearing floorcovering, it is available in 12 colours with five different shades of edging tape, £61.25 per sq m, seaming and binding extra Furniture: Painted wheel-back chair, £675 Best for: All rooms except kitchens, bathrooms and stairs
Flooring: Pink Ash 729 Wood-o-Cork is a wooden flooring laid in plank form.
It is made up of an ash veneer sandwiched between a layer of cork and a layer of vinyl for durability.
Available in five natural wood finishes, about £40 per sq m; and nine coloured wood finishes, about £44 per sq m Accessories: Zoe bowl, £11.95; plate, £7.95; square plate, £6.95 Best for: All rooms, but must be sealed if used in kitchens and bathrooms
Flooring: Furbo-Nairn's Armourflex natural linoleum comes in a choice of 20 colours, including Thistle 580 shown here.
Available in 2 m widths, it can be seam welded to cover large areas and is especially good over underfloor heating.
It costs about £16 per sq m and comes with a 20-year wear guarantee but must be professionally fitted Accessories: Jade green bag, about £72.95; towels, £12.95 each.
Green folder, £1.99; yellow notebook, £1.50; coloured pencils, 20p each Best for: All rooms, especially bathrooms, utility rooms, kitchens and conservatories
Flooring: Pastelle 100 per cent nylon carpet from the Shades of White range is treated with Stainmaster finish to protect it against spills and stains.
Available in 4 m widths, it comes in a choice of 10 colour tints to complement the white paints with a hint of colour currently available.
It has a five-year wear guarantee for living rooms and bedrooms, £11.99 per sq m Accessories: Flowers elastic binder, £3.99; pencil pot, £2.99; pencil (with box), £3.99; hexagonal boxes, £3.50 and £5.50.
Pot pourri, £11.95 Best for: All rooms except kitchens
Flooring: Trellis 80 per cent wool, 20 per cent nylon tufted carpet is shown here in Cranberry 95/520 colourway.
Four other colourways are available and it comes in five widths, about £23.50 per sq m Accessories: Yellow photograph album, £12.50; Jennifer Tuckey stationery, £8.95 and £9.50 Best for: Any room, but especially suitable for halls and stairs
TINT HINTS
A dark red carpet will make a large room feel smaller and more cosy
A pale pink floor can make a small area appear much larger than it is
Red and pink are both warm colours, so use them in rooms that face north
On neutral ground
Flooring: Contract Excel vinyl sheet flooring has an all- over crackle design with a random sprinkling of silver dust.
It's very hygienic because it doesn't retain household dust and is easy to lay yourself.
Available in nine colours, it is 2 mm thick and comes in 2 m, 3 m and 4 m widths, about £18.50 per sq m, Forbo-Nairn Furniture: Cast-iron butterfly chair, £165; table, £215 Best for: All rooms, especially halls, kitchens and bathrooms; not suitable for stairs
Flooring: Oak Classic ready-sealed wooden flooring can be laid over any level and dry floor.
Also available in ash or beech.
There are two different grades: Classic, which is uniformly coloured, £34.95 per sq m; and Harmony, which has knots and colour variations, £30.64 per sq m Accessories: Cast-iron Chinese teapot, £75; rice bowls, about £15 each; chopsticks, £1.25 per pair; chopstick rest, £32.5 Best for: All rooms, but if laid in a bathroom it must be given two to three coats of sealer
Flooring: Hardwearing Mandalay 100 per cent jute floorcovering has a latex backing and is shown here in natural/grey colourway.
Available in nine other colourways, it is 3.66 m wide and costs £19.95 per sq m Accessories: Ecru cotton bath mat, £9.95; hand towel, £11.95; Eleal massager, £6.95 Best for: All rooms except stairs
Buttermilk 223/036 from The Gleneagles range is an 80 per cent wool, 20 per cent nylon Wilton carpet.
Available in 18 colours and in 3.66 m and 4.57 m widths, it costs £35.95 per sq m Accessories: Blue glass Ittala vase, £59 Best for: All rooms, especially halls and stairs, but not kitchens and bathrooms
Flooring: Florency grey 456 772 self-adhesive vinyl floor tiles, 30 cm by 30 cm, £15.95 for a pack of nine to cover 0.81 sq m Accessories: Cinni fan, £79 Best for: Kitchens and bathrooms
TINT HINTS
Neutral colours can enhance both modern and traditional furniture
Textured carpets look particularly effective in creams and pale neutrals as the design is more defined
Neutral tones give a feeling of space, so use them in a small room that needs opening up
STYLE FILE
As you decorate, keep a file or notebook of your curtain and upholstery fabrics, paint colours and swatches of flooring.
Try to place them on the same page so you can see they all work together.
If the skirting is painted in a different colour to the walls, don't forget to stick a smaller sample of the skirting colour next to the wall colour so you have an idea of how well they work together.
If you've had your sofa or curtains for a while and have thrown away any spare material, take a snip from the inside of a seat cushion or from the inside hem of a pair of curtains to stick in your book.
Blue moves
TINT HINTS
Blue is classed as a cool colour and can be used to tone down very sunny rooms
Pale soft blues lend themselves to large surface areas, while intense blues are better in restricted spaces
Blue is a good mixer and can be used to complement most colours
Flooring: Las Vegas grey/ash-laminate parquet flooring is designed for DIY fitting and comes with laying instructions and an optional range of fitting accessories.
Available in two thicknesses, 15 mm for light wear and 20 mm for areas of heavy traffic.
There are 39 variations of wood and laminate to choose from, £35.38 per sq m Furniture: Love seat, £2,750 Best for: Most rooms except bathrooms, kitchens and stairs
Flooring: Powder Blue 72/38 from The Summerhouse Collection is a hardwearing 80 per cent wool, 20 per cent nylon twist pile carpet.
It comes in 21 colours and 3.66 m and 4.57 m widths, about £23.95 per sq m Accessories: Beech tray, £37; Sumatra bone china by Royal Grafton: dessert plate, £10.50; dessert bowl, £10.50; teacup and saucer, £15.25; jug, £18.50; sugar bowl, £14.50; DuBarry dessert spoon, £5.50; teaspoon, £4.45 Best for: Most rooms, especially stairs and halls, but not kitchens and bathrooms
Flooring: Moody Blue 361, 50 per cent wool, 50 per cent polypropylene tufted carpet from the Bracken Twist range is available in 4 m widths and 12 colourways, £15.54 per sq m Accessories: Map writing paper and envelopes, 20p each; spiral- bound notebook, 40p; marble pen, £4.99 Best for: Most rooms, especially halls and stairs, but not kitchens or bathrooms
Flooring: Nordic is a vinyl-coated cork tile that offers the comfort and heat-insulating properties of cork with the durability of vinyl.
It carries a 10-year wear warranty and is available in either plank or tile form, £38 per sq m Accessories: Zeppo Viola halogen desk lamp, £35.
Pencil, 20p Best for: All rooms, especially bathrooms and children's rooms
Flooring: Bluestone 809 natural linoleum floorcovering comes in 2 m widths but can be seam welded for large areas.
Available in 10 pastel colours, it has a 20-year wear guarantee and should be fitted professionally.
It is especially good for people with allergies as it doesn't harbour dust.
About £16 per sq m Accessories: Large flower basket, £9.50 Best for: All rooms except stairs
An Ideal Home Survey
COMING CLEAN
READER PRIZE DRAW
What kind of vacuum cleaner do you own?
Are you happy with the way it cleans, or are there some features you would like to see improved?
How often do you use your vacuum cleaner, and what do you wear to do the cleaning?
Ideal Home and Goblin are interested in finding out all about your vacuum cleaner, how you use it and the features you would look for when choosing a new model.
We can then use this information to help influence the design of future products.
FILL IN OUR QUESTIONNAIRE FOR YOUR CHANCE TO WIN A PRACTICAL, HARDWORKING GOBLIN STEAMATIC CLEANER
All you have to do is answer our questions and if your name is drawn out of our postbag, you could be one of five lucky readers to win a Goblin Steamatic Cleaner worth £99.99.
The questionnaire results will be published in a future issue of Ideal Home.
If you would like to receive a free copy of Goblin's Take A Fresh Approach booklet, please send an A5 sae with your questionnaire.
Please answer the questions by ticking the appropriate boxes.
If you own more than one type of vacuum cleaner, please answer for each cleaner that you own.
The questionnaire itself is strictly confidential.
If you wish to take part in the Ideal Home/Goblin prize draw, please write your full name and address and telephone number in the box at the end of the questionnaire.
These details will not be included in the survey.
1
Which of the following cleaners do you own?
Cylinder vacuum cleaner
Upright vacuum cleaner
3-in-1 type cleaner (ie, vacuums, sucks up liquids and washes carpets)
2
If you own more than one type of cleaner, please give your reason(s) below:
3
What is the make and model of your cleaner?
Make
Model
Cylinder
Upright
3-in-1
4
How old is your cleaner?
Under 1 year
1 to 3 years
4 to 8 years
More than 8 years
5
Who chose your cleaner?
Myself
Spouse/Partner
Myself and my partner
Other (please specify)
6
Did any of the following influence your choice of cleaner?
Owned same make
Price
Friend's advice
Salesperson's advice
Special offer
Test report
TV advertisement
Magazine advertisement
A buyers' guide in a magazine
Other (please specify)
7
How satisfied are you with the performance of your cleaner?
Very satisfied
Fairly satisfied
Dissatisfied
8
If you are dissatisfied with your cleaner, please give your reason(s) below:
9
Which of the following features do you feel are important when choosing a cleaner?
Lightweight
Price
Power
Re-usable dustbags
Requires no dustbags
Appearance
Colour
Tools stored on the machine
Other (please specify)
Please complete the following section if you own a cylinder cleaner.
If you don't, please go to Question 12
CYLINDER CLEANERS
10
How do you rate the performance of your cylinder cleaner?
Please give your cleaner a score by circling the appropriate number.
Very poor
Excellent
Noise
Suction power
Portability of machine
Sturdiness
Dust capacity
Cleaning carpet edges
Cleaning nooks and crannies
After-sales service
11
Which of the following tools for your cylinder cleaner do you use regularly?
Floor brush/carpet head
Dusting brush/head
Crevice nozzle
Other (please specify)
Please complete this section if you own an upright cleaner, if you don't, please go to Question 15
UPRIGHT CLEANERS
12
How do you rate the performance of your upright cleaner?
Please give your cleaner a score by circling the appropriate number.
13
Do you have tools for your upright cleaner?
Yes, stored on the machine
Yes, not stored on the machine
No
14
How often do you use these tools?
Frequently
Sometimes
Rarely
Never
Please complete the following section if you own a 3-in-1 cleaner.
If you don't, please go to Question 16
3-IN-1 CLEANERS
15
How do you rate the performance of your 3-in-1 cleaner?
Please give your cleaner a score by circling the appropriate number.
Very poor
Excellent
Noise
Portability of machine
Wet/liquid suction
Dry vacuum cleaning
Sturdiness
Washing carpets
Dust capacity
Cleaning carpet edges
After-sales service
EVERYDAY USE OF YOUR CLEANER
16
Who in your household does the vacuum cleaning on a regular basis?
Myself
Partner
Other adult aged 16+
Child under 16
Cleaner/home help/nanny
17
How often is your vacuum cleaner used?
Several times a day
Once a day
Several times a week
Once a week
18
What do you usually wear when doing the vacuum cleaning?(please tick all that apply)
Track/jogging suit
Overall/apron
Jeans
Headscarf
Dressing gown/bathrobe
My usual clothes
Other (please specify)
19
If you plan to buy a new vacuum cleaner in the next 12 months, which type are you most likely to buy?
Cylinder cleaner
Upright cleaner
3-in-1 cleaner
Undecided
21
Please give the reason(s) for your choice:
22
Which make of vacuum cleaner are you most likely to consider?(please tick all that apply)
23
When buying a vacuum cleaner, which of the following free guarantees would attract you most?(tick only one)
1-year labour, 5-year parts cover
2-year labour, 2-year parts cover
THE FOLLOWING QUESTIONS WILL HELP US ANALYSE THE QUESTIONNAIRE
24
Are you?
Female
Male
25
Are you?
Single
Married/living with partner
Widowed/divorced/separated
26
Which age group are you in?
Please indicate your partner's age if applicable.
You
Your partner
16 to 24
25 to 34
35 to 44
45 to 54
55 to 64
65 or over
27
Do you have any children in the following age groups living in your household?
0 to 2
3 to 4
5 to 10
11 to 16
28
How many of the following pets do you have in your household?
Birds
Cats
Dogs
Fish
Other (please specify)
Thank you for taking the time to complete the questionnaire and we wish you luck in the prize draw.
Send the completed questionnaire to:
CONSUMER FILE
AS WATER COSTS LOOK SET TO INCREASE, RUTH HAYHURST ASKS IF METERING IS A FAIR METHOD OF CHARGING FOR THIS PRECIOUS RESOURCE.
PLUS SOME TIPS ON HOME SECURITY, AND THE LATEST NEWS ON MAILING LISTS
TESTING THE WATER
The water industry has become big business.
How will this affect householders?
The days of cheap water are over.
For years we have taken its plentiful, unadulterated supply for granted.
Shortages were rare — the acceptable price of a scorching summer.
And if our drinking water looked cloudy, we just let the tap run longer.
But now water is a serious issue.
By European standards, the supply to millions of homes is contaminated.
Demand has escalated and droughts aren't limited to spells of very hot weather.
Water is becoming a scarce and expensive commodity and the supply industry is now big business.
Over the next few years, we're going to have to change our attitude to this precious resource.
PRICE OF PURITY
The water watchdog, Office of Water Services (OFWAT), has predicted big increases in water bills.
Ian Byatt, OFWAT's Director General, believes we'll all be paying on average 50 per cent more for our water by the end of the decade.
So what's behind the price rises?
Firstly, the newly privatised water companies have to bring Britain's water supply up to the European Community standards.
Government figures showed that in 1987, 1.6 million people were supplied with water containing too-high traces of nitrates.
In a survey two years later, the environmental group Friends of the Earth (FoE) identified 150 districts that failed the standard for aluminium.
In the worst case, levels were four times greater than those legally permitted.
To tackle these and other problems, the water companies are investing £28 billion in the next nine years.
But the Government has made it clear that if we want better water, we have to be prepared to pay for it.
The companies also have to cope with a growing demand for water.
In some areas, rivers are drying up because too much water has been extracted and, to maintain supplies, hosepipe bans have become common.
Compared with other Europeans, we don't waste water — our consumption per person is the second lowest in Europe.
But overall demand has risen — by 70 per cent in England and Wales since 1960.
And meeting that increase, through new reservoirs and treatment works, is very expensive.
Then there are costs linked to privatisation.
The water companies have responsibilities to their shareholders, who will expect a return on their investment.
So the sums involved in pricing water must take an annual dividend into account.
In 99 per cent of homes in England and Wales, rateable value is currently used to calculate the charge paid for water.
The higher the rateable value, the higher your water rate, however much water you use.
But on 1 April 2000, water rates in England and Wales become illegal under the provisions of the 1989 Water Act.
Scotland will retain the standard uniform charge for each person for both water and sewerage.
In Northern Ireland, water and sewerage will continue to be part of the rates bill.
In searching for an alternative, OFWAT is canvassing opinion on three different methods: water metering, a flat-rate licence fee, and banding or stepped charges depending on the type of home in which you live.
It believes the way we pay should encourage more careful use of water and allow customers to control the size of their bill.
The method should also be fair and simple.
Later this year, OFWAT will publish guidelines to the water companies on what it considers to be the best methods.
They will then choose the one most appropriate to their area.
But it's unlikely that one method will be used exclusively throughout the country.
With a flat-rate charge, each household pays the same for its water, whatever its size.
It has the advantage of being simple and cheap to establish, and allows the water companies to predict their income.
But there's no incentive to save water and no relationship between how much you use and what you pay.
Banding would group homes by type — detached, semi-detached, terraced or flat.
Flats would pay the lowest charge and detached houses the highest.
It's not yet clear whether the size of garden or the number of rooms with taps would be taken into account.
Charges bear some relation to consumption and it would be relatively simple to set up and run, but, like the flat-rate charge, there's no incentive to save water.
With metering, an individual meter on the service pipe between the internal stopcock and the water main in the street measures how much water you use.
The water company then charges you in much the same way as the gas and electricity companies do.
Of the three methods being considered, this is the most controversial and it has dominated the debate about paying for water.
It is favoured by Southern and Thames Water, areas where water shortages are most common.
If adopted, metering would be the most expensive method to implement and, in the short term, the most disruptive to consumers.
Trials are currently being carried out in 12 areas involving 62,000 properties to assess its effects.
CASE STUDIES
Roger Barrett had a meter fitted in his Ealing flat in 1984 at a cost of about £50.
In the last five years, he's paid on average £75 a year for about 58 cubic metres.
(His annual water rate would be £162.)
He says metering has made him more conscious about the water he uses.
He's reduced the amount of water in his lavatory system and doesn't let the tap run for so long when developing photographs in his darkroom at home.
David Rees had a meter fitted in his home in St Davids in 1986.
He uses around 100 cubic metres per year and estimates he has only saved about £10 each year because his house has a relatively low rateable value.
He has now fitted three rainwater barrels to use in the garden to reduce the amount of water he takes from the main.
THE CASE FOR METERING
Metering is regarded by many as the fairest method of charging for water.
A survey by Which?magazine of people taking part in metering trials on the Isle of Wight found that 66 per cent agreed.
(The method considered  to be the next fairest — flat-rate charge per person — was preferred by only 14 per cent.)
It's argued that metering offers consumers an incentive to save water, allowing you to limit your bill by using less.
In metering trials, use of water fell by 10 per cent.
And the fall was greater where customers were penalised by higher tariffs for consumption above a certain level.
Supporters suggest that because water metering lowers demand, water companies won't need to spend so much money on building new reservoirs — savings that can be passed on to consumers.
However, some water experts argue that much of the investment needed in future is to meet higher quality standards and won't be affected by a fall in demand.
Some consumers will make big savings in a change to metering.
Small households that don't use much water but occupy homes with high rateable values could be much better off.
So far, the water metering trials have found that 65 per cent of households are paying less than, or the same as, their previous bill using rateable values.
THE CASE AGAINST
Opponents say large families or families with young children have little choice about using a lot of water and could face large price increases with water metering.
The Institute of Environmental Health Officers (EHO) and the Child Poverty Action Group (CPAG) believe people on low incomes may try to economise on water, endangering their health.
The IEHO says the introduction of metering could lead to an increase in pests, like bedbugs, if bed linen is washed less frequently, more head and body lice if people bath less often, and a rise in cases of food poisoning caused by poorer standards of cleanliness and food hygiene.
The CPAG is also concerned that people with medical conditions, such as incontinence, who need to use large amounts of water daily, would be unfairly penalised.
And the group's research officer, Carey Oppenheim, says it is hard to see how a rebate system could be built into metering to help them.
Both organisations think the banding option is the best of the three.
And not everyone believes demand would fall significantly if metering were introduced.
FoE suggests that the initial enthusiasm for saving water may be short-lived.
Its water campaigner, Liana Stupples, says the experience of the trials wouldn't necessarily be repeated if metering became compulsory.
The National Consumer Council (NCC) argues that charging people according to the amount of water they use does not reflect the true cost of providing the service.
It says up to 90 per cent of the industry's costs are fixed.
So, for example, although a family of four will use more water than someone living alone, the costs of providing the water and sewerage services will be almost the same for both households.
The NCC favours a fixed licence fee with 100 per cent rebates for people on income support or housing benefit.
Water metering is also very expensive.
It was rejected twice by the National Water Council for this reason.
The NCC estimates it would cost £4.5 billion to meter the whole country and it says the cost to consumers would be £135 to £205 per property, rising to £1,000 for flats that share a common supply.
The NCC also points out that large quantities of water (estimated at 15 to 25 per cent of the total) leak out of the system each year.
And while compulsory metering could discourage the waste of water, the cost of installing meters might be better spent on improving the existing service — fixing leaks in the mains and educating people to conserve water.
COUNTING THE COST
Finding out whether you could save money by having a meter fitted now involves considerable research and complicated calculations.
Firstly, you need to work out how much water you use — estimates vary from area to area.
South West Water, for example, suggests a family of two use between 90 and 136 cubic metres a year, while Severn Trent puts the figure at up to 149 cubic metres.
You then need to multiply this by your company's charge for each cubic metre of water.
Charges differ throughout the country but 40p per cubic metre is a rough guide.
Then add on the local charge for sewerage disposal.
This may be charged on the actual amount of water you use or a percentage of it, or in some areas it may be based on the rateable value of your home.
Finally, add the fresh water and sewerage charges, which together will be about £70 a year.
As only about 1 per cent of households have water meters, there's still little information on how metering works in practice.
But surveys have revealed some of the benefits and problems.
Where the meter is fitted can have an important effect on your bill.
If it's fitted outside your house you will pay for any leak between the meter and your tap.
According to a Which?survey, one in three people were unhappy about where the meter was placed.
And according to the National Federation of Consumer Groups (NFCG), there's no consistency among the water companies on this issue.
Essex Water and Severn Trent Water, for example, allow meters to be installed in your house, while South West Water insists they are fitted outside the boundary of your property.
The NFCG also found variations in the price of the survey required by the water companies before you can fit a meter (£11.50 to £35) and in the cost of the meter itself (free in Severn Trent but £35 in Thames).
Some companies will allow you to fit the meter while others insist that you use their plumber — in one case, at a cost of up to £300.
BREAKING THE CODE
Last time you fought against a pile of junk mail to open your front door did you wonder how the bank, catalogue company or film processor got your name and address?
Later this summer, a new industry code of practice will help you find out.
The direct mail business is a growth industry.
According to figures from the British Direct Marketing Association, over two thousand million items of direct mail were sent through the post in 1989, at a cost of £758 million.
But as the scale of direct marketing has grown, so has the concern among consumers about how mailing lists are compiled, where the information comes from and how it is used.
Drawn up by the Advertising Association, the new code covers about 90 per cent of the companies that use direct mail.
Now these companies must reveal, if asked, where the data they hold on you came from — whether, for example, they have bought or rented a list from another organisation or collected the information themselves.
If you don't want direct mail from any company there is a surprisingly easy remedy.
By simply writing to the Mailing Preference Service, you can have your name deleted from almost all the lists being used by direct mail companies.
The organisation has now registered about 200,000 people and in the last year registered more names than in the previous seven years.
The address to write to is: Mailing Preference Service, Freepost 22, London W1E 7EZ
SAFE AS HOUSES
As the holiday season draws near it's time to think about how secure your home will be while you're away.
According to the Government, Britain is suffering an epidemic of petty crime.
The latest crime figures show that burglaries, theft and handling stolen goods now account for more than 90 per cent of the total.
The police believe we can still do much more to protect ourselves.
In 90 per cent of burglaries, access is through insecure doors and windows.
So fitting sound locks is basic common sense.
It's not difficult to appear to be in, when you're actually out.
Consider fitting a timeswitch that will turn lights or a radio on and off.
And of course, cancel papers and milk while you're away.
Keep valuables like TVs and video equipment out of sight and make a note of their serial numbers.
Mark your possessions with your postcode — the police will then give you a window sticker, which might act as a deterrent.
Always lock garages and sheds.
Ladders and tools could be very useful to a thief.
If you can't find anywhere to keep a ladder, padlock it to something secure.
And never leave a key ‘hidden’ outside.
Thieves instinctively know where to look.
Don't forget about the contents of your garden either.
Check your house contents policy to make sure they're covered.
The layout of your house and garden can aid or deter crime.
High gates and fences at the back of your home will make it difficult for a burglar to get in and slip away unnoticed.
But tall bushes in the front garden will allow him to work unseen.
There's still some disagreement whether Neighbourhood Watch schemes have a lasting affect on crime.
But asking a trusty neighbour to keep an eye on your property should mean you can enjoy your holiday without worrying about what you might find when you get home.
THE BURGLAR'S TOP TEN
Don't assume you have nothing worth stealing.
This is what thieves like most:
1
Video recorders
2
Home computers
3
Money
4
Hi-fi equipment
5
Chequebooks and credit cards
6
TVs
7
Jewellery
8
Silverware
9
Cameras
10
Antiques
You and your rights
Q I sent three films of holiday snaps away to be processed but only one came back.
The processor sent me a cheque for the value of the two missing films.
When I complained, the company said there was a clause on the processing envelope that said if anything went wrong, it only had to pay for the film.
Is this true?
A The film processor is trying to evade its liability by relying on the small print.
But don't be put off.
Under the 1977 Unfair Contract Terms Act, exclusion clauses like these have to be fair and reasonable.
Many people whose films have been lost have taken the processors to court, winning compensation for more than the cost of the film.
Some companies now include a clause on the envelope stating they offer a special service under which they accept extra liability for a higher price.
This suggests that if customers pay extra, their films will be better protected and that if they don't pay the extra charge the company won't be liable.
The courts don't appear to agree.
A growing number of consumers who haven't paid the extra fee have won their cases.
Q I had my winter coat dry-cleaned recently.
When I got it back it was badly stained.
I can't wear it now.
What are my rights?
A First of all, don't be put off by notices in the shop claiming that articles are left at the owner's risk.
Under the 1982 Supply of Goods and Services Act, the shop is obliged to clean with reasonable skill and care.
So, if you believe the shop is to blame for the stain on your coat, you're entitled to claim compensation for its value.
The trade body, the Textile Services Association, has drawn up a code of practice, endorsed by the Office of Fair Trading.
Under the code, if your clothes are damaged and the dry cleaner is to blame, they should be cleaned again free of charge or you should be fairly compensated.
Your case could be strengthened by a specialist's report.
The association can provide a list of test laboratories.
Along with the British Leather Manufacturer's Research Association, it will investigate complaints and examine your garment for a relatively small fee.
The Textile Services Association is at .
The British Leather Manufacturer's Research Association is at .
IDEAL HOME FIRST FOR CONSUMER ADVICE AUTHORITY QUALITY TRUSTED
UPDATE
LINDA NEWMAN KEEPS YOU UP TO DATE WITH ALL THOSE MATTERS THAT AFFECT YOU AND YOUR FAMILY AND TAKES A LOOK AT THE LATEST PRODUCTS AND FORTHCOMING EVENTS
MIND YOUR LANGUAGE
What's in a name?
We find out how people react to our titles.
Plus communication breakdowns — how to cope with stammering and complicated jargon
Often the names of people we meet play an important part in how we perceive them.
Without even knowing it, we may make assumptions about them based on the fact that they're called Charles rather than Kevin.
Names can say a lot about your background; displaying your age, class, roots, religion and, in some cases, revealing your parents' favourite pop star.
Names come and go in fashionable cycles.
Nowadays, it's not often you hear of a baby called Gladys or Reginald.
Or even one of the popular 1950s names like Linda, Janice and Susan, which immediately date the owners.
And the future will see plenty of little Kylies and Jasons named after the Australian stars.
Victorian girls' names like Emma, Daisy, Rose and Jessica are popular at the moment, as are biblical names — Benjamin, Adam, Samuel, Rebecca and Rachel.
Chances are Sharon, Tracy or Wayne weren't raised on a big country estate with Rupert, William, Sarah and Lucinda.
Outrageous names are often found among the offspring of showbusiness parents: Fifi Trixiebelle, Peaches and Pixie are the names of Paula Yates and Bob Geldof's children.
Dakota May was chosen by Don Johnson and Melanie Griffith and Cher called her daughter Chastity Bono.
Zowie Bowie, David Bowie's son, changed his name to plain old Joe as soon as he was out of short trousers.
Ordinary names are probably the best bet for the majority of us.
American onomatologists (people who study names) have observed that the most popular children in classrooms are the ones with the most common names, such as John, Michael and Jenny — although this rule applies most strongly to male names.
Research has also shown that girls' names are chosen from a much wider range than boys.
It seems that girls may be given fancier names because this fits in with a traditionally feminine image while the common masculine-sounding names for boy babies, like Richard, David, James and Alexander, would ostensibly give a boy fewer problems than Tarquin or Marmaduke.
Parents agonising over names for their children might consider the pitfalls of choosing a unisex name such as Lesley/Leslie, Beverley or Vivian, or whether a name can be shortened into an undesirable nickname.
Some families deliberately create pet names for their children — research shows this is a middle and upper- class phenomenon, whereas working-class families tend to call the child by its full birth name.
If you really don't like your name, you could always consider changing it.
The new tag will be valid in all but legal matters — you'll need to change it by deed poll for that.
PLAINLY SPEAKING
The Plain English Campaign is again on the lookout for the incomprehensible, and consumer contracts are the latest to come under fire.
A dissatisfied customer recently sent in the following example: ‘The signatory confirms the accuracy of the above information to the best of his knowledge and hereby authorises and requests ABC Limited to furnish the bank with any evidence they so require forthwith.’
The campaign director, Chrissie Maher, says, ‘If you come across an unnecessarily complicated piece of jargon, you can either forget it or send them one of our cards that carries the pointed message: Gobbledygook can damage your business.’
The Plain English Campaign's translation of this is: ‘To the best of my knowledge, the above information is accurate.
Please give the bank any evidence they ask for.’
If you want more information or free cards and stickers, send a large sae to: Plain English Campaign, Outram House, 15 Canal Street, Whaley Bridge, Stockport, Greater Manchester SK12 7LS.
LOST FOR WORDS
Although 500,000 people in Britain stammer, this disability is often not treated very sympathetically.
The Association for Stammerers would like to increase our understanding and patience of stammering in a world where fluency tends to be taken for granted.
Speech can actually improve if stammerers can be put at ease.
Listeners can help by asking the stammerer whether they'd like gaps in sentences filled when they come across a particularly difficult word.
But what's really needed, says the association, is our patience.
No one knows just what causes stammering, although it seems that there may be a genetic link.
And it appears approximately four times more boys than girls stammer.
Although many children go through a stammering stage when they're learning to speak, most pass through this phase and have no further problems.
Speech therapy teaches people different techniques enabling them to control their stammer and help them in conversation.
If you want any further information and details of courses and individual therapy, send an sae to the Association for Stammerers  .
NEWS & VIEWS
HINTS FOR BUDDING BECKERS AND GRAFS, STUNNING FURNITURE, WHAT'S HAPPENING WHERE AND LOTS MORE
ANYONE FOR TENNIS?
Tennis players start at a more tender age these days.
Budding Beckers and Grafs start gaining skills from around the age of five or six — sometimes even younger.
And short tennis, a scaled- down version of the game, is becoming increasingly popular.
It's played on smaller courts using light plastic rackets and foam balls, so very young children can join in.
‘Currently, 200,000 children play enthusiastically at schools, leisure centres and private clubs around the country,’ says Brian Blincoe, director of national development for the Lawn Tennis Association Trust.
‘We have broadened the appeal of the game.
There are now tens of thousands of children playing who would not otherwise have played tennis.
So this will certainly improve the game's chances of developing future champions,’ he adds.
For a list of short tennis organisers around the country, send an sae to: Short Tennis Department, Lawn Tennis Association Trust, Queens Club, London W14 9EG; tel: 071–385 4233.
EXHIBITIONS AND EVENTS
15 June to 22 June The Quilters' Guild 4th National Exhibition divides the old and new into two parts.
British Textile Treasures displays antique quilts showing patchwork and quilting techniques and traditions; The Skopos Challenge exhibits 150 contemporary works selected by leading quilters, showing bed and cot quilts and wall hangings.
At  .
Open: 10 am to 4.30 pm daily (until 3 pm on 22 June).
Admission: £2.50; under-12s, free.
The exhibition will travel to seven other venues, finishing on 30 November.
For information send an sae to:.
16 June There'll be over 700 stands at the Antique & Collectors Fair — London's largest antiques fair — selling furniture, vintage jewellery, books and toys.
Open: 11.30 am to 5 pm.
Admission: Adults, £2; under-16s, free.
For more information, tel;.
30 June Family Rambling Day.
200 walks organised by The Ramblers' Association to be held all over England, Scotland and Wales.
Each ramble will be from three to six miles long and many will include picnics, nature trails and farm visits.
For a list, send an sae to:
TRUE TO FORM
Nigel Daly is becoming a name to be reckoned with among British furniture designers.
His hand-built furniture has a strong architectural feel epitomised by the sophisticated Gothick Conservatory range (as shown above and left).
Inspired by his lifelong interest in form and structure, items from the range are available in painted ivory, dark green, or antique blue.
Other finishes, such as traditional faux rosewood, can be produced to order.
For a leaflet, write to   
SOMETHING WILD
Work starts this summer in Norfolk to develop the country's first purpose-built wildlife hospital.
It will replace a temporary unit set up by the RSPCA at Docking, Norfolk, in 1988 to deal with victims of the virus that plagues thousands of North Sea seals.
Although the virus has now disappeared, RSPCA staff have been looking after orphaned pups, seals damaged by fishing nets and victims of gales, as well as treating a variety of birds.
The new hospital will care for the annual 3,000 or so wildlife casualties in the area.
Facilities will include an intensive care unit and an oiled bird cleaning facility.
Due to be finished in 1992, the hospital will cost £1 million.
Readers wishing to contribute to the Wildlife Hospital Appeal can ring Freefone 0800 400478 to donate by Access or Visa card, or send a cheque, payable to the RSPCA, to .
COOKING BY COMPUTER
In a bid to boost meat sales, Safeway has installed an electronic cookbook in its Edinburgh and Coventry branches.
Shoppers punch into a keyboard the type of meat they want and how many they'll be cooking for.
The screen then displays a selection of different recipes plus pictures.
You choose one and the machine prints out that recipe.
The idea is backed by the Meat and Livestock Commission which is trying to interest other chains in similar schemes.
TAKING COVER
With the hazards of lying in the sun for too long firmly emblazoned on our minds, holidaymakers can now pack Le Beachtent and protect themselves from harmful rays.
They can also avoid the rush down to the beach to secure an umbrella.
The tent can be put up in as little as five seconds and has enough room to provide shade and wind protection for two adults.
The side pockets can be filled with sand and pebbles to anchor the tent if it's breezy.
Le Beachtent costs £54.95, including p&p, from   .
WINNING ENTRIES
In our October 1990 competition, we asked you to place in order of importance eight reasons for buying Parker Knoll furniture.
After considering all entries, the judges decided the best order to be:
Just one entrant submitted the above, Mrs J Memmott of Worksop, who wins the Ashleigh Collection from Parker Knoll, comprising a three-seater sofa, two-seater sofa, chair, storage stool and a three-seater sofabed in her choice of fabric.
The nine runners-up, who each win an Ashleigh Collection three-seater sofabed in their choice of fabric, are:.
IN THE SHADE
The new collection of totes C2000 sunglasses features stylish designs in tortoiseshell and black, which cut out the dangerous glare from the sun and provide protection from both UVA and UVB rays.
Prices range from £16 to £19.99 and there are 16 styles available for men and women; from Boots and major department stores.
And totes is offering a free pair of its Nassau-style sunglasses to the first 50 readers to write to:.
Showing early potential
Intricate antique patchwork
Left: A Gothic-style settle by talented British designer Nigel Daly, £1,110
Below left: Elegant throne chair, £830; stands, £600 each; Nigel Daly
Releasing healthy birds into the wild
MORTGAGE MATTERS
HOW TO GET VALUE FOR MONEY FROM YOUR SURVEYOR, PLUS THE INS AND OUTS OF CHOOSING AN ENDOWMENT POLICY.
VALERIE BAYES HAS THE DETAILS
SURVEYING THE SCENE
A full house survey, where you brief your building surveyor individually rather than relying on the shorter though cheaper housebuyer's report, can be an expensive matter.
To get the bast value for money in terms of advice and information, Professor Malcolm Hollis, spokesman for the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors (RICS), says you should ask a surveyor to cover various points, with price guidance for each one.
This will make the survey document easier for you to read, assimilate and act on.
First, tell your surveyor what general plans you have for the buildings as a whole (for example, walls to come down, new bathroom or kitchen installations).
Then ask him to tell you:
1
What needs to be done before exchange of contracts — for example, sorting out the problem of next-door's intrusive rainwater pipe.
2
What needs to be done before you move in — repair or installation work that would make life very uncomfortable for you if you were already living on the premises.
3
What work should be done within a year of moving in — jobs that can wait a while and wouldn't inconvenience you too much if they were done around you.
4
What work would be a longer-term liability from then on — for example, jobs that should be undertaken within the next five years or so.
A building surveyor can offer guidance on any problems you anticipate as far as structure, planning and building regulations, and cost are concerned.
He can help you improve the overall condition of the property, says Malcolm Hollis, but obviously he can't change or improve its actual location.
A north-facing or chilly outlook, unpleasing view, proximity to noisy traffic, or even an awkward access, for example, could all easily make your home seem less attractive to a future purchaser.
WELL ENDOWED
If you are considering arranging a with-profits endowment policy to link up with your mortgage, always ask your mortgage lender or financial adviser for details of the past performance of the endowment insurance company they are proposing.
(However, past performance is no certain guide to future returns.)
There can be remarkable differences in the bonuses paid to investors by the various companies offering endowment policies.
These differences show up clearly with the longer-term policies associated with mortgages.
Tables listing 60 endowment companies published in the periodical Planned Savings show that the top performers for endowment policies paying out at the end of 1990 could do anything up to twice as well as companies at the bottom of the table.
The top 10 were Clerical Medical, Commercial Union, Eagle Star, General Accident, Legal & General, Norwich Union, Prudential Assurance, Royal London, Scottish Widows and Standard Life.
BETTER TIMES AHEAD
As numbers of mortgage arrears and repossessions grow, especially in London and the Southeast, and with up to 10 per cent of mortgage borrowers said to be in minor arrears or postponed repayments, building societies and other lenders are being particularly careful to offer their borrowers help in paying.
For example, National & Provincial Building Society offered a mortgage helpline and hints for those who might have difficulty meeting the new level of payments.
These included offering customers with a repayment mortgage the option of extending the term up to 35 years, while endowment customers were told that they could spread the excess (the difference between the amount borrowed and their present balance) over a longer period.
If you are having difficulty making your repayments, always seek help from your mortgage lender before matters get too out of hand.
CLEAR CHOICE
When, and if, you took out your mortgage, did you fully understand the choices open to you?
New advertising regulations from the Department of Trade and Industry, at present moving through their consultative stage, are designed to ensure that mortgage lenders make borrowers aware that they have a choice between an endowment or repayment mortgage.
To quote Mortgage Finance Monthly , the monthly newsletter of the Council of Mortgage Lenders (tel: 071–437 0655): ‘Advertisers that sell other services, typically an endowment policy or general insurance, will have to make clear to prospective borrowers that a mortgage is available whether or not other services are also taken from the lender.’
Michael Coogan of the Building Societies Association Legal Department says: ‘The Government wants mortgage lenders to emphasise to borrowers that they think carefully before committing themselves to taking out a loan.’
If you are arranging your mortgage via a mortgage broker and you do not choose an endowment-linked scheme, you may be charged a fee for his or her services.
BRIDGE OVER TROUBLED WATERS
With interest rates of 4 per cent or more above bank base rate, bridging loans are often seen as risky and expensive.
But in today's lean property market, homebuyers could start putting them to good use.
With a bridging loan you could choose your new, more expensive home and buy while prices remain comparatively low, then delay for some time before selling your first house.
As house prices begin to rise, you could see your loan costing less each month than the gain in your first house's value over the same period.
A bridging loan can also give you an upper hand when buying in a very slow market.
Armed with your bridging loan, you are effectively a cash buyer, not caught up in a chain, and you can use this position to your advantage, demanding and getting a good discount.
This, in turn, should allow you to cut the sale price of your own current property and, therefore, sell it more quickly.
At a time when house sales are few and far between, successful transactions are those where realistic prices are asked.
MONEY TALK
WENDY ELKINGTON SHOWS HOW TO GET THE RIGHT INDEPENDENT FINANCIAL ADVICE, LOOKS AT BANKING FOR SCHOOLCHILDREN AND FINDS OUT WHETHER IT PAYS TO HAVE A LODGER
SOUND ADVICE Over the last couple of years, newspapers have been full of articles about financial advisers, like Barlow Clowes and the Levitt Group, that have gone bust.
This always strikes fear into the hearts of would-be investors.
The last thing you want to worry about when you invest your hard-earned cash is whether your adviser is trustworthy.
If you're considering making an investment, it's nearly always better to talk to an independent financial adviser (IFA).
A company representative or agent will only tell you about his own firm's plans and so his advice will be limited.
But an IFA can shop around for the best deals.
Here's a checklist to help ensure you end up with the right advice.
Make sure your adviser has a full operating licence — known as a ‘regulated’ licence — and that his stationery, business card or literature states his authorisation.
Generally, independent advisers are registered at the Financial Intermediaries, Managers and Brokers Regulatory Association (FIMBRA).
Tied agents normally come under the Life Assurance and Unit Trust Regulatory Association (LAUTRO).
You can check your adviser is properly authorised by telephoning either the Securities and Investments Board (SIB) on 071–929 3652 or FIMBRA on 071–538 8860.
Another important question to ask is whether the adviser has professional indemnity cover and for how much.
At present, the compensation scheme run by SIB has a maximum pay out of £48,000.
But compensation is only granted if the adviser goes bust and is unable to pay back your money.
Don't write out cheques to your adviser — always make them payable to the company you're investing in.
If the adviser wants you to make out a cheque to him, the alarm bells should start ringing.
Always make sure you get a receipt.
The trade association for IFAs, IFA Promotions, will send you, free of charge, the names of 10 of its members in your area.
It also supplies a list of the 10 most important questions to ask your adviser.
You can contact IFA Promotions on 071–200 3000.
BRANCHING OUT
MiniBranch, a new computer-based school banking system, is now available from the Yorkshire Bank to help children acquire a wide range of basic money management skills.
It also helps them build up market research techniques — required in the technology section of the National Curriculum — as well as developing planning, advertising, promotion and interviewing skills.
Once the bank is up and running, children learn how to deal with people and develop working relationships with each other.
The tangible benefits for the children are a preferential rate of interest on Springboard savings accounts, school leaver seminars on money management and certificates of involvement issued to MiniBranch staff to show potential employers.
But teachers also benefit.
They can cash cheques up to a pre-arranged limit, free of charge, settle bills payable by bank giro credit, order foreign currency for school trips and holidays and pay money into their own accounts.
Schools get a £50 payment to help set up their MiniBranch, plus a further £50 on the first bank day, £1 for each account opened, as well as being provided with software to computerise the branch scheme.
Other banks operating school branches are Midland and TSB.
OUT OF POCKET
As more and more shops go out of business, shoppers should be wary of putting down a cash deposit.
If you put down a deposit and the firm goes bankrupt, you'll become one of the many unsecured creditors who wait for their share-out from the receiver.
The best advice is not to place cash deposits on goods unless you are totally sure that the firm is financially safe.
Better still, make the part payment with your credit card.
Under the Consumer Credit Act, items costing more than £100 are protected if the supplier fails to deliver or the goods are faulty.
In theory, people who took out their cards before July 1977 — the date when the Consumer Credit Act became effective — and who still use the same cards, don't qualify for this protection under their initial contract.
However, most of the major card issuers have said they will ignore this distinction.
Shoppers who are in any doubt should ask their card company for a new card.
ROOMS TO LET
As the recession bites, many people have seized the opportunity of making a little extra money by letting out a spare room in their home.
But the rent from lodgers and lettings is seen as part of your income and the taxman will want his share of any profit you make.
You are liable to pay income tax if the profit from letting the room added to your income is more than your tax allowance for the year.
It's possible to offset the costs and expenses of taking a lodger against the rent you receive.
These include gas, electricity, plus wear and tear on furniture, repairs and maintenance bills, and insurance premiums on both property and contents.
But you can only offset the share of expenses that relate directly to the part of your home which is let.
For example, if your house is on three floors and one is rented out, you can claim one-third of the expenses of the whole house.
And as long as you rent out no more than one-third of your property, your MIRAS (mortgage interest tax relief) is not affected.
However, mortgage interest itself is not an allowable expense.
For further details, take a look at the Inland Revenue leaflet, IR 87, called Rooms To Let .
HEALTH MATTERS
ARE YOU HAPPY WITH PRESCRIPTION ADVICE FROM YOUR GP?
PLUS TREATMENT FOR BREAST CANCER AND CHILDREN ON DRUGS.
DR JOHN HASLER PRESENTS THE FACTS
TAKING THE MEDICINE
According to an article in The Drug and Therapeutics Bulletin , GPs should help patients take prescribed medicines properly to avoid any confusion.
1
The GP should explain instructions clearly to the patient.
For example, does taking a tablet three times a day mean every eight hours or three times during waking hours?
If pills are to be taken with meals, what happens if you miss a meal?
2
There is often confusion between generic (proper) name and the proprietary (brand) name.
The former ought to be more prominently displayed, the article says, so that patients aren't confused about whether they have been given a different type of medicine when collecting subsequent prescriptions.
3
The GP should warn patients of possible side effects and what to do if pills are mixed.
4
The routine should be simple.
Taking medicine more than twice a day could be a potential problem for many people, the article warns.
CHILDREN AT RISK
Is your child taking unnecessary drugs?
A recent report in the British Medical Journal by Dr Sue Adams from Southampton shows that stimulants, anti-depressants, tranquillizers and sedatives are quite widely used to treat children.
She questioned all child psychiatrists and 100 GPs in the Wessex health region about their prescribing.
Her research showed that more than 200 prescriptions for such drugs were issued in a three-month period.
The most commonly prescribed drugs were hypnotics to make young children sleep and anti-depressants for treating bedwetting, plus tranquillizers for teenagers suffering from some kind of psychological disturbance.
RELUCTANT MOTHERS
In these days of widespread family planning, you might well think the number of unwanted pregnancies is on the decline.
You would be wrong.
In 1989, Anne Fleissig, a research officer at the Institute of Social Studies in Medical Care, surveyed 1,500 expectant mothers in England and Wales to find out whether the pregnancy had been planned.
She compared the answers to those from a similar survey in 1984.
Recording her findings in the British Medical Journal , Anne Fleissig reports an increase from 27 per cent to 31 per cent in the number of unplanned pregnancies between 1984 and 1989.
The majority of women aged 35 and over were using some form of birth control.
But as you may expect, unplanned pregnancies were more common in young and single women.
Some Pill users don't know what to do if they miss pills.
Others may not realise that some antibiotics interfere with the Pill's effectiveness.
UNDERARM TACTICS
Surgeons operating for breast cancer don't agree whether the whole breast or the lump only should be removed.
They also disagree about whether the glands in the armpit should be removed, treated with radiotherapy, or left alone.
When breast cancer is terminal, it's not due to the primary tumour in the breast, but because the tumour cells have spread through the lymph glands in the armpit to vital organs.
In the past, it was commonplace to clear the lymph glands out of the armpit at the same time as performing the mastectomy (removing the whole breast).
However, this is much less widespread than it used to be and two surgeons from Guys Hospital in London and Withington Hospital in Manchester believe this is a mistake.
Writing recently in The Lancet , they argue that the only way of assessing a tumour's spread is by examining the whole gland.
This then ensures there will be no further problems.
One reason why some surgeons are reluctant to remove the lymph gland in the armpit is that some women develop subsequent swelling of the arm (lymphoedema).
But The Lancet report says this is a rare complication after complete removal of glands.
ON THE PULSE
It may not be just the drink that is bad for your health.
Alcohol stored in lead crystal decanters can contain high levels of lead, according to a team of US researchers
Action & Research for Multiple Sclerosis (ARMS) has published a new guide to statutory services —MS and Community Services .
Costing £2, the guide is available from ARMS,.
Halitosis, or bad breath, may be helped by a new mouthwash currently being developed by a research team from Israel
A new video pack for children with epilepsy is available from the British Epilepsy Association (BEA).
Specially designed to help everyone in the family cope with the problems of epilepsy, it costs £12.50 from BEA,.
Dr Hasler is unable to enter into any correspondence regarding medical enquiries
IDEAL HOME READER SHOWER SURVEY RESULTS
SHOWER POWER
In our special shower survey in the September 1990 issue, we asked how many of you own a shower and how you would pick a new one.
The views of Ideal Home readers are important to manufacturers like Aqualisa, which sponsored this questionnaire, when it comes to future product development.
Here are the results
As many as seven out of 10 respondents currently own a shower they use at least once a day.
About one-third of those showers are bath/shower mixers, and another third are electric instantaneous — only 1 per cent of you had one of the more sophisticated pump-assisted models.
One of the main advantages of a shower is that it can be installed virtually anywhere in the house where there is space.
However, nearly 80 per cent of you who own a shower have it installed in the bathroom, and a shower curtain over the bath is the favourite type of screen.
Most of you had a shower installed because it was convenient and saved time, and also because you liked the fact that it uses less water than a bath and provides an extra bathing facility.
Two-thirds of you chose the make and model on your own or with your partner, and 25 per cent were guided by information in magazines.
Quite a few of you are dissatisfied with your showers; 25 per cent are unhappy with its performance and almost 20 per cent with its ease of use.
Poor water flow and low pressure were the most common complaints.
Problems controlling the temperature were also experienced by about 33 per cent of you.
Despite most of you already having a shower, 80 per cent are planning to install a new shower in the near future.
For 30 per cent this would be for the first time, yet almost half our sample are installing an additional or replacement shower.
Most wanted to buy one of the more sophisticated models — 30 per cent planned to buy a built-in thermostatic mixer, while another 30 per cent wanted a power shower.
The most important features when choosing a new model were temperature stabilisers or a thermostat, closely followed by a powerful, invigorating flow and easy water flow control.
Colour and design were lowest on your list of priorities.
Aqualisa kindly offered two thermostatic showers worth over £300 each for a prize draw.
The winners were: K Dale, Wilts and A P Haworth, North Yorks
LETTERS
Let us know your news, views and home hints.
There's a compact cordless vacuum cleaner from Black & Decker for the star letter; £10 for every other letter published
Inherited problems
A few years ago, after selling our house, we found an idyllic 15th-century farmhouse.
The day before contracts were due to be exchanged, the vendor phoned me and asked whether we could keep on his current lodger who was a student and about to take his final exams.
Although I was sympathetic, I explained we had two children and a large dog and simply didn't have room for him.
The next day, the solicitor phoned to say the vendor had withdrawn the property from the market, leaving us very disappointed and £1,000 worse off after paying legal and survey fees.
The vendor of our current house also put us under some pressure to keep on her cleaner but, this time, we waited until the exchange of contracts to reject the idea.
No-claims bonus
With the increase in home burglaries and storm damage over recent years, it may be that domestic insurance rates are set to rise steeply.
But isn't it time insurance companies started to treat home insurers the same way as motor insurers?
We have paid home insurance for the last 25 years and have never made a claim.
Shouldn't we, therefore, be entitled to a no-claims bonus?
Secret service
I recently applied for a home-improvement loan that would raise my present mortgage above the building society's original valuation of the property.
The building society stipulated that a further revaluation would be necessary.
However, despite the fact that I had to pay for the survey, the society will not allow me to have a copy of the report.
I gather this is normal practice but I find it a little unreasonable.
Although some lenders are willing to let applicants have a copy of the valuation, the Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors explained to us that there is no legal obligation for them to do so.
The Editor
Question Time
The double-glazing industry is a strongly competitive and heavily advertised one.
Prospective buyers might, therefore, consider shortlisting and inviting representatives from each different company chosen to an afternoon tea followed by a quiz session.
This would give them the opportunity to explain why they think their company's product is the best, and at the same time, you can decide which one offers the most appropriate product for you.
Know your rights
I wonder how many people realise that although a guarantee has run out, you still have a right to claim?
We bought a fridge for our caravan that developed a fault several months after the guarantee expired.
When we complained, we had quite a battle with the manager of the firm, but we argued that the fridge was not in use all the time, and if it had been in our home the fault may have occurred earlier.
We eventually got the repairs done free of charge, despite the fact that we were on the verge of receiving a repair bill totalling £100.
The Sale of Goods Act 1979 states that goods must be of merchantable quality when you buy them.
If you can prove that the goods were defective when you bought them, you do have a claim against the seller and this is regardless of whether the guarantee has expired or not.
The Editor
FINDING FAULT
We have moved house five times in 12 years and although moving itself is stressful, I think what's more difficult to cope with is the first month when all the foibles of the new house are discovered.
So far we've had door handles coming off in our hands, sticking windows, a rotten floorboard and a pretty coal-effect fire that produced no heat.
It's high time the insurance companies allowed buyers to take out a special policy to cover the first month in a new home.
I think it would be money well spent.
The writer of our star letter receives a versatile Super Dustbuster Extra from Black & Decker
Clouding the issue
I have read in Ideal Home that a tip to help sell a house is to brew coffee or play soothing classical music when prospective buyers are viewing, but I disagree with this.
Serious buyers are not seeking the homely smells of baking or the aroma of coffee beans.
They're interested in room sizes, condition of the house and its style.
People will buy a house if it suits them, regardless of the image you might be trying to create.
Curiosity and the cat
My cats have learnt how to open our fridge so that they, our dogs and our three-year-old toddler can help themselves to the contents.
We have tried numerous toddler catches but they are invariably pulled off by over-enthusiastic visitors who do not understand them.
Now the side of the fridge looks like a battleground with the remains of all the sticky fixers that hold the plastic catches on.
Oh, for the days when fridges had proper handles.
Paint pointers
I find that many DIY tools are often too heavy for women but a radiator roller is ideal for larger areas.
It covers quickly and doesn't splash as much as the sponge varieties.
Another tip for a different effect is to wrap a plastic bag around the roller with a rubber band.
This creates a stunning tree-bark effect.
Please address letters to  
PRACTICAL MATTERS
DAVID HOLLOWAY REVEALS THE LATEST SHOWER TRAYS, A NEW SAFE PLUG PLUS HOW TO FIT A DOOR CHIME AND USE A SEALANT GUN
HIDDEN ASSETS
Convector heaters that make all the difference
In a modern room with large windows, there is often little space for wallmounted radiators or skirting convectors.
But you can provide heating for a room like this by using underfloor convector heaters, connected by a normal central heating system.
Kampmann makes a range of this kind of heater in different sizes, colours and finishes and with either linear or roll-up grilles.
They can be put in a timber floor or in a trench in a solid floor.
Prices start at about £100 per metre for standard models; fan-assisted convection designs are also available.
Further details from  .
TOP OF THE CLASS
A must for every decorator
The overall prizewinner for the best new product at last year's DIY 90 exhibition was the Harris 6-in-1 Painters Tool.
The versatile tool can be used as a:
wallpaper stripping knife, removing even difficult papers with the sharpened blade edge
paint stripping knife, for dry paint from windows or old paint from wood with the help of a hot-air paint stripper
paint roller sleeve cleaner, using the curved edge to scrape all traces of paint from a roller sleeve under running water
nail and tack remover, using the specially shaped hole in the blade
grout and putty remover, with the sharp edge of the hardened blade.
The 6-in-1 Painters Tool costs about £2.50 and is available from B & Q and other good DIY stores.
ALL KITTED OUT
Fitting a door chime
There's nothing more frustrating than discovering halfway through a DIY project that you have forgotten to buy a simple yet vital piece of equipment.
However, there's some good news from Smiths Industries.
Its new Door Chime Kit contains everything you need to install a new chime, though you will need four R14-size batteries.
Included in the kit is a bell push that you attach to the front door frame, 9 metres of bell wire, complete with cable clips (if you need more than around 8 metres, Smiths recommends a bell transformer is used, connected to the mains electricity), the door chime and securing screws for fixing to wood.
Full instructions are provided, although if you are installing a transformer you'll need a qualified electrician.
The Smiths Door Chime Kit costs about £10 from electrical retailers.
WIRED UP
Safe and simple plugs
Wiring up plugs is something we all have to do, but a recent MORI survey suggests that almost half of British adults are unlikely to carry out the job correctly.
But the Easy Wire plug from PowerBreaker should make the job both easier and safer.
The plug's special features include:
Colour-coded terminals (red, brown and green) to match all the wires
All wires are cut to the same length
The cord grip (an essential safety feature on any plug) doesn't need screws and so is less fiddly
Hinged cover for simple opening and shutting
The fuse carrier is accessible from outside the plug to make changing a fuse simple.
The new Easy Wire plug is available from John Lewis, Payless and selected branches of Texas, price about £2.
ADVANCED DESIGN
Improved shower trays
If you have a separate shower, the base of the cubicle or enclosure is an acrylic or ceramic shower tray.
In an older house, it can sometimes be difficult to get the shower tray level but it's always difficult to get a good and permanent seal between the shower tray and the tiled walls.
On top of this, clearing blocked waste traps can be a major headache.
The new range of Access shower trays from Nordic neatly solves all these problems.
The trays have adjustable feet — so they can overcome any problems with levelling.
And an upstand will improve sealing between the shower tray and wall.
The flat surface of the tray can also be removed, allowing you to clear the waste traps.
The trays have been flow-tested and can cope with power showers.
Prices start at £336.
For further information, contact  tel;.
READER OFFER
MAKING TRACKS
There's no doubt about it, curtains that hang beautifully give an elegant finish to a room.
Harrison Drape's latest quality Superstyle curtain tracks combine versatility with simplicity.
The tracks come in a range of sizes from 1.2 metres (4 feet) to 5.4 metres (18 feet).
And we have 30 2.1 metre (7 feet) Superstyle curtain tracks to give away to readers.
The slimline track holds any weight of curtains and can be easily fitted around a bay window or on a straight run.
The unique ball-chain pull system allows you to open and close the curtains without having to touch them.
And the continuous loops put an end to tangled cords.
So why not give your curtains the treatment they deserve?
Send your name and address to:.
YOU CAN DO IT
Step-by-step guide to using a sealant
Today, the majority of sealers, fillers and mastics for use around the home are sold in cartridges.
But to use these cartridges, you also need to have a ‘skeleton’(or ‘caulking’) sealant gun.
Most sealant guns are made of metal, which soon rusts, and they don't come with any instructions on how to use them.
However, the new Sealant Applicator Gun from Dow Corning Hansil, designed for use with any 310 ml cartridge, is made from lightweight plastic and comes with full step-by-step illustrated instructions.
It costs about £2.40 from DIY stores.
For details of your local stockist, contact   .
1 Remove nozzle and cut end of cartridge.
Trim the nozzle tip to give the required sealant width, making the cut at 45° (do not throw away the nozzle tip)
2 Push down the clutch plate (a) and draw back the piston rod (b)
3 Insert the cartridge, nozzle end first.
Pump the trigger (c) until the follower plate (d) reaches the end of the cartridge
4 Apply the sealant (or other product) by slowly squeezing the trigger to obtain an even flow — practise this first
5 When you want to stop the flow of sealant, release the trigger (c) and depress the clutch plate (a)
6 To remove the cartridge, hold the gun vertical, depress the clutch plate (a) and pull back the piston rod until it clears the end of the cartridge
To re-seal a half-used cartridge, take the piece you cut off the end of the nozzle and push it into the nozzle the other way round
Convector heaters in the floor don't disturb the sleek, modern lines of this room
Left: Anti-leak upstand prevents water getting behind the tiles
Below: A removable hatch allows access to waste pipes
DREAM THEMES
Finding inspiration to decorate a bedroom can sometimes be difficult.
Denise Brock and Julie London have created three schemes to help you
Working pattern
Pattern can be used to delicate effect in a bedroom.
Here, the same powder-blue print has been used for the wallpaper, valance and chaircovering, while cream drapes combine to give an almost French flavour.
Although overtly rustic in tone, the scheme can happily include more modern touches, such as the metal table and collection of colourful contemporary ceramics.
Cream voile has been lavishly draped around the metal four- poster bedstead to make an attractive centrepiece.
A similar four-poster called Voiron is available from Heal's.
Soho Furniture now makes a metal four-poster bed as well as a neat metal-framed side table.
Colour masters
Rather than any particular style, you may want to base your bedroom scheme on certain colours.
This can be an effective way to stamp your individuality on it.
The black and cream colour scheme in this bedroom from Smallbone creates a dramatic effect.
The half-tester canopy and iron bedstead lend a colonial feel to the room, while the Regency miniatures add a touch of extra style.
Sweeping statements
The inspiration for the scheme in this bedroom (left) comes from many sources, but the elements combine in such a way to give it a universal appeal.
Don't be afraid to mix different styles — as long as the overall themes co-ordinate, you'll end up with your own stylish look.
This bedroom in an American home shows how you can successfully mix European and American furnishings.
Soft duck-egg blue walls create a cool Scandinavian feel, echoed in the chairs and painted bureau.
A floral chintz fabric is used at the windows and for the upholstered seat and valance under the white bed linen.
The overall look is comfortable and traditional but with a light, airy quality.
For a good selection of chintz fabrics with floral themes try Warners and G P & J Baker.
And for furniture with a Swedish influence, visit Ikea.
Main picture: Pomander wallpaper WR7536/2, £10.95 per roll; Pomander fabric PR7536/22, 100 per cent cotton, £11.95 per m; Pomander voile, 91 per cent polyester, 9 per cent linen, 150 cm wide, £11.95 per m; Options Collection
1 Cream-painted cupboard with fabric-backed doors, £295; from a selection at John Lewis of Hungerford
2 Verity Stripe CS336630, 100 per cent cotton, 137 cm wide, £21.95
3 Shaker 100 per cent cotton pillowcase, £17.50; double duvet cover, £63; double flat sheet, £39.90; matching towels available
Main picture: Rose Ribbon WF16 monochromatic wallpaper, £15.95 per roll, Floribunda range.
Bedcover and canopy made from Charcoal Wheat Flower handprinted 70 per cent linen, 30 per cent cotton, 126 cm wide, £69 per m.
Bamboo and cream handpainted bedroom.
Bourdon Egyptian percale cotton pillowcase, £12.95 each; double flat sheet, £14.95; double fitted sheet, £30.95
1 The half-tester kit from Swish contains everything you'll need to create this look yourself.
It extends 61 cm and is fixed 214 cm above the bed, takes 21 metres of fabric, and is suitable for double, queen and king-size beds, £39.24
2 Soft, creamy bed linen with embroidery and slotted ribbon detail adds a luxurious touch and complements any colour scheme.
Camelot 65 per cent polyester, 35 per cent cotton pillowcases, £11.99 each; double duvet cover, £59.50; double valance (not shown), £32.50
3 Harvest 100 per cent cotton, 137 cm wide, £21 per m, also available in brown, blue and green on cream
1 Chevalier A1192–01, flame-retardant 100 per cent cotton fabric, 137 cm wide, £23.50 per m
2 Cross Stitch housewife pillowcase, £12.95; double duvet cover, £59.95; double valance, £44.95; cushion cover and pad, £12.95
3 Christina large cushion, £32; Ophelia and Annabel cushions, £28 each; Arabella single bedspread, £115; from a range of hand-embroidered cotton lawn items with handmade lace
If you would like to find out more about any of the items featured here, see our Address Book on page 146
BEST DRESSED
Choose a dressing table to match the style of your bedroom — just take your pick from the wide variety available.
From the ultra modern to the more traditional feminine style, Lorraine Ramsey presents some of the current choices
1 Kidney-shaped dressing table made from MDF, 114 cm by 65 cm by 72 cm, £365 including fabric and glass top; triple mirror, 95 cm by 5 cm by 62 cm, £165.
Fabric from a selection or you can supply your own.
From the Sheredon bedroom range, Ducal
2 Solid oak dressing table, 110 cm by 52 cm by 76 cm, £475; oak mirror, 43 cm by 16 cm, £185; Oak furniture range, Laura Ashley
3 Variations dressing table in light ash, white ash or black.
Made from chipboard with ash veneer, it measures 85 cm by 40 cm by 153 cm; diameter of mirror, 40 cm; £796, designed by Peter May for Ligne Roset
4 Lansdowne dressing table in stained and lacquered pine, 148 cm by 46 cm by 74.5 cm, £449; triple mirror, £149; stool, £109; from the Lansdowne range, Corndell
5 Kidney-shaped dressing table made from melamine-faced chipboard.
A 50 per cent cotton and 50 per cent polyester skirt conceals a useful shelf and additional storage space.
The table measures 99 cm by 50 cm by 75 cm, £299; padded stool, 51 cm by 45.5 cm by 45.5 cm, £99.
Both items are designed to co-ordinate with the Rosamund Bedroom Collection, Marks & Spencer.
Similar dressing table ideas are available from Cover Up Designs
6 This dressing table can be painted to match any fabric or wallpaper of your choice.
This one co-ordinates with Monkwell's Snowdrop fabric.
Made from MDF and available in two sizes; small, 91 cm by 43 cm by 64 cm, £630; large, 124 cm by 43 cm by 74 cm, £700; small swing mirror, 43 cm by 20.5 cm by 46 cm, £137
LAYING DOWN THE FACTS
With more and more types of bed on the market, how do you know which one is best for your needs?
Elizabeth Keevill explains what you should be looking for
Although one bed looks much like another, it's the one piece of furniture not to economise on.
The National Bed Federation suggests the minimum you should spend on a queen-size double bed (150 cm wide) is £400.
For this amount, go for a good quality bed of cheaper construction (such as open springs) rather than a bottom-of-the-range pocket-sprung model.
For real comfort, however, you'll pay at least £800.
If that sounds a lot, bear in mind that over 10 years you're only paying 22p per night.
When you consider that we spend a third of our lives in bed, that hardly seems an extravagance.
If you don't want to spend as much as £400, remember that cheaper beds don't last as long as more upmarket models.
A good quality bed has a lifespan of 10 to 15 years, and so works out cheaper in the long run.
Do you need a new bed?
If you answer yes to even one question, you should seriously think about buying a new bed.
When you take off the mattress — does the base have a saggy surface?
Is the mattress lumpy and saggy?
Have the edges lost their firmness?
When you lie on the bed do you sink into a pit?
Can you feel the springs?
Is it noisy when you turn over?
Do you roll towards the middle?
Shopping around
When you shop for a new bed make sure you try out lots of models.
If you are tired or harassed, any bed will feel comfortable.
Don't be embarrassed about lying on a bed in the shop to try it out, and make sure you test the actual size you want to buy.
Stretch out on your back, with a pillow under your head and check that the natural curves in your spine are being supported.
Slip your hand into the small of your back.
If this is easy to do the bed is probably too hard.
If it's difficult, then the bed may be too soft.
Then turn on to your side.
Do your hips and shoulders feel comfortable, and is your spine straight?
If you're buying a bed for two, take your partner with you when you shop.
This is especially important if one person is much heavier than the other.
Pocket springs can help with differences of up to 4 or 5 stone, or  try a zip and link bed with two different mattresses and bases that fit together to make a double bed.
Buying tips
Always go for a reputable make
Try to buy the biggest bed you have room for
Buy the best bed you can afford
Make sure your hall, stairs and doorways are big enough to manoeuvre the bed through
Hard facts
Remember a soft bed is ideal for a light person, while a heavy person will need something much firmer.
Don't buy a hard bed in the mistaken belief that it is good for you.
If you suffer from back problems you almost certainly don't need a rock-hard bed as it won't support your spine.
Although some doctors may recommend putting a board under the mattress, this should only be done in an emergency.
A board will ruin any bed and cause discomfort at pressure points.
Don't let a shop assistant talk you into buying a so-called ‘orthopaedic’ bed — there is no such thing.
You are simply paying extra for a very firm bed.
To be on the safe side, always ask your doctor's advice before making a final decision.
Mattress matters
Conventional mattresses are divided into interior-sprung and foam models.
The more expensive type of interior-sprung mattress has pocketed springs, where each spring is enclosed in a calico pocket.
It is also the more comfortable type of sprung mattress since each part of you is independently supported.
Open-sprung and continuous-sprung mattresses are the cheaper type and have springs that link together, offering less precise support.
With open and pocket-sprung mattresses, the more springs there are the better (and more expensive) the mattress.
Springs are wrapped in layers of upholstery for comfort and warmth.
It is the gauge of wire used for the springs and the amount and type of this upholstery that governs how firm or soft the bed is.
The upholstery is usually a layer (or mixture) of coir, sisal, curled hair or synthetic material such as polypropylene.
On either side of this comes a layer of varying proportions of wool or cotton felt, curled hair or foam to give the mattress its softness.
Unless you are allergic to them, natural fillings are preferable.
They offer the best insulation and absorbency, though they are the most expensive.
At the very top of the market, Reylon's Woolsack bed has pocket springs upholstered purely with lambswool for extra luxury and softness.
Top quality mattresses are also hand side-stitched — this will look like rows of dimples around the borders to hold the springs firmly in place at the edges and to strengthen the border.
The most usual type of unsprung mattress is the foam one.
Generally, the heavier the mattress, the better the foam.
Cheap foam doesn't last.
Latex foam is a better choice than polyurethane as it's more durable and offers better support.
Latex is also hypoallergenic — it doesn't hold dust and is therefore ideal if you suffer from asthma, hay fever or bronchitis.
It holds its shape very well since it doesn't get broken springs, lumps or bumps.
Go with the flow
Originally developed for use in hospitals, water beds distribute body pressure much more evenly than conventional models.
And as the mattress is made of vinyl, it won't absorb dust or bacteria and can easily be wiped over.
Water beds wear out in a different way from conventional beds.
The vinyl may harden and crack after 10 to 15 years, but until then the bed will be just as comfortable as the day you bought it.
There are three types of water bed: the hard-sided, the soft- sided and the tube.
The hard-sided is the original type in which the vinyl, water-filled mattress is supported by a rigid frame, while the soft-sided type has a sprung or foam surround.
A tube bed has water bags fitted inside a pocket-sprung unit.
If you don't like the idea of being able to feel the water moving, choose a stabilised version.
Some people are also concerned that water beds are too heavy for some floors, but this is practically never the case as the weight of the water is evenly distributed over a large area.
You should expect to pay from about £750 for a good water bed, including installation and filling.
Fact file
Mattresses are designed to be teamed with a specific base.
A mattress used with the wrong base may cause damage to the mattress, be uncomfortable and would invalidate the guarantee.
Sprung bases are the most comfortable and are the only type that can be used with a pocket-sprung mattress.
Sprung-edge bases are the most luxurious, and expensive, as the springs go right up to the edge of the base.
Firm-edge bases have springs inside a wood framework.
This gives better support at the edges but is more likely to cause wear on the mattress.
This type of base is, however, no firmer overall than the sprung-edge type.
Drawer divans are ideal for today's smaller homes.
This type of base tends to feel very firm as there are few or no springs.
Check before you buy that there will be room for the drawers to open.
Continental-style bases with flexible beech-laminated slats are growing in popularity.
These bases can be contained within a conventional-style divan unit, but you must be sure to use the correct mattress — foam is ideal.
The bases have more give and spring than the traditional rigid type and are also adjustable, so you can firm up certain parts of the bed.
And this type of base is also available with head and foot areas that can be raised manually, hydraulically or by motor.
If you have an antique bedstead, you can use it with a good quality mattress provided you have a special drop-in base made for it.
These ‘well-bed bases’ are fully sprung and are made to order.
Side view of open-coil springs, assembled and ready to go into a mattress
A sprung-edge base has springs right up to the edges, giving greater comfort and causing less wear on the mattress
Open-sprung mattresses are often used in combination with firm-edge divan bases, consisting of springs contained within a wooden frame
Pocket springs are enclosed in calico pockets which are then clipped together, giving more precise support than open-coil springs
Above: Vi-Spring mattresses are upholstered using natural materials such as lambswool, curled hair and fire-resistant cotton felt
Right: Vi-Spring will custom-make any of its bed bases to fit existing bedsteads, adding blocks underneath so that the divan fits snugly and securely on to the frame.
Shown here is the Regal Supreme, supplied complete with a pocket-sprung mattress to bring modern comfort to antique furniture.
Bed linen from the Kyoto range by Dorma
Choosing a bed is such an important decision that you should be prepared to take your time, seek expert advice and try out as many models as possible
Dunlopillo makes its foam mattresses from natural latex.
The holes in the foam allow air to circulate and the dust-free properties of the material make it ideal for allergy sufferers
Dunlopillo's Kontur slatted bed bases are adjustable.
Prices range from £1,500 to about £4,000 for the fully automatic version, with adjustable sections
COVER VERSIONS
Give your bed a new lease of life with one of today's range of attractive bedspreads.
Julie London selects her favourites
1 Moti-rib 100 per cent cotton bedspread in Brick colourway.
Single, 183 cm by 274 cm, £14.90; double, 229 cm by 274 cm, £18.40; king size, 290 cm by 305 cm, £25.60; also in Conifer, Smoke Blue and Burnt Sienna; Nice Irma's
2 Pansky 100 per cent cotton waffle bedcover.
3 Tile 100 per cent cotton silk-screen printed bedcover.
two other designs available
4 Ivory lace bedcover, 90 per cent cotton, 10 per cent polyester.
5 Black and tan double bedcover, 50 per cent wool, 50 per cent silk
6 Moti-rib 100 per cent cotton bedcover in Conifer colourway.  also in Smoke Blue, Burnt Sienna and Brick
7 Blue and white hand-stitched double bedcover
8 Colonial Pastel patchwork quilt patterned with rosebuds and pansies, 100 per cent cotton.
9 Blue Diamond 100 per cent cotton patchwork quilt
10 Irish Rose 100 per cent cotton crocheted bedcover.
also in Ecru
11 Jacobean crewelwork cotton bedcover with wool embroidery.
one of five designs
Wall: Painted in Cotton J1–80 vinyl matt emulsion, £13.99 per 2.5 ltr Shelf: Pine shelf, 89 cm by 21 cm by 2 cm.
Painted in Cotton J1–80 eggshell, £7.50 per ltr Accessories: Straight chair, £189, The Shaker Shop.
Senior dry iron, £18.99, Morphy Richards.
Peg basket, £3.55, from a selection, Nice Irma's.
Britannia Victorian airer, £19.50, Acorn
NIGHT THOUGHTS
Add a touch of class and elegance to your bedroom with our stylish accessories.
Elizabeth Keevill shows how
1 This pretty bone china vase is ideal for displaying flowers on your dressing table or by your bed.
Victoria 13 cm base, £7.99
2 A traditional jug and bowl set is the essential accessory for a Victorian-style bedroom.
Jug and bowl set, £89
3 Give your tissue box a new look with this decorated wooden cover.
Box cover, £34.50
4 These charming lace cushions will introduce a soft romantic touch to any room.
Handmade lace Sacha cushions, 100 per cent cushions, 100 per cent cotton, small, £18; medium, £22; large, £36; pads extra
5 Coloured cotton wool balls look pretty in this 1930s-style glass jar.
Cotton wool ball holder, from £9.99
6 This water carafe is designed so the tumbler fits neatly on the top to form the lid.
Handmade lead crystal water carafe and tumbler, £15
7 This cream-coloured linen basket with pale blue stripes is made from plasticised cane.
The smooth finish means clothes are less likely to snag than on ordinary basketwork.
Linen basket, from a selection at John Lewis
8 If you like traditional furnishings, this colourful freestanding mirror is the perfect accessory.
Floral mirror, from £14.99, the Classics range, Debenhams
9 Wake up the music of your choice with this Cassette Player Alarm that also includes an FM/MW/LW radio.
ICF 6500L cassette radio alarm, £40
10 Delicate pierced china makes the perfect container for fragrant pot pourri.
Leeds Creamware plate, £16.50; cherry basket, £26.75.
Meridian loose pot pourri, £1.65 per scoop.
11 To keep delicate clothes in shape and smelling fragrant, these dainty hangers are just what you need.
Damask padded hangers with lavender bags, £11.50 per pair
An Ideal Home reader offer
FRESH AWAKENINGS
LACE LADY COTTON LINEN TO BRING NEW LIFE TO YOUR BEDROOM
No matter how carefully you've planned your bedroom, no scheme is truly successful without just the right bed linen.
That's why this month we're offering you the chance to provide the perfect finishing touch with this beautiful, fresh-looking linen.
Whatever the colour scheme, whatever the style, these pretty white duvet covers and pillowcases from Lace Lady will fit in like a dream — and make for a good night's sleep.
All the linen is made from 100 per cent cotton and carries the delicate Ophelia design.
The design is carefully stencilled on to the fabric, then embroidered and the pattern cut out by hand to produce bed linen of the very highest quality.
It's also easy to care for as it can be hand or machine washed at 40°C, though we do recommend that you iron it on the reverse side while still damp.
We're offering you a range of different sizes so you can choose exactly what you need.
Don't be disappointed — fill out the order coupon now.
And as with all our offers we guarantee to refund your money if you're not entirely satisfied with your order.
Dunlopillo makes a Continental-style pillow that is available from major stores.
Oxford-style pillowcase (50 cm by 75 cm)
Continental-style pillowcase (66 cm by 66 cm)
Single duvet cover (135 cm by 200 cm)
Double duvet cover (200 cm by 200 cm)
King-sized duvet cover (230 cm by 220 cm)
HOW TO ORDER:
Please complete the coupon in block capitals.
Remittance may be made by Access/Visa, PO or cheque (name and address on back of cheque please), crossed and made payable to Ideal Home Offer.
Send to Ideal Home Lace Lady Bed Linen IH35, Box 50, Harlow, Essex CM17 0DZ.
Only available while stocks last to readers in Great Britain, Channel Islands and the Republic of Ireland where readers could be liable for duty (the prices quoted are Sterling and a conversion to Punt must be made).
Orders are normally dispatched within 28 days.
You will be notified if a longer delay is expected.
Or take advantage of our phone-in services: Access/Visa cardholders may order direct on (0279) 427271.
Offer subject to availability.
Readers' offer enquiries, tel:(0279) 635348.
DECORATIVE EDGE
From delicate fringes on floral curtains to brightly coloured braid on the latest fabrics, Denise Brock has ideas for trimming all your soft furnishings
Give your soft furnishings that special look by adding fringing, braid and piping.
On curtains, cushions, tiebacks, blinds, lampshades and even tablecloths, trimmings can create a tailored look that will give a special finish to enhance any room.
The art of outlining and defining soft furnishings is usually associated with traditional-style interiors, but many brightly coloured modern fabrics can also be given a stylish lift with the wide range of trimmings that are available today.
For short curtains, use braids to edge the sides or sew fringing along the inside edges of full-length curtains to add a touch of grandeur.
Even a valance or pelmet will be given an extra highlight when edged with an attractive fringing or braid.
Choosing trimmings
Here are a few guidelines to choosing trimmings successfully:
Trimmings should be matched to a colour in the design of your fabric.
If you choose the background colour, the effect will probably be subtle.
For a more defined outline, match the trimming with one of the stronger colours in the pattern to provide contrast.
If you're using a plain fabric, try a completely different colour picked from the rest of the decor in your room.
Contrasting trimmings will highlight and define the shape of soft furnishings.
Department stores and fabric shops stock a wide range of trimmings.
However, if you can't find exactly what you want, look for a stockist with sample books so you can order the right colour and style.
Trimmings should complement the fabric in both style and weight.
Deep, thick  fringing could be used with velvet or linen drapes, whereas a delicate edging would suit lighter curtains.
Curtains with fringing can be heavy so choose a sturdy curtain pole.
An aluminium one would be ideal.
The proportions of the trimmings should also be taken into account: don't use a large or deep one on curtains for a small window, for example.
Trimmings can be hand or machine sewn.
Test out a small piece first to check that your choice of thread colour is right and to get the tension correct.
Flat braid usually looks better if hand-sewn as lines of machine sewing may spoil the finished effect.
As you use your trimming, turn the ends under and secure with a pin or stick Sellotape over the cut edges as they fray.
Plain curtains can be decorated lavishly with braid, cord and fringing to make an eyecatching feature
Left: Give homemade cushions a sumptuous, exotic look, with a few metres of piping, cord or fringing
Top left: Navy blue cord, 89p per m.
Scalamandré Saxe Blue double tassel
Bottom left: Victoria fringing, £4.25 per m.
Spitalfields C7637–380 silk taffeta, 140 cm wide, £39 per m
Top right: Flanged rope TR6202/1, £5.25 per m; Chelsea Rose FR6182/921, 45 per cent cotton, 40 per cent viscose, 15 per cent nylon fabric, £21.50 per m
Bottom right: Hellenes 31198/9210 flanged rope £10.50 per m.
Amadeus fabric, 40 per cent modacrylic, 40 per cent viscose, 20 per cent polyester, 140 cm wide, £51 per m
Furniture: Arlington sofa in Kamla Maize fabric
Paint: G3–4D matt vinyl, £15.50 per 2.5 ltr
Braid can easily be attached to a chair with upholstery pins or Copydex to give a decorative edge
Below: A decorative curtain is edged with deep fringing and held in place by tasselled cord
Trimmings: 125 mm bullion fringe, colour 330, £29.03 per m; double tassel tiebacks, colour 3300
Fabric: Asquith R1270–01 fine linen union flame-resistant fabric, 137 cm wide, £31 per m
Curtain pole: Simple Curl forged-iron rail, 122 cm long; tiebacks
Furniture: Painted metal Bow chair
Flooring: Hand-plaited Medieval Matting, £28 per sq m,
Paint: Charcoal 3010–R50B matt vinyl, £15.49 per 2.5 ltr; Misty Morn 1505–Y20R gloss, £8.99 per ltr
Accessories: Forged-iron candlestand.
Cream and terracotta vase; Vert de gris vase; wavy glass bowl
TR6201/4 rope, £4.75 per m
32278/9734 woven braid, D'Albret range, about £10.93 per m
Wall braid, £1.10 per m,
V634/6 braid, £5.25 per m, Scalamandré range
33146/9625 tasselled braid, £16 per m, D'Albret range
Blue/gold 3.75 cm wide silk taffeta ribbon, £14 per m
TR6205/7 cut fringe, £6.25 per m
Dover cord, £2.60 per m
Scroll gimp trimming, £4.45 per m
Dent-De-Rat black braid 31304/9983, about £5 per m
Grosgrain black confetti dots in red, 70p per m
Black and white fringing, £6.82 per m, from the Autumn range, Wendy A Cushing
T01/04 fringe, £3.50 per m
Tomato JM02E–14 block fringe, £6.07 per m
Bright patterned curtains and a plain white blind are linked with matching fringing on the curtain edge and wide braid on the blind.
The braid is simply glued to the blind with Copydex
Trimmings: TW04/08 small fringe on curtain edge, £7.51 per m; T201/08 wide braid on blind, £9.71 per m.
Fabric: Klarbar 8125237 cotton fabric, 150 cm wide, £15.90 per m
Blind: 044 white blind, 107 cm wide by 137 cm drop
Paint: Misty Morn 1505–Y20R matt vinyl, £15.49 per 2.5 ltr
Accessories: Cabbage Leaf bowl; Cabbage Leaf plate; Grapes Jug
Even the simplest tablecloth is elegant if edged with fringing
THE LINDA GILLARD COLUMN
ISLE OF DREAMS
Rising out of crystal clear water, the Scottish island of Iona has a strange calming influence on all who go there.
As I stood on the tufted grass, surrounded by natural beauty, I felt as if I'd come to another world
Sunday morning.
An appropriate time for a visit.
We walk down to the shore in the warm drizzling rain and wait at the quayside.
We are early; there is no boat in sight.
The children grumble and fidget, getting more and more impatient.
I beat down my excitement and wonder, knowing that a place cannot possibly live up to expectations such as mine.
It is an island merely, a place with a history and a beautiful name, but just a place.
The grass will be the same green, the sky will be the same grey.
Or maybe blue…they say it may clear up later, but people say that all the time in Scotland.
You travel, as we have done, to the west coast of Scotland, to Oban, and you catch a ferry to Mull, a large and inhospitable island of mountain and moorland.
You travel south and then west over slow, winding roads to the westernmost tip of Mull, to Fionnphort, a weatherbeaten hamlet perched on the edge of the world, defaced by litter, plastic bottles and dirty nappies, discarded as tourists get on and off the ferries.
Fionnphort absorbs uncomplaining the onslaught of coachloads of tourists and pilgrims, but not today, not yet, for we are early, leaving the tourists in their boarding houses to queue irritably for the bathroom and linger over their bacon.
Wet but not cold, we wait on the quayside for a sighting of the boat.
There is hardly any wind, just a balmy breeze.
I look across to the island, only a mile away, a green landmass rising above the grey, a scattering of houses shrouded in mist.
Suddenly, I see a boat weaving its way between the improbable pink granite rocks and I experience both relief and excitement.
Soon we will be on our way.
The ferry boat is rusty and old, like the ferryman.
We walk up the ramp and stand huddled and silent, bobbing up and down with the swell.
We leave Fionnphort and no-one looks back.
The island looms larger until we sight its famous landmark, the Abbey — grey, formidable, not at all picturesque.
We disembark, walking down the rusting ramp over white cockleshell sand and water so clear it could have come from a tap.
We are hushed, reverent; even the children are subdued.
I register at once that this place is different somehow…then I tell myself I am imagining it.
The devout and those with a full itinerary hurry off to the Abbey as the bell tolls for communion.
Instead, we amble uphill, over rocks covered thinly with turf and heather, along ancient car-less roads, through the  bedraggled ruins of a nunnery.
The grass is long and wet, yellow irises huddle at the foot of a grey Celtic cross.
I gaze up at the cross and listen.
There is nothing to hear, not even a bird.
I am bathed in silence and tranquillity.
Iona takes me prisoner.
Iona.
Iona is older than life itself.
There are no fossils to be found on Iona — it was formed before there was life on Earth, 1,500 million years ago.
Iona is older than Mull, older than mainland Scotland.
I am standing on some of the oldest rock in the world, standing on a tiny island in the Atlantic Ocean, the island where, it is said, in 563 AD St Columba landed with 12 followers bringing Christianity from Ireland to the heathen Picts.
Here, according to legend, lie the remains of 48 Scottish kings (including Duncan and Macbeth), four Irish kings and eight Norwegian kings.
Perhaps they believed Iona was a shortcut to Heaven?
Maybe it is.
The 12th-century Benedictine Abbey has been restored by the Iona Community.
This was founded in 1938 by George MacLeod (now the 95-year-old Very Reverend Lord MacLeod of Fuinary), a Church of Scotland minister who believed that the root of community life was shared work.
He described Iona as ‘a very thin place where only a tissue paper separates the material from the spiritual realm’.
Incredibly, this is still true, even at the tail-end of the cynical and materialist 20th century.
But the preservation of Iona's unique qualities has not been left to chance.
Most of the island is now owned by the National Trust for Scotland.
Only islanders and essential services are allowed to bring vehicles on to Iona.
The trust and the Iona Community have achieved a miraculous compromise — the sacred atmosphere of the island remains virtually untainted by commercialism and yet a resident community thrives here, with a parish church, a school, two hotels, two farms and 18 crofts.
The experience of being on Iona is nothing less than magical and I am moved to tears.
The atmosphere is spiritually and historically highly charged.
Adomnan recalls in his biography of Columba, written a century after the saint's death, that one day the monks became aware of a strange presence in one of their pastures; this experience occurred again at the same time every evening.
One of the monks, describing the presence, said he could ‘perceive the fragrance of such a wonderful odour, as if all the flowers on earth were gathered together in one place; I feel also a glow of heat within me — not at all painful, but most pleasing — and a certain unusual and unexplainable joy poured into my heart, which all of a sudden so refreshes and gladdens me I forget grief and weariness of every kind’.
The other monks all claimed to have shared the same experience.
One of the brothers declared that it was the spirit of Columba returned to comfort them.
The rain stops and the grey skies begin to clear.
My husband and daughter decide to set off up the hill ‘to look for America’.
They intend to cross the island and gaze out over the Atlantic Ocean.
I lag behind with my five-year-old son whose legs are short, whose interest in America is minimal.
We sit on a thoughtfully placed bench with our backs against a hollow in the hillside and look out over the island, back towards Fionnphort, to the beginning of our long journey homeward.
In the silence we hear a cow tearing up grass by the roots and chewing.
I spot a pony and trap running along the coast road and point it out to my son who is interested in such things.
We sit there for half an hour perhaps and log one car, a few walkers, several cows, perhaps a few ghosts.
I listen to the silence and stare into the space and I have a sense of belonging.
Iona has accepted me, welcomed me to her forgiving shores.
She has woven her spell and allowed me to see another world, another life, a life of the spirit.
I am happy.
Or rather I know that happiness waits here for those who know where to look.
I look across to the island, a green landmass rising above the grey, shrouded in mist
LIQUID REFRESHMENTS
A pond makes an interesting and attractive feature in any garden, as well as encouraging wildlife.
We show you how to create and look after your own water garden
GARDENING EDITOR DAVID POPLE
On balmy summer evenings there's nothing more relaxing than the splashing sound of a miniature fountain or waterfall in your own back garden.
And perhaps of all the elements that can be used in a garden, water is the most fascinating.
A pond immediately creates a new environment.
Not only can you enjoy the beauty of pond plants, but you'll find all sorts of wildlife attracted to the water.
A pond doesn't have to be large to be effective — if it's big enough to install a small submersible pump you could even have a fountain.
Your pond only has to be large enough to catch the returning water.
A waterfall is a little more elaborate and involves two pools, one higher than the other.
The lower pool holds the main body of water that is pumped to the top one to return via the fall.
If you have more space, you could create a series of pools with the water falling from one to another until it reaches the lowest in a continual cycle.
The lower pool must, of course, be large enough to contain sufficient water to maintain a good depth when the pump is operating.
As with ordinary gardens, choose  water plants to give colour throughout the season, so those that flower first will gradually be replaced by later flowering ones.
INSTALLING YOUR POND
Creating a pond is quite simple using either a pre-formed rigid plastic pool that you simply sink into the ground, or a flexible plastic sheet to line a hole of the shape required.
Most large garden centres can offer a wide range of pre-formed shapes.
The most important measurement is the depth.
A self-contained pool must have a sufficient volume of water in relation to its surface area if the water is to be kept clean.
Minimum depth for a small pool is 38 cm but 45 cm is better for pools up to about 30 sq m in surface area.
For larger pools, a depth of 60 cm is advisable, even 75 cm for pools above 60 sq m in area.
These depths should also prevent the pond from freezing solid in a cold winter, which would kill any fish.
Site your pond in an open, sunny  place that is well away from trees.
This will reduce the chance of leaves falling in, which would only foul the water as they rot.
ADDING SUPPORT SHELVES
It's a good idea to include some shelves about 23 cm wide and deep around the pool edge to support plants needing shallow water.
Plant these in perforated baskets of soil and lower them carefully into place.
This makes it much easier both to remove the plants when they require attention and to clean out the pool when necessary.
It's also far more effective than planting in a layer of soil on the bottom of the pond.
In addition to ornamental plants, you should include plenty of oxygenators.
These work by absorbing mineral salts from the water and so help in controlling algae for clear water.
The oxygen they produce benefits the fish, and they also provide a source of food and shelter.
Planting can be done during the summer and the oxygenating plants should be given three to four weeks to become established before you introduce any fish.
If you're filling the pond with tap water, allow seven days for any chlorine to disappear before planting.
INTRODUCING FISH
One of the delights of owning a pond is to watch the fish as they move through the water.
Large fish can be expensive to buy, but small fish soon grow if fed and looked after.
Make sure the water the fish arrive in is at the same temperature as the pool before they are released.
Float the transport container in the pool until the water temperatures equalise.
You can work out the number of fish a pond is able to support from the surface area and size of fish.
As a rule, allow 5 cm to 7 cm of fish for every 900 sq cm of water surface.
WILDLIFE
A pond encourages a surprising amount of wildlife.
Birds and hedgehogs come to drink and frogs and newts may arrive to breed.
Many insects are attracted, too, including butterflies and metallic-coloured dragonflies.
Always include a way out of the pond for wildlife at some  point around the edge.
This can take the form of a ramp, or a heap of round boulders set on a shelf and breaking the surface of the water.
TIPS FOR AFTERCARE
Once established, a pool needs very little maintenance compared with the many delights it offers.
In summer, you'll need to top it up with water to cope with any evaporation and fish will need regular feeding.
In autumn, it pays to cover the pool with netting to keep out falling leaves.
And in the winter, make a hole in any ice to prevent the fish from suffocating.
Every two or three years, divide overgrown water plants and replant young portions.
And remove debris in the pond base — both are jobs to do when the weather is warm.
HELPFUL BOOKLETS
Water Gardening from Lotus tells you everything you need to know about building and maintaining your garden pond.
For your own copy send 60p to:The Stapeley Water Gardens shows you everything you need for your pond from basic kits to exotic plants.
For your copy, please send £1 to:
Photography/Jerry Harpur Illustrations/Dick Barnard Co-ordinator/Yvonne McCarthy Photographed at House of Pitmuies, Guthrie, Scotland
Rocks and water in harmony
Bricks will make an attractive edging
Lush ferns and bright flowers
A mirror of water reflects surrounding plants
Water lily leaves provide shade for fish
Even the smallest pond can be effective
Nymphaea odorata Alba has attractive white petals with yellow stamens
Nymphaea James Brydon is fragrant and brings colour to a pond
Iris laevigata Alba grows best when planted in water 5 cm to 10 cm deep
Stone nymphs make an interesting centrepiece
Miniature water lilies float on a tiny pond
Eichhornia crassipes, a floating water hyacinth
Butomus umbellatus (flowering rush) grows to about 1 metre high
Iris pseudacorus (yellow flag) looks best when planted in groups
USING A LINER Dig the shape with sloping sides and some 23 cm-wide side shelves.
The pool edge must be level all round
Remove sharp stones.
Line the floor and sides with damp sand or newspaper.
Check edges with a spirit level
Spread the liner over the hole and weight down the edges.
Fill slowly with water, adjusting corners and sides as the liner is moulded to the hole
When the pool is almost full, trim off surplus liner to leave a 15 cm flap.
Cover it with stones or slabs projecting 5 cm over the pool edge
Where informality is the keynote, a curve-shaped pond is more in keeping but choose a relatively simple outline
PRE-FORMED SHAPE Use a long spirit level on and around the pool to mark an outline of the outer edge on the ground, cutting through any turf with a knife
Dig a hole of the approximate shape, checking depths with a rule.
Tamp the base of the hole firm, and cover with a 5 cm layer of soft builders' sand
Place the pool in position, check the edges are level and make any necessary adjustments to the hole, which should be a little wider than the shape
Fill the pool slowly with water, making good any gaps around it with soil or sand as it fills.
Excessive ramming at this stage could upset the levels
The straight lines of an oblong pool suit a formal garden, where curves can look out of place
Try a more formal effect
A bridge is a grand feature
Just sit and admire the surrounding beauty
Water will always add that special touch to even the smallest garden
NEXT MONTH Using ornaments to create a focal point in your garden
GROWING CONCERNS
HOW TO REVITALISE YOUR POND, KEEP YOUR HEDGES TRIM, PLUS PATIO IDEAS FOR LONG SUMMER DAYS
SOAK AWAY
Trees and shrubs (including conifers and roses) planted in winter and spring are likely to be at risk from drought at the moment.
If the ground is allowed to dry out before newly transferred plants have recovered from the unavoidable root damage, or container-grown ones have developed a strong root system, growth will be severely set back and they may die.
If the soil does become dry, water your plants well to remoisten the earth to at least 30 cm deep.
If you can't use a sprinkler, draw back a little of the top soil to form a ridge just beyond the spread of the branches around each plant — like a saucer.
Pour in plenty of water to flood it and then replace the soil when the water has soaked in.
After watering, cover the area with a thick mulch of composted bark or moist peat.
This will help to prevent surface evaporation and ensure that the roots receive all the moisture they need.
WATER WORK
Now's the time to lift, divide and replant overgrown pond plants that are looking unhealthy.
Take the baskets that hold them out of the pool and allow them to drain for an hour.
Tip the plants out and divide them to get young outer portions for replanting.
Then line the baskets with material, preferably hessian, and refill with fresh soil.
Clayey soil is best.
After replanting the divisions to their natural depth, cover the soil with stones or gravel.
Return the baskets to the pool.
Finally, remember to protect oxygenating plants with wide cylinders or domes of netting for a few weeks to prevent any fish from pulling them up before they're established.
KEEPING NEAT AND TRIM
Privet and other quick-growing hedges will soon need clipping if they're to keep their shape.
Ideally, they should be trimmed to form an A-shape with the sides tapering in slightly towards the top.
This ensures the lower shoots receive plenty of light.
Always use a line as a guide when you cut straight lines so you get a professional finish.
To do this, tie the line between two canes pushed into the hedge at the right height and angle.
Hand shears will give you the neatest finish, but on long hedges an electric trimmer saves time.
Work with the cable behind you and place it over one shoulder to keep it well away from the blades.
PERFECT PAVING
If you aim to make the most of your garden by building a patio, Rocstone has a variety of paving.
These attractive slabs and edgings are produced by Rogers Concrete Ltd which also offers free delivery.
They're available from garden centres and some DIY stores.
As well as paving, Rocstone produces some attractive Victorian-style tiles — perfect for creating an elegant floor in a conservatory, or for adding a touch of class.
Coloured brochures giving full details of all these products are available from  .
THE SOUND OF MUSIC
A great opportunity for a free summer musical evening
From Strauss to Sullivan, William Walton to West Side Story, this summer will bring you the opportunity to listen to these musical greats in beautiful surroundings.
For the third successive year, Baileys Original Irish Cream is sponsoring Baileys SummerStage — a series of 18 concerts in the grounds of some of England's most famous stately homes: Castle Howard, Longleat and Sudeley Castle are a few examples.
Programmes will follow three main themes:Tchaikovsky 1812 ,Last Night of the Proms and Baileys on Broadway — and most events will end in a firework display.
(Venues without fireworks are Killerton and Marble Hill.)
Marble Hill in Richmond, Surrey, is a new venue for Baileys SummerStage and will be the setting for two special events.
On 4 August, the big band sound of Syd Lawrence and his Orchestra will delight fans, and on 11 August the English National Opera will give its first open-air performance of Madam Butterfly.
Ideal Home is offering 15 free pairs of tickets to each concert.
All you have to do is send a postcard, stating your preferred date and venue, to: Baileys SummerStage/Ideal Home Offer, 1 Baldock Street, Ware, Herts SG11 1PX.
The tickets will be given on a first come, first served basis.
Once again, at all the venues, everyone over the age of 18 will be offered a complimentary glass of Baileys Irish Cream.
All ticket prices are from £8 in advance, and £9.50 on the night; Syd Lawrence tickets cost from £8 on the night; and Madam Butterfly at Marble Hill, £10 in advance and £12 on the night.
For further information on the concerts, send an sae to Baileys SummerStage, 11 Blackstock Mews, London N4 2BT.
TRAVEL
THE MAGIC OF OZ
There's only one way to appreciate the sheer size and beauty of Western Australia — see it for yourself.
Robin Dewhurst singles out the main attractions
Western Australia is a country within a country.
You can drive for several days and never leave the state.
It's actually nearer Singapore than Sydney.
And Perth, its capital, is an ideal gateway to both, linking Asia with the rest of Australia.
It's a place that is at once both familiar and foreign.
A combination of homely suburbs and hot sunshine; unblemished beaches and boundless bush; manicured parks and tropical shrubbery.
There's a similar sense of humour and a dissimilar sense of space.
Here's just a selection of some of the attractions on offer.
First stop Perth
The gateway to Western Australia, Perth is a clean-cut, litter-free city where some smaller and older buildings, such as a mock Tudor shopping arcade, are shoehorned into a tight complex of contemporary high rise.
The clarity of light throws everything into sharp relief against a backdrop of clear blue sky.
Perth exudes an atmosphere of space and prosperity.
Trees from every continent turn King's Park into a giant botanical garden.
Wherever you look, water glints and a collage of spinnakers billows over Perth Water.
Take a boat trip upstream along the Swan River through vineyards, stopping off to visit wineries.
Over 20, including Houghton, one of the oldest, produce a range of excellent red and white wines — try some of the refreshing Chardonnays and Sauvignon Blancs.
Downstream lies Freemantle, the seaport with restored colonial-style Victorian buildings.
Splendid beaches, clean and sandy, breast the Indian Ocean for more than 20 miles, all within easy reach of central Perth.
Scarborough is one, another touch of the familiar.
The high heat of mid-summer — from November to April — is tempered by a beneficial wind known locally as ‘The Freemantle Doctor’.
Kalbarri stopover
A laid-back little seaside resort regarded by Perth's residents as being on their doorstep — although it's as far as Aberdeen is from London — Kalbarri has a remote, island feel.
The kind of place where you can quite easily forget the day of the week — unless you want to take in the Friday disco — let alone the time of day.
You swim from a splendid beach, you sunbathe, and you feed the stately and friendly pelicans.
Hotels are simple but adequate, and you can eat the freshest of fish in cheerfully informal, unlicensed restaurants.
Take your own wine or beer and tuck into delicious crayfish, with the sound of the Indian Ocean surf singing in your ears.
Kalbarri is at the mouth of the River Murchison.
Local operators will take you in four-wheel-drive vehicles to explore the near outback, where the river has carved a series of spectacular gorges into a vast, rolling sand plain.
Kununurra — The Final Frontier
Not an obvious holiday choice.
A long way from anywhere — more than 2,000 miles to Perth, nearly 600 to Darwin — Kununurra has all the atmosphere of a frontier town.
It was built only 30 years ago to service the  huge and ambitious Ord River reservoir and irrigation scheme, but it gives a fascinating glimpse into the colossal pioneering effort needed to transform the arid outback into a workable landscape.
The town itself is uneventful but has spawned its own genuine tourist activities.
You can visit Argyle Diamond Mine, the world's biggest, producing 30 million carats-worth a year.
I spent an exhilarating day cruising the River Ord, speeding through spectacular scenery in a high-powered boat.
There are adventure tours into the outback, too.
And Kununurra is also the starting point for one of the world's strangest attractions — Bungle Bungle.
Rock of ages
An astonishing rock formation in the middle of the dead-flat outback, the oddly named Bungle Bungle sandstone massif covers some 100,000 acres of multi-hued beehive-shaped domes, high rocky escarpments and deep gorges.
Around 370 million years old, it was once a tropical sea-bed yet it was only placed on the tourist map nine years ago when a TV crew flew over it by chance.
The resulting film made it an overnight tourist attraction.
To control both commercial development and the number of visitors, the entire area has been turned into the Purnululu National Park.
For its protection of geology, ecology and the cultural protection of Aboriginals, it has won the coveted Tourism for Tomorrow environmental award for 1991.
The most sensational views of the Bungles (as the Aussies like to abbreviate it) are from the air, either on sightseeing flights by light aircraft from Kununurra or by helicopter from within the park itself.
To get to the Bungles in the first place needs a certain pioneering spirit as it involves a seven-hour drive from Kununurra, and the last three are over rough terrain that can be tackled only by four-wheel-drive vehicles.
The climate
Best time to go is our winter, their summer, when temperatures range from around 16°C to 30°C, depending on the month and time of day.
But in the tropical north of the state, the wet season from November to March makes the Bungle Bungle impassable, so itineraries need to be carefully planned.
Getting there
If you've the time, why not combine a visit to Australia with an exotic Far East stopover such as Thailand, Singapore, Malaysia and Bali?
You'll find a wide choice of both schedule and charter flights to Perth — fares range from about £790 to £1,400 — and there are many different types of package available.
There are two specialist tour operators: Austravel, tel: 071–734 7755; and Travelbag, tel:(0420) 88724.
Once there
In Perth, West Beach Lagoon on Scarborough Beach and Tradewinds Hotel are both moderately priced.
For a touch of luxury, stay at the Burswood Island Resort.
In Kalbarri, the local Beach Resort is cheerfully informal.
And the best hotel in Kununurra is the Overland Motor Inn.
For camping tours into the Bungle Bungle, East Kimberley Tours in Kununurra has regular departures.
And Triple J Tours, also in Kununurra, runs boat trips along the River Ord.
For further information, contact the Western Australian Tourist Commission; tel: 071–240 2881.
Perth — the gateway to Western Australia
The mock Tudor buildings of Hay Street Mall, Perth
Carved out by the Murchison River, these spectacular gorges make the Kalbarri National Park a popular tourist attraction
Robin Dewhurst is unable to enter into any correspondence regarding holiday enquiries.
NEXT MONTH The unique scenery and character of Scotland
PACKAGE DEALS
Whether you're staying in a smart hotel or under canvas, make sure you're fully equipped for a relaxing break.
Linda Parker gives her tips on how to pack and what to take, plus details of the latest travel products
It's often said the best way to pack for a holiday is to lay everything out you think you'll need — and then leave half the things behind.
However, some items make useful additions to any holiday suitcase and will make sure you get the trouble-free break you deserve.
Here's our guide to the most essential.
Electrical input
Make yourself a quick cup of tea or coffee with a compact travel kettle.
The Russell Hobbs Travel Jug Kettle, £12.99, and the Philips Travel Duo, £13.99, both include mini cups, coffee filter and cord storage, plus extra room for teabags, coffee and sugar.
An alternative to a kettle is a heating element, which will heat a mug of water in two to three minutes depending on voltage.
A travel iron is useful for keeping up appearances on holiday.
Choose a steam model for extra efficiency.
The Morphy Richard's new Voyager, £11.99, and Philips' World Travel Iron, £14.99, are both compact, light and easy to use.
Be adaptable
If you're travelling abroad, remember to take an adaptor.
You can use appliances that contain a heating element on a lower voltage than that indicated (although they will heat up more slowly).
Items designed for travel use will have a dual-voltage switch and are intended for use with the relevant plug adaptor.
Check with your travel agent or in your holiday brochure about the voltage of the country you're visiting.
The Boots Travel Adaptor for worldwide use is neatly designed and good value at £4.99.
Beauty treatments
You can buy most grooming items in compact travel sizes — look at the Braun and Philips ranges of shavers, hairdryers and hair stylers.
The Braun Independent 2000 Combi GCC50, £18.95, is a very neat, gas-powered hotbrush-curling tong.
(Aviation regulations allow gas-powered curlers to be carried in either hand baggage or main luggage.)
Look out for battery-powered shavers, such as Braun's Pocket de Luxe Traveller, £14.95, the Philips Ladyshave Battery HP2604, £11.95, and, for men, the Philishave Battery HS100, £12.99.
If fully charged, some rechargeable shavers and electric toothbrushes have sufficient power for two weeks.
No bites!
If you're an easy target for mosquitos, invest in an electric mosquito killer.
The Boots Electric Mosquito Killer, £6.25, works by releasing an odour fatal to mosquitos — just plug in the machine and insert a tablet.
One tablet will last for up to 10 hours.
Make sure you take enough tablets — at least one for each night.
A suitable case
If you're about to invest in a new set of cases, bear these points in mind.
Hard-sided suitcases are best for air travel.
Soft-sided cases are more likely to be damaged when they're stacked up to be transported
Choose suitcases with recessed wheels — non-recessed wheels can be knocked off or damage other cases
Trailing straps and long handles can get tangled — shorten them before loading your luggage
Darker colours are more practical and don't show scuffs and marks.
Fix coloured stickers or tape so you can recognise your case instantly
Rigid towing handles are useful — you can push or pull along the case instead of carrying it
Sound and vision
Check that personal stereos, cameras and video cameras will be fully covered by your travel insurance policy in case of loss.
If you're looking for a camera, the Polaroid Impulse, AF, about £60, is perfect for taking instant holiday snaps.
It has an electronic flash and a telescopic viewfinder for accurate picture composition.
The new 600 Plus film packs for all cameras, £8.99 for a pack of 10, include a battery to power all the camera's functions — so as long as a film is loaded, the camera has power.
Packing up
If you take a little time to pack, your luggage should arrive in one piece with crumple-free contents.
Don't overload a case.
If you have to sit on it to close it, it's too full
Make sure locks, zips and catches are in working order
If the case or bag isn't full, add some crunched-up tissue paper to stop the contents moving about inside
Pack items like shoes and coat hangers carefully so that sharp heels and edges don't stick out and cause damage
If you're travelling as a family, pack some clothes for each person in each case.
If one case gets lost, disaster is minimised
Always carry medicines, glasses, contact lens equipment and insurance papers with you in your hand luggage
Staying healthy
If you're at all concerned about the quality of drinking water abroad, the best advice is to avoid it and drink bottled water instead.
However, portable water filters provide another simple alternative.
The Travel Water Filter, £7.99, from Spong Housewares will purify all suspect tap water in a two-stage process.
First, you sterilise the water with one of the purification tablets supplied, then filter it through a carbon filter to produce drinkable water for tea, coffee, cold drinks or just for cleaning your teeth.
The kit, weighing just 12 oz, includes 48 purification tablets and will treat 0.5 ltr of water at a time.
Another method is to use Boots Sterotabs, £1.39 for 48 tablets.
One tablet will purify 1 ltr of water in approximately 10 minutes, leaving it perfectly safe for drinking.
Sterotabs Extra, £3.75 for 30 tablets, are more powerful and one tablet will purify 25 ltr of water in 10 minutes — particularly good for camping holidays when you might be using large plastic water containers.
However, do remember to use these products with tap water only — not stream, pond or river water.
The AccuFilter Water Purifying Straw, £6.99, does allow you to drink any water straight through the straw, which filters up to 98.2 per cent of 151 known harmful chemicals and pollutants that are found in suspect water supplies.
Food hygiene is just as important when on holiday as at home — if not more so.
If you're staying in a self-catering apartment in a hot climate, check the refrigerator works properly and buy and cook food on the same day, if possible.
If you are staying in a caravan or tent and don't have access to a refrigerator, buy food only as you need it.
And don't keep cooked food for more than one day — this should help prevent stomach upsets from ruining your holiday.
Food and drink programme
Unless you are doing your own catering, remember the following points:
Don't have ice in your drinks — it may not be made with purified water
Avoid salads — they may have been prepared using suspect water
Peel all fruit
Avoid shellfish
Be aware that milk and milk products may contain unpasteurised milk
Don't eat food kept warm in display cases
Burn out
Concern about skin cancer and the pain caused by overexposure to the sun are reasons enough to take sensible precautions if sunbathing.
Here are some basic guidelines:
Increase your sunbathing time gradually each day.
Never go out into the sun without using a lotion that screens UVA and UVB rays
Never sunbathe between midday and 2 pm when the sun is strong
Always protect babies' and children's delicate skins with sunblock
Re-apply sunscreen or sunblock liberally and often
Wear sunscreen even if you are sitting under a parasol — the sun's rays can still reach your skin
Keep babies out of the sun and persuade children to wear a sunhat
Sun E45 from Crookes Healthcare is a new range of sunscreen lotions especially made for sensitive skins.
Unlike other brands, it contains only one type of non-irritant sunscreen.
It is also perfume and lanolin free.
Sun E45 costs from about £5.99.
If you do get sunburnt, try using a soothing, cooling product such as Aloe Vera Burn Relief Gel, £2.95, from Nectar Beauty Shops.
Shopping list
The Travel Water Filter by Spong Housewares — for drinkable, pure water
A mini travel kettle and supply of coffee and teabags.
The Russell Hobbs Travel Jug Kettle is efficient
A virtually unbreakable vacuum flask for coffee on the beach — the titanium or stainless steel ones from Thermos will last for ages
Travel Benders from Clairol — for an instant curls to add bounce to sun, sea and sand-damaged hair
Picnic equipment from Lakeland Plastics — stock up on ice- mats, insulated sandwich boxes and bottle bags, picnic cutlery, and cool boxes and bags
An emergency dental treatment kit from Dentanurse UK Ltd (£8.80 including p&p), which includes a sterile needle to fit any syringe in case you need urgent dental treatment
The Mobile Alert, £24.99 from Smith Industries.
This portable burglar alarm will give off a loud shriek when it detects movement — good for unattended tents, caravans or boats, or just for extra security at night
Security checks
Do
Take only one piece of hand luggage to minimise security-check time
Take as few electronic items as possible — security screening will slow you down
Be security conscious — report any unattended luggage you see immediately
Don't
Look after or check in other people's baggage
Leave luggage unattended for even a few seconds
Accept gifts or packages to take with you
Gift wrap presents — they will have to be unwrapped for security or customs
Finally, check with your airline, airport or travel agent regarding check-in times — some airlines are allowing more time for extra security searches
1 Nautical-style duffel bag, £10.99, BhS
2 Footcare, travel kit containing powder, lotion, foot bath and pumice stone, £5.99, Marks & Spencer
3 Travel Jug Kettle, £12.99, Russell Hobbs.
50 Jasmine & Flowers Teabags, £1.25, The Tea House
4 Pocket essentials…virtually unbreakable Shuttle Titan flask, 0.5 ltr capacity, made of titanium, £69.99, Thermos.
Voice-control AB313 travel alarm clock showing world time zones, £21.95; Pocket de Luxe Traveller battery shaver, £14.95; Braun
5 Travel Benders hair shapers, £24.95; 1200 Travel Hairdryer, £10.95; Clairol
6 Everything for the beach…
Islander beach duffel bag, £10.99; Snoopy beach towel, £11.99; Marks & Spencer.
Contour 1-ltr flask in candy pink, £5.99, Thermos.
Miami sunglasses, £16.99, totes
7 Impulse AF camera, about £60, Polaroid
8 Snacpac cutlery set containing knife, fork, spoon, salt and pepper shakers, £3.99 each or £11.99 for pack of four, Lakeland Plastics
1 Back seat car tidy, £6.99, Mothercare.
Flipper beaker, £1.59, Lakeland Plastics.
Sun E45, £5.99
2 Travel Water Filter, £7.99, Spong Housewares.
Drinking straw water filter, £6.99, AccuFilter (mail order available)
3 Sun Bloc in blue and yellow, £2.60; Lip Balm With Sunscreen, £1.75; Nectar Beauty Shops
4 Carrot Plus Sun Protection Gel, Factor 15, £3.95; Aloe Vera Burn Relief Gel, £2.95; Nectar Beauty Shops
5 Lites hand torch, £5.99 including two R14S batteries, Ever Ready
6 Keep sandwiches cool in a Thermo Box, £4.99; Lakeland Plastics.
And for drinks try the Flipper Beaker, £1.59; the Fizzy Lid for keeping unfinished cans fresh and fizzy, £2.99 for pack of two; padded bottle cooler, £6.25; Lakeland Plastics
7 First-aid Trip Kit, £7.49; Sterotabs Extra, £3.75 for 30; Travel Bands wrist bands to prevent travel sickness, £6.50; Boots.
Remoisturising Aftersun Lotion, £5.49, Coppertone
8 Emergency Light (plugs into a car cigarette lighter), £4.99, totes
9 Head for the sun with a red and black suitcase, £18.95; straw sun hat, £7.50; paper parasol, £5.25; cotton scarf, £8.15; straw neck purse, 95p; and embroidered slippers, £7.50; Neal Street East.
Santa Monica sunglasses cut out all UVA and UVB rays, £18.99, from totes.
Island In The Sun tanning oil, £5.99, Marks & Spencer
MOTORING
German car manufacturers are now producing advanced designs at affordable prices.
Peter Cracknell takes the wheel behind BMW's 518i and Mercedes' 190E 1.8
Declining car sales in the UK last year did little to dent the popularity of German car manufacturers over here.
In fact, only Porsche fared worse than average, while Mercedes and BMW actually increased their market share.
This month's test cars — the BMW 518i and the Mercedes Benz 190E 1.8 — are the latest variations of popular model ranges.
BMW's new 3-series, not available at the time of writing, will be a close match for the Mercedes 190.
We shall be looking at that range in a future issue.
Insider information
As the longer the two cars, the BMW has more room in the back.
However, despite its steering reach adjustment, drivers who like lots of space may feel a bit cramped.
In the Mercedes, tall drivers can really stretch their legs but, not surprisingly, those behind will suffer accordingly.
And rear seat headroom could also be a problem in the more compact Mercedes.
The boot in both cars is well proportioned.
The 518 naturally has the larger, squarer boot (16 cubic feet).
Measuring 14.5 cubic feet, the boot in the Mercedes is very wide (up to 58 inches) but considerably shorter and the sill height of around 31 inches could make it awkward to load heavy cases.
Put to the test
The sheer quality of the engineering in these models is evident from the moment you get in the car.
Noise levels are exceptionally low for engines that are, after all, fairly small for powering such cars.
On the motorway, the engine noise is no more than a soft hum.
Both cars have 1,800 cc fuel-injected catalyst-equipped engines.
The BMW is marginally more powerful, but the car is, of course, heavier.
And in both cars passengers will get a firm comfortable ride.
The Mercedes is particularly smooth.
Extra value
In the past, German cars have had a reputation for sparse levels of equipment, but this is gradually changing.
Power steering, driver's seat-height adjustment, central locking, internally adjustable mirrors and a first-aid kit are all now standard on these cars.
On the BMW the list of options is huge: there are 27 special features ranging from map-reading lamps (£53) to air conditioning (£1,504).
The Mercedes was equipped with an electric sunroof, automatic transmission, anti-lock brakes and a few more extras that swelled the price by over £4,000.
Electric windows are a £779 option on the Mercedes, but are a standard feature of the 518.
One piece of equipment I really liked on the Mercedes was the wiper system — a single arm that dips in the middle of its strokes to maximise its sweep.
Money talk
Leaving aside the cost of options, which tends to be high, both these cars offer excellent value.
Although the size variation puts them in slightly different markets, they are practical family cars that are easy to drive and fun, too.
Fuel consumption is good, especially from the larger BMW that's said to cost about half as much to run as the old 5-series.
In the UK, more than one in 30 new cars is now either a BMW or a Mercedes.
If you get behind the wheel of one of these, you'll know why.
The BMW is marginally more powerful
Mercedes has built on its reputation for quality and safety
EXTRAS
How do instructors choose their cars?
Plus a look at the Mobility Roadshow and tips on passing your driving test first time
Taking the wheel
Have you ever wondered how driving instructors assess the most suitable car for their pupils to drive?
Some help is given at the Driving Instructors' Association test day, where approved instructors can road test vehicles brought along by manufacturers and importers.
Learner drivers are often frustrated at the long wait for driving tests.
Shown below is an orderly queue of some of the hundreds of instructors awaiting their turn to take the wheel of Ford's Fiesta.
On the road
For more than a quarter of a million motorists, choosing a car can be an especially frustrating experience.
The reason is that the opportunities for disabled drivers to test specially-adapted vehicles are limited.
However, every two years help is at hand.
Following the huge popularity of previous events, the fifth Mobility Roadshow will be held this year at the same venue on 21 to 23 June.
Motorists with any disability can go along to the Transport and Road Research Laboratory (TRRL) at Crowthorne in Berkshire, to look at and test drive the latest production cars and see the widest range of adaptations for disabled drivers anywhere in the UK.
Parking and entry to the show are free.
Seven miles southeast of Reading, Crowthorne is easily accessible by rail or road; the TRRL will be well signposted and is situated midway between junction 10 on the M4 and junction 4 on the M3.
First time round
The British School of Motoring's Pass Your Driving Test First Time!has been designed as a supplement to traditional driving instruction.
The book explains in detail the 20 key points examined in the test.
A series of quiz questions at the end indicates whether you have absorbed all the information and whether you need more practice at the Highway Code.
From BSM branches and bookshops, price £6.95.
London shopping
With quality as our watchword, we present our regular round-up of the best buys in and around the capital
SET THE SCENE FOR SUMMER WITH A NEW, FRESH LOOK FOR YOUR GARDEN.
BARBARA CHANDLER DIGS DEEP TO FIND THE EXPERTS YOU'LL NEED
Exhibition news
The Avant Garden is an exciting exhibition mounted by the Oxford Gallery at the Barbican from 16 May to 16 June.
The sculpture court and magnificent conservatory provide an attractive setting for the works of over 50 artists and craftworkers.
Their work ranges from major pieces of sculpture to some exquisitely designed watering cans.
Consult the professionals
Whether you want a pretty window box, a garden pond, patio paving, a special trellis, outdoor lighting, or a full landscape service — London has an expert for every job.
The landscape gardening, design and construction skills of Mark Harrison and David Milanes are in great demand — particularly for country houses with large gardens within 100 miles of London.
Planting proposals cost from £300.
Aspen,
A wide range of landscaping services is on offer here, including garden maintenance.
The company specialises in York paving and architectural trelliswork.
Please telephone for a friendly discussion.
Christopher Powell, Growing Concern,
Charles and Susan Held will design, construct and maintain: they specialise in small town gardens and use traditional materials, such as York stone bricks, granite setts and cobbles to create authentic designs.
‘We can transform even the most neglected and  overgrown backyard,’ says Charles Held.
There's also a seasonal planting service for window boxes, hanging baskets and tubs.
Patios, Pots & Pergolas,
An expert team of 20 that includes landscape designers, will plan, construct and maintain your roof gardens, window boxes, patios and larger sites.
‘We're a complete landscaping package,’ says group director Miles Couchman.
The company operates within the M25 area.
Asprey Chapman Landscapes  
Anthony de Grey is an enthusiastic and skilled garden designer offering a complete landscape service.
This includes both the design and installation of architectural trellis, gazebos, seats and any other garden furniture.
Wooden planters can be made to order.
Clients can see samples of all the materials and many of Anthony's exclusive products at his small garden centre.
Anthony de Grey Trellises  
George Giangrande and his partners, Sarah Wood and landscape architect Richard Lemmon, have many years' garden design and construction experience.
After joining forces in 1983, they now carry out jobs all over London and the Southeast.
‘Our designers are highly experienced and very professional,’ George explains, ‘and we employ skilled craftsmen who put our ideas into practice.’
Services include paving, planting, turfing and woodwork, and the company specialises in York stone and brick paving.
Wood Giangrande  
Custom-built designer trellises, for panels, screens, pergolas, arches and benches are the speciality at The Trellis Shop.
‘We deal with anything in timber,’ claims designer/director Paul Sale, who has recently opened a new factory.
He offers a service all over London and the Southeast.
There's a well-illustrated brochure full of ideas, including standard items at attractive prices.
The Trellis Shop  
Exterior and interior pools and ponds to large lakes are the speciality of Roy Hathway — from design, construction and waterscaping.
He also specialises in patios, rockeries and roof gardens.
Insideout Plant & Aquatic Display  
This is a telephone ordering service for planted boxes, tubs and hanging baskets.
You can have an instant garden for a windowsill, balcony, roof terrace, or even your doorstep.
The company will also fill your existing baskets and containers with flowers of your choice.
Battersea Boxes;(24–hour answering service).
The small professional garden design team offers an  attractive range, called Tropical Shades, to keep you cool during the summer months.
It includes handmade umbrellas with bamboo poles and struts, and handpainted weatherproof cotton canopies.
Sizes range from 2 to 5 metres, and items are available in six different colours and six patterns.
Prices start at £119.
Boswell Roberts Gardens,
Jude Moraes, horticulturist and garden expert, started her company back in 1979 ‘with a bicycle and a pair of secateurs’.
Now her team offers a design service for private gardens or public spaces — tailored carefully to suit the needs of both client and site.
‘We each have our own skills,’ she says, ‘although all of the team are excellent gardeners.
Some specialise in the hard stuff like paving, fencing and ponds; others deal with soft landscape — that's the plants and the soil.
‘We all think maintenance is as important as landscaping, and enjoy looking after the gardens we have made,’ she adds.
The company also offers an invaluable planning and advice service for people who would rather undertake to do the work themselves.
Moraes & Hansen  
Barralets offers a design and build service for all landscape requirements.
These include making up boxes and tubs, and suggesting suitable garden planting plans.
From a busy garden centre, the company supplies roses, shrubs, trees and bedding plants, all at competitive prices.
Also on sale are seeds, chemicals, compost, fencing and Branson wooden garden furniture.
Barralets of Ealing Ltd  
This company offers a service for designing and installing garden lighting.
There's a 500 square foot showroom displaying the very latest lighting products for external use and they include wallmounted, garden and underwater lights.
Outdoor Lighting Supplies  
‘Friendly, imaginative, discreet and dependable’, that's the claim from Townhouse Gardens.
The company landscapes and maintains all types of garden.
It can supply and lay paving, and will clean stonework.
It will also supply and erect fencing and trellis, and design and construct a new garden on an old site.
There's also a maintenance service available.
Townhouse Gardens,
Chelsea beauts
The Chelsea Gardener is perhaps the most sophisticated and design-conscious garden centre in town, where all the plants have been displayed in locations that suit their growing needs.
There are masses of tubs and boxes,(including hand-thrown pots from Whichford Pottery in Gloucestershire), and an unusually good selection of garden furniture.
There's also a wide range of statues, urns, fountains and sundials in stone, cast iron, lead or bronze.
There's a varied selection of baskets, made from Suffolk osiers to African banana leaves.
All this is next to Chelsea Farmers' Market, with its speciality shops and cafés.
World class
World's End Nurseries is situated in the heart of Chelsea in an acre of landscaped garden.
Founder James Lotery and his team have collected a vast selection of plants for outside and in.
There is also a complete gardening service for roof gardens and patios.
A special attraction is the tropical greenhouse, with its forest of Kentia palms.
World's End Nurseries, 441/457 King's Road, SW10 0LR; tel: 071–351 3343.
Open: Mon to Sat 9 am to 6.30 pm.
Sun 10 am to 5 pm.
Tube: Sloane Square.
Buses: 11, 22, 31.
Parking: Side streets.
Personal touch
Loved by many generations of Kensington gardeners, Rassells is the place for quality plants for the garden, window boxes and tubs.
It's a specialist importer of Italian terracotta urns and troughs, with 60 designs ranging in price from £12 to £200.
There's a wide selection of other garden merchandise, backed by friendly and personal service.
Breaking new ground
Claiming to have everything for the town gardener, the Camden Garden Centre's profits provide horticultural training for young people.
There's also a wide selection of plants and pots from plastic and terracotta to glazed Malay.
High life
Breathe the bracing hill-top air at The Garden Centre at Alexandra Palace.
There's a huge shop and covered area, planteria, café, children's play area, toilet facilities and disabled access.
You can benefit from expert consultations, backed up by a landscape design service.
Growing project
Fulham Palace Garden Centre was created from a derelict site by a group of previously unemployed people, under the direction of expert staff.
Any profit the centre makes goes back into the charity that runs the project.
Customers can benefit from expert advice given by friendly staff, plus there is a super selection of plants and high-quality furniture.
Window boxes and terrace pots can be designed and planted.
Local deliveries are free.
Complete service
London's Little Venice makes a charming setting for Clifton Nurseries, which offers a splendid range of quality plants, containers, furniture and garden sundries.
Antiques and statuary are a special feature.
Qualified designers provide a planning service, and there's a full installation and maintenance team.
Above: Adirondack bench and chairs by Julienne Dolphin- Wilding on show at the Oxford Gallery
Right: Momji garden lantern by Kate Mellor
Below: Terracotta fountain by Stephen Dixon, on show at the Oxford Gallery
Mentions should not be taken as recommendations.
Please check prices before ordering or making a special journey.
Reproduction of photographs/illustrations is prohibited.
Hanging baskets flow with colour
Arbour seat by Anthony de Grey
A plant and aquatic display by Insideout
Trellis-backed trough and Rainbow Gate from Trellisworks, at The Trellis Shop
Tropical Shades from Boswell Roberts Gardens
Garden design by Moraes & Hansen
Path and step lights, Outdoor Lighting Supplies
Reproduction Florentine urn and Neopolitan fountain, The Chelsea Gardener
 Terracotta urn from Rassells
The Garden Centre at Alexandra Palace
NEXT MONTH Give your furniture a new lease of life with the help of the capital's expert repairers, restorers and re- upholsterers
IDEAL HOME READER SERVICES
FOR WHEN YOU NEED EXPERT PLANNING ADVICE
IDEAL HOME — HELPING YOU GET IT RIGHT
UNITS OF CURRENCY
Paula Lockey takes a look at what's new in kitchens
Deep reds, blues and greens may catch our attention when flicking through a kitchen brochure, but few of us actually choose to live with such bold colours.
When investing in a new kitchen, most people still go for easy-on-the-eye neutral shades, pure whites and sophisticated greys.
Natural wood is always popular, and many companies are responding to this continued demand by introducing new woods like beech, birch and cherry to their ranges.
Here we show a selection of the latest kitchen designs.
Below: Edora light birch kitchen by Gruco
Price guide: 60-cm-wide base unit, £280
Birch is a sustainable and fast-growing timber from northern Europe, but it is rarely used for fine furniture because of the skill required to convert the logs.
Here, it is used in panels on the cupboards for an attractive effect.
Also available in grey
Right: Handpainted kitchen range by Wilson & Glick
Price guide: 50-cm-wide base unit, £295
Handpainted cupboards have traditionally been restricted to the top end of the market, but this range comes in flat-pack format at more affordable prices.
The delicate effect is enhanced by lots of fine detail, as shown in this ornate dresser arrangement.
Also available in aqua, peach, cream or blue.
Left: Dales Oak kitchen by Magnet
Price guide: 60-cm-wide drawerline base unit, £273
Oak has been given a rich honey-toned stain for a kitchen with a cosy farmhouse feel.
The curved lines of the cathedral- style doors, open display shelves, a panelled extractor canopy and fretwork detail add interest to the straight runs of units
Right: Elba from the Spectra range by Alno
Price guide: 60-cm-wide base unit with drawer, £155
Proof that a wood kitchen doesn't always need to have a country cottage style.
Simulated beech and black oak combine to produce a thoroughly modern look
Below right: Natural oak range by Newcastle Furniture Company
Price guide: Arrangement as shown, about £8,050, excluding appliances
The uniform grain of oak is perfect for this unpretentious kitchen, inspired by the simple and practical designs of the Shakers.
The peg rail used for hanging mugs is a typical Shaker- style feature
Below: Custom-built cupboards in ash and cherrywood by Whitton Wood Designs
Price guide: About £5,000 for the arrangement shown
Whitton Wood Designs will build any style of kitchen using any wood you choose.
Here, an unusual combination of ash and cherrywood has been used to superb effect.
The solid granite worksurface provides colour and textural contrast
Left: Prado kitchen by Nobilia
Price guide: 60-cm-wide base unit with drawer, £187
Natural wood can look stunning when contrasted with smooth laminates.
The anthracite finish on these cupboard doors could look rather cold and stark on its own but is lifted by the warm beech trim
Above: Form 2000 RP30 range by Poggenpohl
Price guide: 60-cm-wide drawerline base unit, £609
Glowing cherrywood and brown-tinted glass are a sleek combination in this kitchen.
The finely moulded doors are finished with brass knob handles to complement the warmth of the wood
Below: Miami from the 5 Star range by Geba
Price guide: 60-cm-wide base unit, £391
This gleaming white kitchen has high-gloss lacquered units finished with brass rails and handles.
Deep drawers underneath the hob are an attractive feature as well as providing useful storage space
Above: The Nevada kitchen range by Magnet
Price guide: 60-cm-wide drawerline base unit, £161
These units come in beiges, greys and light plums.
The open- ended display shelves are in clean white
Right: The Modern art range by allmilmö
Price guide: Matt white 60-cm-wide base unit, £355
Matt white units and chrome tripod supports give this kitchen a hi-tech look.
Plinth heights can be varied to allow flexibility of design, as seen here where the dishwasher has been raised to a more comfortable height.
The high-gloss blue around the cooker is used for dramatic impact
Below: The Catania range with Trapeze sink unit by Leicht
Price guide: 60-cm-wide base unit in white, £492; Trapeze sink unit, £3,897
Elegant glossy white units are interspersed with slimline cupboards in light ash.
The Trapeze peninsular sink unit with Corian top echoes the shape of the angled units and is supported by an unusual chrome ‘leg’
Above: Ibiza from the Spectra range by Alno
Price guide: 60-cm-wide base unit with drawer, £236
A monochrome effect is created by combining pale Champagne units with black and polished metal.
Also available in Crystal White or Pastel Mint
NATURE'S BEST
USE THE FRESH FLAVOURS OF VEGETABLES TO CREATE ADVENTUROUS, NUTRITIOUS MEALS.
WE PICK SOME OF THE MORE UNUSUAL VARIETIES FOR OUR SELECTION OF TEMPTING DISHES
COOKERY EDITOR NORMA MILLER
Supermarkets and good greengrocers are now stocking an increasingly wide range of interesting vegetables.
Alongside the old British traditionals of cabbage, carrots and potatoes, you'll now find such things as okra, celeriac, eddoe, squash and salsify.
And you can use these more unusual varieties to cook up some tasty and nourishing dishes.
Try potato nests filled with okra, filo pastry filled with eddoes and mushrooms, and turkey and celeriac in a rich, creamy sauce.
They may be different but you won't be disappointed.
For a quick-reference guide to the vegetables used here, see Cookery Plus on page 142.
BAKED ARTICHOKES
Globe artichokes look particularly attractive filled with this bacon and pepper stuffing.
Serves 4
Preparation time: 20 min
Cooking time: 40 to 45 min
Oven setting: 190°C, 375°F, Gas 5
225 g (8 oz) smoked bacon
1 large onion, chopped
Oil if necessary
125 g (4 oz) brown breadcrumbs
1 red pepper, diced
3 tbsp chopped parsley
Salt and pepper
4 globe artichokes
300 ml (½ pt) chicken stock
2 tbsp lemon juice
Melted butter to serve
1
Remove rind and finely chop the bacon.
2
Put into a hot pan and cook until the fat runs out.
Remove the bacon.
3
Cook the chopped onion in the bacon fat, adding a little oil if necessary.
4
Mix together the bacon, onion, breadcrumbs, diced pepper, chopped parsley and seasoning.
5
Trim the base of the artichokes and remove any tough outer leaves.
Use scissors to trim the remaining leaves.
6
Starting at the base, press a little of the filling between the leaves.
7
Stand the stuffed artichokes in an ovenproof dish.
Pour over the stock and lemon juice.
Cover with foil and bake in a pre-heated oven for 30 to 40 min or until tender.
8
Serve with melted butter.
OKRA-FILLED POTATO NESTS
Okra, or ladies' finger, tastes delicious served with chopped tomatoes on golden potato nests.
900 g (2 lb) peeled potatoes
50 g (2 oz) butter
1 egg, size 3
Salt and pepper
2 tbsp chopped parsley
275 g (10 oz) okra
1 tbsp olive oil
2 spring onions, chopped
1 clove garlic, crushed
6 tomatoes, skinned and chopped
1 egg white, size 3, beaten
1 tbsp lemon juice
225 g (8 oz) shelled prawns, thawed if frozen
Lemon slices and parsley sprigs to garnish
1
Roughly chop the potatoes and cook in boiling salted water for 10 to 15 min or until soft.
2
Drain the potatoes, return to the pan and add the butter, egg and seasoning to taste.
Mash until smooth and stir in the chopped parsley.
3
Put the potato mixture into a piping bag fitted with a large star nozzle and pipe 6 nests on to a greased baking sheet.
Alternatively, use two spoons to shape the mixture into nest shapes.
4
Trim the ends of the okra.
Cut them in half if large.
5
Heat the olive oil in a pan and add the okra, chopped spring onions and crushed clove of garlic.
Sauté for a few minutes.
6
Add the skinned and chopped tomatoes and cook for a further 10 min.
7
Bake the potato nests in a pre-heated oven for 15 min.
Brush with the beaten egg white and bake for a further 5 to 10 min until they're crisp and golden.
8
Stir the lemon juice and prawns into the okra and tomato mixture and cook for 5 min.
9
Spoon the filling into the potato nests.
Garnish with lemon slices and sprigs of parsley.
SALSIFY AND ASPARAGUS STICKS
Often referred to as the oyster plant because of its taste, salsify can be eaten raw in salads or cooked.
2 eggs, size 3
275 g (10 oz) salsify
225 g (8 oz) green asparagus
4 tbsp olive oil
1 tbsp white wine vinegar
¼ tsp mustard powder
Salt and pepper
3 shallots
Chopped parsley to garnish
1
Hard boil the eggs.
2
Peel the salsify and trim the asparagus.
Cut the salsify to the same size as the asparagus.
3
Cook the vegetables in boiling salted water until tender.
4
In a small bowl, whisk together the olive oil, white wine vinegar, mustard powder and seasoning.
5
Drain the cooked vegetables and put into a shallow dish.
Leave to cool.
6
Chop the shallots very finely and arrange around the edge of four serving plates.
7
Put the salsify and asparagus in the centre of the plate and pour over the dressing.
8
Finely chop the hard-boiled eggs and spoon over the vegetables.
Sprinkle on the chopped parsley.
TURKEY AND CELERIAC DAUPHINOISE
A variety of celery with a large edible root, celeriac makes a delicious main meal when combined with turkey and courgettes in a rich creamy sauce.
700 g (1½ lb) celeriac
2 tbsp lemon juice
450 g (1 lb) turkey breast
50 g (2 oz) plain flour
2 tbsp oil
350 g (12 oz) courgettes
150 ml (¼ pt) single cream
25 g (1 oz) butter
150 ml (¼ pt) milk
1 tbsp chopped sage
Salt and pepper
Sage leaves to garnish
1
Scrub the celeriac and peel off the skin.
Thinly slice and drop into a bowl of water and lemon juice to prevent discoloration.
2
Cut the turkey into strips and coat with flour.
3
Heat the oil in a large pan and cook the pieces of turkey until golden on both sides.
4
Cook the slices of celeriac in boiling salted water for 8 min and drain.
5
Coarsely grate the courgettes.
6
Layer the celeriac slices, turkey strips and grated courgettes in a buttered ovenproof dish.
Finish with a layer of celeriac.
7
Heat together the cream, butter, milk, chopped sage and seasoning.
8
Pour over the celeriac and cook for 50 min.
Garnish with sage leaves.
BEEF AND ARTICHOKE SALAD
Jerusalem artichokes look rather like knobbly potatoes.
They have a distinctive nut-like flavour and make ideal salad ingredients.
350 g (12 oz) Jerusalem artichokes
4 tbsp olive oil
2 tbsp walnut oil
2 tbsp red wine vinegar
Salt and pepper
350 g (12 oz) rump steak
Oil for brushing
175 g (6 oz) spinach or cos lettuce leaves
175 g (6 oz) green grapes
Orange segments to garnish
50 g (2 oz) toasted almonds
1
Scrub the Jerusalem artichokes with a nail brush to remove as much soil as possible.
2
Cook in boiling salted water until tender, about 12 min.
3
Drain, and if you wish, peel off the skin while the artichokes are still warm.
4
Mix together the olive oil, walnut oil, red wine vinegar and seasoning.
5
Brush the steak with a little oil and season on both sides.
Cook under a hot grill.
6
Finely shred the spinach or cos lettuce leaves.
7
Halve the grapes and remove the pips.
8
Thinly slice the artichokes and the steak.
9
Toss together the shredded leaves, grapes, sliced artichoke, steak and the dressing.
Garnish with orange segments and toasted almonds.
EDDOE AND MUSHROOM TRIANGLES
Sheets of filo pastry are filled with an exciting mix of diced eddoe and mushrooms flavoured with soy sauce.
(Eddoes are now available from most supermarkets.)
350 g (12 oz) eddoes
2 tbsp oil
75 g (3 oz) cabbage, shredded
4 spring onions, shredded
225 g (8 oz) brown mushrooms, chopped
75 g (3 oz) bean sprouts 
1 clove garlic, crushed
2 tbsp soy sauce
Salt and pepper
50 g (2 oz) butter
9 sheets filo pastry
DIP
1 tsp mustard powder
2 tbsp soy sauce
2 tsp grated ginger
Salt and pepper
Spring onions to garnish
1
Scrub, peel and dice the eddoes.
Cook in boiling salted water for 10 min, or until tender.
Drain.
2
Heat the oil in a large pan and fry the shredded cabbage and spring onions, chopped mushrooms and eddoes for 1 min.
3
Remove from the heat.
Stir in the bean sprouts, garlic, soy sauce and seasoning.
4
Melt the butter and cut the filo pastry into 10 cm (4 in) strips.
Brush each strip of pastry with a little melted butter and then sandwich together in threes.
5
Put some of the filling in a corner of each pastry strip.
Fold over at right angles to form a triangle.
Continue folding like this along the pastry.
6
Repeat with the remaining pastry and filling.
Lift the triangles on to a baking sheet.
Brush with the remaining butter and bake in a pre-heated oven for 20 min.
7
Blend the mustard powder with 1 tbsp hot water.
Stir in the soy sauce, ginger and seasoning.
8
Serve the hot triangles with the mustard dip and garnish with spring onions.
SUMMER SQUASH
Squash comes in a variety of shapes, colours and sizes throughout the year.
Remember to increase the cooking time if you use one large squash.
4 squashes, each about 275 g (10 oz)
1 tbsp vegetable oil
1 large onion, chopped
350 g (12 oz) minced lamb
1 clove garlic, crushed
2 tbsp tomato juice
150 ml (¼ pt) lamb or chicken stock
½ tsp ground coriander
Salt and pepper
50 g (2 oz) Red Leicester cheese, grated
25 g (1 oz) brown breadcrumbs
1
Cook the squash in boiling, salted water for 20 min or until tender.
2
Heat the oil in a saucepan and cook the onion, minced lamb and garlic for 5 min.
3
Stir in the tomato purée, stock, ground coriander and seasoning.
Bring to the boil and simmer for 15 min.
4
Slice the top off each cooked squash.
Scoop out the seeds and discard.
5
Cut out the flesh leaving a thin border.
Finely chop and stir into the meat mixture.
6
Divide the filling between the squashes and sprinkle over the grated cheese and brown breadcrumbs.
7
Bake in a pre-heated oven for 20 min and serve with a green salad.
KOHLRABI SALAD
Serve curried ham and kohlrabi salad in crisp, crunchy poppadoms for a quick and tasty meal.
(Kohlrabi is widely available from most leading supermarkets.)
Oil for frying
1 onion, finely chopped
1 clove garlic, crushed
2 tsp curry powder
300 ml (½ pt) mayonnaise
2 tbsp lemon juice
Salt and pepper
350 g (12 oz) kohlrabi
2 red peppers
6 spring onions
350 g (12 oz) smoked ham, cut into strips
6 poppadoms
Sprigs of coriander to garnish
1
Heat a little oil and sauté the onion and garlic until golden.
2
Stir in the curry powder and cook for a further 2 min.
Leave to cool.
3
When cold, stir in the mayonnaise, lemon juice and seasoning.
4
Peel and coarsely grate the kohlrabi.
5
Dice the peppers and chop the spring onions.
6
Stir the vegetables and ham into the flavoured mayonnaise.
7
Cook the poppadoms in hot oil for a few seconds on both sides and then drain on kitchen paper.
8
Spoon the salad on to the poppadoms and serve immediately, garnished with sprigs of fresh coriander.
Delicious baked globe artichokes
Photography/Chris Turner Stylist Sarah Harmer
Okra
Okra-filled potato nests
Asparagus
Asparagus sticks with salsify
Courgette with flower — delicious when stuffed with a savoury filling
Tasty beef and artichoke salad
Eddoe
Summer squash with minced lamb
Ham and Kohlrabi salad in a crisp poppadom
Kohlrabi
NEXT MONTH Delicious barbecue dishes for summer entertaining
COOKERY PLUS
HOW TO PREPARE UNUSUAL VEGETABLES PLUS COOKING WITH VERMOUTH AND FREE COOKBOOKS
FRENCH FLAVOUR
With its special blend of 30 herbs and spices, Noilly Prat is the classic French vermouth.
Serve it as an aperitif, straight from the fridge or on the rocks, or even add a dash to your cooking.
Creative Entertaining with Noilly Prat is a booklet packed full of tempting recipes such as Noilly twists, Marseille lamb, and hazelnut and orange gâteau.
We have 250 copies to give away to the first readers to write to Noilly Prat Booklet Offer,.
HANDY HINTS
What do you do if you come across unusual vegetables and aren't sure how to prepare them?
As a rough guide, first scrub or wash, peel and slice them.
Then steam or boil the vegetables in a small amount of salted water, before draining and tossing them in melted butter.
Here are some basic cooking guidelines (see pages 136 to 140 for illustrations):
Cardoon : Brush the leafy stalks and heart with lemons to prevent discolouring.
Eat raw or cook like celery.
Chayote : Coco or Christophene are pale green, pear- shaped squashes.
Cook like courgettes.
Eddoe : A starchy Indian vegetable with a rough brown skin.
Cook like potatoes.
Okra : Or ladies' fingers.
Shaped like a chilli.
Use in both soup and stews.
Salsify : Or oyster plant — the long tapering root has a flavour similar to oysters.
Seakale : Young blanched stalks can be eaten like asparagus spears.
Use the large leaves like spinach.
Sweet Potato : A red-skinned tuber used like potatoes.
ALL THINGS SPICY
Add a dash of spice to your cooking and bring out the full flavour.
John West's Freshly Minced Chili, Garlic and Ginger Spices are ready to use straight from the jar.
A 110 g jar costs about 95p and once opened will remain fresh for up to three months if refrigerated.
An eight-page colour booklet gives hints and recipe ideas for using each spice.
We have 500 booklets to give away to the first readers to write to John West/1H, Gramby Marketing Services Ltd, School Lane, Denham Maasey, Altrincham, Cheshire WA14 5SZ.
COOK'S BOOKSHELF
From how to make curries and biscuits to microwaving successfully and entertaining in general, The Australian Woman's Weekly Home Library has all the answers.
The series of cookbooks is made up of 60 titles, all featuring easy-to-follow recipes and beautifully illustrated with colourful photographs.
We have 100 copies of the Light & Luscious Summertime Cookbook (normally £4.95) to give away.
Write to ACP/IH, 20 Galowhill Road, Brackmills, Northampton NN4 0EE for your free copy.
Seakale — the young blanched stalks are similar to asparagus
ALL ABOUT WINE
Ned Halley is wary of youthful charms, thirsty for champers and enamoured of El Vino.
Plus the pick of the wines for June
TOO YOUNG TO DRINK
Most of the world's greatest wines are carefully and deliberately made as vins de gardes — wines to keep.
The classic reds of Bordeaux are best left until at least a decade after the vintage date printed on the label.
So I do feel for the chump who, late for a smart dinner party, dashes into the local off-licence and forks out £50 for a bottle of Mouton Rothschild 1988.
It might look good to turn up with such a grand vin , but if it's opened on the night, even Mouton this young would be unpalatable, a horrid waste of money.
With the market for the costliest wines at a current low point, more and more very expensive and underaged bottles are finding their way on to high-street wine merchants' shelves.
But they are rarely, if ever, at bargain prices.
What's more, it's best not to purchase a great wine, with another 10 or more years to wait before consumption, from a shop that has displayed it under bright light lights and in changing temperatures.
Aficionados of the finest wines tend to invest in en primeur purchases — buying by the case before the wine is even bottled.
Prices for these wines used to be considered advantageous, but no longer.
There seems little doubt that the prices of 1990 clarets asked in this year's en primeur promotions will follow the same pattern as last year's lot: 1989 wines on offer a year ago were reappearing in sales this January at prices up to 25 per cent lower.
My advice to anyone thinking of buying the top names is to contact the auction houses for catalogues of their summer sales.
Comparing the estimates with merchants' prices should be interesting.
Christies (071–839 9060) has a sale of claret on 27 June, and an ‘end of season’ fine wine sale on 25 July.
Sotheby's (071–493 8080) has wine sales on 12 June and 17 July.
GROWN-UP MERCHANT
Devotees of Private Eye will doubtless be familiar with the name of El Vino, the Fleet Street wine bar patronised by legendary hack Lunchtime O'Booze until the recent removal of our beloved national press to pastures new in the Docklands and elsewhere.
Perhaps less well-known is that El Vino is one of London's best wine merchants, offering a mail-order service based on its Armchair Wine Buyer's Guide .
The firm's wines, mostly bearing its own distinctive labels, include a magnificent collection of ready-to-drink burgundy.
New customers should try the sampling case of reds (which includes a couple of fine Rhône reds as makeweights) at £99.
Among alluring clarets is Château Branaire-Ducru 1982 — an absolute classic — at the remarkably low price of £15.95 for a great wine approaching maturity.
El Vino is unusual in offering so many traditional wines of a drinkable age, and prices compare well across the board.
The list includes good madeira, port and sherry and some fine German wines, but does not dabble in the New World.
The guide is available from El Vino Co Ltd,.
POP-UP PRICES
Prices are enjoying considerable topicality in the champagne world.
Mike Conolly, off-licence chief at Sainsbury's and thus Britain's biggest buyer of wine, puts it with commendable candour: ‘The Grandes Marques (such as Bollinger, Moët, etc) are intent on imposing very sizeable increases in the full knowledge that a further decline in sales will result.’
(Further, that is, to the fall already brought about by recent recessionary trends.)
‘Apparently,’ Conolly continues, ‘Champagne is to be restored to the position of the rich man's drink it enjoyed before those wretched own-label chappies started making it available to all!’
Sainsbury's is, no doubt, the main own-label offender, continuing to offer its lively non-vintage at £11.30 and the brilliant vintage 1986 at £15.35.
Compared with the £20 prices now becoming typical for the likes of popular Grandes Marques, such as Veuve Clicquot, these wines really do represent remarkable value.
Likewise, less expensive, sparkling wines from farther afield are also being brought into their own by the champagne houses' hauteur .
Oddbins is the place to look for these alternative fizzes — especially with its special deal on sparklers, offering seven bottles for the price of six.
As well as its unparalleled choice of about 70 different champagnes, Oddbins now boasts around 50 tempting imitators.
Among the brut (dry) wines, I particularly commend the zesty fresh California Cuvée Napa at £7.99, the creamy Spanish cava Codorniu Chardonnay at £7.49 and, from among a whole gaggle of Australian champers, the mouth- filling, delectably fruity Seppelt Great Western Vintage 1988 at £9.99 is a real treat.
JUNE FLAVOURS
Two wines of the month from Waitrose supermarkets: Serriger Heiligenborn 1983 is a beautifully fresh, appley Riesling from the Mosel, a spätlese (made from particularly ripe grapes) from a great vintage, and terrific value at only £5.95.
My pick of the reds from Waitrose£s large choice of inexpensive wines is Tinto da Anfora 1987, a fleshy, ripe Portuguese original from the Joao Pires winery at Azeito near Lisbon.
The wine has that distinctive vanilla richness imparted through maturation for a year in oak casks — a delicious bargain, fully ready to drink, at £14.15.
NEXT MONTH What's happening on the wine front in July and exotic vintages from the supermarkets
ADDRESS BOOK
Here we list all the manufacturers and shops featured in this issue.
Many of them offer a mail-order service or can give you details of your local stockist.
NEXT MONTH in our July issue
HOW TO GET THAT LOOK
Ways to transform your home without breaking the bank
Readers' bathrooms
Soak up some inspiration for your bathroom
Sunshine special
Tasty ideas for summer entertaining with products and tips for sizzling barbecues, dream desserts and refreshing cool drinks
Mortgages made simple
Our step-by-step guide to buying your own home — the options and the pitfalls
Consumer file
Is the food you buy what you think it is?— we look at how scientists are tampering with what we eat.
Plus what to do if your holiday goes wrong 
ON SALE 21 JUNE
Ask your newsagent to reserve your copy.
Alternatively, take out a subscription to Ideal Home.
See page 76 for details of our special offer.