

A great many things that other people did all the time she had never done.
These were the ordinary things from which she had been protected by her money and her ill health.
She had never used an iron nor threaded a needle, been on a bus nor cooked a meal for other people, earned money, got up early because she had to, waited to see the doctor or stood in a queue.
Her great-grandmother had never dressed herself without the help of a lady's maid, but times had changed since then.
Places had not changed much and the family still lived at Temple Stephen in Derbyshire.
They still spent Christmas quietly and had a big house party for the New Year.
They played games as they always had, Consequences and Kim's Game and a game her brother had invented called Closing Pepper Gate.
Sometimes they took bets on the heights or depths of things and the location of things and the number of things.
One of the guests asked the others to bet on how many metro systems there were in the world.
They asked him if he knew the answer, for if he did not how would they ever find out?
He said of course he did, he would not have suggested it otherwise.
She said, ‘What's a metro system?’
‘An underground railway.
A tube.’
‘Well, how many are there?’
‘That's what I'm asking.
You name the number of your choice and put ten pounds in the kitty.’
‘In the world ?’ she said.
‘In the world.’
She had no idea.
She said twenty, thinking that must be far too many.
Someone said sixty, someone else said twelve.
The man who had proposed the wager was smiling and, seeing his smile, their sister said a hundred, her brother-in-law ninety.
He won and got the kitty.
The answer was eighty-nine.
‘One for every year of the century,’ someone said, as if it were appropriate.
‘I've never been in the tube,’ she said.
At first no one believed her.
She was twenty-five and she had never been in the tube.
It was quite true.
She mostly lived in the country and she was rich.
Also she was not strong, there was a little something wrong with her heart, a murmur, a valve that functioned less than perfectly.
The older people called her ‘delicate’.
She had been told that having children might present problems, but nothing that could not be managed.
She might want children one day but not yet.
It made her lazy, it made her rather self-indulgent.
For instance, she never felt guilty about lying down after lunch.
She liked having people about to look after her.
It had never occurred to her to get any sort of job.
Since she was seventeen she had had her own car and when she came to London, a fleet of private hire cars at her disposal, not to mention the taxis that swept round the Mayfair comers.
She had been married and divorced, had had fifteen lovers, give or take a little, had been to the United States seventeen times, to Africa twice, explored from a car or at a leisurely pace the capitals of Europe, twice circled the world, done the ‘sophisticated’ things but left undone so many ordinary things.
And she had never been in the London Underground.
She had no intention of going into it.
You heard such stories!
Rapes, assaults, gangs, fires, trains halted through suicides, the rush hour.
Her brother, who was also her twin, said when they were back in London, ‘I shouldn't bother.
Who cares whether you have or not?
I've never been in St Paul's Cathedral.
I hate it, I'd like to destroy it.’
'What, St Paul's?’
‘The tube.
I'd like to raze it and plough over the site like the Romans did with Carthage.’
She laughed.
‘You can't raze something that's already underground.’
‘It runs under my flat.
I can't stand it, I hear it in the early hours.’
'Move, then,’ she said idly.
‘Why don't you move?’
She rested after lunch and then a taxi took her up to Hampstead and a shop that sold a certain kind of ethnic clothes not available elsewhere.
The shop was round the corner in Back Lane.
She bought a dress made for a Peruvian bride, high-necked, tight-waisted, with big sleeves and a big floor-length skirt, white as a white rose, with white satin ribbons and white lace.
They said they would send it, they got so far as taking her address, but she changed her mind, she wanted to wear it that night.
There was no shortage of taxis going down Heath Street and Fitzjohn's Avenue.
She let them pass, came to Hampstead tube station and thought what an adventure it would be to go home in a train.
Buying the dress had altered her mind.
She was possessed by a reckless excitement.
This she knew to have its pathetic side.
What would they say to her if they knew, these people who were obliged to use this means of transport day in, day out?
The thought of their contempt, their disgust and envy, drove her in.
Some minutes were occupied in the buying of a ticket.
She did not know what to ask for at the ticket window so she essayed the machine.
It was a triumphant moment when the yellow ticket fell into the space behind the small  window, bringing her change with it.
She watched what other people did, showing their tickets to the man in the booth, and she did the same.
There was a staircase.
A notice informed the public that this was the deepest Underground station in London, three hundred stairs to the bottom.
Passengers were advised to take the lift.
The gates of the lift closed as she approached it.
If she waited, surely another would come.
It was then that she reflected how complicated a process it was, this travelling by tube.
She thought of herself as intelligent and had been called so.
How was it then that all these ordinary people seemed to manage it with effortless ease?
The lift came and she got into it fearfully.
She was alone in the lift.
Would she have to operate it herself and, if so, how?
It was a relief when others came, others who took no notice of her but, if they thought of her at all, must think her as seasoned a traveller as they.
An illuminated indicator told them to stand clear of the doors and then they closed.
The lift went down of its own accord.
Down there in the depths, and she was very aware of how deep it was, a sign pointing ahead and then to the left said:Trains .
Some people, instead of going ahead, turned directly left, thus indicating their sophistication, their experience, their refusal to be baulked of a short cut by officialdom.
On the platform she was not at all sure that she was in the right place.
She might find herself not being carried down to London but spirited away to distant unknown suburbs such as Hendon and Colindale.
The train coming in made a noise that was fearful and seemed dangerous.
All her energies were devoted to appearing in the eyes of others as nonchalant.
At the same time she watched them to see what they did.
It seemed that she might sit anywhere she chose, that there were no rules to obey.
She had never been very obedient in other areas of her life but in the tube she was a child again, learning, wary, and without that presence which had always been there in her childhood.
She sat in a seat near the doors.
To be near the doors seemed safest.
She had forgotten this was supposed to be an adventure, an experience her life lacked.
It had become an endurance test.
The train started and she breathed deeply; with hands folded in her lap, artificially composed into an attitude of relaxation, she took long slow breaths.
Her fear was that it would stop in the tunnel.
She understood that she did not like tunnels, though this was something she had previously been unaware of.
She did not have claustrophobia in small rooms or lifts.
It was possible she had never been in a tunnel before, except perhaps in a car going quickly through some underpass.
But she was surviving.
She was all right.
The train came into Belsize Park and she looked curiously out at the station.
This one and the next, Chalk Farm, were tiled in white and buff, reminding her of the servants' bathrooms at Temple Stephen.
She occupied herself with studying a map on the opposite wall because she knew she would have to change trains at some point.
Tottenham Court Road must be that point, an interchange from the black line to the red.
This train would take her there, was bearing her there rapidly now, and at the station she would follow the signs, for signs there must be, to the Central Line going westwards.
They had reached Camden Town, blue and cream, another shabby bathroom.
It was unpleasant, what happened next.
Such things happen in bad dreams, dreams of the recurring kind from which one awakens in panic and fear, though she had never dreamed anything like this.
How could she, never before having been in the tube?
The next station should have been Mornington Crescent but it was not.
It was Euston.
It took her quite a long time  to understand what had occurred and what she had done wrong.
The map explained, once she understood how to use the map.
By this time she was trembling.
The train she was in was one bound for south London, as perhaps all were, but it would be reached via the Bank instead of Tottenham Court Road, describing a loop through the City to do so.
She had got into the wrong train.
All this time she had scarcely noticed there were other people in the car with her.
Now she did.
They did not look like the kind of people she usually associated with but seemed inimical, common, even savage, and with truculent, peevish faces.
She told herself to be calm.
Nothing irreversible had taken place.
She could change at Bank and take the Central Line, the red line, from there.
At King's Cross a large number of people got in.
This was the station where the fire had been, she had read about it and seen it on television.
Her husband — she had still been married then-told her not to look.
‘Don't get involved.
There's no one you're likely to know.’
She could see nothing out of the window to show there had been a fire.
By the time the train moved off she could see nothing at all out of the window, she could scarcely see the window, so many people were squeezed between her and it.
She sat very still, making herself small, the bag with the dress in it crammed behind her legs, telling herself it was a privilege to have a seat.
There were people, thousands if not millions of people, who did this every day.
One thing to be thankful for was that no more could get in.
She had to revise this at Angel and again at Old Street.
Perhaps a point was never reached where no more could get in, but they would be pushed and crushed until they died or the sides of the car burst with the pressure of them.
She thought of a tired analogy she had often heard, people  in a crowded train compared to sardines in a tin.
If things go wrong inside a tin, gases build up and the contents swell and the whole thing explodes…
After Moorgate she had to think how she would get out at the next station.
She watched what others did.
She found it was not possible even to get up out of her seat without shoving people, elbowing her way, pushing past them.
The doors had come open and there was a voice on a public address system shouting something.
If she could not get out the train would carry her on to the next station, to London Bridge, it would carry her on under the river .
That was what that band on the map was, that zone of blue bending up and back like a water pipe, the river.
Others got out and she was carried along with them.
It would have been hard at that point not to be ejected from the train.
She felt tumbled out, pushed and pummelled.
On the platform the thick, sour air seemed fresh after the atmosphere inside the car.
She breathed deeply.
Now she must find the red line, the Central Line.
The strange thing was that it did not occur to her then to follow the Way Out signs, leave the station and go out into the street where a taxi could be found.
It occurred to her later, when she was in the westbound Central Line train, but not then, not when she was trying to find her way to the interchange.
All her concentration and all her thought were bent on finding where to go, on doing it right.
The bag with the dress in it was crushed, her pale shoes were covered with black scuff marks.
She felt soiled.
Once she went wrong.
She waited for some minutes on a platform, a train came and she would have got into it if that had been possible.
She could not have brought herself to do as some did, step in and squash her body against the bodies of those who formed the dense wad of people which already bulged from the open doors.
The doors  ground to a close.
Looking up at the illuminated sign overhead she was glad she had not attempted to push her way in.
The train was going eastwards, bound for a place called Hainault she had never heard of
She made the transfer to the right platform.
A great many people were waiting.
A train came in, going to another place she had never heard of, Hanger Lane.
She knew the direction was right, it would stop at Bond Street where she wanted to be.
She began to feel that if she did this a few more times she would get the hang of it.
For all that, once would be enough for her.
Entering the train was not so bad as entering the eastbound one would have been.
It was possible to walk in without pushing or being pushed, though there was no question of finding a seat.
Others stood, so she could too, it would not be for long.
What she should have done was obey the voice that told her to pass right along the car.
Instead, she stayed near the doors, holding on as best she could to an upright rail, the bag with the dress in it clutched in her other hand.
A man, quite young, was sitting in the seat nearest to the door.
Of course he would get up and offer her his seat.
She waited for this to happen.
All her life men had given up their seats to her, at point-to-points and tennis matches, their window seats in aircraft, their centrally positioned armchairs in balconies overlooking royal routes.
This man stayed where he was and read the Star .
She held on to the rail and to her bag.
At St Paul's a great throng crammed the platform.
She saw a sea of faces, each stamped with a kind of purposeful, hungry urgency, a determination to get into this train.
As before, when she was on the Northern Line, she thought there must be some rule, some operating law, that would stop more than a limited, controlled number getting in.
Authority would appear and stop it.
But authority did not appear, not even in the form of a disembodied voice, and the people came on in, on and on, more and more of them, a marching army, a shoving, crushing battering ram of men and women.
She could not see if the platform emptied because she could not see the platform.
A man, pushing past her, swept the dress bag out of her hand, carrying it along with him in his thrusting progress.
She could see it still, made an ineffectual grab at it, seized only a girl's skirt instead and, relinquishing it with a gasp, saw its wearer's face loom close to hers, as distressed as her own must be.
The bag was bundled and squeezed, stretched and squashed, between the legs of the stumbling mass.
There was no possibility of her reaching it.
She did not dare let go but hung on to the rail, where another four hands also hung on, for dear life.
Faces were closer to hers than faces had ever been, except those of lovers in the act of love.
The back of a head pushed one of them aside and pressed so close into her face that hair came into her mouth, she could smell the less than clean hair and see the beads of dandruff.
She turned her face, twisted her neck, found her eyes meeting a man's eyes, their eyes close and gazing, as if they were about to kiss.
His eyes were dead, purposely glazed over, blinded to deny contact.
And then, as the doors groaned shut and the train moved, the fidgeting, the adjusting of positions, the shifting of hands, ceased and all became still.
Everyone froze into stillness like people playing the statues game when the music stops.
She knew why.
If the heaving had continued, if there had been continuous restless movement, existence inside the train would have been impossible.
People would begin to scream.
People would begin to beat each other in their frenzy at something so intolerable imposed upon them.
They were still.
Some held their chins high, stretching  necks, their expressions agonized, like martyrs in paintings.
Others hung their heads in meek submission.
It was worst for the very short, like the fat girl she could see between face and face and back of head, standing with nothing to hold on to, supported by those who surrounded her, her head under the men's elbows, a woman's handbag, clutched under an arm, driving its hard corners into her throat.
By now she had lost sight of the dress bag.
Acquiring its contents had been the purpose of her outing, but she no longer cared about it.
She cared about surviving, about remaining very still and suffering, enduring, holding on until the train reached Chancery Lane.
There she would get out of the train and the system.
She should have got out of the system at Bank, she knew that now.
To lose the dress, the white Peruvian wedding dress, was a small price to pay for escape.
When the train stopped she thought they were there.
She wondered why the doors were not opening.
Outside the windows all was darkness and she understood they had stopped in the tunnel.
Whether this ever happened without dangerous cause, whether it often happened, what it signified, of all this she had no idea.
She would have liked to ask, speak into the face of the man whose breath, rich with garlic, fanned hotly into her nostrils.
Her throat had dried.
She had no voice.
She was aware, more strongly now than before, of all the human bodies pressed against her, the elbows and breasts and stomachs and buttocks and shoulders, and of the hard glass panel against which her own side was crushed.
The heat began to increase.
She had not specially noticed the heat before but now she did as droplets of sweat formed themselves on her forehead and her upper lip, as sweat in a single long drop rolled very cold and insinuating down between her breasts.
Of that icy coldness she was very aware, but not as relief, rather as pain, rather as shock.
It grew hotter.
The train gave a lurch, a kind of belch, and she held on, held her breath, waiting for it to start.
It sighed and sank once more into immobility.
The man close to her grunted.
His face had gone very red and looked as if it had been sprayed with water.
A drop of sweat ran down her forehead and into her eye.
It stung her eye and she asked herself why this should happen.
Why should salt tears not sting while salt sweat did?
While she was wondering this, holding on to the rail with a wet slippery hand, feeling the heat rise and thicken, the train belched again and this movement, much more powerful than before, shifted and heaved the people around her to enclose her in a kind of human tide.
Her face now against a tweed back, she fought for breath, struggled and pushed, moaning as another icy drop flowed down her body and set off the pain.
It seemed to set it off, to trigger it, for as it slipped along her skin like a bead of ice, a huge pain took hold of her left arm, as if an iron claw had grasped it.
She arched her back, tried to stretch her neck above assorted flesh and hair and smell.
The train started, moved forward on a smooth glide, and as it did so the iron claws embraced her, like the appendages of a monster.
They embraced her and dragged her down, through shoulders and arms and hips and legs, to a conglomeration of dirty, trodden-on shoes.
The train ran on smoothly towards Chancery Lane.
The last thing she saw, as her heart that had the little something wrong with it collapsed, was the bag with the dress in it, stuck between a pair of trousered legs.
There was no room in the train.
Not one more passenger could have squeezed in.
Yet as she sank to the floor and died they fell back, they shrank back and made the space for her she had needed for life.
For dear life.
At Chancery Lane the train was cleared and the body  removed.
Remaining in the car was a large dress-shop bag, made of thick, strong paper with some kind of dark blue lacquer coating and a picture of a woman in unidentifiable national costume.
They were apprehensive about opening it and sent for the Bomb Squad.
Eventually, much later, a wedding dress was found inside.
A receipted bill with it gave the address of the purchaser.
It was sent to her home and came at last to her family.
The young woman's death did not find its way into Jarvis Stringer's book.
Only accidents of a more spectacular kind would appear there, the first ‘sledger’ to come to grief, the over-zealous railmen attempting to close doors who were decapitated at tunnel portals, the victims of fire.
He read the account of the inquest and of the later failed efforts of the family to bring an action against London Transport Underground.
If they had been successful, the incident might have appeared in one of the chapters of disaster.
The girl's brother was later to claim acquaintance with him but by that time Jarvis was in Russia and his book half-finished.
He started it while he was living with his mother in Wimbledon, before he moved to the School.
It was to be a complete history of the London Underground.
London has the world's oldest metro system [he began].
It dates back to 1863, to a Victorian London of slums, of gaslight, of the powerless and the poor.
Three-quarters of a million people came there every day to work.
They came on foot, by river steamer and in horse-drawn omnibuses and drays.
And there were those who could not come at all, they lived too far away.
One man had a vision of a railway that would link all the mainline railway termini.
His name was Charles Pearson and, though born the son of an upholsterer, he became Solicitor to the City of London.
‘A poor man,’ he wrote, ‘is chained to the spot.
He has not leisure to walk and he has not money to ride a distance to his work.’
There had previously been a plan for gaslit subway streets through which horse-drawn traffic could pass.
This was rejected on the grounds that such sinister tunnels would become lurking places for thieves.
Twenty years before his railway was built, Pearson envisaged a line running through ‘a spacious archway’, well-lit and well-ventilated.
His was a scheme for trains in a drain.
The house by the line was always called the School.
Jarvis Stringer called it that, as he had done since he was a small boy.
He was too young to remember when it had been a school, though his mother could, she had been there as a pupil.
By the time Jarvis was five it was closed and abandoned and his grandfather had killed himself
The building was a red-brick Victorian house in that West Hampstead street which runs parallel with the Metropolitan and Jubilee Lines of the London Underground.
This large house, neo-Gothic in all respects but for its Italianate belvedere, stood about a third of the way between West Hampstead station and Finchley Road station, at which point the lines enter portals and dive underground.
Its grounds were small for so large a house, no more than two shrubberies dividing it from its neighbours, and at the rear a stretch of lawn with trees ran down to a fence.
Through the palings of this fence the trains could be seen rolling past, northwards to Amersham and Harrow and Stanmore, southwards to inner London.
They could be heard too, a constant if sporadic singing rattle.
Silence came only in the deep watches of the night.
These lines had been there for many years when Ernest Jarvis bought the house in the twenties, the Metropolitan Railway having been extended from Swiss Cottage to West Hampstead in 1879.
Ernest was well off, having his share of the Jarvis family money, and there was no reason why he should not have made his school in some more attractive part of NW6, up in the neighbourhood of Fortune Green for instance .
Even his daughter did not know why he had chosen a house overlooking the railways or for  that matter why he wanted to keep a school at all.
He did not particularly like children, though he liked trains.
Jarvis Stringer's grandparents' qualifications for keeping a school were that he had been up at Oxford where he had read Greats and she had left Goldsmith's College halfway through her teacher training.
The mystery was that it was successful for more than thirty years.
People sent their daughters to Cambridge School, dressing them up in the toffee-brown and pale-blue uniform Elizabeth Jarvis had selected.
Perhaps Ernest had been rather clever in naming his school and Elizabeth showed great psychological soundness in the choice of that Cambridge-blue trim on the blazers and ribbon on the panama hats.
Of course no one even hinted at some connection between this school for girls by the railway lines and the great university, but the implication was there.
Because of its name and that pale blue the school enjoyed a peculiar indefinable distinction.
A small kudos attached to going there, though the fees were never high.
Studies were not taxing and little emphasis was placed on the passing of examinations.
It seems to have been a fact, as Jarvis's mother pointed out, that no girl from Cambridge School, NW6, had ever got to any university, let alone Cambridge.
In 1939, when the new double tubes were constructed, branching off the Bakerloo system, Ernest spent much time away from the school watching the digging of the new Metropolitan Lines under buildings at Finchley Road.
He saw the underpinning of the North Star Hotel and the rebuilding of Finchley Road station.
Not many years later, during the Second World War, bombs fell in the street, destroying neighbouring houses but leaving Cambridge School intact.
Elizabeth Jarvis said it was like St Paul's Cathedral, miraculously saved while all around it lay in ruins.
Elsie Stringer thought the analogy unfortunate, but typical of her parents' attitude towards the school.
Jarvis came down from Cambridge with a degree in engineering; not a very good one because he had done no work.
From his grandfather he had inherited a love of railways and the School.
That is, his mother inherited the School first and never went in a train if she could help it.
Jarvis wandered about the world as young people do, but instead of driving a van to India or observing political upheaval in Central America or getting into trouble in Africa he went to look at metro systems.
He was one of the first passengers on MARTA, the Atlanta underground, when it opened in 1979, rode the new tube in Fukuoka two years later and in the following year watched the building of MMTA in Baltimore and the metro in Caracas.
It was while he was playing with his first train set, a fifth birthday present, that the news reached his mother of her father's suicide.
Jarvis was in his bedroom and Elsie in hers, next to his.
She took the phone call in there.
He had heard the phone ring but did not listen to what was said.
He was playing trains.
Sometimes, when he thought about that day, as he did occasionally, it occurred to him that this was the first instance of railways being able to distract him from the pains of life.
In future, it was always to be the same.
His mother came in, fell on her knees in front of him and pressed him to her; She was gasping and shuddering.
She held on tight to him, murmuring, ‘Oh, my darling, hug Mummy, hold on to poor Mummy, poor Mummy's had a terrible shock.’
Jarvis put up with it for a moment or two.
Then he struggled to escape.
He looked at her.
She was very white.
‘What's the matter?’ said Jarvis.
‘Poor little boy, it wouldn't be right to tell you,’ she said.
She sat on his bed, shivering, hugging herself.
Jarvis went on taking his train from London to Penzance, the  Cornish Riviera.
In his imagination he was both engine driver and passenger.
When they got to Plymouth he would be station-master as well.
Even then he had a special devotion to subterranean tracks and as the train came to the Wellington tunnel (he and his parents had been on holiday to Cornwall that summer) he began letting out a series of long drawn-out hooting sounds.
His mother burst into tears.
Jarvis hooted once more.
But he was a tender and affectionate child and he saw that something more was required of him.
He got up and stood by his mother and put his hand on hers.
She had behaved like this when his grandmother died a few months before.
He said to her, ‘Is grandad dead?’
She was so shocked she stopped crying and asked him how he knew.
Jarvis said he had guessed.
He had also noticed that she was not just unhappy this time.
There was something more.
He sat on her lap and let her hug him.
He judged five minutes was long enough for that, a lifetime when you are five, and since he had just learned how to tell the time he watched the clock over her shoulder.
She went on sitting there staring at him long after he was back on the floor.
By the time he had got the train to Exeter St David's, its first stop, people had begun arriving, notably his father in a taxi.
Ernest Jarvis had hanged himself.
The school had begun to fail in the forties and fifties and the number of pupils declined to fifteen, to ten, to three.
Long gone were the days when they employed four teachers.
His wife taught the remaining pupils, three seventeen-year-olds, and, as if she had only postponed death until her duties were done, she died of a heart attack at the end of July, the day after the last girls left.
Ernest had no wife, no occupation, very little money and a huge white elephant of a house that needed ten thousand spent on it.
Cambridge School had a bell which was never rung, which had never been rung.
It was housed in the belvedere, a word that Ernest insisted meant ‘bell tower’ even after his sister Cecilia told him its correct meaning of ‘beautiful view’or ‘beautiful to see’.
He bought the bell in a shop in Camden Passage and hung it up, intending to ring it to summon laggard children to school.
Then his sister told him gently that schools like his didn't have bells, a bell would lower the tone of the place and put off the parents of prospective pupils.
The bell continued to hang there, the rope passing through apertures in the ceilings of the top, first and ground floors into a poky cell which was to double as cloakroom and bellringer's room.
After a year or so the rope was taken up from the lower floors and wound on to a cleat on the top storey.
Ernest Jarvis did what he had to do elaborately, and it must have taken him a long time.
The trapdoors which covered the original apertures and which had been closed for thirty years he managed to get open with the aid of a tool, a screwdriver from the appearance of the marks.
Methodically, he replaced the screwdriver in a toolbox in the garden shed, though he was not known as a tidy man.
When he unwound the rope from the cleat the bell rang once.
Perhaps he had forgotten that the bell would ring or he hardly cared whether it rang or not.
Cecilia Darne, who lived round the corner, said she heard a bell toll once at about eight in the morning.
Of course she also heard it toll again and then heard a broken peal, a dreadful stuttering ringing, some quarter of an hour later.
Many people heard that but only Cecilia seemed to have heard that first single clang as Ernest, her brother, in freeing the rope from the cleat, gave it a tug which caused the bell to spring upwards and fall again.
He passed the rope through the now open apertures, down into the place where those toffee-brown overcoats had once hung and above them the brown felt hats with  their Cambridge-blue ribbons.
By November 1958 there was nothing in the cloakroom.
A row of pegs on one wall faced a row of pegs on another, eight feet apart.
A small window, rather high up in the wall facing the door, was glazed in frosted glass with a single pane above of the stained kind in a dark purplish-red.
The stone floor was covered in very light brown linoleum with a pattern of black fleurs-de-lis.
Ernest fetched a stool from one of the classrooms.
It was a teacher's stool that had once stood behind a high desk.
In the event, Ernest chose not to use it.
He was getting on for seventy and had arthritis.
Perhaps he did not trust himself to mount that stool and do what he had to do.
The stool was there when he was found.
So, of course, was the chair, from his own sitting room, which he had considered more suitable for his purpose, kicked over and lying on its side.
When Jarvis came to take over the house, although a good many people had been inside it and others had lived in it, the chair and the stool were still in the bellringer's room.
The stool stood in the corner to the left of the window and the chair diagonally opposite it.
They looked as if they had been arranged by some cleaner who had been sent in to tidy up and who did not know that in this room Ernest Jarvis had hanged himself.
The rope, however, was no longer hanging down through the hole in the ceiling.
Jarvis, coming there to take possession thirty years later, found a rope attached to the bell and its other end wound round the cleat.
He wondered if it was the same rope but did not like to ask his mother.
Probably it was the same because hardly anything in the School had changed.
Another aunt, Ernest Jarvis and Cecilia Darne's sister Evelina, lived there in Ernest and Elizabeth's living quarters until she died.
Then Tina Darne, who was Cecilia's daughter but only a year or two older than Jarvis, persuaded Jarvis's mother to let her move in and start a  commune.
Tina stayed for no more than six months but some good, hard-working, idealistic people remained, the kind who are made for communes and communes for them, and they mended the window frames and grew vegetables in the garden.
But none of these people changed the School.
It was far beyond their means.
By that time it needed not ten thousand spent on it, but forty.
Ernest had made a will when his wife died and left everything to his only child.
‘Everything’ was the School and, 98 in the bank.
Considering he had been in possession of a thousand a year from carefully invested family money, a very good unearned income in 1925, he had not done well.
Perhaps he thought of this too when he climbed on the chair and made a noose at the end of the rope, a very neat noose with the rope bound ten times round the loop in even rings.
It worked.
As he dropped and kicked away the chair the bell rang once.
Poor Ernest must have kicked and jerked, for it rang again, a stuttering tremble of sound, and then was silent.
A neighbour who heard the bell, a sound she had never heard in all her fifteen years in the street, puzzled over it for half an hour and then went across the road to the school.
Jarvis's mother told Jarvis his grandfather had gone to live with Jesus.
She never explained the means by which this journey had been made, though Jarvis some time later overheard a conversation about suicide, his mother referring to her ‘poor father’, and put two and two together.
When he was fifteen his mother told him about the hanging.
He had nagged her about why they did not go to live at the School, instead of letting all those other people live there, and at last she told him why.
‘I could never bring myself to live there,’ she said, and then, in a way characteristic of her, ‘Besides, it needs thousands spent on it before civilized people could live in it.’
Civilized people, in her view, did not include her aunt Evelina or cousin Tina or the idealistic vegetable gardeners.
She and Jarvis's father and Jarvis lived in a semi-detached house in Wimbledon.
Jarvis disliked the whole suburban scene but there was not much he could do about that until he was older.
Sometimes he went to West Hampstead and paid a visit to the School, to the commune, and enjoyed it very much and thought how much he would like to live there himself.
When he slept there, as he occasionally did in the classroom on the ground floor known for some mysterious reason as the ‘Remove’, he could hear the trains run past the end of the garden and to him it was the most romantic sound in the world.
Going home next day, he noticed as he waited on the platform for the tube to Baker Street, that the track sings as the train comes into West Hampstead, long before you can see it, and the silver lines shiver as it approaches.
There was a property boom in the seventies.
This was nothing to what came ten years later, no more than a mini-boom, but prices began to rise and estate agents to rub their hands and gird their loins and look about them.
One of them wrote to Jarvis's mother to tell her he could get a good price for Cambridge School.
In the eighties estate agents actually called on Jarvis at the School to beg him to put the place in their hands.
They bombarded him with letters and rang him up at least once a week.
He always told them to forget it because the School was falling down, it was subsiding, and one day would crumble and disappear: the trains had shaken it to pieces.
This was what the surveyor had told the first buyer to whom Jarvis's mother had offered the School in 1976.
He had been going to convert it into flats but backed out of the deal nearly as fast as the second prospective buyer, who was a surveyor himself.
The commune moved to Devon, leaving behind them  some rhubarb growing in the garden which was still there when Jarvis moved in.
At one point the local authority threatened to put a schedule of dilapidation on the place to force Jarvis's mother to repair it.
His father died, two years later she remarried and went to live in France.
She could see — anyone could see — that Jarvis was an eccentric.
He was very different from the sort of person who gets a job and then a better job and promotion and a wife; two children, a boy and a girl, a house, a better house, a car and all the rest of it.
As soon as he had any money he spent it on going to Central America or Thailand by the cheapest possible means to look at some new underground.
He was gathering data for a book about world metro systems, a task on which he had been engaged for years.
When he was at home he had begun living at the School, where he boarded up the broken windows and had the chimneys cleaned.
‘You'd better take it over,’ Elsie said, off to Bordeaux.
‘It seems such a shame, that dear old place going to ruin.
You could let a bit of it and live on the rent.’
She said this last doubtfully because she had seen the School as recently as Jarvis had and could not imagine any ‘civilized people’ renting it.
But she worried about Jarvis having practically nothing to live on, as she saw it, though he never worried.
He had a little bit of money his father had left him.
His mother got the Wimbledon house.
Jarvis's money brought him in a tiny income, on which it was just possible to subsist if he walked everywhere, never went to the cinema, ate anything nice, smoked, drank, bought new clothes nor used the phone.
Jarvis didn't much want to do any of these things, but he did want to go up north and admire the old Glasgow PIE, not to mention going back to ride once more San Francisco's BART, which tunnels deeply through the rock under the Bay.
His income he augmented by writing  pamphlets about railways, teaching an evening class in car maintenance — a subject he knew little about but which he mugged up from a handbook the night before — and, if things got bad, painting houses.
When his mother had gone, Jarvis got into a District Line train at Wimbledon Park, changed on to the Victoria Line at Victoria and on to the Jubilee at Green Park for West Hampstead.
It was a long and awkward journey but Jarvis enjoyed it.
He could never get tired of the tube.
Half an hour later he was crossing the footbridge from the northern to the southern side of the lines.
The rails below him, steely and shining, made a wide silver river.
The bridge, though reinforced with big steel girders which obstructed much of the view, had old lichened wooden boards across its central section and wooden stairs.
Between the girders the back of the School could be seen, a rather forbidding, dark plum red with Gothic windows of a kind more suitable to a church.
On either side of it, where the houses had been bombed, blocks of dull flats had been built during Jarvis's childhood.
A Metropolitan train roared up non-stop to Wembley Park and a slower Jubilee passed it, stopping at the platform below.
Jarvis thought he would enjoy hearing the sound of these trains while he was writing his history of the London Underground.
He went down the steps and through the little brick alley.
Cambridge School was cold inside and it smelt.
Jarvis crossed the vestibule, a large high-ceilinged chamber with mock-medieval hammer beams, on the walls of which were incised on yellow pine panels the names of pupils who had in some small way distinguished themselves.
A big iron lamp with branches, an electrolier, hung high above from the ceiling two floors up.
The flights of stairs ended in galleries with pine balustrades and all the heavy, badly carved dark-stained woodwork was pine, as it might  be in a church.
The stair banisters had excrescences shaped like pew ends every few treads.
Jarvis opened the case he had brought on the vestibule floor, carried the typewriter into Remove, where he put it on one of the desks, and took his clothes upstairs.
There had never been a first form at Cambridge School.
New pupils began in the third form, and III in Roman numerals showed in worn black lettering on the door ahead of him.
IV or Four was on the door to the right and round the corner on the left was the Handwork Room, the Headmaster's Study being on the extreme right next to the bathroom and opposite the Staff Common Room.
All the woodwork in the School was pitch pine, now become either a fierce saffron yellow or a dark, almost sooty, brown.
The floors were of the same wood, some bare, some covered in linoleum, and everything appeared in a state of decay.
Jarvis thought he had read somewhere, or been told, that woodworm was most active in May, yet now in September those small heaps of ginger-coloured dust that lay everywhere looked fresh, and as he opened the door of Three a trickle of the same dust came down on his head.
He chose to sleep in Three because it had the best view of the Jubilee Line, unobstructed by trees, and as he came into the room and crossed to the window, he saw beyond the garden and the trees and the rhubarb plantation a silver train speeding southwards.
There was a fireplace too, as there was in Remove and the other first-floor classrooms, Six and Upper Six, and in the Staff Common Room.
At the moment it was warm, but soon it wouldn't be and he would need fires.
He would need light too.
The electricity supply had been cut off at least two years before.
Jarvis was an eccentric and in the opinion of many who knew him a very strange man, but he had a quiet way of getting on with things.
He was not a procrastinator.
No one could, with justice, have called him a layabout.
When he had had his lunch, which he brought with him in the suitcase, a packet of salami sandwiches, a croissant with jam in it and a fruit-and-nut bar, he set off for West End Lane, to the Electricity Board and the Gas Board, to make inquiries about a chimney sweep, and put an advertisement for tenants in a newsagent's window.
But before he got to the newsagent's he met, coming out of Fawley Road with a small boy and smaller girl, his first cousin once removed, Tina Darne.
The trains ran down to Finchley Road all day and up to West Hampstead all day and others pounded through without stopping up into Buckinghamshire.
The sound of the trains and the flash of their silvery sides through the trees was part of living at the School.
The blaze of lights in the evening was part of it, and the singing and shivering the rails made.
Only at night, in the deep of night between one and the dawn, was there silence and semi-dark.
You got used to it.
Jarvis liked it and Tina did not mind.
There was not much that Tina minded.
The two bathrooms and the kitchen were communal, but Tina had her own bathroom and kitchen.
No one had the Art Room, the Science Lab, the Handwork Room, the Staff Common Room or the Headmaster's Study, though there was a chance someone would one day.
No one used the cloakroom where Jarvis's grandfather had hanged himself and no grown-up person ever would.
Where the wooden floors were not exposed they were covered in that brown linoleum with a pattern of black fleurs-de-lis.
The great iron electrolier, with its arms and claws, still hung high above the entrance hall.
It resembled a medieval instrument of torture, a rack or wheel.
The lamps on it were fake candles, set in sconces like upturned lion's paws.
All the windows had roller blinds made of a dark-green fabric so tough that the years of neglect had done nothing to decay or even damage them.
They rolled up and down perfectly and their presence obviated the need for curtains.
There was no central heating, only a collection of electric and oil and gas heaters, imported by  tenants or discovered more or less in working order in the Handwork Room where all such things were stowed.
Tina had warned against putting that advertisement in the newsagent's.
She thought it unwise.
Arriving at the School with Jasper and Bienvida in a borrowed beat-up Ford van, its roofrack loaded with launderette bags of clothes and its inside with her sticks of furniture (sticks was the word), she told him the advertisement would only attract riff-raff.
Jarvis grinned but could see the wisdom of it.
There was riff-raff and riff-raff, your own being a different thing altogether.
‘Asking around’ was what Tina recommended.
The moment she was settled in she would start asking around.
Jarvis thought he had better get on with it himself because anyone Tina found would very likely default on the rent.
Tina herself was not a risk in this area because the man she had lived with longer than any other was paying her £50 a week for the children's keep.
It was not that Jarvis was asking much rent, in fact no estate agent would have believed what he was asking, but the whole point of letting bits of the school was to get enough for him to live on, indeed to get to Cairo and ride on the new 42.5 kilometre, 33-station ENR.
He went among the beggars who congregated in tube-station entrances, looking them over as they sat hunched and huddled on steps.
It was not possible to give a home to all, so how could he pick out one or two?
At the foot of the Piccadilly Line escalator at Leicester Square a drunk man squatted, singing hymns.
Jarvis tried to talk to him but he was deeply suspicious, saw Jarvis first as a social worker, then as the press, swore at him and spat, landing a gob of spittle on his jacket lapel.
It was late but the platforms were crowded.
When the train came in Jarvis had to stand.
He changed on to the Jubilee Line at Charing Cross and at Bond Street four men  got in.
They entered the train confidently, in a way that put Jarvis on the alert; they looked immediately to right and left, then having exchanged whispered words, split up, two going to one end of the car, two to the other.
Trouble in the Underground was something he had occasionally witnessed.
It was usually late at night but not always.
Once he had seen a girl set upon by a gang of other girls on a descending escalator.
He was on the one going up.
She was standing still, alone on the moving stair, when the others pounded past her, snatching her bag from her shoulder, a chain from her neck, the last one tearing the earrings from her ears.
At the top, Jarvis jumped on to the down escalator but the gang had disappeared into a train coming in opportunely and their victim stood weeping, holding her bleeding earlobes.
Another time he had seen a tourist, a non-English speaker, make the discovery that his wallet had been taken, with his passport and everything he had.
That had been in a train like this one, a Jubilee train heading northwards, and Jarvis could clearly remember the man's despair, his shouts and exclamations in a language no one understood.
But if these men who had split into two parties were here for some heist or scam, they were being slow about it, for they sat calmly in silence, one of them in the seat next to Jarvis, a dusty-looking, very ordinary, middle-aged man in a voyeur's dun-coloured raincoat.
They all got out at Baker Street.
But not to change trains, only cars.
Jarvis saw them get into the next car and on an impulse he jumped up and followed them.
The same thing took place at St John's Wood and now he thought he knew who and what they were.
Perhaps what told him was the attention they paid to the drunk man who weaved his way, shouting and stumbling, down the car.
Most people when confronted by that kind of thing pretend it is not happening, hide themselves behind newspapers, show  an unwarranted fascination in reading advertisements, but these four watched the drunk man's progress, they seemed to monitor it.
When he staggered out at Swiss Cottage the youngest and tallest of them went to the door, apparently to check that he did not re-enter the train.
‘Are you Guardian Angels?’
Jarvis always talked to people without reserve.
If he was curious he asked.
The man in the raincoat turned to look at him, hesitated, said, ‘A similar organization.
We're the Safeguards.’
‘Do you get much trouble?’
‘It's been quiet tonight.
In fact, it's been quiet all this week.
Making up for last, I reckon.
’ The man in the raincoat said hopefully, ‘You're not looking to join, are you?
It's voluntary but there's what you might call a lot of job satisfaction.’
Jarvis, who was getting out at the next station, asked where they would be the following night; the man who said his name was Jed Lowrie told him the Metropolitan, the Hammersmith Line.
On the ramshackle desolate station at Latimer Road he met them dutifully changing cars, but instead of joining the Safeguards, found himself offering Jed and Abelard, his pet Harris hawk, a home at the School.
Jed also had part-time employment in the Job Centre, and he turned pale when he heard the minuscule rent Jarvis was asking.
The hawk installed in the old bicycle shed, Jed moved into Upper VI.
Peter Bleech-Palmer, who was the son of Tina's mother's best friend, took V while he was waiting to share a flat with someone in Kilburn.
The research Jarvis embarked on for his book took him into the lower level concourse at Bond Street.
He was conducting an experiment with the gales that blow through that station when he paused to listen to three buskers playing Scottish reels.
One of them had the bagpipes, another a violin and the third a flute.
They finished a rendering of a Burns song and then the flautist put down his flute and began to sing in a fine baritone voice.
He sang ‘Scotland the Brave’ and then ‘So Far from Islay’, he sang of exile and loss, of love of one's country and separation from it.
The subject of his songs was as far from subterranean noise and heat and crowds as could be imagined.
Jarvis was entranced.
The only kind of music he liked was sung music and of that he liked all sorts — opera, lieder, folk, country, rock, jazz, soul, the blues.
‘That was very good,’ he said to the singer.
‘I don't know when I've heard anyone sing that so well.
Do you do requests?’
‘Do we what?’
‘You know, like in a restaurant or whatever.
If I ask you for something will you sing it?’
‘Depends what it is.’
The singer, who was a good-looking fair-haired boy, no more than twenty-three or four, looked pointedly at the hat, now reposing on the tiled floor.
Jarvis fished in his pocket and among the coins found a pound.
‘He'll sing the whole of the Don's part in Don Giovanni for that,’ said the man with the bagpipes.
Jarvis laughed.
He asked for an Irish song of love and loss.
The singer sang it without accompaniment.
Imagine accompanying that on the bagpipes!
When he got to the line about its not being long, love, till our wedding day, Jarvis felt the old undefined longing and the tears pricking his eyelids, though the last thing he wanted was a wedding day or a wife or any permanent relationship, come to that.
He thanked the singer and gave him another sop, which he could ill afford.
A crowd had gathered, blocking the passage.
Having understood what was going on, people were putting up their hands for requests.
There was a scattering of applause as the singer began and the bagpipes skirled.
Jarvis slipped  away and on to the platform to feel the wind blow through, ahead of the train emerging from the tunnel.
He knew that when they built the Jubilee Line they had had to put in a big fan shaft here to release the air or passengers might have been blown off the platform on to the line.
It was windy.
Women's hair got blown about.
Jarvis had once seen a poor girl's skirt blown over her head and been embarrassed for her.
The passengers carried away, another lot came streaming in.
He went back the way he had come, hearing the music ahead of him, and recognized the tune of a Geordie air.
The crowd was still there, but someone in uniform was pushing his way through and starting to harangue the singer.
Jarvis, who was taller than anyone else there, said over the top of heads, ‘They're not doing any harm.
They're cheering us all up.’
‘It's against the rules, sir,’ said the man in uniform.
Being called ‘sir’, which happened seldom, always had a terribly softening effect on Jarvis.
He could not help feeling how kind it was of a fellow human being to accord him such deference, that the speaker must have a particularly sweet and generous nature, must love and honour him, and he had to struggle against this, he had to resist cravenly agreeing with whatever was said that preceded that ‘sir’.
He just managed.
‘Then the rules should be changed.
It's very unjust.’
The man pushed his way back.
He said to Jarvis, ‘That's not for me to say, sir,’ and, less pleasantly, ‘nor you either.’
Seeing there was to be no more entertainment, the crowd began to disperse.
The musicians were packing up their instruments.
The one who had not yet spoken, or not in Jarvis's hearing, was swearing under his breath.
‘Where will you go now?’
Jarvis said.
The man with the bagpipes said in a  phoney refined accent, ‘How about dinner at the Gavroche before we go back to our suite at Grosvenor House?’
‘Come home with me and give us a concert,’ said Jarvis.
He added, ‘I'll pay you.
It won't be much but I will pay.
It's for my book, the chapter on underground entertainers.’
They looked at each other.
They seemed to confer silently.
The singer said, ‘OK.
What have we got to lose?
I'm Tom, this is Ollie and that's Mac.’
‘Jarvis Stringer.’
They played for him and Tina and the children until they were exhausted.
It was too late to go home after that so they stayed the night.
Two of them never went home but stayed on.
Mac had a girlfriend and a baby with whom he lived in a Bayswater hotel room provided by Westminster Council.
Ollie moved into the Headmaster's Study and Tom into Four.
‘I hope they'll pay,’ said Tina.
‘Tom's got a job as well,’ Jarvis said.
‘He gives flute lessons.’
Tina shrugged.
‘Flute lessons?
I don't believe it.
Imagine that when I'm trying to get the kids off.’
Since Jasper and Bienvida never went to bed until Tina did but fell asleep wherever they happened to be, Jarvis hardly took this protest seriously.
Tina occasionally said that sort of thing to try and sound like a normal mother.
She sometimes pointed out, though not aggressively, that Jed's hawk Abelard on its perch in the bicycle shed screeched incessantly during the hours of daylight.
He thought they probably had enough tenants now.
He had enough money to go to Cairo and he was off next week.
From seeing one of the newest metro systems in the world, he wondered if he could fix it to go home via Budapest and see one of the oldest.
Pearson's plan to send people ‘like so many parcels in a pneumatic tube’ met with mockery from Henry Mayhew, the journalist and sociologist.
Mayhew had written a four-volume work called London Labour and the London Poor and had been an influence on Dickens.
He was also the founder of Punch .
‘We have often smiled,’ he wrote, ‘at the earnestness with which he advocated his project for girdling London round with one long drain-like tunnel…’
Punch itself laboured the irony: ‘We understand that a survey has already been made and that many of the inhabitants along the line have expressed their readiness to place their coal cellars at the disposal of the company.
It is believed that much expense may be saved by taking advantage of areas, kitchens and coal-holes already made, through which the trains may run without much inconvenience to the owners…’
To build it they diverted the course of three rivers and uprooted many thousand poor people living in the Fleet Valley.
And this work was done by men inexperienced in the task.
No one had done it before.
At least they did not encounter what the builders of the Moscow Underground came up against many years later, a quicksand in their path.
The line from Farringdon to Paddington opened on January 1863.
Victorian notables, among them Mr and Mrs Gladstone, travelled on the first train.
At their destination a brass band was playing.
There was a banquet in the evening for 700 people but Pearson was not there.
He had died six months before.
The Metropolitan Company had offered him a reward for his efforts.
He refused it, saying, ‘I am the servant of the Corporation of London; they are my masters and are entitled to all my time and service.
If you have any return to make you must make it to them.’
Nobody says that sort of thing nowadays.
Pearson was a brave man and a liberal, an early anti-racialist.
He campaigned against the ban on the admission of Jews to the freedom of the city and as sworn brokers.
It was he who helped to have removed those lines in the inscription on the Monument which accused Roman Catholics of starting the Great Fire of London.
Tom Murray did not want to have a lot of  girlfriends , but  just one for good, one he could be deeply serious about.
He saw himself as a man who fell in love, not one who had affairs.
It had shocked him to discover, while a student, that at least half the men in his year had had no love or emotional experience at all.
Their sensual lives consisted in picking up half-drunk girls in pubs and spending the night with them, perhaps only seeing them once or twice more, or never again.
He wanted a great love and thought he had found her, for life, when he was eighteen.
Diana was a music student like himself, she was beautiful, warm, loving, a serious person.
But her parents moved to the United States, she transferred to an American university, and after a while stopped answering his letters.
For a long time there had been no one else for him because he refused to compromise.
Then, just before the accident, he had met a girl whose looks reminded him of Diana.
She was a pianist and he met her while they were both taking part in a young performers' competition.
But while he was in hospital he lost her.
She came to see him once, was shy and vague and noncommittal, later wrote to say it was best for them not to see each other again.
During the months of recuperation and the months of rediscovering himself as a changed person, a quick-tempered, irritable person, nervous and hypochondriacal, Tom thought of sex and love as remote concepts that were not for him, that were ridiculous for him to consider.
It was as if he said to himself that he had enough to worry about without that.
But once at the School, in his own place and with his daily occupation, he began to think again of this dream woman, and added to the old notion of what she should be, which Diana had personified, was an idea of her as his rescuer, as someone who would save him and make him whole again.
He could not live as Jarvis did, a detached life with only  casual human contact.
It appalled him to think of living as Tina did, with one lover after another, apparently not even selectively, or as Jed, long separated from his wife and child, consoled by the society of a bird.
He envisaged marriage, a lifelong commitment, growing richer as time passed.
The face that came before his eyes was Diana's, soft-featured, full-cheeked, the mouth dimpled at its corners, the eyes large and dark brown, the hair a rich mass of chestnut-brown silkiness.
She must be a musician or one who loved music.
She must have that quality, without which no woman could meet his exacting standard, a gift of caring and nurturing, a loving, maternal sweetness.
He found himself looking for her in the street, in the trains that took him down to his busking.
He was lonely and longing for someone who perhaps did not exist.
Like most musical children, Tom first played the recorder.
He picked it up in an hour or two and went on to the guitar.
His mother had a guitar she had played when she was young, in the sixties.
His parents had no piano, but his grandmother had a baby grand and he taught himself to play that whenever he visited her.
Soon he was learning the flute.
He was one of those people who can play any number of musical instruments.
It is said that they play none really well but this was not true of Tom who looked like becoming a child virtuoso of the flute.
No one knew quite why this did not happen, why he remained good but no better than that, nor why he failed the audition for admission to a county youth orchestra.
Tom himself said it was because he had to work hard at school at subjects other than music, he could not devote himself wholeheartedly to the flute.
His grandmother told his parents it was due to his talent being dispersed.
He had found he had a good voice and was taking singing lessons, and he went on  flirting with the piano and a trumpet he had bought between practising his flute.
Tom was his grandmother's only grandchild and one day, when he was fifteen and staying at her house in Rickmansworth in order to have access to the piano, she told him she was going to make him her heir.
‘I've made a will and left you everything, Tom.’
He did not know what to say, so he said, ‘Thank you very much.’
‘I'm not making any conditions, I've already changed my will, but I'd like you to do one thing for me.
Well, two things really.
I'd like you to go on to a university and do music, but I think you'll do that anyway, and I'd like you to stop playing other instruments.
I mean, give up the piano and that trumpet you say you've got.’
‘It doesn't do me any harm.’
‘For my sake, Tom, because I ask you.’
Tom thought this a ridiculous reason for doing something (or not doing something), because a person who knew nothing about it asked you.
But he said he would, making a mental reservation that at any rate he would stop playing her piano.
He did not stop playing the trumpet or taking singing lessons.
Not playing her piano might have meant not going to Rickmansworth but he still went.
He went more often.
The idea of being nice to someone because they were going to leave you their money was not pleasant; Tom often told himself this, but it was the reason for his going to see his grandmother.
He also told her lies.
Apart from saying he had given up singing and trumpet-playing, he invented things, such as that his school had suggested he go in for the Young Musician of the Year contest.
About his acceptance by the Guildhall School of Music and Drama he did not have to lie.
He thought perhaps all lying would now be over because he was about to rush  along the highway to success, fame and fortune.
Tom did very well at the Guildhall where nobody told him he should stop singing, a piece of good news he passed on triumphantly to his grandmother.
It was after he had been spending a Sunday with her that the accident happened.
The accident changed Tom's life.
When he went home to his parents' house in Ealing or to the Barbican, his grandmother drove him the mile and a half to Rickmansworth station, which is up on the northern end of the Metropolitan Line.
Sometimes, in good weather, he walked.
The evening the accident happened was fine and he could have walked.
In any case, his grandmother would have driven him.
But while they were out in the garden during the afternoon they began talking to the man next door who had a motorbike and was leaving for the City on it at seven.
Tom had never before ridden pillion on a motorbike, but Andy the neighbour had a spare crash helmet.
For some complicated reason he made this trip every Sunday evening.
Tom did not much like the long train journey through Harrow and Northwood and Wembley down to Baker Street, and the changing and the waiting.
He accepted the offer of a lift.
They were on a narrow winding road which skirted Batchworth Heath when it happened.
The distance from his grandmother's house was just over a mile.
Andy overtook a container lorry, the kind of thing that should never have been on that road, and hit a Volvo estate car coming in the opposite direction.
Everything was going too fast except Andy and he had not been going fast enough.
Tom was thrown clear.
He flew through the air and struck his head against a tree, his life being saved by the helmet.
Andy died quickly under the wheels of the Volvo.
The six months Tom spent in hospital prevented his return to college.
He had a broken leg, several broken ribs, a broken collarbone and a very badly broken left hand.
‘Lucky you're not a pianist,’ said the orthopaedic surgeon.
The man probably thought you played the flute just with your mouth.
But it was not the damage to his hand or the rest of the obvious physical damage that made a tragedy for Tom.
It was what had happened inside his head.
Or what he thought had happened inside his head, for those at the hospital who were supposed to know told him the brain scan showed nothing untoward.
He had not fractured his skull.
His brain was undamaged.
How to explain to them that he was changed?
This quick temper that flared at nothing, that was new.
This irritability.
These headaches.
Above all, this loss of ambition, drive and — immeasurably worst — his lost music, his lost love of it, need for it.
Tom went home to Ealing at last.
The little finger on his left hand would be permanently stiff and the hand, though almost entirely usable, was not the shape it had once been.
More operations on it were proposed.
Tom did not know if he would have them.
He did not know if he could play the flute and he was afraid to try.
His father said he must apply to return to college.
‘They'll make me do my whole second year again,’ said Tom.
‘That's what they always do.’
‘You don't know that till you try.’
‘I won't get a grant for an extra year and I don't suppose you'll pay up.’
His father said not to talk to him like that, so Tom walked out and went to live with his grandmother in Rickmansworth.
His grandmother said if it was a fact he would not get a grant she would finance him but that he should find out.
It was surely only a matter of writing a letter or making a phone call.
Tom agreed but trying to compose the letter brought on one of his headaches.
Secretly, he began playing the flute.
He only played  when his grandmother was out.
It was a great day when he found, not so much that he could still play, but that he still wanted to.
For all that, his ineptitude caused him to fly into rages.
If he had had the strength he would have broken the flute, but his left hand was too weak to apply the necessary force.
Because he had to have money he got a job working in a sandwich bar near Baker Street.
Some people his grandmother knew had a little girl who wanted to learn the flute and Tom started giving her lessons.
Her parents did not seem to mind that he had no qualifications and had not finished his university course.
Most afternoons when his shift ended, he caught a Metropolitan train from Baker Street up to Rickmansworth, the Amersham Line.
But sometimes he went down into London instead and roamed about, especially when it was warm.
He liked listening to the street musicians who played at Covent Garden.
Once he went to a Prom at the Albert Hall.
At that time there were never any buskers in Baker Street station and the ones he saw were at Leicester Square or Green Park.
They played rock, which to Tom was a meaningless cacophony.
He got talking to a man called Mac he met while listening to Vivaldi in Regent's Park and they agreed to try playing something in one of the Baker Street concourses.
Mac had said something about his fondness for wind instruments without actually saying what he played.
Tom was aghast when he saw the bagpipes.
He brought Ollie with him.
Ollie could just about manage on the violin.
Tom told himself that beggars could not be choosers and if he jibbed at playing the flute in this company he could always sing.
It gratified him to discover how popular his singing was.
He and Ollie and Mac made a good team, playing at various Underground stations all that autumn and winter  until Mac left because he had found a place to live up north and they took Peter on.
They met Peter at Cambridge School, where they were all living.
He had lost his job because the club where he played the piano had to close and, though he was after another one on the switchboard in a hospice, he was for the time being at a loose end.
Peter could play a lot of instruments, though none very well.
When Tom told his grandmother he was moving out of her house and confessed — because since the accident he had also stopped lying, could not be bothered with prevarication — that he had been busking at stations, she told him she was horrified, she was disappointed in him.
‘I've been ill,’ he said.
‘I'll never be the same again, do you realize that?’
‘We'll none of us be the same again,’ she said.
‘People change all the time.
Some people change for the better.
You're not ill, it's all in your mind.’
‘Look, I'll never be a concert flautist.
My left hand will never work properly.
I've got to have money, haven't I ?’
‘You've got to have qualifications in this world before you can get money.
Tom, I'm asking you, I'm begging you, it's not too late.
Let's sit down this evening, you and I, and write to the Guildhall School.
If there's no grant forthcoming I'll pay.’
‘They won't take me back.’
‘Then we'll apply to others.
We'll apply to all the schools of music and polytechnics in the country.’
‘Look, I'll go back one day.
I'm young, I can go back any time I want.
I know I've got to go back, I know I need qualifications.
But first I need money.’
He moved out next day.
She was very cold with him.
At the station, where she drove him, though he had been in the habit of regularly walking there, she refused to kiss him.
‘Why don't you just go?
‘I'll be in touch,’ he said.
His hand was nearly all right.
One day, he thought, he would have that operation and then he would apply to go to a university with a music course.
But he was very young, he was not yet twenty-three.
A year to make some money in could be spared from all the time in the world.
They went where they liked, played where they chose.
Opinion was that Tottenham Court Road was the best pitch, the Central Line area.
Tom didn't know that at that station you had to book your pitch in advance, add your name or the name of your band to the list under the No Smoking sign.
A lot of Scots came this way via the Northern Line from King's Cross and they were giving their Scottish concert in the concourse when a heavy metal band arrived and told them roughly to move.
The railway police and station staff were always telling them that but they had never had it from fellow buskers before.
The drummer lashed out at Tom and caught him a glancing blow on the jaw and Tom had to be held back by Ollie to prevent him retaliating.
That was when they all realized acting like this was only playing into the hands of the authorities and giving them a real basis for enforcing their petty laws.
It also showed Tom something else: that busking was not what his grandmother and a lot of others seemed to think, just another kind of begging, but a real musical means of living, something you had to book and arrange like giving a concert in a concert hall.
Unlike the noise made by the strummers who called it pop or country, his was serious music.
That day he committed himself to being a busker.
He was a professional musician and the concourses of the Underground were his auditorium.
This would be the second time Mike's mother had looked after Catherine.
She lived on the other side of Chelmsford and Alice took Catherine there in the carrying cot on the bus.
It was high summer, a warm sunny day.
The baby was awake but fell asleep as they reached the house.
Alice's mother-in-law thought she was going to have an afternoon's shopping, it was what she liked doing herself, and she believed, without any evidence for this, that Alice had been longing to get to the shops on her own.
Shops were what she had missed most when she herself had been house-bound.
Alice gave her the bag in which Catherine's disposable nappies were and a change of clothes and she put the two bottles of formula into the fridge.
The thought came to her that she might never see this woman again.
Or this house, or this immaculate kitchen.
‘She won't need all that,’ said Mike's mother, eyeing the bottles.
‘How ever long are you going to be?’
A lifetime.
For ever.
‘Not long.
Mike starts a fortnight's holiday tomorrow.’
‘Well, I know that.
You're not going to be gone a fortnight, I hope.
Though I must say I don't know that I'd very much mind having this little sweet one for a couple of weeks to myself.’
You may have to.
‘Mike will be home at six.’
Alice told herself to stop making these  apparently inconsequential statements.
They were an expression of her inner fears and hopes.
Fortunately, Mike's mother took them as further manifestation of her confused mental state.
The baby was asleep.
Alice thought she could not leave her only child, her baby daughter, that she might never see again, without holding her once more, without at least giving her a last kiss.
It was not possible to do that.
Even if it meant disturbing her, waking her so that she cried when put down again, she must be lifted up in Alice's arms, held close to her and kissed goodbye.
Alice leant over the carrying cot.
She touched the baby's cheek with her finger, turned quickly away.
‘I'll go then.’
‘Don't worry about a thing.
Have a good time.’
The bus back took her past her own mother's house.
Alice purposely did not look out of the window.
She and Mike lived in a flat, very small, in a purpose-built block near the station.
They had been there for six months, the duration of their marriage.
Alice went up to the second floor in the lift, let herself into the flat and read, for the ninth or tenth time, the letter she had left for Mike.
It was not a note but a long letter explaining everything, as long and taking her as long to compose as the last piece of writing she had done, an essay comparing and contrasting Verdi and Wagner and their operas.
Alice crumpled it up and pushed it into the kitchen bin.
He might find it there but she did not think he would.
Instead she wrote, on the back of a supermarket bill printout:I have left.
I always said I would but you didn't believe me.
Catherine is with your mother, Alice .
When she wrote Catherine's name she started to cry, but the thought of how ludicrous it would be, how corny, if a tear got on the note and smudged the biro, stopped her.
It was then she understood that it was not too late to stay.
She need not go.
So far she had done nothing irrevocable.
She could go down into the town centre and look at the shops, have a cup of coffee somewhere, get back to her mother-in-law by four.
See Catherine again and bring her home.
Her packed suitcase was in the back of the bedroom cupboard.
More valued, infinitely more needed , the violin in its case on the living-room floor between the television and the bookshelves.
She had not played it since two months before Catherine was born.
On an impulse, she opened the case and took the violin out, held it and held the bow without applying it to the strings.
She knew she was afraid to play after so long and knew too that if she stayed here she would never play again.
But the sight and feel of it nerved her.
It gave her courage.
She replaced it in its case.
The money she had drawn out, emptying her account, less than a hundred pounds but better than nothing, was already in her bag.
It was much too warm to wear a coat but it would be imprudent to leave her winter coat behind, and nights were always cold.
Alice took off the cotton dress which was what young mothers wore in Chelmsford to shop in, put on jeans and a black T-shirt, the kind of clothes she would always wear now, through an indefinitely stretching future.
The heavy, dark-blue broadcloth coat would not go into the suitcase.
She put it over her shoulders.
Carrying the suitcase in one hand and the violin in the other, she walked the two hundred yards to Chelmsford station and caught the 15.53 to London.
They had bought the flat because it was convenient for Mike's daily train.
Later her mother was to say, ‘It's beyond belief, you left the baby behind and took the violin!’
It was some time since Alice had been in London.
While at the Royal Academy of Music she had lived there but that, though not much more than a year ago, now seemed infinitely distant.
A lifetime intervened, Catherine's gestation and her short existence.
Liverpool Street station, in process of being rebuilt, was dirty and noisy and very  large.
Alice thought, as she looked for signs to the Underground, I am frightened.
I am afraid of what I have done and where I am going.
By where she was going she meant her uncertain, unpredictable future, not the hotel in Bloomsbury which was just a jumping-off ground.
Once, like many Londoners, Alice had carried in her head a basic tube map, at least of inner London, but she had forgotten it.
Holborn could be reached directly by the Central Line, she discovered from a wall plan.
I mustn't go the wrong way, Alice thought to herself as she made her way to the platform.
I must remember I want a westbound train, not find myself heading off back into Essex.
She had reached London at the height of the rush.
There was no hope of getting a seat.
She stood against the glass partition by the double-leaved doors with the violin and the suitcase wedged behind her calves.
By now her mother-in-law would be wondering what had become of her.
She had not specified, but somewhere around four thirty to five would have been a reasonable time to return.
It was a quarter past five, she saw from the clock on Bank Station.
Her mother-in-law would be looking at the clock too, perhaps walking up and down with Catherine in her arms.
A lot more people got in, and at St Paul's, just when Alice thought it was impossible for more to get in, five did.
Someone pushed them from behind, pushed their backs with the flat of his hand, and the doors closed.
The edge of the violin case cut into her leg.
The coat felt insufferably hot, she thought she had seen people looking at the coat with amusement, but there was nothing she could do.
There was nowhere to put it down.
Catherine would be awake and would find Mike's mother unfamiliar.
Suppose she cried because Alice was not there?
Alice had not thought of that before.
What have I done?
She made a sound and suppressed it.
Mike's office was near Chancery Lane, that was his station, he must use this line.
She had never thought of that before either.
By now he would be in the train, the 17.20, that got to Chelmsford just after ten to six.
He always got that train, he was entirely reliable, steady, though no older than she, designed for a good husband and father.
A good father was what he was beyond everything.
If he had been indifferent to Catherine, if he had not loved her at least as much, more, than she did herself, she could not have done it.
It should have been a relief to escape from the train at Holborn but as she crossed the platform and began to mount the stairs a feeling of confusion and disorientation took hold of her.
At the top she stood leaning against the wall; her breathing had become strange.
It was as if when she caught her breath she would necessarily break into a hysterical laughing and crying.
She swallowed,–forced herself to draw a long breath.
The coat had made her so hot that she was sweating heavily.
Sweat was actually running down her face like tears.
What happens next will seal my fate: the places I find, the letters I write, even the people I meet who point me this way or that.
Alice set down the case and violin and wiped her face on her sleeve, wiped it on the rough wool sleeve of her winter coat.
I am entering my true life, the life I was prevented from leading — well, that I prevented myself from leading by my stupidity, my incredible folly.
Whatever happens to me now will be new, will be an advancement, an adventure, and it will not be Chelmsford.
My life, which was held up, has begun again.
The sound of music met her as she approached the concourse where the escalators were.
She walked on, towards the music.
In her time at the Royal Academy she remembered buskers in the tube, but they played rock or sometimes  jazz.
The sound she was approaching, though hackneyed, its value almost destroyed by its popularity, was what the world called classical: an air of Mozart, a little night music.
Alice saw the musicians as she came to the end of the passage.
There were two of them, two men.
One was playing a flute, the other a guitar.
The guitar was not a suitable instrument for this piece and Alice could see that he was providing only a background strumming.
His guitar case lay open on the floor in front of him and, as she watched, a woman coming down dropped a copper coin into it.
The man with the guitar was dark and smooth-faced, with longish hair, a sensitive mouth.
He looked in his forties.
His companion was much younger, perhaps no older than herself, fair, very good-looking, blue-eyed, with the sort of open face that persuades you its possessor must be gentle and kind.
Alice had stopped to listen to them because this man, this kind-faced fair one, was quite a good performer.
She put her case and her violin down against the wall.
The Mozart came to an end and she clapped.
Someone always has to start the clapping and when she did a few others followed.
A man put a 5p piece into the guitar case and then Alice put a lop piece in.
The fair man said thank you and he and the guitarist began to play Tchaikovsky.
The music they played gradually grew familiar to Alice; it was music for the violin, the famous Violin Concerto, and it sounded very strange on the flute and guitar, so strange that it took her a moment or two to recognize it.
They managed to render the melody, the tune.
Her instinct was to ignore the look the fair man was giving her, a look that was hopeful and inviting.
She intended to pick up her cases and proceed with what she was here to do, go up and out into the street and thence to Streatham Street to find the hotel.
But she hesitated.
The  certainty that this particular music was being played directly at her and for her, that the fair man had seen her violin case and perhaps a look in her eyes of wistfulness, the fair man alone, for the guitarist seemed only there for support and back-up, decided her.
Except that it was not really a decision, more an unthought-out reaction.
Alice squatted down, opened the case, took out her violin and bow and, hesitating only for a moment, walked over to stand by the others.
The flute faltered, the flute player stepped aside and indicated to her the place between himself and the hollow-cheeked man with the guitar.
Alice caught a reassuring smile from the guitarist.
She began to play.
When Alice was sixteen her mother, angry with her about something, said in a fury, ‘You needn't think being good looking is going to be an advantage in life.
It won't be.
It'll be a burden.’
Even then she knew her mother said ‘good-looking’ when she meant ‘beautiful’, just as she said ‘fond of’when she meant ‘love’.
And she also knew she was beautiful, enjoyed it, and that her mother, also beautiful, could see her own looks fading.
‘You'll never know if people want you for your looks or for yourself.
If you ever get to be a concert violinist, which I personally doubt, you'll always wonder if people want you on the platform because of your looks or because you're any good.’
‘It doesn't work like that,’ she had said loftily.
‘You don't know anything about it.’
‘You think it's going to be so marvellous having men buzzing round you, but it won't be for long, and then what'll you have when it stops?’
‘My music.’
Alice, playing her violin at Holborn station, took it for  granted, she did not even have to think about it, that the man playing the flute beside her had invited her to play because she was beautiful.
He wanted her to remain, to go on to Vivaldi and the Handel marches because her playing was good.
She did not think it good, it was the first time she had played for weeks and the sounds she made disquieted her, but perhaps it was good enough for busking.
She could not help observing that more coins fell into the guitar case behind her than had done before she began.
She had rolled up her coat and laid it on her suitcase.
Playing had a liberating effect on her.
She understood the true meaning of a phrase she had often heard but never defined: in her element.
Incongruously, ridiculously, here in this Underground station, with musicians she did not know, playing to an unknown, only occasionally apprecia-tive and ever-shifting audience, she was in her own element.
The fair man whispered to her, ‘One final piece and then we'll call it a day.
Can you do the ‘Entry of the Queen of Sheba’?
They like that.’
‘I can try.’
‘You're great.’
She smiled at him.
The guitar had no place here and the guitarist sat back with a grin, his back to the open case, and let them get on with it.
They played it as a duet, perfectly teamed, at the fast pace the piece demanded, rollicking and dramatic.
Alice ended with a flourish of her bow, held it high in the air and found herself laughing in triumph.
There was real applause this time, as at a real concert.
She turned smiling to the flautist.
For a moment she thought he was going to throw his arms round her and hug her, she was sure he had been thinking of it, but he hesitated and she turned away.
‘You've done that before,’ the guitarist said, scooping the coins from the case and into a large brown envelope.
‘Not in the tube.’
She giggled, pointing to a notice on the wall.
‘Look.
Busking or playing musical instruments in the Underground, to the annoyance of other passengers, is an offence …
It says you can be fined £50
‘No one ever is.
I'm called Peter and he's Tom.’
‘Alice.‘
‘They never executes nobody nohow,’ said the man called Peter.
‘Other passengers aren't annoyed, you see.
They love it.’
This was Tom.
‘It brightens up their dreary journeys.
Look, you've a right to some of this.’
He took the envelope from Peter.
‘You've a right to at least a third, maybe more.
You really drew the crowds with your playing.’
‘And she's prettier than us.’
Alice shook her head.
‘I don't want it.
You keep it.
I've got to go.’
She looked up the range of escalators.
It was the gateway to life and one she suddenly had no wish to pass through, one she felt a gripping fear of passing through.
But every day now would bring its own fear, a series of terrors.
She must face them, get on with them, begin now.
She put the violin back into its case, picked up the bundle she had made of her coat and thrust it under her arm as she hoisted up her suitcase.
‘Well, goodbye.
I really enjoyed that.’
‘How about joining us at Green Park tomorrow?’
‘I won't be there,’ Peter said.
‘Got to work.’
‘What's this then if it's not work?’
‘You know what I mean.’
‘Have you got to work too?’
Tom said, looking at Alice.
‘No.’
She felt like telling him who she was and what she had done, only he wouldn't be interested, he'd be embarrassed.
‘I haven't got to do anything.
I mean, I've really got to do everything and I start tomorrow.’
He was nodding, looking as if he understood.
‘I must go.’
‘Where are you going?’
‘Well, it's a hotel, a sort of hotel.
A girl I was at school with, her mother runs it.
You won't want to hear about this, it's boring.
I'm going to stay there for a bit while I look round for a place.’
Tom said, ‘Please come to Green Park tomorrow.
Say you will.
Please.’
She was almost amused by his vehemence.
‘Why?’
‘You're so beautiful to look at, isn't she, Pete?
And you're a beautiful violinist.
Are you really looking for a place?’
Alice lifted her shoulders, trying to seem indifferent.
‘Who isn't?’
‘I might be able to help.
Come to Green Park tomorrow.‘
She used one of Mike's worn-out expressions, immediately wished she had not.
‘That's an offer I can't refuse.’
They went up to the street with her, Tom carrying her coat and Peter her case.
Alice waved as they went back down, until they were lost to sight on their way to Bond Street and then, they had said, to West Hampstead on the Jubilee.
An hour had passed since she had thought about Catherine, about her and Mike and what would be going on at home.
This now returned and it seemed that her meeting with Tom and Peter had been like a dream from which she was waking up to reality.
It was very light outside, a shock of harsh brightness.
London felt hot and dusty and the air smelt different from Chelmsford air, a compound of diesel and petrol fumes, exotic tobacco, oriental cooking and occasionally a whiff of urine.
She found the hotel.
Mrs Archer told her that apart from three vacant rooms ‘for the tourism’, all the others were let off to the council, who put homeless people into them.
These were mostly Somalis and Sudanis.
Mrs Archer  sniffed and shrugged her shoulders, admitting that the money was good.
It was not Alice's idea of a Bloomsbury hotel.
Shabbiness she had expected, but not dirt and this air of something disreputable lurking though unseen.
She was told where her room was and on the stairs — there was no lift encountered a young woman in a black veil with a small pretty face peeping between the folds.
Four small children trooped down behind her.
Alice's room was tiny, with a single bed, one other piece of furniture apart from the wall cupboard, a small chair, and a narrow window that would not open.
Later as she lay in that bed, after she had eaten a meal in a small cheap cafe in New Oxford Street, she squirmed between sheets of a kind she had never seen before, purple knitted nylon.
It seemed to her as if every hair on her body, every roughness of skin, unevenness of toenail, snagged on the sticky, shiny fibres.
She turned this way and that, imagining Catherine in her cot beside the bed in which Mike slept alone.
By five in the morning she had decided to go back, to return to them and forget music, blame her defection on a temporary post-natal madness.
She slept, woke up at nine to find out her second mistake: that all hotels everywhere serve breakfast.
The cafe which had provided her supper had coffee and Danish pastries on offer.
Drinking the thin, bitter coffee, she reverted to the ideas of the night, to returning home, and before she had finished it was resolved on packing her things and making her way to Holborn station and thence to Liverpool Street.
The map of the London Underground, which can be seen inside every train, on all stations, on the back of the London A-Z guide, on tea-cloths on sale at the London Transport Museum, on posters, in diaries and in sundry other places, has been called a model of its kind, a work of art.
It was designed by Henry Beck and first used by London Transport on posters in 1933.
They paid him five guineas, or 5.25 for it.
It has been reproduced in millions and has served as the model for metro maps all over the world.
The last to carry the signature Henry C. Beck in the lower lefthand corner was issued in 1959.
Today's version is irritatingly called by London Transport Underground a ‘journey planner’.
It presents the underground network as a geometric grid.
Some say that if you stood it up-ended on your roof it would look like a television aerial.
The tube lines do not, of course, lie at right angles to one another like the streets of Manhattan.
Nor do they branch off at acute angles or form perfect oblongs.
A true map of the London Underground shows the central complex as a shape suggestive of a swimming dolphin, its snout being Aldgate, its forehead Old Street, the crown of its head King's Cross, its spine Paddington, White City and Acton, its tail Ealing Broadway and its underbelly the stations of Kensington.
The outer configurations branch out in graceful tentacles.
The seal has become a medusa, a jellyfish.
Its extremities touch Middlesex and Hertfordshire, Essex and Surrey.
A claw penetrates Heathrow.
The Metropolitan Line, which was begun in 1863, had additions made throughout the 1860S and 1870S and in 1882 and 1884.
The District Line, which was begun in 1865, continued to grow until 1902.
Additions were made to the Central Line,.
first opened in 1900, in 1908, 1912, 1920 and 1946–9.
The years between 1860 and 1884 saw the building of the Circle, for a long time called the Inner Circle.
The Northern Line was begun in 1890 but added to throughout the twentieth century until 1941.
A new terminus and intervening stations were added to the Piccadilly Line of 1903–7 in 1933 and 1971.
London's only entirely new tube line in recent times, the Victoria, opened in 1971, and the Jubilee, only a small part of which was new, the rest the partially transformed Bakerloo of 1905–15, was completed in 1979.
Since then the Docklands Light Railway has branched off the network to serve the redeemed areas of London's east river.
By eleven she was in Green Park Underground station with her violin, looking for Tom, lured to him by the sound of the flute reaching her as she descended the escalator.
‘I didn't think you'd come.’
‘I nearly didn't,’ she said.
‘I nearly went back to where I came from.’
He looked inquiringly at her, waiting for her to say more, but when she did not introduced the man he was with as Ollie, another guitarist.
This was Ollie's last time, he said, he was going to live in France.
‘They all move away,’ said Tom.
‘I expect I shall.
I'll have to.
I can't afford to stay in this awful dump I'm in for long.’
He started singing then and they accompanied him.
Alice suggested he try the Don's serenade from Don Giovanni .
They had no mandolin but Ollie's guitar would do.
While he sang to the girl the Don wants to come to her window, calling her his treasure, asking her not to be cruel, at least to let him see her, he looked at Alice, turned his face away from the audience who had gathered and looked at her.
She was rather embarrassed but people loved it.
A lot of coins were thrown into the guitar case and some of them were pounds.
Alice had a poor opinion of her own voice, an uncertain soprano, but when Tom suggested the duet the Don sings with Zerlina she agreed.
He sang in the words of the aria that she should give him her hand and put his out to her, but she pretended not to understand.
People clapped.
Ollie scooped out the money and found just a little short of l 5
‘We usually bring our own food and eat it in the park,’ Tom said, ‘but today we thought we'd eat a proper meal in a cafe with you.’
‘But you didn't expect me to come.’
‘I half did.
I hoped you would.’
It was a sandwich bar like the one he had worked in.
They made just enough money busking for him not to have to go back to that.
Alice thought it sounded a hand-to-mouth existence.
She did not tell them she had never had a job, had been supported by a husband she had left.
When the coffee came Tom said she could come and live at Cambridge School if she liked.
‘A school?’
‘It used to be.
It's just a house now where people rent rooms, only the rent's very low.
There's a room free now Ollie's going.
I asked the man who owns it and he said you could have the Headmaster's Study.’
She laughed.
‘It sounds like a good address.’
‘Say you will.’
‘Leave her alone,’ said Ollie.
‘Let her make up her own mind.
She ought to see it first.’
‘Of course she'll see it.
We'll go up there now.’
The Headmaster's Study was on the first floor next to Four.
Alice, who had several times caught Tom looking admiringly at her while they were coming up there in the tube, and could not forget the way he had held out his hand to her while they sang the duet, wondered if having the room next to his was a good idea.
But it was the only one available, since Jarvis did not want to let the other rooms on the second floor.
The sound of the trains she was sure would prevent her sleeping at night.
But she took it.
The absurd rent lured her, it made her hundred pounds look less pathetic than it had when she checked into Mrs Archer's hotel.
Tom insisted on going back with her to Streatham  Street to fetch her suitcase and winter coat.
On the return journey he told her all about himself and he held up his left hand for her scrutiny.
It looked the same as the other one to her, except perhaps that the knuckle bone of the little finger was more prominent than the rest and the finger itself rather stiff.
‘I think your grandmother was right.
You should go back to college.’
‘I don't mind you saying it.’
‘That's what I've come to London for.
I've got to go on studying.
I want to go to Brussels, that's the best place.
We ought to have a national conservatoire of music in this country but we don't.’
‘I'll go back to college one day.
I have this feeling I'll know when the time's right.
I'll have to pay for it myself too, but I will.
It would be wrong to rush into anything.’
She nodded, not taking in much of what he said.
Being alone, as she soon would be, was a threatening thing.
She did not want to find herself alone in that Headmaster's Study, where she would have to begin to think.
For the first time since her escape she was very conscious of the fact that she had given birth only a month before and could even fancy she felt a pulling sensation where the fundament stitches had been.
She was sore and uncomfortable, perhaps because she had been standing for so long and walking so much.
If she was alone she was afraid she might begin to cry.
The last thing she wanted was for Tom to take her under his wing, to regard her in some sense as his find and his property, but that was what was happening.
He said they must meet later, she must come and eat with him in his room and he would get a bottle of wine.
Then he left her.
To avoid introspection she concentrated on her surroundings.
Nothing remained to show that the headmaster had  had his daily being here, perhaps here conducted interviews with backsliding pupils, commended scholars.
There was no desk, only a big bed someone had made up with whose sheets she did not know, an armchair and a table, a cupboard, a window through which the passing trains could be seen, tube trains and Metropolitan trains and the trains that went up to the Chilterns.
She had seen a phone in the big hall they called the vestibule.
Her mind emptied.
She sat on the bed and real life came rushing in to fill the vacuum.
She thought of Mike starting his holiday today.
He would be at his mother's and Catherine would be there too and they would be talking about her, that was all they would talk about.
They would be saying she was mad and her behaviour beyond their understanding.
Mike's mother would say she was mad and wicked.
By this time, if not long before, they would have phoned her parents and talked it all over with them.
Alice decided to tell no one about it.
She would keep it to herself.
There was no point in talking about it to someone who did not know the personalities involved and could not appreciate the circumstances.
She resolved on this but three hours later, having eaten Tom's Indian takeaway and drunk half Tom's wine, she was telling him her whole history.
Tom said, ‘Why did you get married?
Why didn't you have an abortion?’
He could not know it but to talk of aborting Catherine, who was a living child, a person, was like coolly contemplating murder.
To talk of it now, that is.
She had thought of it then.
‘Everyone got at me,’ she said.
‘It's hard to explain because you think I'm strong.’
He had said so.
She must be strong to leave like that, to make plans for leaving and carry them out.
‘I'd just left the Royal Academy, I'd just got the results  of my finals.
Mike was pleased I was pregnant.
He wanted to be married and have a family and he said this way I'd have to marry him.’
‘Did he do it on purpose?’
‘No, it was my fault, it was an accident.
I'd never thought of marrying him, he was just a boyfriend, he didn't even seem all that attractive after I got pregnant.
Then my parents and his parents started on me.
My mother said she didn't know what things were coming to when you had to make girls get married because in her youth it was always the boys who didn't want to.’
She thought he was going to start talking about abortions again.
He only said, ‘You didn't have to do what they said.‘
‘I gave in.
I know it was weak.
I was one of those people who're sick all the time in pregnancy, not just in the mornings, I was sick day after day for hours.
I couldn't go out, I couldn't do anything.
Mike was there every day, being nice to me and telling me not to worry about anything, he'd found this flat and his mother was seeing to furnishing it and they were making arrangements for the wedding.
I just gave in, I hadn't the strength to resist them.
A week before the wedding the sickness stopped and my mother said it had been psychological, she said that ‘deep down inside’— I'm quoting her-I longed for marriage and once I knew I was really going to get married I stopped worrying.’
‘What would you have done if you hadn't got pregnant?’
‘I was going to be a concert violinist.’
She looked at him.
‘I'm still going to be.
That's why I ran away.
That's why I left my baby.’
Her eyes filled with tears and she began to cry.
Tom got up and went to sit beside her.
He took her hand, then when she seemed not to mind this, put his arms round her.
She sobbed and he held her close to him.
A dark purplish-red, or burgundy, is the colour of the Metropolitan, green of the District, yellow of the Circle, scarlet of the Central, brown of the Bakerloo, dark blue of the Piccadilly and black of the Northern.
These are the colours of lines on Beck's map and also sometimes of station trims and new station bucket seats.
On the map the Victoria Line became light blue.
When the Jubilee Line was nearly finished there was some speculation as to what colour would be used for it.
Possibilities remaining were pink, lime green, orange and mauve.
London Transport Underground chose grey.
Pink has been given, unexpectedly and without precedent, to the Hammersmith branch of the Metropolitan.
The days went by and Alice did not phone her mother.
Each day she had gone with Tom and Peter or just with Tom down into the Underground and played her violin.
This, in spite of resolving not to do it again, not to lower her standards, which playing pop classics against a background noise of trains and pounding feet and chatter, yells and whistles and rival groups, seemed to her to be.
Standing there with the violin tucked under her chin and the bow in her hand, she was removed from anxiety and from thinking of Catherine.
In a way it was as if she was drugged.
She felt set apart.
The people who passed by, sometimes pausing to give them money, were the others.
She and Tom and Peter were special and different, allied by their music.
It kept her from worry and it kept her from settling down to write those applications which would lead to  progress in her career of serious music.
Alice had already told herself that it would be stupid to think about those applications yet.
Apart from still being post-parturitive, she was in a state of shock — self-induced shock but shock just the same.
The worst thing for her was to be alone.
The best thing at the moment was to be with someone who admired her and was kind.
While Tom played his flute or sang, she played her violin, not much liking the sounds she heard herself making, sometimes even glad there was so much background racket and an undiscerning audience.
But she had re-entered the world of music, she comforted herself with this; in the least expected way she was back in the life from which Mike and his family and marriage had threatened to cut her off for ever.
That night, after she had confided in Tom and begun to cry, he had comforted her, held her in his arms and kissed her.
If he had not known she had had a baby only a month before he would have wanted to make love to her, she was.
sure of that.
But she did not know if she would ever want to make love to Tom.
Would she, come to that, with any man ever again?
Alice's body felt cold and closed-up and stiff except where it felt sore and vulnerable, and her mind felt sore all over.
She slept badly.
By the third day the silence from Mike and her parents and his parents grew uncanny.
Yet how could it be otherwise when they did not know where she was?
She asked herself which of them she should phone and found herself trembling at the thought of phoning any of them.
His parents were impossible, her mother-in-law would just put the phone down.
As she stood there in the vestibule, in front of the carved names of Cambridge School's distinguished pupils, all the Dorothys and Joans and Ediths and Hildas, the glass-panelled front door opened and an old woman let herself in.
She said good morning to  Alice and Alice said hallo.
She was thin and rather tall with a very lined gentle face and hair that was white but which Alice could see had once been blonde.
She could also have told this was Tina's mother before Mrs Darne went off down the passage that led to the Headmaster's Flat.
Alice thought it would be easier to phone someone like that than her own mother if you had done what she had done, but she could be wrong there.
Appearances were deceptive and her own mother looked handsome and smart and had what people called a very sweet expression.
Still, it was her mother she must phone and that by default.
Apart from other considerations, many other almost insuperable obstacles, in order to get hold of Mike or her father she would have to go through switchboards and in her father's case a secretary.
She dialled her mother's number and nearly put the phone down when it started ringing.
When her mother answered, she said the stupid thing she always said to those who were supposed to be close to her, ‘It's me.’
There was silence.
Alice heard her mother's indrawn breath.
More silence, nothing.
She expected the receiver to be replaced.
‘It's me.
It's Alice.’
‘I heard you the first time,’ her mother said.
Alice waited.
At least her mother had spoken.
‘I think you must have lost your mind.’
‘All right, I can understand people might think that,’ Alice said.
‘I had to leave, that's all.
If I'd left it longer I might never have gone.’
‘Then it's a great pity you didn't leave it longer.
Who do you think is looking after your baby?
Did you think of that?
Are you going to condescend to tell anyone when you're coming back?’
‘I'm not coming back.’
‘Alice, you are coming back.
You are having some sort of mental breakdown.
The best thing will be to tell me where you are and Daddy will come and fetch you, or Mike will.
Well, Daddy will.
Mike's too angry and upset to do anything.
You need to see a doctor.
You probably need to be hospitalized.’
Alice had always called her mother Mummy.
This would no longer do.
‘Mother,’ she said, ‘I left because I want to be a musician, I don't want to be someone's mother and someone's wife.
I don't love Mike, I don't even like him any more.’
If she mentioned Catherine's name she knew her voice would break.
‘I'm not going to tell you where I am.
Not yet.
But I'll tell you one thing.
I'm a violinist now, I'm free to be that.
I don't expect you to understand.’
Marcia Anderson gave her hard little laugh.
It always made Alice wince.
‘Mike saw you'd taken your violin.
You left your baby and took your violin.’
‘Goodbye, Mother,’ said Alice.
‘Give my love to my father.’
‘I shan't bother, he's never going to speak to you again,’ said Marcia.
Alice looked up at the lamp which was like an iron tarantula hanging from its web.
Leaning her head back kept the tears inside her eyes.
She thought, I'm not going to cry any more, it's stupid and awful, wanting to cry for everything.
She stood there, leaning on the phone table, and started reading the names incised into the wood.
She made herself read to keep from crying: Hilda Bevans, two credits, three passes in Oxford School Certificate, 1944; Marjorie Grace Pickthorne, one distinction, two credits, four passes in Oxford School Certificate, 1945.
From behind the door of Remove came the regular faint clatter of Jarvis's typewriter.
The first trains were drawn by steam engines.
The smoke and  steam had to escape and passengers had to breathe.
A civil servant home on furlough from Egypt said the tunnels smelt like a crocodile's breath.
In the end they used a locomotive which diverted the steam into tanks behind the engine by means of a ducted exhaust.
When the train emerged from the tunnel the tanks were opened and the steam released.
The point beyond Paddington Station chosen for the release of underground steam was in Bayswater, among the new terraces of five-storey houses then being built.
In order not to spoil the appearance of Leinster Gardens, facades were put up where numbers 23 and 24 should be, at a glance indistinguishable from their neighbours but easily spotted by the observant eye.
I was first taken to see these ‘houses’ by my father when I was nine; I have often wondered since then why they had never become a tourist attraction.
From the opposite pavement in Leinster Gardens, sandwiched between two hotels, the Blakemore and the Henry VIII, they present an appearance of early decay.
It is possible to see that they had never been lived in,could never be lived in, though front door and portico are present and their ranks of windows, the spaces where the glass should be painted a dull blue.
On that first occasion my father took me through Craven Hill Gardens into Porchester Terrace, showed me the blank brick back of the facades and lifted me up on to the wall so that I could look down into the shaft.
I asked my father about the people in the adjoining houses, they must have lived in perpetual fog, and I remember he told me that perhaps they got their houses at a reduced rent.
Mrs Darne was coming back from Tina's.
She had a shopping list in her hand which she put into her handbag when she saw Alice.
They had already spoken, so this time Mrs Darne only smiled and Alice managed a faint smile back.
Her mother's words rang in her ears.
She was making an ineffectual effort to keep herself from trembling.
Mrs Darne, she guessed, would be too polite, too gentlewomanly, to let herself notice.
As the old woman reached the front door there came distantly but tremendously, with a long reverberating thunderousness, the sound of an explosion.
Mrs Darne said, ‘Goodness, what was that?’
She had a voice and intonation exactly like those of the history mistress at Alice's school, an elderly lady, rumoured to be a baronet's sister.
Alice went outside with her.
The sound was over and silence was back, or what passed for silence here.
A train ran by.
The front garden of Cambridge School was like a piece of meadow, long grass, willow herb, daisies and golden rod.
A laburnum growing out of the midst of it was in flower.
‘I suppose that was a bomb.’
‘I suppose it was,’ said Alice.
‘There were houses all down this side of the street once,’ said Mrs Darne, ‘but they were bombed in the war.
That was the night all our windows blew out.
We had a Morrison shelter and we were under that, my husband and myself and his mother.
Of course, that was long before Tina was born.’
‘Perhaps it was just a car backfiring,’ said Alice, ‘or even thunder.’
‘No, it was a bomb,’ said Mrs Darne in the tone of an expert.
Alice went back into the house and upstairs to the Headmaster's Study.
She had borrowed a small tape recorder from Jarvis and was going to record her own playing, a critical exercise that she had postponed from day to day.
She took her violin out of its case, feeling afraid.
Accommodation was plentiful at Cecilia Darne's house where all those years ago a bomb had blown the windows out.
It was a fine large house, built in the last decade of the nineteenth century of red brick and red tiles.
By Tina's standards and those of her friends, it was enormous.
When she was in her teens she had even felt ashamed, having to confess to people she knew that she and her mother lived all alone in it instead of letting bits of it off as flats.
But when Cecilia was married in 1940 and first went to live there it was thought a poor sort of house, semi-detached, shabby and in a dowdy district.
The Jarvis family had all come down in the world, considering the money their Victorian grandfather, a manufacturer of bathroom fittings, had made for them, Ernest with the dwindling Cambridge School, Evelina nutty as a squirrel's cage and with her first sojourn in a nursing home behind her, Cecilia married to a Customs officer.
The house was called Lilac Villa, a name no one used, though the front garden contained several ancient gnarled lilac bushes.
High-ceilinged large rooms filled the three storeys.
On the top floor the bedrooms had pretty sloping ceilings and dormer windows peering out under eyelid gables.
The front windows stared into a row of typical West Hampstead studios, red brick, balconied and with Gothic windows from a design by Burne-Jones.
Tina had lived up there with her children when Brian threw her out, but ate downstairs because Cecilia was a good cook and the television was in the drawing room.
Tina never felt guilty about anything, but Cecilia was guilty all the time.
She blamed herself for the way Tina was, though she did not know what she had done wrong, and she blamed herself for not trying harder to keep Tina in her house when she wanted to go off to Jarvis Stringer's.
Cecilia was willing to do anything to make up to Tina for the deprivations of her childhood, though what these deprivations were she hardly knew.
They must have been there because people only grew up like Tina when they had had a hard time as children.
Perhaps she had been too old for  parenthood, and then it was very sad for a girl to lose her father in her teens.
Perhaps she should have had a brother or sister for Tina, though being well into her forties by then and having waited twelve years for Tina to come along made that impossible.
When Cecilia looked back to Tina's childhood it was always that particular day when Ernest Jarvis had hanged himself that she remembered.
Tina was seven, very pretty and sweet, with long blonde hair.
Even then she had found it difficult to get up in the morning, had begged and pleaded to be allowed to lie in a little longer, had gone back to sleep more often than not, the forerunner, Cecilia supposed, of her present practice of often lying in bed till noon.
It was while Cecilia was running upstairs for the third time to tell Tina she must get up, she really must or she would be late for school, that she heard the Cambridge School bell utter a single toll.
The strange thing was that she knew it was Ernest's bell, the bell she had tactfully told him would be unsuitable for the kind of school he had in mind.
She stood on the stairs by the open window, waiting for the next stroke of the bell, waiting in fact for this sign of Ernest's madness.
It would not be too extreme to ascribe insanity to a headmaster with no pupils ringing a long-silent bell in an empty school.
Besides, Cecilia had the example of poor Evelina before her and the recollection of a family rumour that a brother of that manufacturing grandfather had died in a lunatic asylum.
No second stroke came.
Fifteen minutes were to pass before the bell rang a second time, succeeded by that awful rattle.
Cecilia had closed the window and gone on upstairs to find dear little Tina up and dressed and trying to brush out the tangles in her golden hair.
She had been a very affectionate child, climbing on Cecilia's knee to hug her, sitting with her arm round her father and her head on his  shoulder.
Cecilia sometimes wondered if this was the precursor of all that sex she seemed so fond of later on.
She, Cecilia, though a loving, kind and humble woman, touched no one if she could help it and thought this reserve might be connected with her never having been much for sex.
Of course she had touched Tina and kissed and cuddled her too much or too little?
Tina said a terrible thing to her when she was seventeen, two years after her father died.
It was in the late sixties, an awful time in Cecilia's opinion.
Morals began to lose their meaning and people said anything that came into their heads, the sort of thing that used to appear in books as a row of stars or be written down on slips of paper and handed to judges in court.
‘If you and Daphne had been young today,’ Tina said, ‘I suppose you'd have realized you were in love with each other and just lived together.’
Cecilia was speechless.
She blushed deeply; Tina laid a hand on her arm and laughed merrily.
‘Oh, Tina,’ said Cecilia, ‘what a terrible thing to say to me, what a really terrible thing.’
‘No need to freak out,’ said Tina in the parlance of the time.
She held her mother's hot fidgety hand and stroked it kindly.
‘If that's the way you are, that's the way you are.
I don't suppose it's too late anyway.
You look quite young for your age.’
Cecilia tried to gather together some dignity.
She was near to tears.
‘Daphne is my closest friend, Tina.
We've been best friends since our first day at school, when we were five.
I am very fond of her and I respect her as she respects me.’
Tina only laughed and shook her head.
But the next time Cecilia saw Daphne Bleech-Palmer Tina's words came back to her and she was for a while shy and constrained.
If they had not been in the habit of seeing each other so  often, at least once a week and sometimes more, talking on the phone every day, that appalling suggestion might have driven a bolt through their friendship, eventually destroying it.
But Daphne's dear familiarity, the pleasure of her company, the comfort of knowing pretty well what she would say in response to any remark, the whole warm, easy,ancient closeness that had subsisted between them for more than half a century, won over Cecilia's temporary, though profound, embarrassment.
It had been deepest at the moment just inside the Bleech-Palmer front door when, as always, Daphne set her plump hands on Cecilia's shoulders and lifted her lips to Cecilia's cheek.
The blood had run into Cecilia's face and she felt that its hot presence under her skin must burn Daphne's mouth.
But Daphne only smiled and, as also was customary, asked after Tina.
They were both widows, so there was no husband's welfare to inquire about.
Cecilia forced herself to show an interest in Daphne's son and Daphne's garden and after a while things grew easier.
Their frequent meetings gradually heaped oblivion on Tina's remark and if Cecilia never entirely forgot it, it surfaced only when something was said that dug into that particular muddy accumulation.
A piece, for instance, about homosexuals on the television, which was all too frequent, or some comment on the things Peter got up to .
One of them phoned the other every evening.
Daphne, whom Cecilia suspected of being rather less well-off than she was herself, though this was not a matter to delve into, phoned her just after six on alternate evenings and she phoned Daphne on the others.
The arrangement was to wait until after six because that was when the cheap rate started.
Cecilia always waited until after 6.30.
She liked to watch the early evening news on BBC I and see it through to the end so that she could get the weather forecast.
Daphne  tended to phone her just after six, which meant missing fifteen or twenty minutes of the news, but Cecilia never said anything about this because she would far rather miss the news than hurt Daphne.
She could always watch it at nine, though this was not the same.
By nine she felt, knowing this to be illogical, that the news was stale and she had passed three foolish hours in ignorance of disaster or even, very occasionally, of something wonderful.
It was her turn to phone Daphne this evening.
Cecilia sat in her comfortable drawing room on the sofa-bed that was always a sofa and never a bed —‘But you've got five bedrooms, Ma,’ said Tina who had her eye on it — and turned on the television at twenty seconds to six.
She had learned to time it so as not to hear the tail end of the terrible Neighbours music which, no matter how much you hated it, was a tune you could easily get on the brain.
The first item on the news was the bomb.
It had been a bomb.
It had gone off in a hotel in Leinster Place and would always in future be known as the ‘Bayswater Bomb’.
Two people had been killed, a waitress and a hotel guest, and five injured.
If it had been timed to go off an hour later, probably it had been timed to go off an hour later but something had gone wrong, the hotel dining room would have been full and the results of the explosion much worse.
Cecilia thought this would not be much comfort to the relatives and friends of the waitress and the guest.
The waitress was only nineteen.
There followed a catalogue of bomb outrages in London in recent and distant years.
No terrorist group had yet claimed responsibility.
Cecilia reflected on how massive the explosion must have been for her and that beautiful girl to have heard it up here in West Hampstead.
For some reason, perhaps because they had heard it together, she equated that girl with the dead girl in her mind and thought that if bombers could actually see the people they  were going to kill, see that they were young and beautiful and full of hope, they might not do what they did.
She said it to Daphne when she phoned her after the weather forecast.
‘That one doesn't work,’ said Daphne.
‘Look at the Nazis and the gas chambers.’
She did not seem much interested in the bomb.
Peter was being silly again.
He had brought a boy called Jay to meet her, in exactly the way Arthur had taken her to meet his mother all those years ago.
Then he phoned, he had just this minute phoned, to ask her what she thought of Jay.
‘I told him he was being silly but he'd grow out of it.’
‘I'm sure you're right.’
‘He'll meet the right girl and then he'll feel differently.’
As Daphne said this there flashed into Cecilia's mind that conversation with Tina, that terrible thing Tina had said, and another thought, one that seemed to swim up out of the deep waters of her unconscious, the idea that she, Cecilia Darne, yes, she, had once long ago met the right girl, and here was that right girl talking to her now of something, oh, so akin to what Tina meant…
Panic was the feeling Alice had when, after several tries, she gave up attempting the Beethoven.
She threw down the bow.
She felt like throwing it across the room but managed to control herself.
What was she going to do?
Why hadn't she realized how hopeless she had become, how she had forgotten everything during those months of pregnancy?
She began pacing the room.
Had that really been her playing?
Not for a moment had she been able to deceive herself that she was anything but bad, truly bad.
Buying that blank tape had been a waste, for she knew she would never dare play it back.
At the window she pressed her forehead against the cold  glass.
The panic receded as she forced herself to make practical plans.
It was no good harking back to the days of coming top in exams, the days of her violin teacher's delight in her, his saying that really he wouldn't be surprised if she was good enough for Brussels or Prague.
A year of continuous musical training at a conservatoire and she would be fit for a top orchestra or even the concert platform.
He would not say that now, he would be embarrassed.
She must find a teacher.
Before she was fit for any audition she needed lessons.
And lessons must be paid for.
A train rattling by made her lift her head and look out of the window.
You could see the station platforms from here, and the station itself and the bridge.
Tom and Peter and Peter's new friend Jay were standing on the platform waiting for the southbound Jubilee train.
She had told Tom she would not go with them today but now she wished she had.
Being alone was the worst thing; when she was alone she thought about things and nearly all of them were bad.
If Tom wanted her she would go to Tom, just to be with someone, to have someone to hold her in the night.
She waved to him but he was not looking in her direction.
Perhaps you could not even see the windows of the School from where he was.
The silver train, drawing into the station, first hid him from view, then took him away.
She watched it rattle down to Finchley Road.
Jay was no mean performer (in Peter's words) on the tenor sax but he was nervous and edgy about doing something which he said was against the law.
It made them all laugh when Peter said that come to that, what he did with him was against the law since Jay was not yet twenty-one.
‘Someone told me,’ said Tom, ‘that they never arrest you, they only move you on.
They'd arrest you if you  gave a false name or something like that or if you were just a beggar.
I mean, you get people who blow a couple of bars on a mouth organ and then hold out their hands.
We're real musicians.’
They were going to Oxford Circus for a change and had booked a patch.
The Argyll Street entrance was full of real beggars, the kind that do not even have mouth organs.
The beggars held out old caps, which made Tom resolve never to use a cap.
A hat was all right or an instrument case or even a scarf with knotted corners.
They set up at the foot of the first escalator.
It was noisy and crowded, the concourses and passages full of tourists, hundreds of schoolchildren and students with backpacks.
Tom said he wouldn't play.
Later on he would sing.
The flute did not really go with a guitar and sax.
Peter and Jay played the sort of music he disliked even more than he disliked rock, the kind of thing you associated with canned tunes in restaurants and supermarkets: ‘La Vie en Rose’ and ‘Never on Sunday’and ‘Un Homme et une Femme’.
It hardly surprised him that people were not too keen on paying good money for that.
He found himself wishing Alice were with them then, wishing it quite fiercely.
He missed her.
Her lovely face came before his eyes and he thought how beautifully she had played on the few occasions she had come down here with him.
The two of them should be playing here now, giving these commuters some real music, something they would love.
Alice had been sent to him, in the midst of all his unhappiness and frustration and failure, this beautiful talented musician had been sent to him to save him.
She was not Diana, she was not Diana's successor, but the perfection he had looked for and half-seen in both of them.
The idea of a woman who would save him was not new, but it had become real, it was no longer fantasy.
He was falling in love with her.
No, it was past that.
He  thought he had loved her from the moment he set eyes on her.
It was Diana's face but lovelier, as if Diana's looks had been enriched by life and sadness.
A warmth, coupled with excitement, had filled him as she opened her violin case, took out the instrument and began to play.
He loved the way her eyes lit when she heard the kind of music she liked well played.
Peter and Jay finished ‘Some Enchanted Evening’ and he told them which of his repertoire he would sing.
That made Jay nervous again but Peter assured him they would manage, it was dead easy, a breeze.
Tom sang a Burns song and then, because it went so well with the guitar, never mind the sax, Don Giovanni's pretty serenade.
The coins started dropping into the guitar case.
When a railway policeman came to move them on, an officious, spiteful man, Tom thought, they went two stations down the Central Line to Holborn.
The best pitch was free from 3.30 onwards.
Peter suggested keeping on until half an hour into the rush hour but no longer as it looked like being particularly crowded today.
Someone who put 20p into the guitar case also left his Evening Standard,possibly as part-payment or just to be rid of it.
Huge type on the front page announced a bomb disaster in west London.
Tom read just enough of it to see that it was a long way from West Hampstead and no one he knew had been killed or injured.
The IRA perhaps or some Middle Eastern group, there were plenty of them.
Looking about him at the great press of people, the escalator that was a river of people flowing on and on, the crowds that streamed down the stairs so that if a train was held up there would be room for no more to squeeze on to the platform, he wondered why a terrorist group had never thought of putting a bomb in the tube.
Perhaps they had and it had been kept dark.
Tom turned his eyes from the paper and started singing the song from  Don Giovanni that is always called the Champagne Aria.
It was very fast and wild and Peter and Jay, laughing, gave up their attempts at accompanying him.
In another part of Oxford Circus, a station where three lines converge, where there are fourteen escalators, four and a half miles of passages and platforms and through which nearly 200,000 passengers pass each day, a man was taking photographs.
People do not like being photographed on their way to or from work.
They are not on holiday on a beach.
Most of them did nothing about it but hurried on, some scowling, one, a child, making a face at the camera, holding up his hands as if they were big ears and waggling his fingers.
The photographer was a dark young man with a beard and very blue eyes.
He was dressed in black — black jeans and sweater.
He began handing cards to some of the people who had let him take their picture.
The cards had nothing on them but apparently meaningless hieroglyphics and they were thrown to the ground to add to the litter that so distresses London Transport.
He turned his lens on a man who came striding through the concourse, his collar turned up, his hat pulled well down.
Hat and collar together were insufficient to hide an exceptionally ugly face, among other unattractive features a spoonbill nose and inadequately repaired harelip.
The man went up to the photographer.
‘I want that film.’
The photographer smiled.
He seemed pleased, satisfied,relieved ,
‘I said I want that film.’
‘You don't want your lovely face on record?’
‘That's right.
Now give me that film, please.’
People passing turned to look.
This was more interesting than being snapped and given a card.
‘I'm at least as strong as you,’ the photographer said, and thoughtfully, ‘maybe stronger.
But I'll give you the film gladly on one condition.
That you'll come up and have a drink with me.’
He opened the camera, took out the film and handed it with another smile to the man with the spoonbill nose.
The identity of her children's fathers was unknown to Tina Darne.
She knew they had different fathers and she knew that in each case there was only a certain number of possibilities, but beyond that all was obscure.
It was her big secret.
Tina had no moral sense about this question, no feeling that children ought to know who their fathers were or should be fathered by the men their mothers lived with or were married to.
This seemed to her so much humbug.
The reason for her secrecy was that if Brian thought there was any doubt about Jasper and Bienvida's paternity he might stop paying her the so a week child support.
One of those who must never never know was Tina's mother.
Tina regarded her mother as a kind of insurance policy and her house as a bolthole.
Finding out the truth about Jasper and Bienvida might finally militate against Cecilia Darne's view that a child should always be able to find a home with its parents.
Tina had found a home with her parent, her father having died when she was fifteen, on every occasion when other roofs had failed her.
The last time was for the three months before she encountered Jarvis in Fawley Road.
Brian had thrown her out for what he inaccurately called adultery.
Tina had never been married, though her mother had never given up hope, and did not give it up now, that a wedding would one day take place.
Cecilia Darne had loved Brian.
He was the first responsible man her daughter had ever known.
She thought it quite wonderful that this kind man, who was not married, who had a job, who was on Lambeth Council's housing list, actually wanted Tina to go and live with him.
It was the first step, she believed, in  the direction of marriage, for Mrs Darne — necessarily with a daughter like Tina — had moved with the times.
Those views she had been taught in the twenties while a young girl, that men do not love or respect, still less marry, women who have ‘given themselves’ to them, she had been obliged to revise.
She saw it happening all around her.
She read about it and saw it on television.
Indeed, it now seemed to be the case that men did not marry women unless they had had sexual relations with them beforehand.
Brian would marry Tina, it was only a matter of time.
Perhaps he would wait until a baby was on the way, for Mrs Darne had not failed to notice that these days extramarital pregnancy, once a horrible disgrace, was often the loudly publicized occasion for a wedding, with the bride, far from ashamed of herself, carrying all proudly before her.
Brian Elphick had been on Lambeth's housing list for twelve years, having insinuated himself on to it when engaged to a woman he never married.
Now he lied to the housing department about having lived all that time with an old aunt, since dead, and got a friend who kept a garage in the dead woman's street to swear to having seen him there daily.
The flat he was offered was in a nasty area and in a tower block but neither he nor Tina minded about that.
Cecilia Darne was very happy for Tina.
She had never heard of Peggy Guggenheim, nor of her boast that she had slept with every man she had ever known.
If she had discovered that Tina could have said much the same she would have been deeply upset.
Tina might have told her mother this, during one of their evenings of confidences, but it had never occurred to her, she being neither proud nor ashamed of it, nor even thinking it very out of the ordinary.
Thus Jasper's father might have been the man who was painting the flats and who came in for a cup of tea, or the  old lover whom she happened to run into in Denmark Hill, or the neighbour who was moving out of Flat 16 and who came up to say goodbye while his  girlfriend was packing their furniture into the rented van.
The only certainty was that it was not Brian, for Brian had been away during that crucial week of Tina's cycle, doing an electrical job in Aberdeen.
For Brian to be certain he was the father of any child of Tina's, for anyone to know he was the father of any child of Tina's, he would have had to keep her for months on an island inhabited only by the pair of them.
Brian wasn't even away when Bienvida was conceived, but ill with flu and not inclined for sexual activity.
He begged her not to miss the party they were invited to on his account, so she made him a hot drink, turned on the TV and, making no bones about it, said she would be back in the morning.
Tina got drunk and remembered very little of what happened after midnight.
She woke up in bed with a man with a red beard, but from the snide remarks and sideways looks of those fellow guests who were still there in the morning gathered that he had not been her only partner of the night.
Bienvida had red hair when she was born but later on it turned dark, so that told her very little.
Brian never seemed to notice that the children were very odd looking to be the son and daughter of a pair of fair-haired blue-eyed ectomorphs.
Nor did he draw any obvious conclusions when he kept on coming on Tina in bed with other men.
But after three such encounters he said he realized this was because after eight years she had stopped loving him and he made his famous remark about adultery.
Tina went back to mother.
There was nowhere else to go.
The only woman Peter Bleech-Palmer had ever slept with  was Tina Darne.
It might be truer to say that Tina slept with him.
They were very good friends, which neither Daphne nor Cecilia could really understand, though for some time, especially before the advent of Brian, both mothers had hopes of their ‘making a match of it’.
Peter was a pianist, had a job as a pianist, and always seemed to have money, which made Cecilia see him as a potentially good husband.
She was unaware that the job was in a ‘gay and/or straight’ bar in Frith Street.
When Tina and the children moved into the School, Cecilia felt both dismay and guilty relief.
Had she driven poor Tina away by hesitating about paying for the installation of a bathroom?
What would happen with Jarvis?
Cecilia did not dislike Jarvis, she did not dislike anybody, but she feared and distrusted him as a bachelor with no regular job, no real income and a home which she was convinced would be sold to the property developers.
Notwithstanding experience and observation, she was still somewhere inside her convinced that if a man and a woman lived under the same roof, even if the roof covered a very large area, they would soon be cohabiting in a sexual sense.
She was not to know that Tina, sticking to her principles, had long ago slept with her cousin Jarvis.
Just once.
Neither of them had any desire to repeat the experience.
Cecilia could also vividly remember Tina's first venture at the School and the founding of the commune, the reputation it earned in a place which, after all, was only a stone's throw — within easy bell-sound — of her own house.
In those days there had been no children.
Cecilia worried about those children.
Another old belief of hers and one which died hard, which refused to die, was that no man will willingly take on another man's children.
‘I worry about the children,’ she said to Daphne.
‘Do you know what they call them in America?’ asked Daphne.
‘They call them grandbabies.’
‘Well, yes, kiddies, grandbabies, I worry about them.
They run about so and they make a lot of noise, you know how children do, and I'm afraid Jarvis will get tired of it.
I mean it isn't exactly his house but it's more his than anyone else's, if you see what I mean.’
‘Except his mother,’ said practical Daphne.
‘Jarvis Stringer isn't that sort.
I don't suppose he notices.
He's always got his head in the clouds or down a tunnel.’
‘I've never liked that house, that school, whatever they call it.
It should have been pulled down after my brother died.
Do you believe violent death leaves a kind of surge of energy behind it which is really what's meant by ghosts?’
‘No,’ said Daphne.
‘Perhaps you're right.
I know I always feel uncomfortable there.
I always feel something's going to jump out on me from behind a door.’
Daphne laughed.
‘That something would be Jasper or Bienvida.’
‘I don't like going there,’ said Cecilia.
‘It's partly on account of the bell.
Wouldn't you think my niece Elsie would have had it taken away?
Jarvis never does anything that isn't to do with trains but I can't understand Elsie.
And that's another thing.
It's bad enough with the trains where I live but the whole house — the School, I mean — it shakes when the trains go by.
It's like an earthquake, or what I imagine an earthquake would be like.’
But she continued to go there regularly, somewhat more often than she went up to Willesden to see Daphne.
To go past the School and over the railway bridge was one of the ways of going shopping in West End Lane.
Cecilia had passed Cambridge School several thousand times and been inside it several hundred times but she had never got over her feelings of loathing it.
She had an obscure feeling that other passers-by would not notice the bell up there in the  shadowy interior of the bell chamber.
It was almost concealed by the small columns which held up the campanile roof, merely a shinier darkness in the dark.
She told herself that if she did not look up she would not need to see it and after a while this not-looking would become habitual, but in the event she could not prevent her eyes from turning up to the campanile.
As she walked along, passing the blocks she still thought of as the ‘new’ flats, she caught sight of her grandson Jasper disappearing, in company with three other boys of similar age, into the narrow alley which led to the railway bridge.
Jasper, at nine, was a sturdy, broad-shouldered, dark-haired boy, very handsome, with strong regular features and eyes of a curious shade of dark violet-brown.
Cecilia thought it remarkable, an instance of the inexplicable ways of nature, that a child could be so unlike his parents, but she thought no more than that.
Reflecting in her vague kindly way that it was very nice for Jasper to have friends of his own age to play with in the holidays, a lot better than in the days when he had lived in that tower block in Walworth, she was still thinking along these lines as she entered the gateless gateway and found her eyes irresistibly turning upwards to the bell.
It must have been the bell, a school bell, which brought into her mind the realization that this was still term-time, not holidays.
Why was Jasper not at school?
Cecilia was about to let herself in when the young woman called Alice, who had been there when she heard the bomb go off, opened the door to her.
Alice, Cecilia had often thought, was the prettiest girl she had ever seen.
She put her in mind of a favourite painting her father had possessed, a portrait of Mary Zambaco by Burne-Jones, and which had hung in the hall of the family home in Hendon.
It had passed to Evelina in the days when a Burne-Jones was not worth twopence and goodness knew  what Evelina had done with it.
Alice had the same swanlike neck, delicate features and full soft mouth, only her hair instead of red was a dark chestnut-brown.
‘I'll just go and tap on Tina's door,’ she said to Alice.
The place was a lot cleaner than in commune days.
It did not look too bad.
The smell was gone.
From somewhere in the back Cecilia could hear that sound she had never been able to identify and had not liked to ask about, a regular screeching as made by a bird in a zoo.
In this house, since commune days, she had always felt shy.
She liked to go quietly, not ask too many questions, never to interfere.
She was conscious of being a misfit, and that was a great understatement.
It was partly her age, of course, she was an old woman by anyone's standards, but her attitude to life too and her clothes, her grey tweed skirt and green Viyella blouse and green and grey check cardigan, her stockings and ‘court’ shoes, the powder on her nose, lipstick on her thin old lips and the perm in her hair.
In the passage she encountered the man who always smelt of meat on the turn.
Cecilia could clearly remember the days before refrigerators were in general use — she did not have one until 1952 — and remember too the smell of the joint by Sunday lunchtime if you had been imprudent enough to buy it on Friday.
This man smelt far worse than that.
 Cecilia , saying good morning to his ‘hi’, wondered if he had some dreadful disease.
She tapped on Tina's door.
It was ten past twelve.
Cecilia always left coming to Tina's until noon was past because she did not want to find her daughter in bed.
Had she done so she would not have said a word, would not have looked a word, would simply have sat on the bed and talked to Tina for ten minutes instead of the two of them sitting opposite each other in armchairs.
But if she came and found Tina up she could pretend to herself that Tina had been up for hours, and was a normal person and a proper mother.
What she in fact found Tina doing pleased her greatly.
In Ernest and Elizabeth's awful old kitchen, which had last had a re-fit in 1926 and in which Cecilia herself would not have so much as peeled a potato, though nothing would have made her say so, Tina was baking a birthday cake for Bienvida.
Cecilia would have been very surprised indeed if she had been wearing anything but jeans and a sweater or T-shirt, and she was not.
What pleased her enormously was that over these garments Tina actually wore one of the patchwork aprons she had made and given her years before, with little hope of their ever being used.
The radio was on, whatever it was that shrieked was at it full-blast, and from somewhere upstairs came music that sounded as if it proceeded from a violin.
Someone was hammering in the cellar.
As Cecilia sat down she felt the earthquake rumblings that came when a train passed by.
‘Where are you off to then?’ said Tina, laying a rather floury hand on Cecilia's sleeve.
Cecilia had nearly got over feeling embarrassed when she mentioned Daphne.
‘I'm meeting Daphne for lunch in D. H. Evans.’
‘My God, can you still do that?
I remember you taking me there to lunch when I was small and I threw up in the lift.’
Cecilia remembered it too.
That word ‘small’ reminded her of her grandson.
She was always careful while here to cast her inquiries in the form of statements and she said, choosing her words meticulously, ‘I expect Jasper was a bit off-colour this morning so you felt it wiser not to send him to school.
I'm glad he's well enough to be out with his friends.’
As she uttered these words she thought they sounded snide and insinuating, sarcastic even, though she had not meant them like that.
She had only wanted to know without seeming to criticize.
However they sounded, Tina took them in the spirit  they were intended, laughed loudly and said Jasper must be playing hookey in his lunch hour.
‘Do they let them do that?’
It had occurred to Cecilia as soon as the words were out of her mouth that five minutes to twelve, which was the time when she had seen Jasper, was rather early for a lunch hour to begin.
Indeed, it would have had to have begun much earlier, her grandchildren's school being a good fifteen minutes' walk away, on the other side of West End Lane.
But of this she said nothing, watched Tina putting her cake into the filthiest, blackest, greasiest oven she had ever seen, while waiting for an answer to one of her rare inquiries.
By the time it came she had almost forgotten what the question was.
‘Oh, it's an awful school.
They let them do anything, they can't control them.
The kids hate it but what can I do?
The teachers are always on strike and I don't blame them, poor things.’
These statements, terrible to Cecilia's ears, were made in tones of the utmost placidity.
Her anxiety must have shown in her face.
Tina uttered another peal of happy laughter, put her arms round her mother's shoulders, squeezing her, and using the pet name Cecilia loved, treasured and secretly longed to hear, said, ‘Don't you worry, little mum, my kids'll always be all right, that's the way they are, they're like me.
Off you go and have your nice lunch with Auntie Daphne and give her my love.’
Moved, Cecilia said, ‘You know you can always come back to me to live, Tina.
You know that, don't you?
It's always your home.’
‘Don't push your luck,’ said Tina.
‘I just might do that one day.’
Walking towards the station, having promised to bring back with her all sorts of expensive food items Tina had requested from Selfridges' Food Hall, Cecilia thought how  much she liked living on her own and that at seventy-six she was too old to have Jasper and Bienvida running around her, fond of them as she was, not to mention Tina's boyfriends and the odd hours she kept and her lying in bed till noon.
It embarrassed her to meet men — to herself she called them ‘strange men’— coming down her stairs in the middle of the morning, putting their heads round the door and saying ‘hi’ to her.
But she would put up with all that to make Tina happy and give the children a secure childhood.
She would smile and be lighthearted and welcome them all back and have a bathroom put in on the top floor.
There was only one person she could have happily shared her home with and that was Daphne Bleech-Palmer.
But Daphne had her own house in Willesden, a house Cecilia was sure she would not be willing to leave, though it was far less nice than Cecilia's own, being part of an ugly white brick terrace.
It was a measure of Cecilia's character that, unlike most people, she experienced no schadenfreude about this, felt no secret pleasure in the superiority of her circumstances over her friend's, but sincerely regretted Daphne's inferior home and reduced income.
Cecilia went down the steps at West Hampstead station and stood on the lefthand platform waiting for the train to come down from Kilburn.
She did not need Jarvis to tell her of the phenomenon of the shivering platform at West Hampstead as a train approaches, that and the singing of the rails, because she was accustomed to the point of no longer noticing it.
The half-erased graffiti on the silver train she did notice, without being able to identify it as man-made.
Cecilia attributed the marks to some kind of metal fatigue or rust.
A notice inside tube trains reads as follows:
In an emergency assistance can be provided more quickly if you operate the red alarm when the train is at a station.
Only operate the red alarm between stations if it is essential to stop the train immediately.
There is a basic misunderstanding of human psychology here, for it is only between stations that you would wish to press the red alarm at all.
Surely, if the train were in a station when the emergency occurred, you would get out and run away as fast as possible.
The trains on the Jubilee Line, at least beyond the confines of inner London, are seldom crowded at midday during the week.
Only three other people shared the car with Cecilia.
One sat at the extreme righthand end of the car, another at the extreme lefthand end and the third in the middle by the doors, facing the platform.
Tina would have plumped herself down in the nearest seat even if this had been next to a passenger but Cecilia, conforming to usage, sat in the emptiest area of the coach, on the platform side with her back to the window.
Having no book or magazine with her, she read from the opposite wall an advertisement for duty-free goods obtainable at Heathrow, one for travelling very cheaply by boat to Holland, another was deciphering an invitation to office temps couched in a kind of code, when the train drew into Finchley Road.
Only two passengers got into the car, a man and a bear.
Cecilia saw the bear and thought for about five seconds that it was real.
Then she saw the man's face through the open mouth and immediately turned her head away so that she appeared to be looking at something of consuming interest outside the window.
Anything of that sort, people in fancy dress, people in obvious disguise, caused her intense embarrassment.
The train started and soon plunged into the tunnel.
There was no longer anything to pretend to look at out of the window.
Cecilia turned somewhat fearfully back and saw that the man and the bear had gone to the far end of the coach where a woman not much younger than herself sat alone.
The bear was in front of this woman and half-squatting, its paws raised, in the attitude of a begging dog.
Cecilia could see that the man with the bear held it by a chain looped round its neck.
He was a young, dark-haired man with a short dark beard and he was curiously dressed in a black overcoat that came nearly to his ankles.
It was the kind of coat her father had worn all those years ago to go to business.
She thought that she would leave the train at the next station, Swiss Cottage, even if this made her late for her meeting with Daphne, due to take place at one.
The woman whom the man and the bear were tormenting — for this was how Cecilia saw it, as torment — at least had the good fortune to be possessed of a magazine, which she was now pretending to read while the bear cavorted in front of her.
It was pretence, Cecilia knew, for no one could help feeling an embarrassment so deep as to amount to actual dumb fear in the face of such a performance.
Well, not exactly no one, she corrected herself, for she knew Tina would not be embarrassed or afraid.
Tina would very likely laugh and clap or even stroke the bear.
This was what the bear-leader seemed to be asking of the passenger he now approached, the man who sat in the seat next to the doors.
The man, middle-aged, wearing a suit, complied with a nervous smile.
He put out a hand and smoothed the bear's shaggy head, giving it embarrassed pats, while looking up at the bear-leader as if to say, Is that all right?
Is that enough?
Will you leave me alone now?
The bear sprang at him with a growl.
It was what an unreliable dog does when stroked by someone who is afraid of it.
The man jerked backwards with a cry.
Cecilia heard herself gasp and at once put her hand up to her  mouth.
The bear-leader gave a tug on the chain, pulling it until the bear nearly fell over backwards.
‘I can't bear it,’ he said to the passengers, his eyes swivelling the length and breadth of the coach.
‘I knew there was trouble brewin'.
Geddit?
Brewin?
Bruin?’
The train, to Cecilia's extreme relief, drew into Swiss Cottage.
She began to get up but by now the man and the bear had moved themselves into the open area of the coach between the pairs of doors.
They had in fact stationed themselves in front of the doors which were the kind which open only if you press a button either from outside or inside.
There was no one on the platform, or no one in front of the doors of this car.
In order to open the doors she would have to get past the bear, say ‘excuse me’ to it, or actually push it.
She dropped the inch or two down into her seat again as the train began to move.
Embarrassment had now been succeeded by fear.
Embarrassment, she thought,was fear but of a very reduced kind, just as they say an itch is pain to a very mild degree.
This new feeling was real fear, not so much of physical injury as of humiliation, that being most easily provoked in someone of her age and sex.
It had not escaped Cecilia's notice that to many people, even today, old women are objects of ridicule.
Her heart began to beat fast and heavily.
She could hear it, as if it were not in her chest but something outside herself.
The man and the bear, who had had their backs to her, now turned round and the bear began a clumsy lolloping in her direction.
Cecilia, with pounding heart, opened her handbag in a desperate effort to find something with which apparently to occupy her eyes.
She could find only her chequebook and the small, leather-bound directory Jasper had given her for Christmas and into which, to gratify the child, she had painstakingly copied the addresses and phone numbers of friends accumulated throughout a  lifetime.
But it was as if her grandson had saved her life with his gift.
She busied herself with putting on her glasses.
The bear was in front of her now, dropping down into that squatting or begging position it had adopted to torment the other woman passenger.
Cecilia opened the small red book and the first name she saw was Bleech-Palmer.
The handwritten words swam before her eyes and her heart thudded.
The bear growled and grunted.
Cecilia turned the pages of her address book, she turned them slowly, she scrutinized them as if they fascinated her.
All the time she was resolving not to raise her eyes, not to look at the bear.
The other passengers took no notice.
She did not blame them.
She had appeared to take no notice when they were persecuted, she had not intervened.
If the bear attacked her they would very likely even then not intervene.
Her hands had begun to shake and now her whole body trembled.
The bear laid a paw on her knee.
Cecilia did not scream.
Afterwards she wondered how she had kept silent, holding her breath, listening to the drumming of her heart.
Through the tweed of her skirt, her pure silk lace-bordered slip and the nylon stockings she wore, she felt the hairy thing, hot-heavy and disgusting.
She could not move, she could no longer turn the pages, but she kept her eyes down.
Her flesh shrank away from the paw's touch, as if gathering and compressing itself on to the bone.
She supposed afterwards that the bear-leader took pity on her, or had grown bored.
Instead of jerking on the lead, he gave a mighty push to the bear's head and the man-animal rolled over backwards.
It rolled over with its paws and hind legs in the air, showing the dirty leather pads under its splayed feet.
Cecilia found she had clenched her fists and was driving her nails into the palms of her hands.
The bear began picking itself up as the train came into St John's Wood.
By this time Cecilia had forgotten all about not pushing past the bear to press the button and get out.
She would have pushed past anything, a snake, a Rottweiler, a sabre-toothed tiger.
In the event she had to step over one of its feet.
The bear-leader laughed, a throaty giggle.
She clutched her shopping bag and her handbag.
As she reached the doors they came open, the button pressed by two people outside.
Cecilia got on to the platform.
She could see only through a watery mist and realized after a moment's panic that she still had her reading glasses on.
The train moved away, taking bear and bear-leader with it.
Cecilia was shaking all over.
She sat down on one of the grey bucket seats to calm herself, to get her breath, but instead she began to cry.
The birthday party was of a kind which Cecilia would have wondered at, had she been invited to it, for although a few of Bienvida's classmates were present in its early stages, by seven it had become a celebration for the grown-ups.
Bienvida and Jasper were of course still there.
No one noticed that Bienvida, her grandmother's granddaughter more than her mother's child, had at some stage gone back to the Headmaster's Flat and changed into dungarees to keep her Oxfam dress of nylon organza from getting dirty.
She was a tall, very thin child with the dark curly hair, aquiline features and wild poetical eyes of the Irishwoman.
Jasper, her elder brother, had refused from the first to dress up for this party and wore his school jeans and Western shirt, though school had not seen him that day.
Bottles of wine were produced just after seven.
Jed had provided some of it, Peter brought the Beaujolais Nouveau and the rest came from Tina's current boyfriend, who worked in the Grog Blossom shop.
None of the children had wanted birthday cake, which Tina had mistakenly made with fruit and nuts in it, so they ate it as their second course.
It was a fine warm evening, vermilion streaks of sunset even reaching this eastern skyline.
Jarvis had set up a trestle table on that terrace where pupils had once assembled for the annual school photograph.
Around it sat Peter Bleech-Palmer, Jay Rossini, Tom, Alice, Billy the Grog Blossom man, Tina and himself.
From their feet stretched away the plain of shaggy grass, a wild lawn of weeds, buttercups, dandelions and lady's  smock in full bloom.
All the trees, so large now as to enclose this garden, excluding the sight of other houses, so that but for the complex of railway lines it might have been in the country, were in late summer leaf.
The soft twittering hum came from birds going to roost.
There were more birds in this London sanctuary than many country gardens and the cries of the hawk had not yet driven them away.
The trains, running up and down from London to Stanmore and back, could only be seen through the foliage as a series of silver flashes, but their singing rattle made a constant background music.
There was no wind.
The air was still enough for candles to be lit.
In the fading light Tina, wearing greenish-blue Indian cotton with silver alloy chains of Kabul turquoises and coral round her neck, began lighting yellow wax candles set in saucers.
As the wicks burned, a strong perfume of sandalwood came from them.
But this was not enough to keep away mosquitoes, which started to arrive and drift towards the flames.
Peter had brought his guitar and he and Tom began to play.
When Tina and Billy began to dance Jarvis asked Alice but she shook her head, smiling at him.
She was beginning to feel committed to Tom, she wanted to dance with no one but him.
The children's seats at the table had long been empty.
Jarvis's train set, the one which had diverted him from his mother's grief on the day her father hanged himself, was laid out on the floor in Lower Six, a classroom on the top floor, and Jarvis had told Jasper he could play with it whenever he liked.
Jarvis still occasionally played with it himself.
Jasper, while dimly understanding that this was a very generous offer on Jarvis's part, considered himself too sophisticated for train sets.
But he went up there now, with Bienvida trailing behind him, from an obscure feeling that he ought to show Jarvis this offer was appreciated.
He was also bored.
Jasper knew he was allowed extreme  latitude in almost everything he did.
He also knew ‘allowed’ was not exactly the word but that it was more a question of not bothering.
No one kept an eye on him.
Sometimes this pleased him and sometimes it made him feel frightened, though he could not have said why.
He could have wandered unchecked all over north London if he had had a mind to it, but this was supposed to be Bienvida's party and he and Bienvida were supposed to be there.
It had, of course, gone the way of all their parties he could remember and turned into an excuse for grown-up drinking, talk, dancing and all that cuddling and kissing stuff he inescapably associated with his mother.
He and his sister went into Lower Six and contemplated the train set in silence.
It was just a train set, indefinably old-fashioned.
They looked out of the window and down on the merrymakers.
Peter had taken the flute from Tom, Tom was dancing with Alice and Jarvis capering with Jay, while Tina and Billy were half under the table in a clinch so tightly intertwined as to seem to make one person of them.
‘Shit,’ said Jasper.
‘She's off again.’
Bienvida, being two years his junior, asked wistfully if he thought she would ever go back to Brian.
If she had been speaking to a school friend she would have called Brian Daddy but this was not acceptable to Jasper.
Early in life he had put away childish things.
‘I doubt it.
Don't put that idea into her head, Bee.
I like it here.
There are things I specially like about living here, never you mind what they are, they're just things I like.
So don't go telling her she ought to go back to that dump in the sky.’
Bienvida said nothing, though her wild and wary eyes looked wilder.
‘They will be all over gnat bites,’ said Jasper.
His duty done — that Jarvis would never know one way  or the other made no difference in Jasper's estimation — he went back on to the landing which by now was in darkness.
Faint light from the open doors of Five, Lower Six and Upper Six made it possible to see, shedding pale blurry patches on to the corridor floor.
Bienvida pressed the light switch but the bulb was long used-up and no one had replaced it.
The skylight in the ceiling looked as if covered by a dark purple cloth.
Up here once, Bienvida had seen the full moon appear in that purple square and a pointed cloud cut a segment from it like an eclipse.
Since then she had sometimes looked for the moon again in that dark, usually empty space but had never seen it.
Jasper stood looking at the bell rope which came out of a small square aperture at what was the base of the campanile.
The end of the rope was wound round a cleat high up on the wall above the door to what had once been the Science Lab.
It was far out of the reach of grown-ups as well as children, except that Jasper did not really think anything was out of his reach.
‘There must be a hole in the floor under here,’ he said to his sister, scuffing with his toes at the worn grey and red runner which one of the commune people had laid along this corridor.
‘And there must be another hole in the floor outside the Handwork Room.’
‘Why must there?’
Jasper had got down on to the floor and was grubbing about under the carpet.
His fingers felt the division between the old floorboards and then the cross-cut which marked the edge of a trapdoor.
He scraped with his thumbnail the metal hinge.
‘Because the rope used to come down through here so they could ring it in the cloakroom.
They never did ring it but they meant to.
Shall I tell you why they never did?’
‘I don't know where the cloakroom is,’ said Bienvida.
‘It's that room no one ever goes in.
Down the bottom  between the way out to the veranda and the toilets.
Shall I tell you why no one ever goes in?’
‘Not if it's very frightening.’
Once more on his feet and staring up at the bell rope, Jasper said, ‘D'you know what I'd like?
I'd really like a cigarette.‘
‘You'll get lung cancer.’
‘Have you ever heard of anybody of nine getting lung cancer?’
Jasper opened the door of Upper Six and looked inside.
Putting the light on would be too risky, but the curtains were drawn back and by now their eyes had become accustomed to a darkness in which could be made out the shapes of furniture and smaller objects, a darkness of monochrome and black spaces and faintly gleaming edges.
Jed's room had a raunchy, hot, savage smell.
So might smell the den of some great carnivore, thought Jasper, where the floor was stickily carpeted in dried blood and littered with licked bones.
He fumbled about on the table, felt in the pockets of the odorous hawk-training jacket which hung on the back of the door, told his sister to try the cupboard.
She opened the door a little fearfully, but giggling now.
Her giggles became a scream, a short sharp shriek like the sound the hawk made.
‘Shut up, will you?’ said Jasper.
‘What's got into you?
D'you want them to hear you down there?’
But the music must have drowned Bienvida's cry.
Jasper looked out of the window and down into the candlelight.
No upturned face met his eyes.
His sister clutched his arm.
‘I put my hand into something horrible.’
She talked in her ghoul voice.
He could see the whites of her eyes and the big dark pupils rotating.
Both children were always asking each other: Shall I tell you?
Shall I ?
Shall I tell you what happened, what I saw, did, shall I ?
‘Shall I tell you what it was I put my hand into, Jas?’
‘Yeah, OK, what was it?’
‘A dead person's stomach.
Like he'd been cut open and died and I put my hand in all among his intestines.’
‘Oh, come on,’ said Jasper.
He had found the cigarettes and matches with them, up at the end of the windowsill between a pile of books and a plant pot.
A cigarette between his lips, he struck a match, lit it and held the lighted match up inside the open cupboard.
‘It's not a dead person's stomach, it's those day-old chicks he gives Abelard.
They're all messed up together in a bowl.’
‘Yuck,’ said Bienvida.
‘They're dead, aren't they?’
‘Of course they're dead.
Shall I tell you what happened in the cloakroom, Bee?’
‘Yeah, OK, what was it?’
They returned to the landing and sat on the stairs.
‘One day I'm going to ring that bell,’ said Jasper, puffing away.
‘What happened in the cloakroom?’
‘An old man that wasn't our grandfather but something like that hung himself.
In the cloakroom.
I heard Tina telling Tom about it.
He hung himself from the bellrope.
It came all the way down there then.’
Jasper extended his narrow brown neck in which the Adam's apple had not yet appeared and in the near-dark clasped his hands round his throat.
The throttling sound he made, accompanied by a frenzied rolling of the eyes, expelled the cigarette from his mouth and sent it halfway down the stairs.
It took them a few moments to find it.
By then the fleur-de-lis patterned linoleum which covered the stairs was singed and smelling.
Bienvida had started giggling and clutching at Jasper, alternately nervous and hopeful, terrified of the corpses and ghosts he fed her, but always hungry for more.
Holding hands, they came down the stairs in an exaggerated parody of the grown-ups' dancing, shaking skinny hips, flicking their free hands, the  glowing end of Jasper's cigarette describing parabolas in the darkness.
Below them the vestibule was lit, dimly, by the electrolier, in which only two candles had bulbs in them.
Someone must have come indoors to turn that light on.
Jasper laid a finger to his lips and tried the cloakroom door.
It was not locked, as he had feared it might be.
Taking Bienvida by the hand, he drew her inside.
Absolute darkness and a new smell in here, not rotting meat or burning lino but something sour and cold.
If a wet stone could smell it would smell like this.
They had been inside no more than thirty seconds, Bienvida trembling all over the way she did from terror and excitement, when they heard the voices of Peter, Tom and Alice, as these three people crossed the hall and went upstairs together.
Jasper dropped his cigarette end on to the floor and trod it out.
‘We'll sleep in here,’ he said.
‘We'll get our sleeping bags and a torch and things and sleep in here.’
‘Not tonight.’
Bienvida's voice was faint with the horrifying enormity of it.
‘Not now .’
Jasper said impatiently, ‘Of course not now.
I'm not planning on going to bed yet.’
In quest of further adventures, experiments, discoveries, he emerged from the cloakroom, his sister behind him and holding on to him, and padded along the passage towards the long disused kitchen regions and the cellar stairs.
Dancing with Tom, Alice nearly told him what had happened that day.
He was kind and understanding.
He had asked her to talk to him about the things that troubled her, but she could not.
People were enjoying themselves, Tom was laughing, she was afraid of casting a blight.
Now was not the time to tell him how she had tried to phone her mother, had dialled the number and her father answered.
Bravely, Alice made herself say who it was and her father put the phone down.
That had unnerved her.
She phoned her mother again at a time her father could not be there; she had to know about Mike and Catherine, what was happening.
‘Mike's sister's looking after her, what's-her-name, Julia.’
‘Mike's not going to let her adopt Catherine?’
‘What do you care?’ said Marcia Anderson.
‘You've made it pretty clear you couldn't care less.’
‘Would you like me to give you my address, Mother?’
‘Suit yourself.
I can't say I know of anyone who wants to write to you.’
She told herself she deserved it, but that did not make the punishment less.
She held Tom close and pressed her cheek to his.
After a while she drew away again, determined not to seem inviting, and they danced in silence.
They were to be friends, not lovers, she had made up her mind to that.
The mosquitoes broke up the party.
They came in a singing swarm.
Peter was the first to say he was going indoors; he took one of his bottles of wine with him and Alice and Tom followed.
He came up with them to Four on the first floor, Tom's room.
This irritated Alice.
Peter might have supposed that they were lovers from Tom's ardour and her acquiescence, might have thought it not just tactful but a requirement to leave them alone together.
If she and Tom had been two men he would have been discretion itself, she thought.
He behaved sometimes as if heterosexual love were an improper or even immoral exercise and if his presence could disrupt it, so much the better.
Still, they were not lovers and never would be.
She had drunk very little, a small glass of wine while they were eating and another ten minutes before they came in.
Mike had once called her a natural non-drinker, one who enjoyed neither the taste nor the effect.
But in Tom's room, when  Peter had poured the wine into two mugs and an inch into a glass for her and she had tasted it, she found she liked this wine that had a taste of how elderflowers smell, reversed her decision and asked him to do as he had offered and fill her glass.
It was a Riesling from Yugoslavia.
She was experiencing no unwelcome change of consciousness, no lightness in the head.
They talked.
Peter sat in the armchair, she and Tom on the bed.
A corn-coloured moon climbed up the sky outside the closed window and Tom turned off his lamp so that there was no competition for the warm moonlight.
Peter picked up the wine bottle and looked at her and this time she didn't put her hand over the top of the glass.
Tom said he had had enough so she and Peter drank it.
Peter kept looking at his watch because he was on duty at midnight.
Since giving up playing the piano in the Soho bar, he had had a job as a receptionist and switchboard operator in a hospice in Kilburn.
When he had had a few drinks, though not otherwise, Peter talked about how he knew he ought to have the test to find out if he was HIV negative, as he hoped, as he desperately hoped, but he had not had it yet.
At a quarter to twelve he left.
Alice was drunk.
There were two conflicting thoughts in her mind.
One was that it was horrible and she would always regret it if she made love to Tom only because she was drunk, the other that here was the opportunity to get it over, make a start, break the ice.
She was drunk, so she didn't care.
She wanted to, she quite wanted to, she might as well.
Tom didn't expect it.
She watched him.
He was so handsome, probably the best-looking man she had ever seen, anyway the best-looking that she knew, fair, tanned, slim, features like an actor in a Western, like the hero.
He had got over expecting her to turn to him, pull him close to her, lie beside him.
Sometimes he said he knew it would  happen one day.
He would wait.
Love did marvellous things, he said, and one day love would do that.
He must expect her to get up off the bed and kiss his cheek, say good-night, see you in the morning, go out quickly and close the door behind her.
She did get up.
She was not very steady on her feet and she kept thinking how she had resolved not to do this, but her thought processes were blurred and hazy.
She started to take her clothes off.
He made a sound behind her, an intake of breath, nothing more.
She took off her clothes and turned round in the moonlight.
Tom was quite still, looking at her.
Because of the way he was looking, his parted lips, his wondering eyes, she felt desire, a flicker of it, the first sign, the first time for months, a movement like a string being plucked where she thought her womb was.
The bad thing was that when she woke in the morning she could remember nothing about it.
She had woken in the night, she could remember that, and at first not known where she was.
She was lying on the edge of the bed far from Tom and had not known it was Tom's bed and Tom's room or that she was not alone, but had been cast at once, as usual , into that incredulous panic where she was asking herself, how could I have left Mike?
How could I have abandoned Catherine?
I can't have done that, I can't how could I ?
And then Tom had moved.
His hand had reached for her and a sigh of relief at finding her had come from him and she had turned deeply into his arms to let him hold her there.
The panic was absorbed by his warmth, the hard resilient muscles of his body, absorbed and drawn and sucked out of her.
But the morning — in the morning there was nothing.
There was mild headache and muzziness but no memory.
It sickened her that she could have made love with Tom and be able to remember nothing of it.
She only knew that  they had made love at all by the sticky wetness in between her thighs and on the bedsheet.
Birds were singing in the garden trees.
It must be a blackbird she could hear in the pear tree.
Her room was not far from Tom's and on the same side of the house, but she could not remember hearing birds before.
The dawn chorus, her mother called it, though it was not dawn but nearly eight.
Tom was awake and watching her.
She turned her face to him and smiled, feeling pain as she moved her head.
Her massy hair, which she usually plaited at night or at least tied back, was all over the pillow and herself and him, covering his shoulders as well as her own.
She felt a different kind of guilt.
She was so ashamed of not remembering what had happened that she felt she must compensate him in some way, so she kissed his mouth and stroked his cheek.
A little breeze blew in.
At some point he must have got up and opened the window.
That was why she could hear that thrush, that blackbird, that cuckoo.
He said softly, ‘I love you so much.
You've made me very happy.’
She said she was glad.
If only she could remember.
‘You know how I said you could save me and only you.
Well, it's starting.
I can feel it.
I'm starting to feel like I used to.’
‘I couldn't save anyone, Tom.
I can't even save myself.’
‘Perhaps it's easier to save someone else.’
She put up her arms to him and he began to make love to her very gently and slowly.
She thought about Mike.
Thinking about Mike now was wrong, was disgusting, but she could not help herself.
She thought how rough they had been with each other, how savage almost, sometimes in an odd way wanting to be done so that they could begin all over again.
Tom made love like he played the flute, with slow, studied precision.
He was patient and controlled.
She put aside the guilty thought that he made love as if he had studied it as he had told her he once studied keyboard fingering and Bach's Innovations.
It was strange that an impulsive, warm person could be such a calculating lover.
His care was wasted.
It made her impatient.
She kept her eyes open, looking at him, though his were closed.
He was so good-looking, wonderfully handsome and young and sweet, and that should have been enough, but it was not.
She smiled at him when it was over because there was nothing else she could do.
The birds went on singing.
He began talking to her about birdsong, about bird music, really.
After a while he made tea and brought it back to bed and they talked in a way she never could have with Mike, or anyone she knew, about Garstang's book on the songs of birds and about Haydn's Bird Quartet and Wagner's bird music in Siegfried.
Tom had perfect pitch and a wonderful recall and he could sing whole passages from Boccherini's aviary music.
This was having something in common with your lover, she thought, remembering the way it had been with Mike, who was interested only in banking and golf and what he called making a home for one's family.
She seemed to see a distant future in which she and Tom were together in their own home, a house where music was made, and with perhaps their own children.
But that idea killed the vision and she could only put her arms round him again and hide her face against his chest.
Jed would have been at the party if it had not been his duty evening with the Safeguards.
They were a group of three men and a woman, patrolling the Central Line trains westbound from Oxford Circus.
By the time the train reached Ealing Broadway they had been in and out of every car and as the train returned they followed the same routine.
The woman had a car at Ealing in which she would drive them all home after the last train was gone.
They rode in five westbound trains and four eastbound trains, observing how the crowds began to thin, especially in those heading for inner London, encountering no trouble beyond some pushing and shoving by teenage boys and a smoker in the third car who put out his cigarette without protest when one of them asked him.
The smoker was black.
The only other black person in the car accused them of being racist, which made one of the other men indignant and started an argument.
The last train going westwards disgorged its passengers at Queensway and Notting Hill Gate, five only at Shepherd's Bush and one lonely traveller at White City.
‘I believe we're the only ones left,’ said Jed as they stopped at East Acton, a rather dark little station that looked as if it might be out in the country.
At Ealing Broadway they found they had been.
Walking along the empty platform, away from the empty train, they felt like the four last people on earth.
An American was responsible for electrifying the London Underground.
He was a monopoly capitalist from Chicago called Charles Tyson Yerkes.
(The name should be pronounced to rhyme with ‘turkeys’.)
He came into control of the District Underground Railway in 1900 but he had no particular interest in trains or the tracks they run on.
He was interested in making money.
Yerkes had been an embezzler in the United States and had served a prison sentence.
He was thrown out of Chicago and fled to New York where he built a palace and filled it with Old Masters.
In London he gradually took over the Underground system and came to control every line except the Metropolitan.
But first he had built his own power station at Lots Road in Chelsea, and another at Neasden, and electrified the District Line.
London Transport Underground still draws its power from Lots Road, the vast elegant power station that overshadows Chelsea Harbour.
In no other British rail system are the sections of a train called cars.
They are variously named coaches, carriages or compartments.
But cars are what they are called on the London Underground, just as they are in all American trains.
Were they dubbed cars by Yerkes, the crooked tycoon from Chicago?
When Yerkes died in the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel his empire was taken over by the son of a Derbyshire coach-maker, Albert Henry Stanley.
He had been President of the Board of Trade in the 1914–18 War and was later created Lord Ashfield.
He was godfather to a child born in a Bakerloo Line train and gave her a silver christening mug when she was named Thelma Ursula Beatrice Eleanor.
T.U.B.E.
‘I hope people will not make a habit of this,’ said Lord Ashfield, ‘as I am a busy man.’
When Jarvis first rode the Bay Area Rapid Transit system, or BART, in San Francisco, there were carpets on the floors of cars and closed circuit television in operation.
He had never seen anything like it before and he was astonished.
This was in the early seventies, when he was very young.
The massive car in which he sat was twenty-five yards long.
The whole system had been constructed to stand up to earthquake pressures.
But Jarvis's greatest pleasure came from knowing that this line, whose builders had had to work in compressed air because of the high water-table in downtown San Francisco, passed through the rock under the deepest bay in the world.
In those days he had been a smoker.
On leaving Powell Street he had lit a cigarette and within seconds a disembodied voice was booming at him to extinguish it and at the next station put it out the door on to the track.
Jarvis had complied.
So entranced was he by all this technology that he half expected the same voice to thank him.
Jasper smoked for show.
He didn't much enjoy it, but enjoyment was irrelevant.
It was something people of his age were not supposed to do and that was enough for him.
Another thing he was not supposed to do was be tattooed.
His tattoo had been done the previous winter by a Chinese man in Harlesden, who specialized in non-fade colours, fluorescents and airbrush fantasy.
No one ever saw Jasper naked, since he skived off going swimming with his school and Tina was never present when he bathed, but he intended, one day, as a treat or reward, to show the tattoo to Bienvida.
It was on his back, between his shoulder blades.
The Chinese man had wanted to do a Celtic torque in plain black, very fashionable at the time, but Jasper's wish was for something less austere.
He chose a lion done in tawny red, prowling among turquoise palm trees and blue and purple flowers.
He could only see  it himself by standing with his back to one mirror and looking in another.
He was very interested in discovering whether the tattoo would grow as he grew and he thought he already detected some enlargement.
Having it done had been painful and quite expensive.
When he got a passport of his own, if they still had the sort Jarvis had by that time, he was going to write ‘lion tattoo on back’ under ‘distinguishing marks’.
Jasper often went to school but nearly as often did not.
His school was a big red-brick Victorian building to the east of Kilburn.
There were not enough teachers, those there were harassed almost beyond bearing and driven from pillar to post, and no one ever seemed to know who Jasper was, still less remember his name.
A great many obscure languages were spoken and some children remained silent because no one else spoke their language.
It was not long before Jasper made contact with the boy who wrote the sickness notes.
Damon could copy anyone's handwriting and had been told by their class teacher, in a burst of anger, that he would go far, perhaps as far as the Scrubs for forgery.
But she never seemed to make the connection between these skills and the sickness notes, apparently in parents' hands, which her pupils brought to school after prolonged absences of two or three weeks.
She was busy and tired and underpaid and fed up.
Damon had given Jasper measles, glandular fever, two bouts of flu and two colds since Easter.
He and Jasper and others, schoolfellows or street acquaintances, spent their days on the streets or in the Underground.
At first they had taken to the Underground because it was warm, later for other reasons.
Jasper thought of a way of smoking in the trains.
They clutched each other and fell about, it made them laugh so much.
Jasper laughed until he thought he was going to be sick.
Prudently, they had got into the Jubilee  Line train at Finchley Road, in case someone they knew might be on the platform at West Hampstead.
In the train, in a car with only two other people in it, Jasper held up his cigarette in the middle of the space where the doors would meet when they drew together, and let them close on it.
The cigarette was held in place quite tightly with the end outside and filter tip towards him.
When the train started Jasper put his mouth over the tip and realized he couldn't light the cigarette because the end was outside.
This was what started him laughing.
There were five of them.
They laughed and pushed each other about.
A boy called Lee fell over and rolled about on his back with his legs in the air like a dog.
Damon rubbed Lee's stomach with his foot the way you would a dog's and Lee screamed because it tickled.
All the while the cigarette was in between the doors, being carried along with them to Swiss Cottage.
In the station Jasper forgot for a moment that the doors were the kind that need to be opened by pressing the button.
and wondered why they didn't open.
He had his cigarette firmly between his lips because he didn't want it falling on the floor, or worse, on to the track.
Damon pressed the button, the doors parted and Jasper, making sure no one was watching, lit his cigarette.
He held it up there in his fingers and let the doors close on it.
In order to stop it going out he drew hard on it and exhaled billows of smoke into the car.
They were hysterical and hiccupping with so much laughter.
Of the two passengers, both women, one had turned and given them a glare, the other pretended nothing was going on.
Jasper knew she was pretending, though he could not have said how he knew.
Damon and Lee lit up cigarettes of their own at St John's Wood, which they placed between the doors, and Chris and Kevin were going to do the same at Baker Street.
But there a braver adult, entering and pushing them aside, saw what was going on and drove them out of the train.
All five of them had tickets.
It might just be possible to get past the ticket collector at West Hampstead without paying but at Finchley Road there was a nearly impenetrable barrier of ticket gates.
Jasper and his companions were of a size to creep under gates and had done this until they were caught.
They walked along the platform and made their way to the Metropolitan Line, thus entering, though they did not know it, the oldest part of the system.
The London Underground is the second largest metro system in the world.
Its length of 422 kilometres is exceeded — just exceeded — only by New York's network.
The Metropolitan Line grew fast in the 1860S and 1870S, the District Line joined it and it spread its branches out into the open countryside to the north-west of London.
But it was still a steam railway and remained so until after the turn of the century.
These were cut-and-cover railway systems.
By 1890 a different kind of underground railway, a tube, had been tunnelled out through the green and yellow clay (incidentally providing materials for millions of bricks), and this first line passed under the river from King William Street to Stockwell.
It was known at first as a subway, a name thought of as an American term for an underground system, but later on was named the City and South London Railway and became the first tube railway in the world.
Another remarkable thing about it was that the trailer cars were pulled by electric engines.
Although the passengers in the ‘sardine box railway’ had to sit facing each other on long benches in light too dim to read a newspaper, they could breathe.
The days of fear of a subterranean death from suffocation, at least if you lived in south London, were past.
The buskers were at Leicester Square, deep down at the level of the Piccadilly Line.
Peter had borrowed a xylophone  from a dying patient at the hospice and with Alice on the violin and Tom with his trumpet, they were attempting the foxtrot from a Shostakovich jazz band suite.
Alice was learning how to make a receptacle out of a scarf and had folded a cheap silk square into a bonnet shape.
It had started filling with coins when they played the popular Eine Kleine Nachtmusik.
This odd Russian jazz, rendered on unsuitable instruments, was nearly as successful.
She could not see how much was in the scarf, only that there were a lot of pound coins among the others.
Tom was exultant.
He kept saying how their fortunes had taken a turn for the better from the moment Alice began playing with the group.
‘It's you, you're magic.
You're our lucky charm.’
She smiled at him but pulled away when he tried to kiss her.
Kissing in public, holding each other , even holding hands, was not something she would ever consent to.
But she was starting to feel that making music underground might not be too unacceptable a way of living, it might be preferable to certain compromises, when an unpleasant thing happened.
For a while people had dropped coins into the scarf in passing but since Tom began to sing, starting on his Mozart opera repertoire, a small crowd lingered.
Among them was a boy of about fifteen, who suddenly bobbed down, snatched the scarf and ran.
Alice could not go on playing.
The bow flagged in her hand and she heard herself exclaim.
Tom gave chase.
He went running off after the boy down the tunnel, dodging people and cannoning into others.
After a moment or two Peter followed him.
They came back empty-handed.
What had happened was what always seemed to happen when there was trouble underground.
A train — which, as Peter said, the law-abiding might wait ten minutes for — arrived and bore the boy away in the nick of time.
Alice burst into tears, she could not help herself.
Anyway, she knew, and perhaps Tom knew too, that it was not just this theft which had made her cry, not only this isolated setback.
‘We've got to have money,’ she told Tom as they went home together in the Jubilee train.
‘We'll need money for our educations.’
She surprised herself, the words came out, she had not thought about them or thought at all about this subject.
But now they were spoken she knew she had been right.
This was what they had to do.
‘What educations?’
‘We've got to go on, you and I.
You said I'd save you and that's the way I'm going to do it.
I'm going to see you get more education.
And I've got to have violin lessons.
I've got to find a teacher because I'm just not good enough, I'm utterly out of practice and I need help.
You have to finish your degree and you know you say what stops you is money.’
‘We make money playing in the tube.’
‘We've just lost everything we've made.’
‘It's never happened before.’
‘We never make very much, Tom.’
He took it as a personal reproach.
She saw him blush, the way Mike might have done if someone told him his salary at the bank was inadequate.
And as Mike also might have spoken, crossly and defensively, he said, ‘It'll get better.
I've got plans.’
‘We need real money,’ she said.
‘I think I'm going to have to get a job.’
She corrected herself,
‘Well, we're going to have to get jobs.
I've got to do what I set out to do, Tom.
I've given up too much just to let it go.’
‘You can be what you like,’ he said.
‘You can be anything you like.
I wish I had untold thousands to give you.
I love you.‘
She never knew what to answer when he said that.
It made her feel awkward and she looked away.
The Metropolitan and District Lines, though hugely expanded, still operated by steam in 1895, the date of Conan Doyle's The Bruce-Partington Plans .
This story depends for its interest and a good deal of its plot on the existence of the District Line.
It would no longer be possible to do as Oberstein and Colonel Walter did and place a dead man on the top of a train from a window in west London.
The train carrying the body of Cadogan West gave a lurch as it passed over the points and the curve in the rails just before Aldgate Station.
The body was thrown off on to the track and the investigators with the exception of Sherlock Holmes were deceived into believing it had fallen from a carriage.
It could not happen today.
This was at Gloucester Road, or near it, and though the tall buildings are very close to the line here, they are not close enough for anyone inside to reach or even touch a passing train.
Illustrations from Sherlock Holmes stories decorate the platforms at Baker Street, but The Bruce-Partington Plans is not among them.
Can this be because London Transport was afraid it might give passengers ideas?
The cars in Underground trains have a door at each end as well as the double-and single-leaf doors for passenger use.
The end doors, with sliding glass-panel window for ventilation, are not for passenger use.
Notices attached to them make this plain.
Above all, they are not to be used when the train is in motion.
It is here, where the doors are, that cars are linked together.
The linkage is tight and the space between the doors is a few inches.
Outside the train, at the foot of each door, is a step or running board, again no more than inches wide.
On the body of the car, on each side of the door and on what might be called the architrave, are two handles.
The roofs of the cars are ellipses, the curves somewhat shallower than in the days of Charles Tyson Yerkes or, come to that, Sherlock Holmes.
At Ladbroke Grove a boy called Dean Miller, whom the rest of them knew and had teamed up with on the platform at Royal Oak, opened the door at the end of the car and climbed up on to the roof.
There was no purpose in this.
If Dean had a motive for doing it he did not say what it was.
But they had no need of motive or purpose.
It was enough to do it.
This is a very old part of the Metropolitan, called the Hammersmith Line, nearly 130 years old, the line running out in the open via Latimer Road, Shepherd's Bush and Goldhawk Road to Hammersmith.
There are no tunnels and no low bridges to encounter on the train's journey to Latimer Road.
As Ladbroke Grove is left behind, the chimney of the old brick kiln at the now demolished Ruston Mews can be seen, the street once called Rillington Place where Christie the multiple murderer lived, killed women and immured them in his garden and the cupboards of his house.
But this was unknown to Dean Miller, it having happened twenty-seven years before he was born.
Spreadeagled on the roof of the car in a scissors or St Andrew's Cross position, he concentrated on holding on and not losing his balance as the train gathered speed under the shadow of the Westway and rocked past the desolate terraces of north Kensington.
He had done this before, but not here.
He had done it on one of the western stretches of the Central Line from North Acton to Ealing Broadway, a rather more hair-raising experience than this.
For one thing, it had begun to rain as soon as he had climbed on to the car.
The train had halted for a full five minutes on the western side of West Acton and all that time Dean had been lying on the roof in the rain.
He heard later that a suicide had thrown himself on to the line.
It was not raining this time and the train went through to Latimer Road unhindered.
Dean climbed off the roof  and let himself into the car the way he had come.
Surrounded by the others who made a protective wall between him and the rest of the passengers, he stood there brushing himself down.
Jasper said, ‘What was it like?’
‘It was OK,’ said Dean.
‘Would you do it on one of the underground bits?’
‘Would you?’
Having brushed the most obvious dirt off his clothes, Dean sat down.
He broke off and ate a piece of Mint Crisp from out of the platform chocolate machine Kevin offered him as a tribute to his prowess.
‘You couldn't do it where it's, you know, really tube.
Not unless you're less than nine inches through.
You'd get your head knocked off.’
This led to an attempt by Chris to measure the chest depth and head size of the others.
But since he had no tape measure he could only estimate, by a very rough and ready method, that Lee being the thinnest was the only one to qualify.
Lee gave him a shove, there was some pushing and tripping up, Kevin fell over into Dean's lap and a woman at the other end of the car shouted that if they didn't behave themselves she'd find someone at Goldhawk Road who would make them.
The easiest course was to leave the car, which they did by the end doors, and they were still walking in single file through the train when it came into Hammersmith.
The Metropolitan has a different station here from that used by the District and Piccadilly Lines.
They made the changeover and came back into London on a District Line train from Richmond.
At West Kensington Lee wanted to get out on to the roof and sledge to Gloucester Road but Dean, who had assumed the position of expert adviser, said he wasn't sure about the tunnels.
He thought you would have to keep well over to one side of the car roof to avoid  being struck by the side of the tunnel arch as the train came into Gloucester Road.
But which side?
He found it hard to remember whether you had to position yourself on the left or the right side.
They all got out at Gloucester Road and tried to check it out.
Chris said it was obvious you would have to be on the right side.
Not if you were in a Circle train though, Kevin said.
Then it would be the left.
No one felt like risking an attempt on Gloucester Road to South Kensington.
They changed platforms for the Circle going clockwise and, told by Dean that it was a safe stretch, at Gloucester Road both Chris and Damon climbed out on to the roof of the car.
The train stood a long time in Gloucester Road station, for no apparent reason.
Passengers went to the open doors and looked up and down the platform, trying to make out why they were stuck there, but no one looked up on to the roof of the car.
No one ever does.
Before the train started Damon came down.
He didn't say anything.
He just shook his head.
‘Chicken,’ said Dean.
‘I was not.’
‘You were.’
‘I was not chicken.
I was cold.
It's cold up there.’
Jasper thought of going up in his place.
He immediately felt excited.
Then he felt sick.
Once he had thought of it he knew he would have to do it.
If not now, tomorrow.
If not tomorrow, next week.
He would have to do it.
But he wasn't going to climb up there now and once up there see some obstruction ahead, some tunnel rim that might be just too low, so that he had to get down again and come back in like Damon had.
And get called chicken by the expert.
He wished the train would start.
When the train had started he wouldn't be able to go up there.
It felt dead, marooned, abandoned, as if it would never move.
As the chugging of the motors began, on a sudden unexpected surge, he felt as relieved as any forty-year-old traveller in a hurry to keep an appointment.
The doors gave their preliminary sigh and closed.
Jasper knelt up on the seats with the rest of them to observe out of the window their progress to Kensington High Street.
There was not much to see.
The train immediately entered the tunnel — a tunnel cut just beneath the surface, of course, not the deep tube.
There was probably a space eighteen inches deep or more between the roof of the car and that of the tunnel.
It was dark but not black-dark as inside the tube.
You could see the dirty brown cables strung along the walls.
Where the Circle runs through the cut-and-cover, in most stretches of it, are open shafts for ventilation.
There are two of these on the stretch between Gloucester Road and Kensington High Street and, as the train passed under the first one, they all cheered.
Daylight suddenly burst upon them, sunlight, and up there for a moment blue sky and white clouds and a tall whitish building.
The darkness made this a more hazardous stretch than that undertaken by Dean Miller, or if not more hazardous, more frightening.
‘Scary’ was Kevin's word for it, an American word he said, and they all agreed that, yes, it was scary.
You could never be absolutely sure, Jasper thought, that up there in the tunnel roof there wouldn't be some great iron bar or post sticking down to within an inch or two of the top of the car.
You wouldn't be able to see, or avoid it if you could see.
They cheered again when the train passed under the next, much bigger shaft, again the sunshine came flooding in and again you could see the sky and brickwork and even trees.
A moment or two of renewed darkness and then the train was coming into Kensington High Street.
Covered in  dirt, Chris came quickly back into the car, showing no pride in his achievement, but giving Damon a glare of contempt.
‘What got into you?
Were you chicken?’
‘I was not,’ said Damon.
‘You were scared,’ said Chris.
‘There's nothing to be scared about.
It was OK.
It was great.’
‘I was not scared.’
‘Chicken, chicken, chicken,’ said Dean.
Damon hit him.
They rolled on to the floor.
Someone down the car said it was a disgrace and the school holidays were too long and someone else said, pity the poor teachers.
At Notting Hill Gate, as they were leaving the car, they found their way impeded by a uniformed official of London Transport Underground that the woman who said the holidays were too long had got hold of and was complaining to.
The official was saying, ‘Now wait a minute, you just wait a minute,’ and put his arm out right across the open doorway.
Jasper ducked underneath it and started running.
They all knew there were no television cameras here.
It would have been a different matter at Oxford Circus, say.
Damon and Chris followed him.
None of them looked back to see what happened but galloped for the interchange to the Central Line.
This involved an escalator going deep down.
Instead of standing on the treads, they ran down.
Jasper wondered if the man in uniform had actually seen Chris on the roof of the car, had had a phone call from Kensington High Street that someone was on the roof of a car, or if he knew nothing except what that woman was telling him.
Buskers were at the foot of the escalator, not Alice and Tom and Peter, but two men with a saxophone and an electric guitar, playing rock.
Jasper looked back up the empty moving stair.
On the eastbound platform Dean and Lee were already waiting for them.
They had doubled back and got out of the single-leaf door of the car.
Now there was only Kevin unaccounted for.
He came rushing on to the platform just as a train bound for Debden came in.
Nothing had happened, he had been given a warning, that was all.
They all got into the train, though Dean's idea had been to head for Epping, but it was as well to be on the safe side.
As soon as they were in the train, in a rather crowded car where there was no chance of a seat, Jasper understood what he had to do.
This was it.
When the train had emerged from the last tunnel on the Central Line between Stratford and Leyton, issuing with little more space to spare than toothpaste squeezed out of the nozzle of another kind of tube, somewhere past that point, though he was not sure yet where, he would climb out on to the roof of the car.
He stood between Kevin and Damon, holding on to the upright, saying nothing.
He intended to tell no one about this, just to do it.
The car remained crowded as far as Holborn and then the passengers thinned out.
Jasper got a seat.
He was not yet of an age where polite altruism is practised.among friends, a situation in which one denies oneself comfort and offers it to another.
Such a thing would not have occurred to Jasper or to any of them.
A seat became vacant and he sat down in it.
In the back pocket of his jeans he could feel the rather squashed packet of cigarettes.
When he had done his roof ride and the sick feeling had been replaced by a feeling of triumph, he would have a cigarette.
The closed doors would hold it for him and he would smoke it on the way back as he had smoked that earlier one on the way down from Finchley Road.
They came back on the Northern Line, a tall handsome  man in a long overcoat and a man whose face was mostly hidden by an upturned collar and a hat pulled well down.
It was a train bound for Mill Hill East that they got into, so they were obliged to change.
They did so at Euston.
But instead of waiting on the same platform for an Edgware train, they made their way up to the British Rail terminus, and in the men's lavatory the bear got into his bear suit.
Outside, in the concourse, the bear-leader passed the chain round the bear's neck, made a noose of it, and led the bear back to the Underground.
Money was never short with the bear-leader.
It was not for money that he had the bear dance to amuse commuters.
He made no attempt to re-enter the system without paying but bought two tickets from the machine while the bear waited meekly with bowed head.
As they descended the escalator they were once more the centre of attention.
No one looked anywhere but at them, not at the advertisements or each other or the tube map, but at the man and the bear.
In the passage leading back to the northbound platform of the Northern Line they stopped in a corner, the man got out his mouth organ and the bear began to dance.
The rich ignore the simplest things in the area of earning, making, keeping, regarding money, and the bear-leader forgot to put any receptacle for money on the ground in front of them.
He had no hat and certainly he had no handkerchief, but the bag in which the Semtex was would have done, or the square scarf which, under the brown hairy suit, was still knotted round the bear's neck.
It scarcely mattered, since only one of the passers-by gave them anything.
This was a man who perhaps gave to all tube buskers indiscriminately, without even looking at them, for he tossed a 5P piece on to the ground as he strode past.
The coin bounced, spun and rolled away into the corner.
The bear said, ‘Put the bag between us and open the top of it.’
‘Remember what's inside.’
‘That won't matter.
You could throw a fag end in, throw a lighted match in.
It needs percussion to go up.
Black powder now, that would be something else again.’
‘I'm learning,’ said the man with the mouth organ.
They were bound for Epping because Dean lived there.
A self-appointed leader, he made the rules without being explicit about them or even explaining that there were rules.
He wanted to go home and therefore the others must come with him.
What happened to the rest of them when he left them on Epping's still rustic station, at the extreme eastern end of the Central Line, was their business or misfortune.
Jasper sensed some of this and vowed not to go along with it in the sheeplike fashion of the others.
Cars in London Transport Underground are seldom entirely empty.
Even in the slack times, between rush hours, there are usually several people in each car, even on these distant tentacles of the lines.
In their car, after Snaresbrook, only the six of them remained.
Jasper had begun to feel hungry.
It was lunchtime and past.
He had about a pound on him, in small change, which would buy no more than a chocolate bar and a couple of packets of crisps.
But Kevin was a notorious thief and always had money.
The idea of Kevin's rewarding him for his prowess with a real lunch somewhere acted as a spur to Jasper, but he did not really need a spur.
He was prepared, determined, ready.
A woman the same age as their combined ages stepped into the car at Woodford and quickly stepped out again when she saw Lee swinging from the passenger hand-holds, Damon and Kevin sparring on the floor and Chris doing something to a continental ferry advertisement with a red felt-tipped pen.
It was getting greener outside the windows, not exactly country but a lot of trees and leaves and green grass among the buildings.
At Debden they would have to change, if they were going on further with Dean Miller.
Jasper was not.
Loughton was the place he thought of as the station at which to de-train and seek food.
He was suddenly aware of the sun, of bright sunshine pouring into the car.
The platform at Buckhurst Hill was empty, or empty at their end.
The station looked sunlit, deserted.
It looked like somewhere waiting for a film to happen, Jasper thought, like a Western on television where two gunmen will come out of the badlands and hold up the mailtrain on the Santa Fe railroad.
By that time he had opened the door at the end of the car.
Behind him Dean said, ‘He's going to sledge,’ but Jasper did not look back.
He climbed up the door of the next car, using the handles and window frames as footholds.
It was easy getting up there.
What he had not anticipated was that the top of the train would be so smooth.
Curved, yes, he had expected that, he had known he wasn't going to find a flat plateau, but something to hold on to he had expected, a double ridge perhaps, pipes or cables, not what was in fact there, nothing more than shallow flanges at the tops of the double-leaf doors.
Nothing would have made him do a Damon and slink back.
He squatted, then lay down, he edged and wriggled along and had his fingers round those curved shallow indentations when the train started.
It gave a lurch and Jasper, his heart in his mouth, felt his body jerk and slip.
He held on, digging his fingers into metal, as if the metal were soft and would give.
The train pulled out, heading for Loughton along the green valley of the Roding.
Under his prone body the roof felt hot.
September sunshine had been shining on it ever since Leyton.
Now the sun stroked Jasper's back, laid a burning hand on the nape of his neck.
He spread his legs and tensed  his fingers.
He was in control now, he had the measure of this car roof, this train, the knack of getting a grip on it.
In spite of the heat, he understood why it was called sledging.
This was what it must be like on a toboggan roaring down the snowy slope of a mountainside.
A great exhilaration filled him.
The train was going fast, rushing along now, and the clatter of it sang in his ears.
He bounced a little, pleasantly, not alarmingly.
Why had no one said it was like this?
Why had no one told him how marvellous it was?
Jasper would have liked to yell and sing and shout, if he had dared lift up his head.
He would have liked to stand on the roof of the train and leap along from car to car like one of the bad guys in that Western.
But he dared not move, not this time, not yet, and he held on tight, lying there with his body ten times more thrillingly alive than he had ever known it.
A great joy possessed him as the train bore him on, on, on through the sunshine, down the line to Loughton.