

NORSEMAN ON THE TRAIN
The Gendarme on duty at Boulogne Police Station looked surprised when I said that I had come to join the French Foreign Legion.
I had stepped straight off the ferry from Dover and had nothing in my pockets except  a disposable razor and my toothbrush.
I told him that I was English, an ex-paratrooper and that I had come to be a legionnaire.
He took my passport off me and told me to sit down on a bench sat against the wall; I picked up a magazine and read it while he checked my details.
He handed me some leaflets and magazines about the French Army, one of which was Képi Blanc , the monthly journal of the Foreign Legion.
On the cover was a picture of two legionnaires with shaven heads staring over the battlements of a fort in Chad, where in that summer of 1984 the Legion was assisting the government in their lowkey war against Libyan-backed rebels.
Having looked at my passport, the Gendarme made a telephone call during which he turned to look at me, spelling out my name and saying that I was English and a former paratrooper.
Then he walked over and told me that a Corporal from the Foreign Legion recruiting office at Lille would come to pick me up in two hours; until then I was free to go for a walk and get something to eat.
I went outside and stood in front of the police station, which was set on a hill.
I had woken up as the ferry was docking, feeling bad-breathed and half drunk, and had walked off the ramp, shown my passport at customs and asked where the police station was.
I was directed up through the town, past some municipal gardens to a small building set back from the road.
From where I stood outside it I could see the Channel  and the town of Boulogne set around the port.
I turned right and walked up to a crossroads where two shops and a bar were open; I couldn't go in because I had no money, so I continued up the road.
On top of the hill was a wood of beech trees surrounded by a stone wall; I climbed the wall and found that underneath the trees were hundreds of moss-covered gravestones of soldiers from Napoleon's Imperial Army who had died of disease while waiting to invade England.
In the middle of the wood was an obelisk commemorating the Emperor.
I sat on it and smoked a cigarette before falling asleep in the long grass.
For some reason I felt detached from all that was going on, presumably because I was tired and drunk.
When I opened my eyes, it had got colder, so I stood up, brushed off my blazer and set off back to the Gendarmerie.
As I approached it I noticed a beige Renault outside with military markings.
The Legion had arrived.
Earlier that morning I had awoken lying on the grass underneath an oak tree in Regent's Park.
Pushing myself up off the wet ground, I brushed the twigs and earth off my trousers while I checked my pockets.
My passport was wet and creased from where I had lain on it all night; but it was there.
One side of my trousers was soaked with dew, and there were mud stains on my shoes; my hair was short and stood up on end, and there was a leaf in my ear.
It was 7.00 am and I was very cold.
That summer of 1984 was very hot, with successive weeks of clear skies and sunny days, but so early in the morning there was mist in the air and the grass was still wet.
I lit up a Rothmans as I walked jerkily over the park, shivering, the cigarette rushed to my head and I felt better as I drew on it strongly, cupping the end in the palm of my grubby hand.
There was dirt underneath my fingernails and my hangover was worse than normal, as the result of weeks of drinking throbbed through my head and churned my stomach.
There was nobody in the park at that time and I walked quickly through the dew, my  feet soaked before I had gone ten yards, a trail of sliding tracks behind me on the grass.
I headed for the tube station at Baker Street and turned down my collar as I came into the Marylebone Road.
A man wearing an anorak was walking his dog, and the terrier trundled past me on its lead as I rubbed my hands together, trying to keep warm.
I leant back and looked at the seat of my trousers, checking that I had brushed off the mud; I wanted to make the transition from somebody who had just slept rough to somebody who looked as though he was out for an early walk.
I had only to make it to Dover and then I could sleep on the ferry to France.
I had £30 in crushed fivers and damp change sitting in my pockets, and all I needed to buy with it was the train ticket to Dover, a toothbrush and some beer.
I counted on being able to dodge my way on to the ferry and I didn't think I would need any money once I got to France.
I fell asleep on the Circle Line and had to retrack from South Kensington to Victoria, curled up in a corner seat in the warm tube.
The train for Dover left at Il.00 am so I bought a copy of Soldier magazine and leafed through the photos of happy-looking squaddies as I drank a cup of British Rail coffee, which tasted hot and disgusting.
I hoped that the off-licence opened soon because the journey to Dover could only be improved by getting drunk; besides, a few cans of lager helped me through the morning pretty well, and killed off hunger till late afternoon.
I had another coffee; I was confused, irritable and dizzy as I stood by the buffet and watched the station cleaners, suddenly desperate to be on my way before tiredness made me change my mind.
I had come this far and was determined to make it to France.
As soon as the off-licence opened I bought a dozen cans of Norseman lager, hefting the packs under my arm as I went off to find a quiet corner of the station where I could guzzle them in peace.
I was on my sixth one by 10.30 am, sitting behind a luggage trolley with my head against the wall.
I felt much better.
I got on the train and settled myself in a corner  compartment with my back to the engine, feeling pissed and happy as the carriages rolled out of Victoria towards Clapham Junction and the South Coast.
I couldn't wait to get to Boulogne.
I was going to join the French Foreign Legion.
I didn't know quite where or how or with whom but I was going to turn in at the Gendarmerie and take it from there.
They would know.
This was the most dramatic move I had made in all my twenty-two years, and, buoyed up by ten cans of lager, I was convinced it was a good idea.
I had enough remaining money for a proper ticket, and I bought a toothbrush as well.
It was lunchtime so I bought a packet of Jaffa Cakes and more lager, which I drank while waiting for the ferry to start boarding.
I ate the biscuits in one go and walked on to the boat, climbing up the decks to stand at the back.
The ferry turned into the sluggish waters of the Channel.
I went down to the washroom to get a drink of water, and to have a shave; I didn't want to turn up at Boulogne Police Station looking scruffy.
Fortunately a lorry driver was washing in the basin, so while he went off to have a shit in one of the cabinets, I rifled his spongebag and pinched a disposable razor.
Scurrying aft, I had a fast shave, using the pink slime from the soap-dispenser to lather my face.
Later I watched as the white cliffs of Dover diminished in the ship's wake, before going downstairs to get some sleep.
I wondered how long it would be before I saw England again.
I was working in a heart clinic off Harley Street as a receptionist and delivery boy when I decided to join the French Foreign Legion.
My job was to answer the telephone and welcome the patients, who were mainly wealthy Greeks and Arabs who came to have check-ups and electrocardiograms.
I would open the door to them and check their names off in the appointment book, often unable to converse because of the language barrier.
They were referred to the clinic by their doctors in Greece or  the Middle East, and looked horrified when I said there was no lift and they had to walk down seventeen stairs to the basement.
The closest I came to anything clinical was watching a nurse shave the chest of a Lebanese businessman, so that she could attach the electrodes required for an ECG — I held the kidney dish into which the used razor was deposited.
I was having a spell as a civilian after leaving the Territorial Army in mild disgrace.
I had initially become interested in things military through my father, who had served in the Cavalry in World War Two.
His tank had been in an encounter with a German howitzer and he had been badly burnt, his face, hands and arms requiring extensive plastic surgery, although he went on to run a preparatory school in Sussex.
My grandfather had also been in the Army, firstly in the Leicestershire Regiment during the Great War, and then the Education Corps after the armistice.
He had been serving in Cairo when my father was born, and afterwards the family came to live in England, as my grandfather was posted to the Military Academy at Sandhurst as an instructor.
They lived in a house in the Terrace, and eventually my father was sent to Ampleforth in Yorkshire, a Benedictine monastery which also ran a boarding school.
I was born in December 1962, the seventh of eleven children, eight of whom were boys.
We lived in part of a school my father ran, which was situated in a large white house outside Arundel, Sussex, on the edge of the South Downs.
It was an idyllic place to grow up, as there was an enormous garden and a real jungle of bamboo beyond the vegetables.
We had a nursery and a nanny, and until we were thirteen ate with her rather than with our parents.
Nanny's mother was of French stock and lived in Calais, and her father came from Bishop's Waltham, a village in Hampshire.
She smoked more cigarettes than anybody I was ever to meet, and she cemented my loyalty to her with frequent presents of Airfix model aeroplanes.
I first talked about the war with my father on a train outside  Bognor Regis, when I asked him how many Germans he had killed.
He told me not to ask questions like that.
I read comics, like Victor and Dandy .
In the Victor the Germans were always getting slaughtered by plucky chaps with square jaw-lines and purple stubble.
Men who didn't do up their helmets and who held machine guns in one hand.
The stories always came out well in the end, and if one of the officers was a coward or incompetent, you could be sure that by the end of the story he would have done the decent thing and charged the machine gun nest singlehanded, getting killed in the process.
I read lots of War-Picture Libraries , which came out every week, and detailed the exploits of soldiers, sailors and airmen in World War Two.
The Germans were ‘krauts’ and ‘squareheads’and were portrayed as being stupid and incompetent.
The Japanese had slit eyes and very bad teeth, and fought the Australians, who never rolled their sleeves down.
I played Knights with my brothers and sisters, wearing a suit of plastic armour and a helmet with a visor.
At age seven I decided that I wanted to be a soldier, after I had watched a TV programme about the D-Day landings.
I attended my father's prep school where I was one of the worst-behaved pupils, constantly talking after lights-out and fooling around in class.
I moved to a school in Herefordshire when my father closed down Avisford and moved to mid Wales.
St Richards was fun and strict, with not enough to eat and high academic standards; I developed a crush on the assistant matron who had a phenomenally large chest; I liked her because she used to sit on the ends of our beds and talk to us before we went to sleep.
I excelled at no sports at all, preferring instead to be one of the boys who was allowed to use the lawn mowers and keep the garden in trim — my one attempt at cricket was a disaster, and I was sent off the field for not paying attention.
As far as I was concerned, cricket was, and certainly still is, the most tedious and unengaging sporting activity a man could possibly indulge in.
Team games always put me off.
Football meant standing on  a muddy pitch hoping the ball wouldn't come anywhere near me, so that I wouldn't be forced to tackle some vicious little boy who really cared who won the game.
The people who took sports seriously aroused deep loathing in me.
Rugby was even worse, as it involved a large amount of physical contact, and there was nowhere on the field you could hide and no playing position which kept you out of harm's way.
I had nightmares about scrums and tackles from a very early age and refused to play as a linesman, in case I got involved in violence.
Rugby nightmares replaced nightmares about witches, which had been the basis of my bad dreams for several years.
I loathed sport well into my teens; a distinct disadvantage, as I had decided I wanted to be an Officer in the Parachute Regiment or the Royal Marines, a vocation which demanded exceptional physical fitness and courage, qualities I didn't possess.
My first real contact with the military was when I went on a familiarisation course to the Parachute Regiment depot at Aldershot when I was fourteen, and spent two days living in the mess, where I looked around the regiment, met serving officers and had some basic interviews with retired Colonels, who were in charge of selecting the future leaders of the toughest regiment in the Army outside of the Special Air Service.
I tried boxing when I was fifteen and won a bout against an opponent who was smaller than me and who normally wore thick glasses; I went on to the second round of the competition and was beaten flat in thirty seconds by a demon midget who hammered me onto the ropes and kept hitting me until the referee stopped the bout before I suffered permanent damage.
The referee was also the Quartermaster in the school's Combined Cadet Force, who paraded on Wednesday afternoons and ran around in the woods with Lee Enfield .303s practising ambushes in the rhododendrons.
With the advent of punk music in 1977 I transferred my energies and enthusiasm from the military and spent a lot of time  dressing up and putting Vaseline in my hair, much to the annoyance of my house master, a quiet Benedictine who wrote on my term report, ‘Christian seems to have developed a nihilistic attraction for punk rock, which is strange for somebody who avoids violence even on the rugby field.
So what about some real punk rock with courage in the boxing ring?’
I thought Father Ambrose had missed the point of modern music.
I was sixteen and thought I was in love.
I had lost my virginity to a Belgian au pair who was a friend of my eldest sister.
The girl had told me that she was a virgin and that she was in love with me.
I believed her on both counts, especially when she visited me for a weekend and gave me a bottle of ‘Denim’ aftershave which she had shoplifted from a Chemist in mid Wales.
Bored, I ran away from Downside when I was sixteen and spent two days in Paris, sleeping rough, before hitch-hiking home.
I was taken away from the school by my father and tutored in a caravan by an eccentric ex-priest.
I was turned down by all the universities on my UCCA application form, because I had received a bad report from my headmaster at Downside School who said I took drugs, which was true, but was also an admission made to him in confidence.
London University had interviewed me for both of the courses for which I had applied: Arabic and Economics, and Swahili and Commercial Law.
I had chosen these subjects specifically because I knew nothing about any of the four disciplines and because, having studied foreign languages at A Level, it seemed natural to develop my linguistic skills.
Hitch-hiking home from London to Wales after attending my interviews, I was given a lift on a roundabout outside Monmouth in South Wales.
It was a cold day and I had been standing in that particular spot for half an hour, so I was glad to get into the car, which was driven by a smart-looking man in a tweed cap.
We had gone two or three miles when he asked me what I did and how I came to be hitch-hiking.
I told him that I was a student and studying at London University, my course being Swahili and Economics.
I  was tired of all the conversations I had had that day and wanted to glamorise my life.
I told him I was in my first year and that my curriculum to date had been based around mastering the basics of Swahili, its grammar, basic vocabulary and syntax.
I enthused about my imaginary prowess in the language, telling him that I hoped to visit Africa that summer.
He was silent for a while as we drove through the late afternoon towards Abergavenny and Brecon.
I had told him that I was going to Bulith Wells, near where my parents lived, and he had agreed to drop me there.
It meant that I had another thirty miles in his car.
Turning to me suddenly, he pointed through the windscreen and said something in a tongue I didn't understand.
I kept silent, thinking that he might have an embarrassing speech impediment.
Two miles further on, he pointed out of the window again at a field of cows, saying something in his unintelligible language.
I looked at him nonplussed.
He still kept silent.
Finally, he turned to me and asked a question, repeating it twice, in the same jumble of words and sounds which I couldn't understand.
He was speaking Swahili.
Brought up on a farm in Kenya, he had lived there until he was seventeen.
He had been pointing out of the window and asking me if I liked the weather or the colour of the cows.
I got out silently at the next roundabout.
Doing a lot of hitch-hiking, as I did from my parents' house in Wales to London, I met many different people.
A middle-aged man picked me up on the M4 near Swindon and offered me a lift to London, which was very convenient.
Asked where I lived, I replied that I was staying in my parents' flat in Knightsbridge.
‘Oh,’ he said, ‘I live in Knightsbridge as well.
Which part are you from?’
‘Egerton Crescent.’
‘Good Lord, how interesting; have your parents lived there long?’
I thought quickly.
We had another seventy miles till London  and at least another fifteen until the next junction where I could get out.
I shouldn't get this wrong.
‘Yes, since just after the war.
My grandmother bought it so that she could be close to Harrods for the shopping.’
‘What number is it you live at?’
‘Forty-seven, in the basement flat.’
He was silent for a while.
I turned to him and asked, ‘Is something the matter?’
‘No, it's just funny, that's all.
I had drinks there on Thursday with Paul and Angela.’
In May 1978 the Foreign Legion first came to my notice, through the pages of Paris Match .
I was in a French class at school when I picked up a copy of the magazine, which had been lying on one of the tables.
On the centre pages I found a huge black and white photograph of a Hercules aircraft disgorging paratroopers over a large expanse of grassland somewhere in Africa.
The caption said,.
(At last, in the sky, the boys from the Legion.)
This was the 2ème Régiment Étrangere de Parachutistes jumping over Kolwezi in southern Zaire to save 2,000 European hostages from Katangese rebels who had attacked the small mining town some days previously.
I cut out the caption and stuck it on the cover of my French notebook.
It was the most powerful affirmation of strength and military prowess that I had ever seen, and I found it completely fascinating.
I was slightly built, and although I hated team sports and games, I spent much time in the school gym doing circuit training and fitness programmes.
I was nicknamed Pune, an inverted pun on puny, a physical status I retained, no matter how many press-ups I did.
To escape this branding of myself as a bodily failure, I longed to be able to attach myself to an organisation stronger than myself, an association through which I could derive a feeling of physical achievement and personal status I would not otherwise possess.
On holiday at my parents' house in Wales, I locked myself into the ground floor bathroom and swore that one day I would be a paratrooper in the French Foreign Legion.
After being turned down by university, I moved to London and joined the Territorial Army, attending evening training sessions in preparation for the physical selection tests.
I had chosen to join the 10th Battalion of the Parachute Regiment, and the preliminary training evenings were geared towards physical exercise, getting us ready for ‘P Company’, the tests which every aspiring paratrooper, territorial or regular, had to pass before being able to wear his coveted maroon beret.
At the time I was living in a bedsit in Chelsea and was unemployed; through a mixture of odd jobs and the DHSS I managed to keep myself in beer and cigarettes.
Being unemployed in the TA was a positive advantage as it meant that I could devote all my time to training.
I did a lot of my socialising at the barracks and at least twice a week would stagger down the King's Road towards my bedsit.
This was the autumn of 1982, immediately after the Falklands war, and the public image of the Parachute Regiment was in high profile after its members' achievements in the South Atlantic; they had won two Victoria Crosses and had fought at Mount Longdon, Goose Green and Wireless Ridge.
As such, many people wanted to be part-time paras.
Out of the eighty-two people who started the selection process from our drill hall, nine of us made it.
I was one and felt that I could conquer the world.
I rushed off to tell my girlfriend at her Catholic convent in Berkshire.
She wasn't too pleased, as she thought I had been coarsened by the whole experience, which was true.
She didn't like me wearing T-shirts with ‘Death From Above’ emblazoned on them at her friends' parties in Wimbledon.
Most of my new friends were paras, and we used to sit around listening to our Sergeant-Major, who had been seconded to us from the 3rd Battalion after an exemplary performance in  the Falklands.
He had been in the Parachute Regiment for twenty years and had served in Borneo, the Oman, Northern Ireland and the South Atlantic.
I would go drinking with him at lunchtimes during the week, listening to his stories of combat and debauchery in distant corners of the world.
After hours, we went to a bar in Knightsbridge, where one afternoon I met a fifty-five-year-old Italian woman who was wearing white leather flared trousers.
I undressed her in her South Kensington hotel room and fucked her, only retreating to the safety of the street outside when she asked me to stay the night so that she could pretend to be my mother.
Having been awarded my red beret, I went on to RAF Brize Norton where I completed seven parachute jumps and was awarded my ‘wings’.
I attended every weekend exercise and had drill evenings twice a week.
Most of the weekend exercises started off with a para drop on to a drop zone somewhere in the British Isles, after which we would spend two days marching with large packs, practising attacks and fieldcraft.
On Sunday evenings we would return to barracks in London and head home.
The other soldiers had wives and families to go to, but I felt slightly at a loss away from the TA.
I was still unemployed, and happy as such, for it gave me more time for the TA.
I perfected the technique of entering my bedsit without anyone hearing me or noticing me, but eventually it became impossible to stay there ad infinitum without paying my rent, so I took all my military kit and some clothes and set myself up in the changing room at the barracks.
Friends were surprised at how often I would stay on their floors after an evening out, and I would alternate between trips to my parents' house in Wales and visits to friends from pre-army days, who I would surprise by telephoning to say I was on leave from the regular army.
I received my mail at the barracks and showered there in the mornings.
Each summer and Christmas, there was a party held for every member of the TA unit and their girlfriends and wives; the price of the ticket included food and as much as you could drink.
The year after I joined, I attended the party and drank several pints of a mixture of lager and gin, after which I lost consciousness in the changing rooms; I woke up to find myself being hit, kicked and pushed down the stairs.
An unhappy gatecrasher, who had been asked to leave, had decided to vent his aggression on a defenceless paratrooper before he left.
I passed out, but an hour later lurched downstairs into the hall.
The evening was drawing to a close and everybody was dancing with new-found friends.
In the middle of ‘Nights in White Satin’ I appeared on the dance floor, my face, head and shirt covered in blood, and with two teeth missing.
I was bleeding from a laceration on my scalp and was so drunk that I had no recollection of what had happened; a Sergeant quizzed me closely and seeing that I was incapable of speech, took me downstairs and put me into an ambulance.
I was allowed no anaesthetic because I was so drunk, but felt nothing of the emergency dental surgery or stitches.
The army continued with its exercises and I continued with my life; friends from the TA would join the regular army, returning months later with stories of how much tougher things were there.
I couldn't join the regular army because of my criminal record.
In a moment of stupidity I had forged an entry into my building society account book with a pencil, attempting to draw out several hundred pounds.
Not surprisingly, I was discovered, and when I presented myself at Wandsworth police station I was arrested.
The magistrate did not consider a barrack changing-room to be a proper address, and so I was ordered to be confined in a bail hostel in Camden Town while social reports were completed.
We were kept in on a strict curfew and given meagre amounts of pocket money each week, which was just enough to buy food and travel to the DHSS office.
The other people were a mixture of juvenile delinquents and retarded  middle aged criminals.
I went to court a month later and was fined £175.
In the year which ended with my twenty-first birthday, I had made twenty-nine parachute jumps, been arrested, spent a month on bail, been in hospital twice, stabbed in the face once, and spent over two thirds of my days with the Territorials.
Part-time soldiering essentially took second place to a full-time job, and it was impossible to make the TA work as anything apart from a weekend occupation.
I saw that I was going to have to find a job before I did something rash which landed me in prison.
Two friends from the paras — one an ex-member of the Irish Rangers, the other a deserter from the French Foreign Legion — were saving up for a trip to South Africa where they intended to join the South African Army.
I went to see the former legionnaire at the pub in Paddington where he was working.
The Legion sounded like a good idea: the pay was good, the uniforms smart, the bullshit no worse than the British Army, and there were varied postings abroad.
The idea of going to France and turning into reality something which for so long had seemed a dream was now a concrete possibility.
I knew nothing about the realities of proper soldiering, and to counterbalance the tedium and boredom of my small-time life, I surrounded the idea of the French Foreign Legion with a cocoon of glamour that it didn't possess.
Nothing could be worse than the life I was leading at present, I thought, where the pressures from being homeless and unemployed were likely to force me into a series of criminal acts which would result in prison, or vagrancy at the least.
(I had taken to climbing over the railings of the barracks each night, as the watchmen on the gate had been forbidden to let me in as I was known to be sleeping there.
Each morning started off with me trying to find enough small change to get something to eat, and gradually, I sold off all my army kit at government surplus stores to finance my drinking.
In late August I was finishing my day at the heart clinic, where I had been working for several months, when I decided that it was time to go.
I had just received a telephone call from the barracks which informed me that officials from Horseferry Road magistrates court had phoned demanding to see me about nonpayment of fines.
I hung up on them; I had had enough.
It seemed as good a time as any to go, so I went down to the squat in the King's Road where I was living and picked up my passport.
I went to see a friend in Regent's Park that evening but she wasn't there, so I climbed the railings into the park, crossed the grass, and settled under an oak tree…
‘HAVE YOU EVER HAD SEX WITH AN ANIMAL?'
As I walked back into the Gendarmerie the following afternoon, I saw my first legionnaire.
A small, tubby figure in olive fatigues and high-lacing combat boots was leaning on the counter drinking a cup of coffee; on his head was a white képi, the distinguishing box-like hat worn by all legionnaires.
He looked at me as I walked through the door and looked to the Gendarme as if to say, Is this him?
The Gendarme nodded and told me to wait outside.
He gave my passport to the Corporal who put it into his pocket, then we got into the car and drove off in the direction of Lille.
I wanted a cigarette; I had finished my packet and desperately wanted one to dull my hangover, but felt reluctant to cadge from the Corporal.
He made little attempt at conversation and showed no surprise that he should be asked to drive to Boulogne in the middle of the afternoon to pick up a well-dressed but grubby Englishman.
It was late afternoon as we drove across north eastern France through the Pas de Calais, past the fields and along the poplar-lined avenues where twice in one century the German Army had invaded.
Eventually the Corporal gave me a cigarette, and in due course we pulled over at a roadside cafe to have a cup of coffee and to stretch our legs.
As we walked into the cafe, a couple of the local farmers in denim overalls and caps looked up and welcomed us.
‘Ah, c'est La Legion!
From their smiles it appeared that the Corporal was a regular there, as he obviously travelled the road to Boulogne often.
I felt nervous, out of my depth and completely at odds with the friendliness of the locals around me.
I had sobered up by now and felt terrible.
Looking at the menu on the wall I realised  how hungry I was, yet I had no means of buying anything to eat; I had no money and so had no idea of where my next meal would be coming from.
We arrived in Lille as dusk was falling and drove through the centre of the modern sprawling town until we reached the citadel which was surrounded by a moat and an ancient drawbridge.
We drove across it and through an arch where a conscript in a shabby uniform saluted the car as it passed.
I asked the Corporal why he had saluted and he explained that it was because the Legion was the senior arm of the French Armed Forces.
We drew up outside a building which was surrounded by a walled courtyard.
There was a sign above the gate which said ‘Legio Patria Nostra ’(the Legion is our Country).
I walked inside and sat down in a hall, whitewashed and cool with a red-tiled floor.
On the walls hung faded photos of legionnaires drilling on parade grounds, jumping out of aeroplanes and marching across deserts.
I wondered how long it would be before I was doing the things portrayed in the photos.
It certainly wasn't too late to tell somebody that in fact I had made a terrible mistake and that I wanted to go home.
But knowing, as I did, that there was little to return to in England, and buoyed up by the sense of adventure and risk brought on by the thought of joining the Legion, I knew I would be staying.
I felt I was poised on the edge of something bigger and more unknown than anything I had encountered in life, and the mystery of what was about to happen added to the attraction.
If I could have foreseen the progress of events over the next two years I would probably have stood up and run directly back to Boulogne.
After fifteen minutes, there came a shout of ‘Entreé ! from inside an office.
I walked in and faced the desk.
In front of me sat the smartest and most alert looking person I had ever seen in my life.
His head was shaved almost bald and he was tanned.
A scar ran from the corner of his eye to under his jawbone, and his tattooed arms rested on the desk in front of him, which was  covered with mementoes of his Legion career.
His tan shirt was ironed with the regulation creases; above one pocket was a set of silver parachute wings, above the other, three rows of coloured medal ribbons.
His sleeves were rolled almost to the shoulder and the right one bore the three gold chevrons denoting his rank.
He already had my passport in front of him, and he opened it and asked me my name, age, parents’ names and a lot of other routine questions.
He then asked me about my sexual habits, to which I replied that I was heterosexual.
I wondered what would have happened if I had told him that I was bisexual or that I liked little girls.
He appeared satisfied when I told him that I didn't have a criminal record and shouted for somebody to come and show me upstairs.
A Corporal appeared and beckoned me through to the kitchen; he was taller and thinner than the other one and his arms were covered with rough tattoos executed in Indian ink; on his right forearm were the words,(My courage for my father, my heart for my mother, my prick for a whore).
I followed him through a washroom and into a barrack room with a tiled floor.
The air was full of cigarette smoke and chatter in several different languages.
Everybody stood up as the Corporal walked in.
All the recruits were dressed in blue tracksuits and the Corporal told one of them to show me a bed and explain what was going on.
The room was full of three-tier metal bunks made up with grey blankets and hung with clothes and towels.
The walls were painted dirty cream and there was a poster advertising Air France stuck next to the door.
It showed a bright-faced man running on a beach with two girls, both of whom were wearing fifties' bikinis.
The colours had faded to blues and yellows and the caption said, To travel is to have fun.
Standing there in my civilian clothes I felt completely out of place and wished that I could be wearing a blue tracksuit like the rest of them.
One of the recruits on a top bunk leant over and shouted, ‘Here, mate, are you English?’
I told him that I was and suddenly the ice was broken.
He jumped down, shook my hand and pulled a packet of Peter Stuyvesant cigarettes out of his pocket which he gave to me.
I lit up and stood there trying to answer all the questions coming at me in French and English.
Alex, who had given me the cigarettes, was Scottish and had been at Lille for three days; he had deserted from the Military Police in Germany, and thought that French food was nowhere as good as Glaswegian.
I said that I had been in the British Army which prompted another Englishman called Chris to ask if I had known anybody in the Royal Signals in Aldershot or Catterick.
Chris had a typical English soldier's moustache, thick and well-controlled, and on his bare arms were tattooed a combination of daggers-, roses, skulls and messages to his mother.
They showed me a bedspace and Alex went off to find me a tracksuit.
I jumped up on to my bunk and looked at the others sitting around playing cards, arguing with each other or lying on their beds staring at the ceiling.
Almost everybody was smoking.
There were two Frenchmen in the corner with shifty eyes and scarred faces who looked away when I stared at them, and a friendly Scandinavian with a tan and fine blond hair who shook my hand and said, ‘France fucking shit, yes?’
I smiled in answer to this, and started talking in French to a small, balding man who turned out to be Swiss and who was on the run from the customs in Geneva.
There were Belgians and Dutchmen, a Spaniard and a silent Italian smoking through nicotine-stained fingers who, Alex told me, was suffering withdrawal from drugs.
I changed into my tracksuit and took my civilian clothes downstairs to the Corporal.
The atmosphere in the barrack room was like the first day back at school, with everybody trying to outdo each other with stories of how exciting their holidays had been.
Meeting a group of complete strangers from backgrounds very different to my  own, in such an alien environment, was disconcerting.
I had no idea how long we were going to be at Lille, or whether I stood any chance of being accepted by the Legion at all.
I wanted to be accepted by those around me, and so joined in with their stories of soldiering, sex and drinking prowess.
Immediately I felt worried lest I be seen as different from the others.
As soon as you were noticed you became the butt for other peoples jokes and worries.
But it was all right.
The others were too bothered worrying about themselves and their chances to spend time thinking about the new arrival from England.
I talked to Alex and Chris about the British Army and tried to look anonymous.
The English stuck together against those Alex called the ‘fucking frogs’, and Marius, the Scandinavian, attached himself to us.
Life at Lille was easy and completely noneventful; it was only a recruiting post used for clearing volunteers before they were despatched on to Paris.
There was a staff of three Corporals, one Sergeant and the scarred Sergeant-Major who had interviewed me, all of whom were veterans of some twenty years' service in the Legion, filling in their last years before retirement.
Everyone gathered together in the room next to our barrack room for meals, which were brought over from the main kitchens somewhere else in the citadel.
The Legion's recruiting post was only a small part of a large camp, which also housed French teenagers doing their military service; it formed an enclave of tidiness and order among the sloppiness of the conscripts' barracks.
In front of our building was a patch of raked gravel with flowerbeds full of geraniums and palm plants.
In one corner next to a store house was a rusting metal cage which housed a pet crow with broken wings and tatty feathers.
That evening I had my first meal since leaving England eighteen hours before; by the time the pizza, chicken stew and garlicked beans arrived from the kitchen they were cold, but I was so hungry that I had seconds, which amazed Alex.
He was in the grip of severe constipation and was only eating fruit in an effort to clear himself out.
At 10.00 pm the Corporal came round to check that we were all present and in bed before turning the lights out and leaving us to sleep.
I lay there with absolutely no idea what I would be doing the following day or if I stood any chance of being selected by the Legion.
I was no closer to knowing the selection procedure, as my conversations about this with the other recruits had been based on mere speculation and gossip.
The whole Legion surrounded itself with mystery in multiple layers, and the further one penetrated it the more complex the mystery became.
There was little noise from outside the windows and we appeared cut off from the city and from civilian life in general; I lay in bed and pulled the sheets up over my nose.
The bedding smelt of vomit and old sweat but the sheets were clean; I smoked a Stuyvesant and thought how nice it was to have no control at all over my future.
Presently, I fell asleep.
We were woken up at 5.30 am, and Alex and I were told to go over to the kitchens to fetch the breakfast.
I shaved in cold water and walked out of the gate and across the parade ground to where a queue of people were waiting to be served at the kitchen.
The parade ground was surrounded by trees and it had rained in the night; the cobbles under our feet were wet and puddled.
We walked straight to the head of the queue and helped ourselves from a huge cauldron which was steaming on top of an oven.
Two cooks in white jackets and blue and white check trousers sat on the edge of a table having a conversation about their night out in Lille.
Both were smoking and the pungent smell of Gauloise tobacco so early in the morning made me feel sick.
When we got back to our building everybody else was up and busy cleaning the rooms.
The Corporal who had fetched me from Lille was shaving in the washroom, wearing only tracksuit bottoms and flipflops; his back and stomach were covered with a mixture of hair, scars and tattoos.
We had another interview with the Sergeant-Major that  afternoon.
As I sat in front of him, I looked at a poster-sized photo which was on the wall behind him.
It showed a group of legionnaires sitting on a wall in a wrecked and burning tropical town; the soldiers were filthy, looked exhausted and were draped with hand grenades and belts of machine gun ammunition.
A couple had sun goggles around their necks and one a blood-stained bandage on his face.
Their weapons were varied: Belgian FNs, Russian AK47s (Kalashnikovs) and French MAT39 submachine guns.
At the centre of the group was the Sergeant-Major looking younger, with the whole front of his uniform covered with a vast brown blood-stain.
He saw me looking at the picture and said, ‘Kolwezi, Southern Zaire, 1978.’
I wanted to sit there and ask him all about it, but he finished questioning me and told me to leave.
I really wanted to identify with him and wished that I could have said that I had been in the Falklands or in Northern Ireland, thereby establishing some sort of link.
That evening one of the Corporals made me clean out the crow's cage; I lifted the large black bird out and parked it on the gravel beside a flowerbed.
Terrified that it would try to escape or fly away, and not wanting to risk the Corporal's anger, I pinned it to the ground by leaning a large stone against it.
Peeling the shit-stained newspaper from the bottom of the cage, I emptied out the accumulated guano and went off to look for some fresh newspaper.
Alex and Chris were playing poker as I walked in, and after explaining my predicament one of the Frenchmen handed over an old copy of the local paper which he had brought with him when he had joined.
I didn't know what crows ate, so picked up some cabbage leaves and a lump of congealed moussaka from a dish in the Corporal's kitchen.
I was relieved to find my protege still motionless underneath his breeze block, so I picked him up, showed him the food and then laid him back on a fresh bed made from the local evening paper.
Unable to play poker, I looked at a poster on the wall of the room which described the different regiments of the Legion, their roles, and where they were based.
Alex and I both favoured the 2ème Régiment Étranger de Parachutistes , based at Calvi on the north coast of Corsica.
According to the poster, the unit was made up of a number of different combat companies, each fulfilling a specialist role, ranging from amphibious and mountain warfare to sabotage.
As I disliked swimming and Alex had already done some climbing in the British Army, we favoured the mountain warfare unit.
According to the poster, there were nine other regiments, divided between mainland France and the ex-colonies: units in Tahiti, French Guyana, Djibouti and Madagascar, and five regiments in France.
The Parachute Regiment seemed to have the best time, for it was based in Europe yet each-company spent four months of each year abroad on training attachments.
I wanted to carry on as an airborne soldier, a paratrooper, enjoying the prestige which came from being part of an elite, and also the better pay and training opportunities that were the lot of such units.
So when the Sergeant-Major asked me where I hoped to be posted eventually, I told him the 2ème Régiment Étranger de Parachutistes ; this didn't surprise him as most British recruits said the same thing.
We had an argument that evening in the barrack room between the English speakers and the French and Spanish; the recent Falklands conflict the bone of contention.
We reckoned that the British Army was the most professional in the world and that it had been influential in training the South African and Israeli armies who we thought took second and third place.
The Spaniards and Frenchmen claimed that the British victory in the South Atlantic had been a propaganda triumph over vastly inferior conscript forces, further demonstrating our need to re-establish our reputation overseas, which had been tarnished by the loss of Empire.
Chris explained with rapidly diminishing patience that some of the Argentinian officers  had received their training at Sandhurst; his brother had served in the Scots Guards on Mount Tumbledown and had said that the Argentinians they had confronted there had been good, professional soldiers.
Some time after supper Alex finished the discussion by kicking one of the Spaniards in the face.
The whole of the following morning was spent gardening and weeding in the area in front of the building; there was the gravel to be raked and the flowerbeds to be kept tidy.
I got the crow's cage again and afterwards was sent inside to do the washing up in the Corporals' eating area.
The three Corporals had a dull time in Lille and would often invite prostitutes in from the town to cheer up their afternoons.
Later on that day I was sent into the Corporals' quarters with a mop and bucket and as I went in a Corporal came out buttoning his flies.
I went on into the room where a middle-aged Moroccan woman lay sprawled on his bed, open-legged and completely naked.
Pointing between her legs, she looked at me and asked, ‘Tu veux ?’
I shook my head rapidly and mopped the floor as she lay there humming quietly.
Later the same afternoon, seven of us were ordered over to the medical centre for a check up by the doctor, who turned out to be a medical student doing his military service.
One by one we went into the office for a number of basic tests: we read a letter board at ten paces, ran on the spot and had our pulses taken before providing a urine sample and having a hearing test.
The doctor was friendly and shook my hand when he had finished, wishing me luck.
I took this medical test to be a sign that things were happening and that we could hope to go on to Paris, which Alex said was the next staging post.
At no point had any of us been told the procedure that would lead to us being selected to start our basic training.
What I knew about the Legion was based on a series of rumours and pieces of misinformation passed down from recruit to recruit.
If we were selected at Lille, apparently we proceeded to Paris and then on to Marseilles after a number of further tests.
The crucial time was the period spent at Aubagne, fifteen kilometres outside Marseilles, which was the depot of the whole Foreign Legion.
Only if you satisfied the selection board there were you allowed to carry on and start basic training, which itself lasted four months.
My posting to the 2ème Régiment Étranger de Parachutistes seemed a long way away.
That evening there was another line-up, when, as a result of the medical tests, four more people were turned away, including the Spaniard Alex had kicked, who had been found to be suffering from bronchitis.
This was a relief as his coughing at night had irritated us, and it meant that Alex could stop hitting him with a broom handle when he woke us up.
Although people would turn up every day to join, there was now a group of us who seemed likely to progress to Paris: Alex, Chris, myself, Marius the Scandinavian, the balding Swiss man, two Belgians and one of the Spaniards (who now kept a low profile).
The latest addition to our English-speaking group was a Rhodesian who had served in the Rhodesian Light Infantry in the war of Independence and who told endless stories of shooting black terrorists, or ‘floppies’, in cross border raids into Zambia.
He called them by this name because, he said, they went ‘floppy’ when you shot them.
The next day, all nine of us were lined up and given our civilian clothes; we were to take a train to Paris that evening.
It was interesting to see everybody in their own clothes.
My brogues and blazer were in marked contrast to Alex's jeans and Union Jack T-shirt, which he wore, he said, to avoid any confusion about his nationality.
This was an unlikely eventuality since he also had a tattoo on his forearm showing the Union Jack with the caption, ‘These colours don't run.’
Roy, the gunman from Rhodesia, had a suede jacket with tassels on the back and sleeves, and a pair of boots which he swore had been taken from a dead terrorist.
The quiet Swiss man had actually  turned up in a three-piece suit and tie, with a large amount of baggage; one of the Belgians had two suitcases and a hand grip.
We drove off to another barracks in Lille where we were taken individually into an office occupied by a portly Major; he handed each of us a pile of papers and we were told to sign each one at the bottom.
I tried to read them but he stopped me, so I signed my name nine times.
It was a five-year preliminary contract.
That evening we sat on the train bound for Paris.
The fat Corporal had accompanied us to Lille station, bought us all a beer, and joined us on the train.
I was sitting next to Alex chatting.
After a period spent talking about the Legion and what we thought it was going to be like, he turned to me, shook my hand and wished me good luck.
Then we both fell asleep.
I woke as we were arriving in Paris.
A lorry was waiting outside the station and we all got in, driving through the well-lit streets which were full of people.
We left Paris behind and drove off on a series of flyovers and underpasses, before drawing up outside the gates of Fort St Nogent on the outskirts.
The huge wooden gates were opened by a legionnaire in combat kit with a FA-MAS assault rifle slung across his chest, and his beret tilted over his right eye; we drew up in front of a five-storey building and got out.
I felt terrified and utterly lost.
It was the feeling that nobody around me gave a toss whether or not I got into the Legion, nobody cared what happened to me, or whether or not I succeeded.
To them I was just another recruit, and if I did well, got myself through the first six months and became a legionnaire, then I would matter to them because I would be part of their system.
As it stood then, I was a nothing and a nobody, with everything to prove and nothing to say.
I didn't exactly want one of the Corporals to come up, put his arm around me and say ‘Tell me all your problems’, but I felt bloody intimidated by the impersonal approach.
It was around midnight and the staff were lively and efficient.
We went up to the top floor and were told to sleep in a room full of grey metal  bunks and steel lockers, and to sleep fully clothed to avoid the lice.
I took off my shoes and fell asleep immediately.
It was still dark the following morning when we were woken up by a screaming Corporal who came in, kicking the lockers and pushing us out of bed.
I rushed off to have a shave and a wash, which I had hardly finished doing before we were ordered downstairs for breakfast in the darkness.
We were allowed ten minutes to have our coffee and bread before being chased back to the barrack rooms for cleaning and tidying.
The Legion used a word to describe any sort of menial duty to do with tidying, cleaning and arranging, ‘corvée ’.
As they were fanatically tidy this took on enormous importance.
I was given ‘corvée chiottes ’— the shithouse.
Later we assembled in a large room with the other recruits who had arrived from Cherbourg, Amiens and Rouen.
One by one we had all our hair shaved off, in the regulation crop known as a ‘boule à zéro ’.
As people's heads were shaved, scars and cranial disfigurements came to light; most people had four or five different marks on their scalps, and there was a lot of story telling.
I felt relieved that I had my scar from the fight at the summer party and so looked the same as everybody else — I was afraid of appearing different or clever which meant that I would be noticed by the Corporals and picked on by all the others.
I couldn't wait to be issued with a uniform as I stood out in my civilian clothes, which were much nicer than anybody else's.
The fact that everybody around me looked and sounded completely different from myself was worrying and disconcerting; I wanted to shed all semblances of my past civilian life and be assimilated totally into the system of the Legion.
The haircut helped.
At least I looked the same in one way.
We were paid 120 francs and interviewed again.
The same questions.
The same answers.
No, I hadn't been in prison.
No, I hadn't deserted from the British Army.
I signed more pieces of paper and went downstairs to join the queue outside the  clothing store.
Passing one by one in front of a counter, a Corporal sized us up for height and girth before dumping a pile of cast-off clothes in front of each one of us.
Trying mine on, I found that the trousers were several inches too short, the shirt was missing most of its buttons and the beret was like a sleeping bag.
I picked up a pair of combat boots from a pile in the corner, found some laces, and looked at the other people wondering with whom I could swop my uniform.
A small Portuguese man with ringworm scars on his scalp was holding up a huge pair of trousers in despair; I went over, took his trousers and shirt, told him that mine would fit him perfectly, and changed into his.
When he realised that the trousers hovered round his calves and that the shirt didn't do up it was too late; I had put on my newer, better-fitting shirt, bloused my trousers on to the tops of my boots and was putting on his beret as he stood there looking like a circus tramp.
I then went off for lunch which was soup and crayfish.
I got picked for the washing up detail and with six others swept the kitchen and dining room, drank the dregs from the glasses and bottles and had a conversation with one of the cooks about Beirut.
Then a French Polynesian with a rosary around his neck and scarred knuckles drew out his cards and we sat down to play.
After a couple of hands, an officer walked into the dining room and we all stood up.
This was the Padre attached to the unit.
He wore full combat kit and a large silver crucifix on a chain, which matched his parachute wings.
He asked us if we were all well and healthy; three of the Frenchmen started talking to him and the rest of us giggled and joked in English about this ridiculous figure who appeared to be out of touch with everything we were doing.
A Spanish recruit I had been playing poker against started making faces and gesturing behind the Padre's back, when suddenly, without taking his eyes off the Frenchman to whom he had been talking, the priest jerked his elbow backwards into the Spaniard's face, slamming him against an oven.
* 
We sat in a room all afternoon.
Of the forty of us who had survived so far, another twelve were weeded out and the rest of us sat there until 6.00 pm looking at the posters on the walls and reading the few tattered paperbacks which sat on the shelves.
I had a choice between a Western adventure in German, two American spy thrillers or a much-thumbed pornographic comic which had had all the lurid pages torn out as wanking aids.
The posters on the walls were all the same old ones of 1950s legionnaires in tanks looking at the desert through binoculars, or cutting their way through the jungle with machetes.
There was nothing explaining the makeup of the organisation which all of us were so desperately trying to join.
None of the Corporals were forthcoming, explaining with a shrug of their shoulders or a smile that everything would happen at Marseilles.
Each stage of the selection process so far had been a complete surprise: the waiting tended to heighten the anticipation and sense of cowed nervousness we all felt.
Apart from the facts about the different regiments gleaned from the poster on the wall at Lille, I knew no more now than I had as I stood watching England disappear from the back of the ferry.
In hindsight, if I had been aware of the exact nature of the Foreign Legion, how it operated, and how its members lived, I would have been much more hesitant about joining.
But in retreating so hastily from my life in England, the decision to leave had been facilitated by the sheer lack of knowledge about what lay in store for me.
I was nervous and frightened about the future, yet excited because of being so.
I had a fixed image in my head of what I wanted to become, culled from history books and magazine articles in Paris Match.
It involved parachuting, shaved heads, sunglasses and Africa.
I thought that it would be possible to adopt the exterior trappings of the system without succumbing personally; yet because I was frightened of appearing different or cockier than the others, I fell in with their mannerisms, jokes and brutishness.
They were being themselves, and it was I who was playing a game.
Despite this, I felt it would be better to prove myself in basic training before allowing my real personality to resurface.
I wondered whether, by the time it did resurface, it might not have changed already.
That evening we left Fort St Nogent on a coach for the Gare de Lyons where we embarked for the south of France on an overnight express.
It was to be more than two years before I saw Paris again.
We were jammed eight to a compartment, smoking, playing cards and drinking beer; the lights were on and sleep was completely impossible.
I went and stood in the corridor and watched the towns and villages flash past; we went through Chalon-sur-Saône, Dijon and on towards Lyons.
In my compartment two Frenchmen and a Spaniard were losing their pay to a tiny Glaswegian who excelled at poker; he had already won most of the hands and was trying to explain in broad Scottish that he was open to credit arrangements.
I fell asleep on the floor of the corridor somewhere near Lyons and woke up as we were drawing into St Charles station at Marseilles.
We were met on the platform by an old man with a barrow selling coffee and sandwiches.
I felt terrible and wanted some but only the Corporals were allowed it.
Standing behind them looking at the steaming urn on the barrow, I felt worse than hungover; it was a mixture of too little sleep, being hot and unwashed, completely unaware of what was going on, and worst, I was hungry.
A branch line train took us to Aubagne where a coach picked us up for the journey up to the camp.
I knew that Aubagne was the depot of the 1er Régiment Étranger (the 1st Foreign Regiment) of the French Foreign Legion, through which everybody passed on their way to basic training, and where legionnaires spent time while on attachments from other regiments, and pending postings overseas.
Until the sixties the headquarters of the Legion had been at Side Bel Abbe s in Algeria, the country which for 150 years had been the Legion's home.
Before 1965 none of the regiments  had been based in France, and a man could expect to spend his entire five year contract without seeing Europe.
After the end of World War Two the Japanese were expelled from Indo-China, and the French returned to their former colony.
A war ensued between the French and the Indo-Chinese from the north, who were led by General Vo Nguyen Giap and backed by the Communist Chinese.
The Legion, which was then largely composed of escapees from the German Wehrmacht and SS, had been thrown in its entirety into the war.
For nearly ten years a jungle war of incredible savagery had been fought over the same jungle tracks and expanses of savanna grassland where a decade later the Americans would lose to the Vietcong.
The German soldiers — who had learned their fighting on the Russian Front, at Monte Cassino and through the hedgerows of Normandy — had proved a match for the guerrillas, and it was only the indifference and boredom of the French public to a war which proved astronomically expensive in financial and human terms which led the French government to seek a political settlement.
The final showdown between the Viet-Minh and the cream of the French colonial Army had come in a deserted valley in the north of Vietnam, around a small village called Dien Bien Phu.
For five months in 1954, the Legion and several regiments of colonial paratroopers were besieged by guerrillas before being forced into captivity with heavy losses.
Those who made it back to Algeria after the debacle were reformed into other regiments.
The crack 1er and 2ème Régiments Étrangers de Parachutistes were staffed and run almost entirely by old hands from Indo-China who felt immensely bitter at the French government's handling of the war.
In Algeria, they found themselves in a similar situation, fighting a war against the regular Algerian Army and the guerrillas of the Front Libération Nationale .
De Gaulle's new government, elected to the Élysée on promises of keeping Algeria French, were engaging in secret peace negotiations with Algeria's leaders, and in 1961, after peace talks at Evian, Algeria was declared independent.
For the professional soldiers of the Legion, this was the final blow, and when Generals Challe and Salan led a revolt, the 1er and 2ème Régiments Étrangers de Parachutistes joined it almost to a man.
The revolt was crushed, the 1er Regiment disbanded, and the Legion brought back to France, setting up its headquarters at Aubagne.
The other regiments were sent off to guard France's ex-colonies in Africa and the Far East, and in 1967 the 2ème Régiment Étranger de Parachutistes was posted to Corsica.
Driving up to the gates of the camp, I saw my first legionnaire in parade uniform; he was wearing a white képi, a green tie and blue cummerbund.
He saluted the coach and we drove through the gates and up a hill past the enormous parade ground at the far end of which I could see the Monument aux-Morts , the memorial to every dead legionnaire.
It took the form of a huge bronze globe supported by an enormous stone plinth.
It had originally occupied a position at Sidi Bel Abbe s, but when the Legion left Algeria it had been dismantled stone by stone and brought to its present resting place at Aubagne.
Behind it was a stone wall on which was written in bronze letters the motto of the Legion, ‘Legio Patria Nostra ’.
It was only 7.30 am but already it was getting hot.
The camp was full of pine trees and flowerbeds of bougainvillea and hibiscus.
Square white buildings, three storeys high, sat at regular intervals on the slope, all looking down towards the parade ground.
Uniformed legionnaires marched around, and there was a group of convicts from the regimental prison in filthy fatigues and greasy boots who were emptying the dustbins and sweeping the roads.
A body of soldiers in sports kit marched past at a slow, rhythmic pace, singing loudly.
They were all in step and looked very smart.
We drove on to the top of the road and drew up outside a compound surrounded by a wire fence; inside was a large white building surrounded by an expanse of gravel on which a huge group of people were drawn up in lines.
This was the  ‘Section Engagés Volontaires ’, the department which dealt with all prospective recruits.
We got out of the coach and walked through the gates to the stares of those gathered on the gravel, and over to a low metal hut in the corner of the compound where we were ordered to go inside and sit down in silence.
We stripped and sat on metal stools; we were told to take everything out of our pockets and wait until our names were called from the room next door.
Some people, like myself, had very few possessions, while others had come with suitcases and rucksacks.
Somebody even had a violin.
Alex, Chris and I sat next to each other in our underpants, staring at the others: nudity revealed a lot of scarred, disfigured bodies, with missing fingers and toes, the marks of surgical operations, and huge tattoos.
I sat with my head between my legs and looked at the dirt-encrusted toenails of the silent Yugoslavian on my left until-'Jennings' was called from the next room.
I walked through to where a Chief-Corporal was standing behind a table.
He took all my clothes, my underpants, my toothbrush and razor, in return for which I received a clean set of fatigues, underwear and a wash kit.
After handling each recruit's clothes the Chief-Corporal swilled his hands over with surgical spirit, wiping them dry on a piece of grey towel.
He had worked out that in his job he got to handle over 6,000 pairs of dirty underpants from sixty countries each year.
Some of the others protested at being separated from their belongings, but a Brazilian Corporal in the corner hit two people in the stomach and things moved fast after that.
I put on my clean uniform and adjusted my beret, blousing my trousers over the buckles of my combat boots.
We were taken off for a shower — which was welcome as I hadn't washed properly since the night before I left London- and then shown our beds in the barrack rooms on the second and third floors.
Going downstairs, I witnessed my first proper fight.
A Spaniard and an Englishman were arguing over some duty, when the Englishman headbutted the Spaniard between the eyes; as the latter stepped backwards clutching his face, the  Briton executed a curious hopping movement as he placed both his hands behind the Spaniard's head and wrenched it down to meet his upcoming knee.
There was the squashing noise of bone meeting flesh as the Spaniard's upper
As we sat in the lecture room, the Legion numbered 10,000 men split up into ten different Regiments, based in mainland France and the ex-colonies.
Each of the Regiments could trace its history back to one of the units which had fought in Indo-China or Algeria during the previous century.
The only exception was the 2ème Régiment Étranger de Parachutistes which had been formed in 1948.
There were infantry Regiments in Djibouti, French Guyana and Mayotte, an island off the coast of Madagascar.
There was also a works Regiment building roads and sea defences on the Pacific atoll of Mururoa.
Apart from the airborne unit in Corsica, the rest of the Regiments were in mainland France, forming part of her commitment to NATO.
The Legion was formed on 10 March 1831 by royal decree of Prince Louis-Philippe, who saw it as a good way of clearing Paris of undesirable elements and at the same time providing free labour to defend and build France's new colonial empire.
The Legion had fought with distinction in the campaigns in Tonkin, Morocco, Algeria, Madagascar and Mexico.
It was in 1863 at the farmhouse at Camerone in Mexico that they had fought their most spectacular action.
Sixty-three legionnaires had held off a Mexican force of 2,000 soldiers for a whole day, at the end of which five legionnaires had been left alive; these five, thirsty, hungry and out of ammunition, had bayonet charged the Mexicans.
Two were killed immediately but the Mexican Commander had been so impressed by their bravery that he had spared the lives of the other three.
The Commanding Officer, Capitaine Danjou, had been killed, but his artificial wooden hand, found afterwards in the wreckage of the farmhouse, became a symbol for the Legion's bravery and every year was paraded at Aubagne in the Camerone day celebrations.
For the rest of the year, it was kept in the crypt of the museum behind the Monuments aux Morts .
The Legion went on to distinguish itself in Africa and the Far East, in both World Wars and in Indo-China, where it was almost wiped out.
Algeria was followed by small anti-guerrilla operations in Chad, Somalia, Beirut and Kolwezi.
Over the decades the Legion had developed its own style of soldiering.
It was not soldiering where all hung on victory or defeat, as in other armies, but rather a stylish profession of arms, aimed at bringing greater glory to France and to the Legion.
As at Camerone and Dien Bien Phu, the cost was high; but the Legion in its purest tradition saw only merit in dying for France.
Painted on the walls of a barracks in the last century had been the words, ‘Legionnaires, you are soldiers in order to die, and I am sending you where you can die.’
This was the essence of its self glorification.
It was an idea based on the lifestyle of the true legionnaire, who, before his time in  the Legion, had been nothing, and therefore in the eyes of the Legion, anything he had done in his past life was immaterial.
He only became whole in becoming a legionnaire.
The lines of a-poem were written on a plaque at the end of our corridor,(He who has become a son of France, not through blood received, but by blood spilt.)
In our history lecture I grasped only the most basic nature of this ‘wunderkinder ’ warrior creed, but it was something which I was to find permeating the Legion at every level.
Successors to this proud tradition, our group was now engaged in some cleaning duties.
I had landed the shithouse.
A Corporal had given me a coathanger and a broom and showed me the Foreign Legion's way of unblocking a difficult lavatory bowl; it involved unbending the coathanger, jamming it down the U-bend, and working it vigorously backwards and forwards.
In particularly difficult cases he recommended using boiling water as well.
There had been a tricky one in Paris, where an entire detachment of men had arrived back from French Guyana and left the ablutions in an appalling state.
I didn't know what had been the last meal eaten before leaving South America but it took me twenty minutes to coathanger my way through it, and consequently I had missed breakfast.
The routine at Aubagne was the same every day; we got up at 4.30 am, washed, shaved and paraded outside before a breakfast of coffee and bread in the main cookhouse; then we cleaned the barrack rooms for an hour and paraded again at 7.30 am for the allocation of the day's duties.
Each parade was preceded by a cleaning ritual known as ‘corvée quartier ’, which involved clearing up any litter surrounding the barracks.
We would line up across the parade ground, shoulder to shoulder, and in a slow forward walk, eyes fixed on the ground, would pick up any cigarette ends or pieces of paper on the gravel.
The resulting scene was bizarre, as ninety skinheads moved slowly over the stones, heads down like rooting chickens, with the  occasional flurry of movement as somebody found a Marlboro butt.
Whole areas were cleaned like this, and sometimes when there was a particularly fastidious Corporal in charge, there was a second reserve line which followed behind.
Every week a detachment of men who had completed all the selection processes, interviews and tests would go off to the 4ème Règiment Étranger at Castelnaudary near Toulouse to start their basic training.
Each week detachments would arrive from the main recruiting offices at Paris, Marseilles and Strasbourg.
In between arriving and leaving for Castelnaudary, most people would be weeded out by the tests or fall short of the required standards.
After morning parade, those not required for any tests or interviews would go off on working parties around the camp.
Our nucleus of myself, Chris and Alex, along with Marius, had been augmented by an Australian martial arts expert who had fled Australia after half-killing a nineteen-stone truck driver in a fight.
He was six foot seven and had developed his own style of street fighting which he called Zen-Do Kai.
He felt attached to it so had tattooed the name in his right armpit where it matched the oriental dragon rampaging over the inside of his bicep.
We all found him interesting, so when we lay in the sun after lunch, the white gravel covering our backs with powdery marks, his fighting demonstrations were keenly attended.
His techniques varied from the basic side kicks and elbow jabs to more advanced methods.
He had an impressive set of movements which he said were excellent for dealing with charging horsemen.
I wondered if any of the desert peoples in France's colonies still rode horses.
I attended the medical centre for my test and stood in my underpants for an hour in a shiny-clean waiting room with yellow walls and a kitten sitting in the corner.
Then I went in to face an English Corporal of ten years' service, who had a bad reputation.
I pissed in a test-tube, had four injections and did twenty press-ups to get my heart going.
The Corporal fired questions at me, all the time trying to catch me out.
I denied  homosexual inclinations but he still made me bend down so that he could inspect my behind with a wooden spatula.
In between the various tests there was a delay of two or three days when we would be left on tenterhooks in case we had failed; every afternoon people would be told to pack their bags and would be deposited at Aubagne station to take a train back to where they had come from.
If you had joined at Paris, then you received a ticket back there; if, however, you had joined at Marseilles, then you only got fifteen francs to get you down the line from Aubagne.
The Legion would return you to the place at which they had taken charge of you.
I was terrified that I wouldn't be accepted.
For all the assurances from those around me that I was perfect Legion material, I could not accept that the prestigious French Foreign Legion would have any need of the services of somebody whose military prowess was earned more at the bar than in the field.
Compared to an Israeli paratrooper or a former member of the Black Watch, my pathetic charade at soldiering in London was risible.
So I could jump out of an aeroplane and fire a machine gun.
I was fit and could run well.
I spoke three languages.
This was all a glossy shell over an insubstantial interior.
I used to get frightened at my parents' house in Wales when the boys from the village asked me to play with them.
I had been thrown off the cricket team at school for making daisy chains on the boundary.
There was no history of violence or physical hardship in my upbringing at all.
Had I been born in the Middle Ages, I knew that I would have been one of those retainers who stayed inside the castle and embroidered whilst the knights went off to slaughter the French.
The amenable supporter who changes his allegiance with each new king.
So I wondered what chance I had of outstaying Lebanese men who had picked up their first Kalashnikov aged six, or the Vietnamese man who had seen his mother raped before going on to kill his first Cambodian at the age when I was doing my Common Entrance.
The Legion was being selective.
Very selective.
The percentage  of people who were going on to start basic training stood at four per cent in September 1984.
The myth that the Legion took anyone was being rapidly disproved and I didn't want to be a victim of it.
There were very few people around who seemed to be telling the truth about their past lives, and what they told you was only meant to further their self image.
A young Englishman, arms covered in tattoos, said that he had served in the Special Air Service, The Duke of Wellington's Regiment and with the Parachute Regiment in the Falkland Islands.
As he was only nineteen and failed the medical test for being colourblind this was impossible.
The most important interview was with the 2ème Bureau , the Military branch of French Intelligence; it was their opinion which was ultimately decisive.
Nobody knew how much they burrowed into one's past, and this ignorance coupled with a fear of being rejected by the Legion was enough to make most people tell the truth.
I passed my medical check and after two days Alex, Chris, myself and a dozen others were ordered to report for our Intelligence tests which were held in a metal hut at the back of the compound.
A multilingual Corporal explained to us as we sat at desks that the tests were aimed at determining our ‘niveaux générales ’ or basic IQs.
The test papers were given out and we had an hour to complete all three sections, involving general commonsense, and basic maths and language questions in our respective tongues.
‘Which is the odd one out: cod, trout, sardine or lorry driver?’
‘Divide 8.8 by 2.2.’
‘What is the capital of South Africa?’
‘What was Hitler's first name?’
I emerged after an hour confident on all but the maths.
I was awarded seventeen points out of twenty but judging by the worried looks and furrowed brows there were some lower scores.
Later on the results would affect our choice of regiment and our aptitude for specialist training.
Another Englishman called Harris had joined our group.
His parents lived on the Isle of Skye where they spent a lot of time observing the habits of the puffins on the beach.
Harris had wanted to get away from all that, and had tried to join the British Parachute Regiment, but they had turned him down.
All of our group wanted to go to the 2ème Régiment Étranger de Parachutistes , and I decided I wanted to be a high-altitude free-fall parachutist.
September finished and morning parade was colder each day.
I passed my physical test which involved a lot of running and exercise, only being beaten by Marius.
We had now spent three weeks at Aubagne and had seen detachments move off to Castelnaudary, and numerous people rejected.
We had worked in the kitchens, in the Officers' mess and the clothing stores, and had spent afternoons and evenings discussing our futures together.
One afternoon we had been taken for a walk up to the top of the mountain behind the camp, which had been good exercise; from the top I had been able to see the sea.
One morning I was called up in front of the 2ème Bureau and walked into an office to be interviewed by three Sergeants who spoke perfect English.
They were pleasant and quiet, asking me banal questions about my life in England.
I was then told to go away and write down my entire life history on three sheets of blank paper.
I sat in an adjoining room and started off, ‘My father owned a Roman Catholic prep school in Sussex…’
I detailed my education, A Level results, the particulars of my brothers and sisters, everything that I had done while in the Territorial Army and my minimal brush with the law.
When I had finished, I was made to wait two hours before being called back into the office for questioning.
I stood at ease in front of them and the interrogation started.
‘What did you say was your mother's maiden name?’
‘How often do you take drugs?’
‘What kind of parachutes did you use in the British Army?’
‘What would you do if you were drunk and I ordered you to suck my cock?’
‘Where did you move to when you were twelve?’
‘Describe what it feels like to be in prison.’
‘Where in Holland was your father wounded?’
‘Have you ever had sex with an animal?’
All three Sergeants asked questions simultaneously, the interrogation wending back on itself, crisscrossing through my life in an arbitrary yet efficient way.
When they had finished several hours later I felt confused and sat outside the room to smoke a cigarette while the Sergeants deliberated.
I was called back in.
I had passed, and the process of anonymity used by the Legion to protect itself and its members was now explained to me.
If I wanted to, I could change my name regardless of the fact that I had not committed any crime.
I would be issued with a completely new identity by the Legion, involving a different nationality, date of birth and name.
This was done on a haphazard basis, so that a Peruvian Indian from the Andes could be issued with papers proving beyond legal doubt that he had in fact spent all his life in Godalming.
This process completely protected the Legion against enquiries from Interpol.
It seemed odd that a military organisation could have the power to change your entire identity.
I assumed that somewhere in our contracts there was a clause in which we relinquished our rights to our own nationalities.
It worked both ways, protecting us and protecting the Legion.
If, for example, Interpol contacted the Legion and demanded to know whether Fritz Hemmeling who had killed a security guard during a bank raid in Munich two weeks before, was serving with them, the Legion could say no.
Fritz Hemmeling from Munich was now Asseyake Dimpuna from Ghana.
I wanted to change my name, because I thought it would be glamorous to be called Rudi Kesselreicher or Auberon de Hautevilliers.
Unfortunately, the Legion chose your new name for you, so I remained Christian Michael Jennings.
In return for this anonymity and help with the setting up of  a new life, the Legion demanded five years' service, wherever they chose to send you.
After three years it was possible to revert to your own name or to have another false one, thereby preserving the anonymity.
Most of our group changed their identities, as they all had something to hide.
There were two Catholics from Northern Ireland who seemed to know a lot about the British Army.
What a man had done before he joined up was the past, and the past was unconnected with the Legion, and therefore irrelevant.
The present and future were all that mattered and everybody started afresh.
So men from the IRA mixed with British squaddies, and through necessity got on with each other.
Traditionalist to the core, the Legion fully encouraged the romanticism of escape from ‘real life’ and forgetting, because in practical terms it gave them that much more control over their members.
Everybody started equal, so that a uniformity of training and military technique was possible.
Although it was difficult to pretend that a former member of the Rhodesian Special Air Service was on a par in purely military terms with a goat-herd from Bolivia, the fact that both were starting afresh made administration that much easier.
The Legion knew that many of its recruits had learned their killing and soldiering elsewhere, in Beirut, Rhodesia, Vietnam or the Falklands, and was more than pleased to be able to recruit such proficient fighting men.
It was evident that the skilled soldiers would naturally gravitate to the tougher units, like the 2ème Régiment Étranger de Parachutistes , giving the Legion a regiment full of highly-trained soldiers who had received their instruction at somebody else's expense.
Although it was called the ‘Foreign Legion’, many of its recruits were Frenchmen who had changed their nationalities.
Thus it was possible for a Frenchman to hide from a crime committed in his own country by adopting another nationality.
A Section was made up of those who had passed the 2ème Bureau interview, and we were given red strips of cloth to wear on  our epaulettes to show that we had passed our selection.
The others had nasty accounts of their interviews.
An Irishman had denied belonging to an illegal terrorist organisation; one of the Sergeants had left the room and come back with a photocopy of a warrant for his arrest issued by the RUC in Dundalk.
They had hit him several times for lying.
Marius had confessed that he had crippled a Turkish immigrant in Stockholm and Alex was told the registration number of the Land Rover he had left behind at the German frontier when he had deserted.
We visited the Legion's museum the following day and wandered round looking at the different flags of the units which had fought all over the world for 150 years.
There were displays of medals, weapons, uniforms and pictures.
We went down into the crypt where the wooden hand of Capitaine Danjou lay in a glass case.
It was the focal point of the room, and whenever visiting dignatories and military authorities came to visit Aubagne they would be taken down to the crypt where they would stand and salute the hand.
There was a poem on the wall written by an American legionnaire called Alan Seeger during World War One:
But I've a rendezvous with Death
At midnight in some flaming town,
When Spring trips north again this year,
And I to my pledged word am true,
I shall not fail that rendezvous.
I Have a Rendezvous with Death
There were tattered flags from Dien Biên Phu and Algeria, and collections of medals belonging to famous Legion soldiers.
I walked over and stood respectfully in front of Capitaine Danjou's false limb.
It was made of dark wood and looked like a graceful gorilla's paw.
I read another poem on the wall written by a God-fearing Captain who had been killed in Algeria, in  which he implored God to look sparingly on humble soldiers performing their divine task as warriors of Christianity.
It effectively conjured up the mixture of religion, fighting prowess and romanticism which the Legion held so dear.
As a military museum it was very interesting, but as an insight into the ways of thinking of the French Foreign Legion it was invaluable.
It contained all the mementoes of an organisation for which pain and suffering (military and personal) became virtues, because they were experienced in the cause of the Legion and ultimately the cause of France.
It was a cross between military masochism and romantic delusion, and was almost impossible to understand unless one could grasp the complete picture.
It was warm inside the building as I looked at the uniforms from Algeria, Morocco and Tonkin.
I used to get very sentimental during my period with the Territorial Army about the exploits of the British Parachute Regiment, despite the fact that my sole contribution to their reputation had been made in Aldershot discos.
The romance of the French Foreign Legion struck me in the same way, and especially the exhibits from Kolwezi and Chad, where there were photographs of camouflaged paras with shaved heads and sunglasses helping starving babies.
This was the visible humanitarian face of elite soldiering, and I fell for it.
If I stuck with the basic training and did well I too could be one of them.
I had yet to be disillusioned.
Basic training and a posting to a Regiment lay ahead, all of it an unknown quantity, and my enthusiasm was so manifest because everything that lay in front of me was so foreign.
We were told that we would leave Aubagne to start our basic training on the following Monday.
Although all the recruit instruction was normally carried out at Castelnaudary, we had been informed that we would be going to Orange, the base of the 1er Régiment Étranger de Cavalerie , as Castelnaudary was overcrowded.
We were given another haircut, issued with ID  cards and complete uniforms.
We signed our contracts, which we were not allowed to read, dispensing with, I suspected, every conceivable right as human beings.
I thought nothing of it; it was all a part of the selection process and the more extreme it proved itself to be, the happier I felt, for I was enjoying the feeling of succeeding and managing while others failed.
Of the twenty-eight who had arrived from Paris with me, only four were coming to Orange.
On the Saturday before our departure our group was sent off for a day's grape picking at Puyloubier, the rest home for injured and retired former legionnaires, in the foothills of Provence, about two hours' drive from Aubagne.
Wrapped in old greatcoats, we left at sunrise in two trucks and drove across a plain covered in vines.
At breakfast time we went through a forest of olive trees and arrived at Puyloubier.
The-building, white with red shutters, faced over the vineyards, which were tended by the residents of the home, most of whom had been wounded.
They spent their days in the potteries, the ironworks or in the fields.
Those in wheelchairs or too old to work outside helped in the kitchen or made elaborate Foreign Legion memorabilia for sale in the regimental shops wherever the Legion served.
Most of our group were sent to pick grapes under the supervision of an ex-legionnaire whose age and Germanic inflexion marked him as a former member of the Wehrmacht.
Myself and another Englishman called Ronny were given rakes and told to clear the leaves off a huge area of gravel.
We spent the morning raking gently, and he told me a long and obscene story about a girl called Tina Jelly from Aldershot.
After lunch, where both of us drank too much red wine, we were taken to the wild boar pens and told to clean them out.
Unsupervised, we succumbed to the effects of the wine and the sun and went to sleep, berets over our eyes, in the long grass underneath some olive trees.
Driving back to Aubagne, Alex told me how the rest of them had spent the day throwing grapes at the old  German and accusing him of being in the SS.
Just before getting in the trucks, I had wandered down to the rooms where the crippled legionnaires lived.
Looking in through the open door of one, I saw a fat, drunk skinhead in a wheelchair.
The arms of his wheelchair were hung with all the accoutrements he needed; a lighter, two packets of cigarettes and a little leather bandolier which held his supply of Kronenbourg bottles.
He was listening to old Legion marching songs and giving himself the Nazi salute in the mirror.
A Sergeant and four Corporals arrived from Orange to pick us up on the following Monday.
There were forty-eight of us in the Section.
Chris, Marius and the Swiss who had come from Lille were here; Alex had been turned down at the last moment on a medical detail.
Three of the staff from Orange wore the silver parachute wings which denoted service in the 2ème Régiment Étranger de Parachutistes , and all of them had the blue and white campaign ribbons denoting service in Chad or Lebanon.
The Sergeant took us into the small canteen and told us quietly and forcefully that our holiday in Aubagne was over and that we were off to start four months of basic training designed to turn us into legionnaires.
It was highly likely that only half of us would complete the training, he said, and that many of us would try to desert.
I was surprised that I had made it this far.
Many of the applicants who had looked suitable had been rejected and I deduced that I had been selected because I had not tried to glamorise my life history, and because I was medically and physically fit.
I was bored with Aubagne and was looking forward to Orange.
If I was to have any chance of being posted to Calvi, I would have to come in the top five in basic training.
It sounded hard.
A MOUTHFUL OF ROCKS
Sergeant Moustaine punched me in the face, stuffed my shitty underpants in my mouth and ordered me to run around the parade ground holding my kitbag above my head.
Every time I ran past where he was standing he hit me again or tripped me up, sprawling me in the dirt.
We had been at Orange for a week and were having a kit inspection.
Each member of the Section had dragged their entire kit down to a patch of gravel behind the barracks and, standing in a semicircle, we had lain all our uniforms and possessions at our feet.
The Sergeant walked past inspecting the kit, finding fault everywhere; my mistake had been to try and conceal an unwashed pair of pants in my bag.
The Corporals followed behind him, throwing stuff everywhere and beating anybody who did the slightest thing wrong.
All our kit was strictly numbered and counted, and anybody who was missing a vest or who had an extra T-shirt got kicked or punched.
While we were outside, the duty Corporal was doing the rounds of the barrack rooms, checking for cleanliness and tidiness; every two or three minutes a pair of boots would sail out of the window, or there would be the sound of a locker crashing to the floor.
We had arrived at Orange a week previously, and after disembarking from the coach had been ordered into the barrack rooms by our Corporals, who were waiting outside on the parade ground.
The barracks was a modern red-brick building set on the edge of the base which housed the 1er Régiment Étranger de Cavalerie .
The Regiment was made up of five squadrons, each comprising 200 men, and they spent their time in tanks  and armoured cars.
Our training staff came from the 3rd Squadron, which had returned from the war in Chad three months before.
Under the command of a Sergeant-Major, there were a Top-Sergeant, four Sergeants, a Chief-Corporal and eight Corporals.
They would spend the whole of the next four months with us during the time it took to turn us into legionnaires.
Immediately after our arrival things had been quiet.
We had been divided four to a room, with a Corporal in each and with the different nationalities split so that no nationalistic factions developed.
Those who couldn't speak French were mixed in equal number with those who could.
As the entire process of orders and commands was given in French, it was imperative to learn it and we were all forbidden from speaking anything else.
In my room were Olivier, a Frenchman who regarded the Legion as a funny game; Macier, a ‘pied-noir’ Algerian; and a Portuguese recruit called Da Silva.
Our room Corporal was a tall Italian called Tambini who looked like an eagle with a head cold.
He appeared reasonable at first, speaking to us slowly and explaining our daily routine.
We unpacked our kit and laid it out on the floor, and then started the lengthy and tiresome process of folding it ‘à carré ’ so that it sat on our shelves in tidy, identical bricks.
On the back of each barrack room door was a plan of how our lockers should look: trousers, shirts, socks, pants, vests and everything else had to be sucked in a certain order, and folded exactly thirty-five centimetres square.
If done correctly, the end result was a pile of sharp, thin bricks exactly thirty-five centimetres across.
It took a lot of trouble to get right.
On our first night at Orange we were up until 10.00 pm when we were ordered to put on our brown nylon pyjamas with their maroon piping.
Then we went to sleep.
It all started the next day.
At 4.30 am the Corporal of the day, a squat pig-like Polynesian called Vigno, came round the rooms, turning on the lights, throwing open the windows and tipping people out of bed, at the same time screaming at us in French to get downstairs on to the parade ground for ‘appel’or roll call.
I tumbled out of bed, threw on my tracksuit and joined the others shivering outside on the gravel; the Corporal kept us waiting about twenty minutes until the Sergeant arrived.
This was Sergeant Moustaine, half French, half Moroccan.
He lined us up, screamed at us, and decided that our turnout was unsatisfactory; we were ordered to return to our rooms to await his call, and then sprint downstairs while he timed us.
We repeated this four times before he was satisfied.
We went back upstairs to find that all the contents of our lockers had been thrown out over the floors, mixed up, trampled on, and that the lockers themselves had been hurled around the room, across the beds, which had been stripped, and out of the doors.
We re-arranged the room, swept and mopped, cleaned the windows, dusted the lockers and changed into combat kit for the day.
Breakfast was served from a room down the corridor, and consisted of an inch of coffee and a biscuit.
Once it was finished we went outside and swept round the entire barrack block in an extended line, picking up litter from the damp grass.
Halfway through, Corporal Vigno decided that we were slacking so we all had to do press-ups on the gravel, perched on our clenched fists.
At 7.30 am we paraded outside for the Sergeant-Major, shivering at attention.
We set off for a five mile run in the woods to the south of the camp.
It was a nice morning and it was good to be able to get out of the barracks and just run; it became immediately apparent that there were some who were fitter than others, and the Corporals ran at the back encouraging the slow ones.
At the front was the Sergeant-Major, who was an easy-going Italian with spectacles and fourteen years' Legion service.
There was a simple logic to the run, which we discovered on our return to barracks.
Those who kept up at the front got back to the barracks first, got into the showers first, got dressed first, and were ready downstairs in combat kit for our first singing  lesson with Sergeant Moustaine.
Those who were slower on the run missed the showers and were late downstairs, so they got kicked and hit by the Corporals.
When everybody was present, we ran off to a classroom and copied the words of a song off the blackboard into our notebooks.
The song was called ‘Képi Blanc ’ and its first two lines reflected our life well,.
(Since we have to live and fight in suffering.)
We wrote it down and repeated it time and time again to Sergeant Moustaine, until he was satisfied that even the most stupid of us had understood it.
We then went outside to practise singing it.
The Sergeant stood fifty yards away from us and made us repeat those two lines again and again until our voices were hoarse; as our singing got worse, he became more and more frustrated and threw stones at us.
After two hours we were dismissed upstairs, only to find our rooms wrecked again.
Vigno had thrown our clothes on to the floor and poured a bottle of aftershave over them before stuffing them back into our lockers to ferment.
All my different uniforms now smelt of ‘Ziggi’.
We went off to parade for lunch; this meant ten minutes doing press-ups with the Corporal halting us in mid exercise so that we were poised between the ground and the arms-stretched position — as our limbs weakened so people started to slump and collapse, which resulted in kicks and blows.
The cookhouse was only fifty yards away and was open from 12.30 pm to 1.30 pm; at 1.15 pm we were still hobbling round the block in an abdominal crouch with our hands behind our heads.
We finally entered the building and lined up, eight to a table, behind the metal stools.
Sergeant Moustaine shouted ‘Bon appétit, tout le monde !’ to which we replied
Merci, Sergeant, et bon appétit .’
Then we fell on the food set out on the table.
It was a case of grabbing first and taking as much as you could before your neighbour pulled the dish away from you.
We had six minutes to eat lunch, so I stuffed bread, yoghourt, fish stew and beans  into my mouth, and chewed as fast as I could.
Suddenly the Sergeant stood up which was a signal for us to go outside again.
As Moustaine emerged from the cookhouse a small Scotsman called Haines was still chewing.
Moustaine walked through the ranks, stuck his fingers into Haines's mouth and proceeded to pull out the half-chewed food, before hitting him hard in the solar plexus.
Haines fell over and a Corporal kicked him in the stomach, shouting at him to stand up.
Two of us dragged him to his feet and the Section marched back to the barrack block.
All of us had been hit several times already and there was a correct way of dealing with it.
As soon as you saw that you were about to be struck, you stood at attention and waited for the blows.
If knocked over, you stood upright again, at attention, and took the punishment until the staff tired of it.
If you lay on the ground whining it incensed them and the subsequent kicks and punches were harder and aimed at the mouth and head rather than the stomach and back.
We had a lecture that afternoon in which the course and aim of our training was explained to us by Sergeant-Chef Gibeau, an angular Frenchman with a perfectly shaved head and a tendency to wear sunglasses in the rain.
We would spend a month at Orange learning the basics of marching, singing, fitness, weapons drill and Legion history.
Then we would move to a training ground in the foothills of the Alps at Canjuers, where we would spend a month away from the regiment and the barracks, and learning the basics of fieldcraft, tactics and shooting, and where we would spend a lot of time living outside as self sufficient soldiers.
After Canjuers, we would return to Orange for six weeks, during which time we would celebrate Christmas and the New Year, before moving to a battle camp near Nîmes for a fortnight.
After that, the final two weeks at Orange would be spent in taking tests and exams in everything that we had learnt.
On the basis of this we would be allocated our postings with one of the Legion's Regiments.
So there were going to be four months of hard training and probably a lot of violence.
There was absolutely nothing to look forward to except sleep and food, and these commodities had now become very important.
I had a good friend in Marius, who had been in the Swedish Army before joining the Legion.
We worked together and backed each other up on lessons and instruction periods.
I was trying to teach him French, as he was finding it hard to keep up with the stream of orders and commands being issued by the staff.
In return I was trying to grasp the basics of Swedish, whose inflexions and vocabulary I found hard to manage.
It was like trying to whistle with a sardine in your mouth.
Marius called me a ‘mukis keele ’, which meant ‘soft boy’ or ‘mother's boy’in his native tongue.
He came from Kalmar and showed me photographs of his family and girlfriend.
His girlfriend was very pretty with a flawless complexion and hair the colour of new parchment.
His whole family was pretty.
His mother looked about twenty-five and his brother looked like a hermaphrodite Greek deity.
Both were photographed standing in the kitchen in Kalmar.
The kitchen was made of very new-looking pine and the clothes of his mother and brother were very clean.
Marius had been a skinhead and had assaulted a Turkish immigrant, fleeing the pending court case to join up in Lille.
He told me that he had come to the Legion so that he could kill people without going to prison.
This sounded a hollow threat while all we were doing was folding our clothes and learning how to be housetrained and use flushing lavatories.
The evening of our first day at Orange was spent folding our clothes and cleaning the rooms in preparation for ‘appel ’ at 10.00 pm.
The routine was to be the same each evening: at 10.00 pm, the Sergeant on duty would go round all the rooms, counting the men present to make sure that none had deserted, and checking on the cleanliness.
Lockers were immaculately arranged, rooms scrubbed, windows polished and shoes and  boots lined up under the beds.
Each man stood in total silence at the end of his bed in the at-ease position, his locker open behind him.
When the Sergeant or Corporal entered, the man who saw them first would call out, ‘Garde à vous ’(attention), to which the Sergeant would reply, ‘Au repos ’(at ease).
As the Sergeant approached your bed, you stood to attention and presented yourself,
‘Engagé volontaire Jennings; Un mois de service; Escadron Duransoy, Peloton Barlerin; Premier Régiment Étranger de Cavalerie; A vos ordres, Sergent.’
This demonstrated that I was not yet a legionnaire as I had not been awarded my white képi, and as such was still an ‘engagé volontaire ’ or recruit; it went on to say that I had one month's service in the Legion, and that I was part of the Squadron commanded by Capitaine Duransoy, in the section of Sergeant Major Barlerin of the 1st Foreign Cavalry Regiment.
Even for somebody who spoke French it was a mouthful, and it was tedious because it had to be repeated each time one spoke to a Corporal or Sergeant.
Assuming that one's locker and bedspace was satisfactory, the Sergeant would salute and leave the room, meaning that you could get into bed and go to sleep.
Unfortunately, on our first evening, things weren't in good order.
Most of our clothes ended up on the floor, and Corporal Fleicher, a tall German, went round hitting people in the stomach to see how firm their abdominal muscles were.
‘Appel ’ was rescheduled for 11.00 pm and then 1.00 am; it was almost 2.00 am before I got to bed.
A week later I was running around with my underpants in my mouth feeling very stupid.
We had spent most of the morning going through our kit, because a Rumanian and an Irishman hadn't been able to pronounce one of the lines of a song correctly.
This had so infuriated Moustaine that he had decided  to punish them, which meant the rest of us as well.
Lining us up on the waste ground behind our barrack block, he had made the original offenders climb a pine tree until their bodies were jammed in the lower branches.
He had then thrown stones at them for fifteen minutes before ordering a kit inspection for the rest of us.
In this way everybody suffered for one person's mistakes; this was meant ultimately to draw the Section together.
I had underestimated the importance placed on personal cleanliness and hygiene, and had been caught out on my underpants.
It was very humiliating.
When Moustaine was finally satisfied, we replaced all our kit in our rooms; mine still smelt strongly of ‘Ziggi’ aftershave.
Then we collected our rifles from the armoury for our first lesson in shooting drill.
The weapons were FA-MAS 5.56mm assault rifles, recently issued to the French Armed Forces to replace the old FSA (Fusil Semi-Automatique ) which had been in service since Algeria.
The FA-MAS was a compact weapon which was no longer than a man's arm and only weighed eight pounds; it held a magazine of twenty-five rounds and could fire automatically, on single shots or in three-round bursts.
Although smaller and lighter than the 7.62 Self Loading Rifles which we had used in the Territorial Army, its strength lay in its high velocity rounds and accuracy.
At 200 metres you could be reasonably sure of a killing hit, or, if not, a wound which would cripple and which would therefore require the services of another man to look after the wounded soldier.
We picked up our weapons and went outside.
It was still warm during the day, and the sun came in over the trees of the forest outside the camp.
We lay on the hard, orange clay and went through the different procedures that we would use when we went off to fire on the shooting range.
This involved repeating various commands given by Sergeant Moustaine, which was difficult as he spoke fast and only a third of our Section spoke French.
As the class progressed, more of us started to make mistakes, and Moustaine lost his temper.
We were lying on the  ground in a row, pointing our rifles to our fronts, as he walked past each of us and made us repeat the different orders that we would be given, such as‘unload’ or ‘cock your weapon’.
Of course he was dissatisfied, and he would kick your rifle back into your face.
He also liked to make people do press-ups, but with their rifles stretched across the tops of their hands; he would then stand on the rifles so that his entire weight was pressing down on to their fists.
Although he was only one of the four Sergeants in charge of us, he was Duty-Sergeant for the first week, so that all the complexities of dealing with a group of recruits at the start of their training fell to him.
There was also a Corporal of the week — Vigno — and his duties included the more mundane tasks of getting us up in the mornings and making sure that the rooms were kept clean.
He was in close proximity to us all day and was capable of making our lives hell.
The Sergeants would take us for training sessions and escort us over to our meals, but it was the Corporals who governed our lives.
All of them had served in Lebanon and Chad, and each of them had a minimum of three years' service, which meant that when they had done their basic training the violence they were employing with us had been the norm.
Ours was a one-off Section in that we hadn't been sent to Castelnaudary where things were reputed to be much easier, and where there was a spirit of prevailing moderation which had pervaded the Legion since  Mitterrand had brought it into line with the rest of the French army.
The staff at Orange were faced with a hard task.
Only eight of us had any sort of previous military experience: Marius, myself, Chris, a German from Oberammergau who had killed a tourist in the celebrations surrounding the Passion Play, a Frenchman, Mike the Rhodesian, and a Portuguese and a Rumanian who had both served with their countries' airborne regiments.
Because everybody was treated equally at the start of their Legion service, Mike, who had learnt his killing in the bush war in Rhodesia, was treated the same as a South  Vietnamese man who had never put on a uniform in his life.
In other armies, the selection process assumed that people were of the same social balance.
In the Legion, there was no guarantee that a man had even used a flushing loo before.
However, toilet training took second place to skill with weapons or natural aggression.
A man could be taught to handle, fire and dismantle a weapon, but an aggressive disposition was the result of upbringing and social conditioning.
In my case, all my education and upbringing meant very little.
I had learnt how to take orders and get up in the morning since I had gone to boarding school at age seven.
But my education made things harder for me as a soldier, paradoxically, for I thought too much and questioned the wisdom of those in command.
At the other extreme was a Filipino who had been brought up in the slums of Manila, his father an alcoholic drug dealer and his mother a whore.
He had watched his sisters slide into prostitution, through financial and practical necessity, and told me in his Spanish dialect that he had become used to sleeping on the floor at home while they fucked a random selection of Cuban, Puerto Rican and American sailors from the nearby US Naval base at Subic Bay in the Philippines.
He had learned to look after-himself, selling fake watches and drugs to anybody who would buy, and after killing a rival dealer had fled to Hawaii as a stowaway on a freighter.
He had been discovered by a member of the crew and rather than be handed over to US Immigration officials had allowed himself to be buggered by three of the sailors, including the Captain.
He had wound up in Marseilles, sore and desperate, and signed on at Fort St Nicholas.
Then there were Mike and Marius.
Both came from Western backgrounds, and both had received proper military training.
More importantly, both were natural fighters.
If we four were representatives of our platoon, it was understandable that the staff were having a tough time of it, pretending that we were all the same — physically, socially and morally.
A lot of the recruits found the orders process hard to take  and didn't understand why they should do as they were told.
When there was a confrontation between the casually civilian and the uncompromisingly military, the results could be frightening.
An Italian, Gionesca, was absent from parade one morning as we lined up for inspection by the Sergeant-Major; Corporal Herve, a scarred Frenchman who had taken over from Vigno as duty NCO, went upstairs to find him.
None of us saw what happened but we heard about it secondhand from an Irish Corporal called Ryan.
Gionesca had been in the lavatory when parade was called, and had hidden in his room thinking his absence would not be noticed.
When Herve charged through the door the Italian was lying on his bed reading a porn comic.
Herve kicked him onto the floor, walked over, dragged him to his feet and broke his jaw with a side kick.
The disciplinary process required to keep people of low intelligence in order was simple.
In the British Army, discipline was centred around self-discipline, and it was assumed that each man had enough self-discipline to carry out an order without being told twice.
You appealed to his initiative, intelligence and commonsense.
However, in dealing with people of whom there was no guarantee of social, professional or military competence, the system became more basic.
A Corporal would tell a recruit not to spit on the floor because it was disgusting and because if he continued to do so he would be hit.
They did not enter into lengthy explanations about the sanitary and social implications of such behaviour, because the recruit had more than likely spent his entire life spitting on the floor at home; the recruit responded to an order backed up with the threat of violence.
We carried on with our training, going for runs every morning, doing the assault course, learning about weapons, marching, singing and having very little sleep.
The training was hard because we were hungry all the time and extremely tired.
Mike the Rhodesian and I were on ‘corvée ’ duties one  afternoon and were carrying the dustbins out to the shed behind the cookhouse where all the rubbish was deposited, which was home to a lot of stray cats and some aggressive rats.
We both had large appetites and although we tried to get on the same table at mealtimes so that we could monopolise the food, we were permanently hungry.
As we emptied our dustbins out we noticed another bin full of cold ravioli and bread left over from lunch; the bread was mixed in with the garbage and was soggy from being in a dustbin of cold ravioli for two hours.
Several cats were feeding on it so Mike cleared them away with a kick from his combat boot and we started eating, dipping the wet crusts in the ravioli.
I was full for the first time in two weeks.
Two days later Webb and Davies deserted.
We found out about this when an impromptu ‘appel ’ was called at 7.00 pm.
The two Britons had climbed over the wall outside our block and fled into the woods.
To the accompaniment of shouts and screams from the Corporals, we lined up in the corridor and were counted and recounted by them.
They were panicking as it was their lack of observation which had led to the two getting away unseen.
The situation was only just controllable, but it seemed that we might get to bed before midnight without being beaten up.
Then Corporal Auriega, a fat Spaniard who sweated all the time, arrived back from town where he had been drinking all evening with his friends.
As he was one of our Corporals, the Military Police had sought him out and made him return to barracks.
He was drunk.
He bellowed at us, yelling that he was fucked if he was going to let a group of dead-ass wankers spoil his time off.
However, he added, since his evening was spoiled, then so was ours.
He said in a deceptively reasonable tone that in the Legion everybody took the blame for everybody else's mistakes.
He lined us up in the corridor and told the other Corporals that he would deal with us.
They stood smoking at the end of the passage and watched Auriega.
I was very frightened.
I looked at Marius standing next to me.
He nodded and shrugged.
Being hit in the  face hurt.
It was also the anticipation of being hit that was worrying; would it be a punch in the guts, or the scarred knuckles of a Spaniard's fist in the eye?
My nose was bigger than most people's, and being punched on it made me cry with pain.
My stomach muscles were up to it, but I didn't want to lose any more teeth.
Auriega advanced the length of the corridor, stopping in front of each man, screaming at him and hitting him.
He drew level with Marius and myself and started shouting about the English and how they were always the first to desert; how he, Corporal Auriega, with four years' Legion service, who had endured shelling in Beirut and the heat and flies of Chad, had finally had enough.
He turned away and I thought that I was clear.
Then he swung on his heel and brought his palm in an open-handed slap which crashed into my right ear with an explosive bang; as I reeled away from it, he drove his fist into my eye.
It felt as though a grenade had gone off in my head.
I couldn't hear and was crying from the pain, but I saw him put his foot sideways into Marius's midriff.
Then we were confined to our rooms as the Corporals organised some sort of excuse for the Sergeants and Sergeant-Major.
My eye swelled up in a matter of minutes, and I was unable to hear anything.
Marius was trying to pretend that his kick didn't hurt, and the two Frenchmen, Macier and Olivier, were groaning and swearing loudly.
Macier was spitting his front teeth into the palm of his hand.
Webb and Davies were caught two days later in the forests.
They were kicked senseless and then handed over to the Military Police who locked them up in the roofless regimental prison before they were handed over to the Colonel of the Regiment for interrogation and questioning.
The Legion considered desertion as the penultimate serious crime, the most heinous being stealing.
It was understood that everybody became so frustrated occasionally that they tried to escape, but to desert and to fail was considered despicable in their eyes.
The two Englishmen  missed their family and their lives in England, and had thought that even with no money and no civilian clothes they would be able to make it back across France to one of the Channel ports.
Few of us felt any sympathy for them, because apart from the beatings which we had received on their accounts, we all knew the rules by now, and being caught and failing in any way was wrong.
Marius was dismissive about both of them and thought that if they couldn't manage two weeks of bedmaking and personal organisation then they should have stayed at home.
I wasn't so sure.
It was frightening how hunger and lack of sleep could make you behave and think like a real bastard.
I knew that I shouldn't have felt sorry for them.
Outwardly, I criticised them as much as anybody, feeling more than pissed off that we had been hit on their account.
I couldn't hear anything with my right ear and my eye looked like a burst, over-ripe plum.
Yet Auriega, I was sure, had wanted to hit us around a bit anyway, and the disappearance of Webb.
and Davies had provided an excuse.
Inwardly I had a sneaking admiration for them because they had been sure that they didn't like the Legion and so had acted directly and left.
Because we had all come from such different backgrounds, and were individuals bound together only by circumstance, I felt it was impossible to criticise their actions as I didn't fully understand their motivations.
But there was a huge discrepancy between my thoughts and my actions.
Any rational person would disapprove of Moustaine, Auriega and the way in which we were being treated.
Anybody with any sensitivity would have sympathised with Webb and Davies.
We would all have liked to be able to eat normally at meals and not to have to hit each other to be first in the breakfast queue.
(I had resorted to kneeing a Frenchman in the face over a biscuit the day before.)
It was evident that those who were going to do well were those who ran faster, acted more efficiently and were more ‘switched on’.
I had set my sights on getting a good position in training so that I would be sent to the 2ème Régiment Étranger de Parachutistes.
The further we got into basic training the more obsessive I got about it.
There were five or six who were in the running for the top places, and there was a fierce sense of competition between us.
We treated each other within our little group humanely and normally, and passed over thinking about the others.
It was the first time in my life I had acted like a complete sod to other people, and I felt that my behaviour was worse because I had loads of advantages the lesser recruits didn't: I could speak French; I was basically healthier and therefore found fitness much easier; I was a north European Caucasian which endeared me to some of the more racist instructors.
Knowing full well that I was a wimp at heart, it was refreshing to be treated as something else.
There was one recruit for whom we all felt sorry.
The Portuguese Da Silva had a permanent affliction in that he was very slightly hunchbacked.
How he had passed his medical tests was a mystery to everybody; he was completely incapable of marching in time and swung his arms like a chimpanzee, unsynchronised and out of time.
On a Saturday afternoon, Corporal Tambini tried to cure him of this structural malformation.
He tied two broomsticks to Da Silva's arms and stuck one down his back, making him march up and down the corridor again and again, repeating ‘I am a cripple’.
This went on for three hours while the rest of us were preparing for the move to Canjuers.
Of course, by the time he was finished, he was behind with his kit, so Tambini started hitting him.
Our four weeks at Orange had been made up of marching, singing, being hit and not having enough sleep.
One afternoon we had made a forced march around the local countryside with our rucksacks on.
Our military training had otherwise been minimal.
We had been shooting once with our FA-MASs which had been tantalising, and most of us wanted to do something more dynamic than learn to fold clothes.
As we loaded up the trucks with everything we would need for our month away at  Canjuers I felt that we might be about to learn some soldiering.
Two days later, we had packed up our rucksacks, weapons, ammunition, heavy machine guns, camp beds, field stoves and stores and were ready to depart.
We drove out of the barracks huddled in our combat jackets, and turned north towards the Alps.
We had been at Canjuers for a month when Auriega and Herve, who were both drunk, buried Vadgama.
They made him dig a grave in the rocky ground at 1.00 am and then forced him to lie in it while they shovelled earth over him.
When his entire body was covered apart from his head, Herve picked up a folding entrenching tool which he swung into Vadgama's face, splitting his nose and smearing it over his face.
Both of them took turns to kick him in the mouth and eyes.
Canjuers was tough.
We had driven for five hours in open lorries through a rainstorm, climbing into the foothills of the Alps and then across a wilderness of a training area, with sharp mountains and expanses of harsh, windblown moorland.
There were no houses or villages, only the occasional ruined farmhouse surrounded by pine trees and sandy, boggy ground.
We had driven up a muddy track for ten miles and had arrived at a completely ruined farmhouse with no windows or doors, set into the slope of a mountain, looking over a marshy plain.
Clumps of pine trees sat in hollows, and an icy wind blew around the bottom slopes of the mountain, whose top was covered in snow.
It was the beginning of October and winter was coming.
It was raining as we drew up in front of the building and started unpacking our kit.
Corporal Tambini immediately made us lie down in the mud and do press-ups.
As it got dark there was a nightmare of organisation and shouting; there were meals to be cooked for the Sergeants, marquee and tents to be erected in a rainstorm, personal kit to be unpacked and weapons to be put into a makeshift armoury.
The Corporals ran around screaming and kicking us, as we  climbed and scrambled up the muddy path to the house.
It was an old farm building with numerous rooms with empty window sockets and a leaking roof; the floors were stone and the plaster was peeling off the walls everywhere.
Next to it were two old barns and in the confusion, myself and an Italian recruit, Gionesca, were ordered to go and find wood for a fire.
The wood in the barn was soaked and we stood there in our dripping combat jackets close to despair; we had been made to wear our helmets for the duration, and the oversized tin hats kept slipping over our faces, as we scrambled in the mud taking the wood to where the petulant staff were demanding hot coffee.
Later we went through the routine of 'appel' with our clothes laid out next to our sleeping bags, and at midnight were allowed to climb into them, sodden, muddy and cold.
We were a long way from Orange, isolated in the farmhouse, and we knew how unpleasant the next month was going to be depended entirely on the whims of the staff.
We got up at 5.30 am and it was grim.
The only source of water was a horse trough a hundred yards from the building, there was no electric light anywhere, and we dressed in the dark.
I stumbled along to the trough to shave in the icy water, and without a mirror managed to remove what little stubble there was on my cheeks.
I was glad that I wasn't one of those Portuguese or Italians who only had to go three hours without shaving for there to be a blue carpet on their chin.
At school, aged fourteen, I was only just starting to trim the fur off my jaw while some of the Spanish or Arab boys would be tucking in with razor and foam.
On parade that morning, Moustaine inspected our chins very closely and punished De Winter for not shaving by burning the stubble off one side of his face with a lighter.
At Canjuers we followed the same routine as at Orange.
There was morning sport, meals, singing,'appel' and marching.
Everything was much harder work because there was no light, no hot water (except what could be heated on a stove), no  washing facilities and nowhere that was warm.
It got colder each day, and rained nonstop.
The roof of the farmhouse leaked and often you would return at the end of the day to find a puddle of water on top of your sleeping bag.
There was mud everywhere, especially around the house itself where we all walked and where the lorries, jeeps and wagons drove.
But it was preferable to Orange.
We spent a lot of time outside on exercises, we had runs every morning in full combat kit which were longer and harder than the ones at Orange, we dug trenches, learnt how to camouflage ourselves and how to move across country at night.
We were taught about hand grenades and explosives, and how to set ambushes and lay mines in the most effective pattern.
We did a lot of shooting on the ranges, practising unarmed combat in the middle of a boggy field and singing all night.
The Legion attached incredible importance to singing.
We would march along in step, doing eighty-eight paces to the minute, singing our hearts out.
Singing was intended to enhance the bond between us, for by reciting verses and lines about the Legion, past and present, we were reinforcing our beliefs in the traditions we stood for.
When it went well, it sounded magnificent, but if one person was out of step, it was a shambles.
Each line and each verse of a song started as the left foot hit the ground, and with each particular song a different number of steps were left in between verses.
The presence of one person like Da Silva could ruin the whole harmony of the section.
We would be marching along in perfect time, waiting for the cue to start a new verse, when suddenly Da Silva, or Gionesca the Italian, who were both incapable of marching correctly, would pipe up by themselves.
The Corporal or Sergeant leading would stop us, we would have to start again and try to sing the whole song faultlessly.
None of it was made any easier by the fact that all the songs were in complicated French and to be able to sing them it helped to understand them.
The songs were concerned with the same themes of love, death, deprivation, hardship, romantic yearnings and self-denial.
All were new ideas to me.
The themes centred around the lone legionnaire who has given up his past for the Legion, yet still longs for his former life and forgotten loves, his home and his happiness.
All this is denied to him because he has made the irreversible decision to join up and his life will never be the same again.
There is only hardship, pain and the possibility of dying for France:
Far into the distance stretch two large marshy plains.
Not a single bird sings in the dry, hollow trees.
Oh, land of sadness, where we must suffer endlessly.
Sounds of chains and sounds of arms,
A sentry guards us day and night.
Oh unhappy land, land of tears,
Death awaits he who flees.
But one day in our lifetime,
Spring will flower again.
Liberty, sweet liberty, I would say you were mine.
The legionnaire sees himself caught in a never-ending cycle of darkness and despair, until the day when he will be liberated through atonement of his past crimes.
Some songs were more romantic:
In Africa, despite the wind and rain,
The sentry looks out from the crag.
But his heart has stayed in his beloved homeland
Which he left to see distant horizons.
He has noticed the enemy approaching.
The alarm goes up.
His memories vanish.
It's time for combat.
In the sky shines the star which reminds him of his childhood.
Goodbye, my country, I'll never forget you.
This was my favourite song as it was quite easy to sing and it had a stirring, catching rhythm.
We sang a lot of SS and Werhmacht songs, including the Horst Wessel song and other Teuton airs which were meant to remind us of our Runic backgrounds.
I think some of this was lost on the non-Aryan members of our section, such as the Polynesians who could in no way pretend that their ancestry stretched back to the Vikings.
Obsessed as the Legion was with tradition, many of the songs harked back to Indo-China and Algeria, to when a man could expect to serve his entire contract without seeing Europe.
In ‘Adieu vieille Europe ’ the legionnaire is on a boat off to Algeria:
Goodbye, old Europe, may the Devil take you.
Goodbye, old country, for the burning sun of Algeria.
We are the wounded from every war, the world's damned ones.
We need sunlight and space, to regild our bodies.
France and civilian life has done nothing for him, and so he is off to Algeria to get tanned and fight.
He is saying goodbye to what is past and irretrievably lost.
The Sergeant-Major had said that like all other legionnaires we would learn to sing in perfect time, so sing we would.
We sang marching across the muddy fields in front of the farmhouse, we sang in the cookhouse tent before we were allowed to eat, we sang at parade before we went off to exercise, and at any point that the staff thought we had nothing to do, it was out with the songbooks.
Before each meal we ran halfway up a mountain and fetched rocks which we piled in the field in front of the farmhouse, to leave some sign of our presence there.
We sang as we ran up the mountain.
After two weeks it started snowing and the ground froze.
The mountain behind the farmhouse was lost in a mist of snow and sleet and we had to smash the ice on the horse trough in  the mornings.
I took to sleeping in all my clothes in my sleeping bag, and managed to get away with not undressing for ten days.
Running and sport took on a new emphasis as it was the only way to keep warm.
This was a difficult one to sing.
Against the Vietcong and the enemy, wherever duty calls.
Soldiers for France, soldiers for the homeland
We will attack the positions again.
Oh, legionnaire, the ensuing combat will fire your heart with bravery and enthusiasm.
We had been getting it wrong, so were face down in a foot of water in the field doing press-ups.
My uniform was soaked and each time we dipped down at arm's bend our faces went into the muddy ice and water.
The Chief-Corporal in charge shouted out that if any of us had any sisters, we were to stand up.
I had three.
In return for their addresses he would allow me to stop doing press-ups in the mud.
I agreed.
He took out his notebook and noted three addresses, one at St Hugh's College in Oxford, another in south London, and another at a Berkshire convent.
He put his pen away.
I went back to the farm building, smoked a cigarette and got changed.
Although our life was cold and miserable, I felt enthusiastic because I was fit and because we were doing a lot of military training.
The urge to succeed and be competitive was stronger in some of us than in others, and although the section was  theoretically united there was a faction which stood apart from the rest.
The members of this group changed regularly, and were composed of those who had done well on this or that physical test.
You only retained membership as long as you succeeded on the runs, and in the classroom periods, which were held in a sodden marquee on the hillside.
Being in with the gang didn't stop you getting hit but it meant that the Corporals might think for one second before lifting their fists Along with Mike the Rhodesian, Marius, Robert from Oberammergau and Chris, there was myself and a Frenchman called Tignet.
Corporal Herve had christened us ‘Les Aigles Noirs ’, The Black Eagles, after a comic strip story about superhuman warriors.
I felt less than superhuman.
I had boils and chilblains all over my hands, had had two days food poisoning (when I had vomited over the Sergeant-Major's jeep), and was tired all the time.
But for all our fitness we were treated no differently from the rest of the Section.
We had a hard physical test one morning, which comprised part of our ‘Certificat Technique Élémentaire ’, the exam we had to pass on completion of basic training.
With full combat kit, helmet, rifle and webbing, and weighed down by a thirty-five pound rucksack, we set off on a run.
The course was only eight kilometres, but it was cross country and had to be completed in less than one hour.
Vigno, who had served with the 2ème Régiment Étranger de Parachutistes , intimated that if we ever got to Corsica we would be expected to do it in under forty minutes.
It was a freezing morning and the Section had run for five miles over muddy paths and swampy fields.
Gasping for breath, legs and backs aching and chafing, we stood at the finish, bent double, dripping sweat, while the Corporals read out the times.
The Sergeant-Major walked alongside approvingly, waving his clenched fist saying, ‘Eh, alors, les fuckings, ça va?’.
‘Les fuckings ’ was a generic term used for all English speakers as it was the word the staff heard us use the most.
Not all the Section had finished the run in the time allowed  and so Sergeant-Chef Gibeau decided that we should all be punished.
We were told to climb to the top of the mountain behind the farmhouse.
Sergeant Moustaine gave one of the Frenchmen a walkie talkie and told him that on reaching the summit the entire section should sing all three verses of the 'Képi Blanc' into the radio.
I looked up at the mountain.
It was over 1,000 feet high.
The top of it was shrouded in mist and wind, and in this weather it would be an icy, treacherous climb.
We set off, with our rucksacks, and halfway up the farmhouse had disappeared into the mist.
Clambering over slippery, wet rocks we halted at a rowan tree just below the top.
We gathered round, and before Moustaine was satisfied we had shouted the song three times into the mouthpiece of the small radio as the wind howled around us.
Two days later, we all suffered again for one person's misdemeanour.
At ‘appel ’ the Rumanian Corporal Asioz asked if anybody felt ill, because on emerging from the back door of the farmhouse that morning he had noticed a spray of liquid excrement beneath one of the ledges where somebody had shat out of the window.
Nobody owned up so he ordered us all to fetch our kit downstairs and to spread it out in a line on the wet grass, while he went along inspecting our underpants and spare trousers.
When he got to Gionesca, he screamed in disgust.
All his underclothes, his sports socks, his trousers and vests were smeared with shit.
He had had violent diarrhoea and had wiped his arse in the night with his own clothes.
The rest of the section were standing in the rain with all their clothes spread out on the wet grass because he had not wanted to admit that he was ill.
On instructions from the Corporals, we stripped him naked and made him run across to the horse trough where he was thrown in.
While three men scrubbed him with a stiff yard broom, the rest of us stood to attention in front of the trough and sang ‘Képi Blanc ’.
Marius and one or two others in the Section decided that possible pneumonia and deep humiliation were not enough of a punishment for Gionesca.
We had  been eight weeks in basic training and even in the most placid of us the qualities of self preservation and selfishness were coming to the surface.
Apart from Marius, Mike and Robert, I didn't give a shit about the rest of the section.
I hated Gionesca because he complained all the time, and I knew that I could get away with hating him because I was stronger and fitter than him.
Marius and I were chosen by the rest of the group to finish off punishing him.
Our chance came the following afternoon.
Meanwhile, Da Silva, the quiet, arch-backed Portuguese man, who had suffered such ill treatment, wandered off when nobody was looking.
It was an hour before he was discovered missing and we spent the rest of the afternoon searching for him in the woods and plains surrounding the house.
We never found him.
He just disappeared.
It froze again that night and everybody guessed that by morning his twisted icy body with its pathetic malformation was lying at the bottom of some gulley, where he would have taken cover from the snow and the wind.
We were due to leave Canjuers four days afterwards and there was much to think about so nothing was done.
We did get Gionesca, though.
While looking for Da Silva in an oak wood behind the farmhouse, Marius and I cornered Gionesca behind a lichen covered rock.
The Sergeant and Corporal leading our bit of the search party were out of earshot.
Marius smashed the Italian in the face with his gloved fist and stood on his chest.
I hesitated.
Then I drove my combat boot onto his temple as Marius hit him again in the mouth.
We got up, walked through the trees and left him.
Sergeant Moustaine, however, noticed blood coming out of his mouth later that afternoon.
He paraded the section and asked who had attacked Gionesca.
Marius and I stepped forward.
Moustaine explained in a low, controlled voice that any violence which was going to be dished out would come from him and the Corporals.
He would not tolerate bullying, especially by two of the stronger members of the section towards one who was weaker and actually ill.
He had punished Gionesca  by putting him in the horse trough and that was it.
He walked over, grabbed me by both lapels and screamed, ‘Tu comprends, toi, ou quoi ?’
He threw me over his shoulder in a judo hold on to the rocks and gravel we were standing on.
He then picked me up and drove his knee straight into my balls.
I wanted to throw up, pass out, scream and cry at the same time.
It felt like an elephant had hit me in the guts.
Moustaine made me stand up and slapped me across the eyes with his leather gloves.
I stumbled off to be sick behind an armoured personnel carrier as he started on Marius.
There was one weekend left to go of our time at Canjuers.
We had all come out of ourselves and were more self confident.
We were fit, thinner than any of us had ever been, good at singing, proficient with a variety of weapons, and we could survive on three hours sleep a night.
We were learning what it was like to be legionnaires.
Sergeant-Major Barlerin left the following day for Orange, leaving us in the charge of Sergeant-Chef Gibeau for the weekend.
Gibeau felt that we had had too easy a time of it at Canjuers and for the last three days introduced a new punishment.
Any petty misdemeanour resulted in the offender having to report to the Corporal of the day with his entrenching tool after evening ‘appel’.
He was then taken outside and made to dig a grave in the rocky, frozen ground, which took about three hours, before sleeping in it for the night.
The Corporals took it in turns to watch those digging from the shelter of the farmhouse, wrapped up and drinking hot coffee.
By the time the graves were dug, it would be 2.00 am and far too cold to sleep in the sub-zero winds that blew around the bottom of the mountain.
On the Saturday night, Gibeau devised one last piece of theatre.
Being a fanatic nonsmoker and health freak, he made us enact the ritual funeral of a cigarette end.
We dressed up in a combination of combat and sports kit, wearing gas masks and carrying makeshift torches made of sticks and rags dipped in  tar.
Gionesca wore a bedsheet and a necklace of rabbit-bones, and led four pall-bearers carrying a plastic carton containing a Marlboro butt.
A small hole was dug, the cigarette buried, songs sung over the grave and then the whole procession wended its w? y round the field four times singing the funeral march from Aida , which we had been practising for a week.
A bonfire had been lit and wine heated in a cauldron with sugar.
Each recruit had to stand up and sing a song in his own language.
I sang an obscene ditty I had learnt in the TA, Mike an African song in Matabele, and the Germans some carols.
When the wine was finished, we went to bed, apart from those who had graves to dig.
The Corporals pulled out some more wine and two cases of beer and carried on drinking while supervising the digging party.
Around 4.00 am Vadgama was buried and had his face smashed in with a shovel.
We left Canjuers on the Monday morning and arrived later on that day at a small village, from where we would march back on foot to Orange.
This was our ‘Marche Képi Blanc ’, on completion of which we would have passed the tests to become legionnaires.
The presentation ceremony would take place in Orange and only those completing the march would be entitled to wear their white képis.
We pitched our tents in a wood of olive trees and wellingtonias and went to sleep.
Forbidden to speak any language but French, Marius and I had been punished by the Corporals for speaking English while dismantling the tents at Canjuers.
Vigno had taken two lumps of granite from the side of the hill and made us keep them in our mouths for three hours.
We folded wet canvas and icy guy ropes, sucking back streams of saliva which collected in our teeth, unable to smoke, talk or move our jaws because of a mouthful of rocks.
BLOWING UP RENAULT 4s
It was eighty-five miles to Orange, a distance we hoped to cover in three days' marching.
Our section was split up into four groups, each under the command of a Sergeant and two Corporals.
Sergeant Ninez, who commanded our group, had just joined us, and along with him there were Corporals Vigno and Herve.
Ninez had recently been transferred to the Cavalry Regiment from the Paras in Corsica.
He marched extremely quickly.
As far as myself, Mike and Marius were concerned, this was a good thing, as it meant that the march was going to be tough and that those of us who finished would deserve their white képis.
Of the forty-eight of us who had left Aubagne two months before only thirty-six were in a fit state to attempt the tests.
Webb and Davies had finished their time in prison, had deserted again, been recaptured and imprisoned for a month.
Da Silva had vanished at Canjuers; a Scotsman had been thrown out for being underaged; Gionesca was in hospital in Orange with dysentery and pneumonia after his bath; Gazil, the Rumanian paratrooper, had developed a massive infection on his back caused by the friction of his rucksack during marching; and the other six were ill or disabled after our stay at Canjuers.
Vadgama was in hospital in Marseilles.
We marched fast and by noon had covered twelve miles.
We stopped at the side of the road outside a small town for our lunch.
One of us made a fire and we brewed coffee and lay in the autumn sun.
Down from the mountains the weather was warmer, without the snow and wind of Canjuers.
All of us had sores and infections on our hands and arms from the cold and the dirt.
My knuckles and hands were a mass of windblown  cuts and boils which meant that whenever I clenched my fists the gashes opened.
Our faces were red and raw and most of us had blisters.
So it was nice to lie in the sun and undo my shirt as, head propped against my rucksack, I dozed off.
Occasionally a car would pass by on the road, but otherwise it was quiet.
We lay under the trees and slept.
Sergeant Ninez was playing with his compass and map, measuring distances and calculating the best route back to Orange.
Mike and Marius were playing cards in the dust, Macier was pricking his blisters and the others were asleep.
We moved off two hours later, through a town with white buildings with red shutters and dogs asleep in the road.
The locals sat in the cafes and stared at us as we passed.
We moved through the town and up a hilly field covered with vines before we entered a forest where the branches grew close above the path.
We had to fight to make our way through as rifles, packs and radio aerials snagged on bushes and branches.
The air in the wood was damp and smelt of peat, the path was muddy and wet, and it was exhausting constantly pushing brambles and twigs out of the way.
It was a relief to reach the edge of the wood and come out into bright sunlight again.
We walked along a narrow road with elm and oak trees on either side, moving slowly because Macier's feet were hurting him.
As we could go no faster than the pace of the slowest man, Marius and I took his rucksack and FA-MAS to lighten his load.
We walked at the end of the group, idling along, looking at the scenery and day dreaming.
Marching long distances with rifle and rucksack was tiring and boring; you cradled your rifle in your arms, settled your pack in a comfortable position and let your thoughts drift away.
We stayed that night in an empty holiday home we discovered on the edge of a village.
All ten of us crammed onto the porch to keep out of the wet grass and we slept in a tangle of sleeping bags, packs and machine guns.
We woke abnormally late at 8.00 am and sat in the garden of the house for an hour drinking  coffee and eating the bread one of the Corporals had bought in the village that morning.
Away from the main body of the section it was very easy.
Ninez saw no reason to complain or criticise so long as we marched fast enough.
As we drank our coffee, a lorry arrived from the main group to pick up Macier whose blisters had burst, preventing him from walking.
We carried on.
Through the morning and the sun of the afternoon we marched, thirty-five miles across the départements of Savoie and Vaucluse, through woods and towns, up hills and across vineyards.
We were all filthy, our uniforms, hands and faces covered with a mixture of mud, woodsmoke, sweat and dust.
We stopped at a shop and bought apples and beer, which we guzzled on the march, assault rifles and ammunition belts swinging round our necks as we used our hands to prise the tops off the beer bottles.
We spent that night in a field of asparagus seedlings.
We crossed the wide River Rhone the following morning on a huge suspension bridge, then moved up a main road, poplars and plane trees to either side of us.
We reached Orange before any of the other groups and went into the barracks.
They were hot and dusty.
I had a shower, scrubbing off the dirt of a month in the open.
My hands stayed brown and cracked, the knuckles swollen up and bleeding.
When the trucks arrived we unloaded them, watching those who had fallen out on the march as they disembarked.
Nineteen of us had made it to the end.
The following day we learnt that the Colonel of the 1er Régiment Étrangere de Cavalier had ordered an inquiry into the incident with Vadgama at Canjuers.
What concerned him was not the brutality but the fact that it had taken place while the Corporals were drunk.
Vadgama emerged from hospital in Marseilles after a complicated facial operation; he had a bone transplant in his nose and cheek and his brown skin was marked with the fresh scars.
The Colonel decided that Herve, Vigno, Auriega and Tambini should return to their respective Squadrons, and that  Sergeant Moustaine should leave the Section.
We saw them rarely after that.
Corporal Ryan, the Irish Corporal, went off for a week's leave in Marseilles and, for an unknown reason, killed himself with a hunting rifle in a hotel in the Old port.
We were now legionnaires.
It was only eight weeks since we had left Aubagne yet there was a difference in the way in which we behaved and in which we saw ourselves.
For the nineteen of us who were to be awarded our white képis, there was the certainty of a place with one of the Foreign Legion's Regiments , and the satisfaction of having made it this far through basic training.
No longer were we ‘engagé volontaires ’, who could be treated as nothings — we had proved ourselves to the instructors on our course, and henceforth they would treat us as legionnaires and expect us to behave as such.
Each generation of legionnaires was expected to carry forward the traditions and ethics of the Legion, handing them down from one man to the next.
These traditions were encapsulated in everything which we did and which we were taught.
The most prominent and, as we had experienced, most problematic symbol of the Legion's past was the singing.
We had been taught the history of the organisation, and each day were learning more about its curious codes of morality and behaviour.
Within the space of three weeks we were to experience two of the most important ceremonies of any legionnaire's contract: the moment when he was presented with his white képi, and the celebrations surrounding Christmas.
At a torch-lit ceremony held on the regimental parade ground two nights later, we were given our képis.
We ironed our best uniforms, sharing two electric irons, until Corporal Vigno, on a parting note, decided that irons were too much of a luxury.
He made us fill up our regulation cups with hot water and press our uniforms using the flat base of the cup as an iron.
We paraded the following night as it was getting dark, the parade  ground lit up by flaming torches with four tanks lined up as a backdrop to our ceremony.
In green ties, red epaulettes and blue cummerbunds we lined up; Marius, who had been chosen as the star recruit, would lead the parade and stand out in front of us as we received our képis .
There were speeches by the Commander of the 3rd Squadron, by the Colonel of the Regiment, and by the President of the Association of Former Legionnaires of Orange.
The talking finished, we stood to attention, sung the ‘Képi Blanc' , and then put on our képis .
I was now Legionnaire Jennings.
There was a party afterwards during which we were able to talk to some of the officers who seemed faintly bored by the whole process.
I consoled myself by drinking a lot of warm red Martini.
Our training now got easier.
There was less violence, the ‘appels ’ were not so severe, and we spent much more time in the classroom doing theoretical work for our exams.
But we still did a lot of sport and work on the assault course, which was a set of twenty-four gut-wrenching obstacles set on the edge of the camp.
We were even allowed to write home.
Those who were sheltering behind assumed identities were discouraged from getting in touch with their friends and families, so it was a small group of us who sat down in a classroom.
I didn't know how to begin, so began by assuming that my parents knew where I was and then proceeded to tell them all the details of the food, living conditions, pay and training.
I left out any reference to brutality in our lives and assured them that I was well and healthy, which I was.
I described our time at Canjuers, the singing and the landscapes.
I filled four pages which I sent with a footnote requesting that they send me some books.
I had had nothing to read for three months, and now that we had some time to ourselves reading was a good way of distracting myself from the immediacies of life around me.
I asked for Hammond Innes, Frederick Forsyth, Iris Murdoch and Evelyn  Waugh.
It was nearly the same as writing a letter home from school.
It was important that they should feel that I was healthy and happy.
They were so far away from me, and there was nothing that they could do to alleviate the hardship of Legion life, so it appeared unnecessary to burden them with minor worries about bullying and violence.
I had always felt, partly as a result of my upbringing, that I should be able to fend for myself, especially in a situation which was one of my own making.
At age eleven I had gone away from my parents' school to a boarding school in Herefordshire, and remembered crying miserably as my mother and father drove off down the drive, leaving me to be looked after by one of the older boys.
Every weekend that they came to visit me would end in tears, and I was fourteen before I could manage without them, and before I stopped kissing my father goodnight.
The years of dishonesty and drunkenness which preceded my trip to Boulogne had erased any feeling of homesickness, and by November 1984, I could write them a composed, controlled letter from a Legion barrack room without any problem.
As some of the other legionnaires couldn't write very well, they asked me to help them with their letters.
We all read what each other had written, anyway.
A New Zealander, Wilkins, who had joined the section halfway through basic training from Castelnaudary, asked me to write one for him.
He wrote to his sister, who he hadn't seen for a year, as he had been travelling round Europe before joining the Legion.
He told her that he was well and that he missed her a lot.
His feelings for her as his sister were still the same, because although he was across the world he still thought about her every day.
He had been travelling and had seen some pretty strange things.
As she would notice from the heading on the notepaper he was in the French Foreign Legion and it was fucking tough work, but there were some good mates around him.
He hoped the shearing had been successful so that the family could pay for their father's operation in Auckland.
He  promised to send more money home as soon as he got paid, and he wanted her to look after his puppy, which he guessed by now would be a full-grown collie.
She should look after herself, as well, and he would see her in five years' time.
Mike wrote his own letter but showed it to me all the same.
It was to his girlfriend in Harare and he told her straight away that he was showing the French a thing or two, but it still wasn't like the old days with the Rhodesian Light Infantry.
He missed her very much, and thought often about their baby.
But they all knew he was doing the right thing in joining the Legion, for her sake as well as his.
She knew how important it was for him to be in a good army, and if the war had ended in Rhodesia, then perhaps another might start in one of France's old colonies so that the Legion could get involved.
She shouldn't run off with any of his old mates or she would get a good hiding when he came home.
She should give his hello to any of the boys who were still around and in the meantime could think of the home they were going to build in South Africa.
He wanted her to make enquiries with some of his friends about his chances of getting into the South African Army after leaving France.
But he was OK and he sent her a big kiss.
Chris had written a letter to Tina Jelly in Aldershot saying that he still loved her and missed her a lot, but was sure that until he came home she would be able to go out with his mates from the Royal Signals.
He asked her to drop in on his Mum and Dad and say hello, and to make sure that his father wasn't drinking too much.
He finished his letter by saying that she was still close to him and that he wanked about her a lot.
I liked the sound of Tina Jelly.
She didn't get many letters, he thought, so I should write her one.
I gave him my butter ration at breakfast one morning in return for her address.
Marius had written a long one to his mother and sister, at home in Kalmar.
At my urging, he asked for some more photographs as I was keen on the idea of this spotlessly clean, ruthlessly attractive family in their Nordic pine kitchen.
We posted our letters, and immediately started calculating how long it would take for replies to reach us.
When my parents did eventually reply, their letter was full of the most ordinary details of life in England and seemed far removed from my experiences in the Legion.
At the end of the writing session in the classroom, we filed out, back across the gravel to our barrack rooms.
It felt as though our contact with the outside world had closed away from us again.
We took our tests on the shooting ranges the morning after.
These tests were part of our ‘Certificat Technique Élémentaire ’ and were important.
From 200 metres we fired single shots at the targets depicting charging men holding machine guns.
We then moved close and fired from the hip and shoulder in reflex action shooting.
Despite its low calibre, the weapon was hard to control firing on-full automatic, as it threw out 1,500 rounds per minute.
It needed a lot of experience to be able to hold it correctly so that all the twenty-five shots in the magazine riddled the target.
Mike was an excellent shot at short and long distances and taught me how to control my weapon, how to change magazines with a simple wrist flick operation, and where it was best to hit a person if you wanted to be sure of incapacitating him.
He taught me to aim for the knees since any weapon firing on automatic would climb high and right, and thus the fall of shot could be evenly distributed across the stomach and torso, ending in the head.
He was two years older than me and was only eighteen when he had first killed somebody.
A ZANLA terrorist had risen out of the bushes with a Kalashnikov while Mike had been involved in an ambush on the Limpopo river which had been set up by the Selous Scouts, the counterinsurgency tracking teams of the Rhodesian army.
The man had seen Mike first but had fumbled with his safety catch as Mike killed him.
The war in Rhodesia had been a continuous sequence of search and destroy missions and cross border raids into Mozambique and Zambia.
After the The Lancaster House  agreement, Mike had found himself in a similar position to the rest of the Rhodesian Army — overqualified, over-trained, and unemployed.
Many of his friends had travelled to South Africa, signing on with the South African Army.
Mike, however, had travelled north, leaving his pregnant girlfriend with relatives in the safety of a Harare suburb as he went looking for another war.
He had been playing the piano in a waterfront bar in Dar Es Salaam when he had heard one of the customers talking about the Legion.
He had picked up his money, and caught a plane out to Marseilles.
After stopping in Kinshasa, the flight had landed in France and Mike had walked into the recruiting post at Fort St Nicholas and joined up.
He was better trained than anybody in our section, and the Corporals admired his physical prowess.
He was the archetypal Legion recruit.
Ex-soldiers such as Mike would travel from one army to the other, hoping to be in the right army at the right time.
The right time was when it went to war.
For members of the 2ème Régiment Étranger de Parachutistes , this moment had undoubtedly been when the Regiment jumped over Kolwezi in 1978.
For the British Army, it had been Operation Corporate, the reclaiming of the Falkland Islands in 1982.
Other armies, like the Israeli and South African ones, had been in a state of armed conflict for some considerable time.
The mercenary wars of the 1960s in the Congo and Near East were over.
Military combat in the 1980s survived within established armies where a man had to be a contracted, organised member of a unit.
For those such as Mike, it was like a surfer trying to catch his wave.
The ability to predict where hostilities were likely to occur, in what countries, under whose jurisdiction, was paramount to a man whose professional abilities lay in being a practising soldier.
I supposed that I was trying to catch my wave as well.
When, and if, I got to the 2ème Régiment Étranger des Parachutistes I hoped that my efforts during basic training would pay off, and that I could get involved, if not in a war, then in something physically and militarily more adventurous than anything I had  done so far.
We had all heard rumours about the Legion's paras, and I was holding myself to my vow made in the bathroom in Wales nearly ten years before.
Meanwhile, in Orange, it was time for Christmas, and the section started to organise itself for the festivities.
In keeping with the Legion's view of itself as a family, Christmas was an important event.
The main celebrations were the midnight mass, the Christmas eve supper and the crib building competition.
Each Section of thirty men would construct an elaborate ‘creche’ or crib, and at midnight the results would be judged by the Colonel of the regiment as he made his rounds.
The cribs were not the usual constructions of shoe boxes and straw, with small religious figures and matching sets of the Magi; they were a challenge for the ingenuity and imagination of each section and would often involve large amounts of gravel, stones, concrete and other building materials.
Some would fill half a room, and the themes were normally an interpretation of the nativity in military terms.
The mountain troop of the 4th Squadron were devising a crib which involved a lifesize figure of the baby Jesus abseiling down a mockup of a cliff face towards a rock grotto containing an edelweiss, the symbolic flower of the German Wehrmacht mountain troops.
Seven of our Section were detached for a fortnight to make our creche, so each day after parade they would go off with a Corporal to hump sand, fill wheelbarrows with moss and look for things to add to the project.
None of us were allowed to see the unfinished article, which was being built in one of the lecture rooms in our barrack block; the rest of us were involved in practising for the midnight mass carol concert where our section would be providing the choir.
Each day we would assemble in a room under the supervision of a young Lieutenant and sing carols.
Each nationality had contributed a song which we all had to learn.
‘Silent Night’ sung in German was the best.
Christmas day itself was for sobering up and clearing up the  debris from the wild night before, and after lunch the entire regiment was allowed ‘quartier libre ’ or free time in town.
As every man would be drunk from the night before, this would be a continuation of the celebrations.
Christmas ended officially with ‘appel ’ at 6.00 am on boxing day.
By Christmas eve our singing was practically perfect and we had a repertoire of ten carols in French, German, Spanish and English.
The creche was finished, and depicted two lifesize figures of legionnaires in the desert, one cradling the other in his arms as he lay dying.
This was set against a background of rocks, sand, barbed wire and empty ammunition boxes, with large amounts of fake snow sprayed over everything.
There was a cassette which provided a background commentary, a monologue about the glory of dying in the arms of a comrade at Christmas as the stars above sung out the glory of the Lord.
As we were still undergoing our basic training, we were not allowed to have a bar and nor would we be allowed to make a tour of the rest of the bars in the regiment, a ruling which Mike, Marius and myself were determined to do something about.
It would involve crawling out of a window while nobody was looking and trusting in the spirit of Christmas goodwill should we be discovered.
Christmas eve arrived and at 5.00 pm we changed into our walking out uniforms which we had spent most of the morning ironing.
We walked down to a tank hangar on the far side of the camp where the mass was due to be held, and filed in to take our seats.
Normally the building was the repair shop and garage for thirty AMX-10 battle tanks, but for this evening it had been converted into a temporary church with the aid of some camouflage nets, 300 chairs and a platform where a nativity play would be staged, and from which the Priest would read out the lesson.
The Officers arrived with their wives and girlfriends, the children following behind.
As in the British Army, the cavalry was considered to be the aristocratic elite of soldiering and the Legion's Cavalry Regiment was one of the  superior regiments in the French Army.
The girlfriends and wives of the young officers were pretty, well-bred girls who leant over to each other and laughed a lot as they waited for the ceremony to start.
The Colonel was there with his wife and children, and although it was not compulsory for the men to attend mass, there were a large number of legionnaires present, mostly Latin or East European.
The service started with our opening carol, ‘Away in a Manger’ and continued with all the normal Christmas readings; after the gospel we sat down for the nativity play, which was performed by a section from the armoured car squadron.
Joseph was played by a Yugoslavian Sergeant, Mary by a slim Gambian Corporal and the three wise men by a trio of Tahitians with tribal tattoos and scarred faces.
There was clapping when they had finished, and mass progressed with us singing well.
Most people took communion.
Then we went to the cookhouse to have dinner.
The tables were laid with white cloths and there were floral spreads of flowers and holly; plates of cold meats, salads and fruits were laid out, there were bottles of rose and white wine in front of every man, and Christmas decorations hung from the ceiling.
As the Captain commanding the 3rd Squadron came into the dining hall, we stood to attention to sing a slow lament called ‘Souvenir qui Passe ’, before sitting down to eat.
It was the first wine any of us had had to drink for nearly five months and we got very drunk, extremely fast.
The main courses arrived, with more wine, there was singing, then pudding in the form of gateaux and fruit salads, and liqueurs and cigars.
The decorations shone on the walls and I loosened the buttons of my tunic and slipped my tie down a few inches.
Sergeant-Chef Gibeau leant over, tapped me on the forefinger with a table knife and told me to do them up again.
I sat smoking my cigar and looked at the people around me.
At a table behind ours was the English contingent, laughing and drinking; they were the nucleus of the Mafia Anglais of the  regiment.
In every Legion Regiment, the English-speaking people stuck together in tight groups, drinking together, socialising together and looking after each other; Australians, South Africans and Canadians joined in with the club, which evolved its own codes of conduct and unspoken rules of behaviour.
When an English-speaker went into the foyer of the regiment, a NAAFI-style canteen where you could buy beer, cigarettes, sweets and memorabilia, he would head over to the table where the Mafia was sitting.
If he had no money, he could sit down and take a bottle of beer from the crate on the table, and carry on drinking until it had run out.
If he had money, he would buy a case of beer from the bar which would gain him entry to the table.
Taking a bottle, he would then open it with the bottom edge of the Bic lighters that most people carried, prising the top off in one movement.
Cigarettes were placed on the table in front of you which meant that they were for everybody.
Cigarettes were normally Marlboro, the lighters Bic, and the beer always Kronenbourg.
This system of drinking guaranteed people a drink every night of the month, even when they had no money.
Everybody in the regiment was paid in cash on the same day, so there were no difficulties in reclaiming debts.
Most people were not taxed on their earnings as they were not French citizens, and there was nothing to spend money on apart from cigarettes, beer, and trips into town.
The Mafia system worked subconsciously and introspectively.
An Englishman in the 32ème Régiment Étranger d'Infanterie in French Guyana had refused to drink with the English, had spoken French, and considered the Mafia a waste of time.
Several drunk Britons tried to hang him one night, and would have succeeded had not a French Corporal cut him down in time.
Our Christmas food had been consumed and most of the drink had been poured down our throats.
There were sketches by members of the Squadron who thought themselves good at  acting.
There were spoofs on the Officers, insinuating that they were upper class twits, and there were jokes about the Squadron based on its experiences in Chad that summer.
There were photographs of the unit in the Chadian desert on the walls of the dining hall.
Men sitting in the turrets of their reconnaissance tanks, men riding camels, and men driving through the streets of the capital, N'Djamena.
In one, a Corporal inspected the remains of a blown up Libyan tank.
There were a lot of sunglasses and Arab headscarfs in evidence.
Corporal Vigno held an African baby in one photo, and I looked over to where he was talking with Corporal Auriega.
There was only Sergeant-Chef Gibeau to make our lives miserable now.
His veto on our drinking after the meal was annoying.
Most of us had reached the point where we wanted to carry on drinking until we collapsed.
We had received our Christmas presents from ‘La Marraine ’, the godmother of the regiment.
She was a dignified octogenarian aristocrat who had been made an honorary Chief-Corporal in the Regiment since she had served with it in World War Two.
She paid for the Regiment's presents each Christmas and presented them to the legionnaires.
She looked extremely elegant in the tailored tunic and skirt of her ‘Chief-Corporal's’ uniform.
Down one arm ran gold chevrons, denoting her length of service with the Regiment.
She had offered her immaculately powdered cheek to each man and had received a kiss from everyone.
As a present I had received a large book of complex Legion history written in difficult French.
We sang for twenty minutes, the songs loud and impressive in the high-roofed hall, each man's voice resounding with the alcohol and the nostalgia of Christmas.
We filed back to our barracks and went to bed.
The Corporals then disappeared to the different section bars which were doing business all over the camp.
Marius and I waited for twenty minutes and then walked into Mike's room, only to find him snoring loudly, unconscious.
We left him, got dressed again and walked down the fire escape.
We headed for the 4th Squadron where we had been officially invited by some of the English members.
We walked through the front door and into the bar.
In the corner Jesus abseiled down his cliff face and at the makeshift counter two barmen worked furiously.
All around were Officers and men getting extremely drunk.
A Scottish Corporal waved at Marius and handed over two tumblers of neat Malibu which we swigged quickly.
Beer, brandy, Scotch and Malibu were being drunk out of plastic cups, everybody was in uniform and there were lots of medals and badges in evidence.
Most men wore the blue and white campaign medal from Chad and Lebanon as well as the ubiquitous red and dark blue of the General Service medal.
One or two of the Sergeants had the red and white stripes of the ‘Valeur Militaire ’, awarded for bravery in action, and a Lieutenant with a bald head and tattooed hands had the ‘Légion d'Honneur .’
From his wrinkled face and sunburned skin he looked as though he had risen from the ranks rather than graduating from Saint Cyr or the Ecole Militaire.
Nobody seemed to mind the presence of Marius and myself, and we got into conversation with two Officers about the respective merits of the different Legion regiments.
They both urged us to go to the 2ème Régiment Étranger de Parachutistes .
The Chief-Corporal to whom I had given my sisters' addresses at Canjuers was there, and he told me that he had sent my oldest sister a photograph of himself in a tank and one of his apartment in La Rochelle.
He awaited a reply eagerly and was going to drop in to see her on his next leave.
Three cups of neat Malibu mixed well with the rose wine and Armagnac I had drunk at supper and I felt garrulous and cheerful, confiding in strangers and telling the story of my life.
Two Portuguese legionnaires dragged a Scotsman out of the door before he was sick.
Loud French pop music howled out of a cassette recorder and everybody danced with each other to a song which was in the charts at the time,.
I  waltzed across the floor with the scarred Lieutenant and as soon as the song was finished it was put on again.
Everybody joined arms and a bottle of whisky was passed round; we finished it between twelve of us in two or three minutes.
The windows were thrown open and people began howling and screaming into the night as the drink mingled in our stomachs and the music got louder.
I was in a deep embrace with a Rumanian mortarman when the door opened and Gibeau walked in.
He saw Marius and myself and told us quietly and firmly to go back to our rooms.
He would talk to us in the morning.
People clung to our arms as we walked out and an Officer emptied Pernod over Gibeau's tunic, telling him that it was Christmas and that we had a right to enjoy ourselves.
We walked out and staggered back to our beds, pushing out the dummies we had left there as decoys, using rolled up overcoats and our pyjamas.
We fell asleep almost immediately but as I dropped off I heard Marius pissing over Macier as a Christmas present.
The next day was hungover and quiet; everybody wanted to know what we had got up to, and Girod told us that we would not be accompanying the section in town that afternoon.
Marius and I were too tired to care, so carried on ironing regardless.
Everybody else went out at 2.00 pm and at 3.00 pm Gibeau appeared, saying that we were free to go.
We put on our képis , straightened our ties, pulled our fingers into regulation gloves and set off for the guardhouse.
The afternoon was clear but cold and there was ice on the ground and frost still in the flowerbeds by the main gate.
We saluted the Guard-Sergeant, slapping our palms down against our sides in regulation salutes, looking him in the eye and showing our leave passes.
Through the little side gate, across the road, and we turned left to walk into Orange.
We stopped at the first bar we came to and walked inside, to where Johnson and Fleming, two English legionnaires, were drinking.
We had a quick beer with them and teamed up with them as they knew the town better than us.
Beer followed pizza  and we looked round the Roman amphitheatre which had been built by Roman legionnaires 1,800 years before.
Orange was a typical Provençal town, with streets lined with plane trees and houses with red and green shutters; the bars and restaurants were empty save for the Legion, and there was very little to do except spend money.
All through our time at Canjuers, through the days of rain and abscesses on our hands, mud and sleeping in sodden clothes, we had dreamed of the moment when we would be able to walk into a cakeshop or bar and be able to buy what we wanted, but now that the choice was available, we did nothing about it.
We had an expensive meal and tried to get drunk, but the evening had a forced feel to it as though it had been written on Orders that we would, compulsorily, enjoy ourselves.
We sat in a bar with walls covered in red plush-velvet and watched the Rumanian Asioz chatting to the two waitresses.
They had lowcut dresses and thick black eyeshadow, and one wore no shoes, toes crossed over each other from having her feet crammed into tight footwear all her life.
Marius jerked his head at them in disapproval but I liked their Romany appeal.
Asioz bought them champagne, and they filled his glass with sparkling wine and their own with apple juice from a carton.
He was so pissed he didn't notice.
We smoked some dope with the girls and went to have an omelette.
We ended up in the bar opposite the gates of the camp.
This bar was run by an old woman who for twenty years had run a Legion brothel in Algeria before retiring to Orange after the Legion moved to mainland France.
The woman ran a number of girls who were not technically prostitutes but more hostesses.
They would chat and flirt with the legionnaires, making them buy champagne and other expensive drinks, in return for which they would provide female company and, if they found the legionnaire attractive, they would sleep with them.
They found a lot of legionnaires attractive.
I fell through the door with Marius and immediately started talking to a former member of the British Parachute Regiment who had known some friends of mine.
I asked him about the girls and he told me to offer them drinks, talk to them, spend 1,000 francs on them, and I would be away.
I looked over to the corner where a pretty girl with long brown hair and freckles was sitting.
I walked over and sat down.
She smiled.
I grinned lopsidedly and asked her if she wanted a drink.
She did.
We had several until I decided that it was time for me to sit on her lap.
I stood up, suddenly slipped, and crashed across the table onto the floor.
Standing up, I assured her that I wasn't drunk but tired and that I thought it was time for me to walk her home.
She stood up, kissed me on the forehead, said  (How sweet you are), and walked away.
Marius dragged me back to camp and afterwards I told the other legionnaires how she had wanted to sleep with me, but I had turned her down.
The next day was grim and hungover.
We tidied up our rooms and cleaned the kitchens, dragging out the mundane tasks so that we could stay in the warm.
We could clean swiftly and efficiently by now, and knew the special little ways that made a lavatory really white, or a tiled floor that bit more gleaming.
We had two weeks to go before we finished basic training, and among those of us who had survived there was the blase attitude of the old hand.
We smoked without taking our cigarettes from our mouths and we shrugged like Frenchmen.
I could talk to anybody in fluent French, and Marius had managed a good grasp of the language.
Both of us strolled around the camp in an exaggerated swagger, saluting with panache and wearing our berets just above our eyes.
I kept a book by John Mortimer in my side trouser pocket so that when I saluted, slapping my palm against my leg, there was a good cracking ring.
I felt on top of things, and Marius and I had agreed that we would accompany each other to our respective regiments.
The winter sun came out over the signals aerials on the top of the regimental headquarters and I warmed my neck, rubbing it against the collar of my knitted undershirt.
We walked back to our rooms and packed up for our move to  Nîmes.
This was the last stage of our training, and would be based around a farm called Garrigues.
We loaded the trucks up again and at 5.00 am on 27 December 1984, we left.
The trucks were open at the back and we shivered as we climbed into the hills, Sergeant Major Barlerin in the jeep up ahead with Sergeant-Chef Gibeau.
At midday we reached Garrigues and piled out of the trucks to set up all our equipment in the farm building; it was better appointed than the one at Canjuers, and there was running water, lavatories, sinks and beds.
At one point it had been somebody's house; the gardens were laid out with palm trees, yucca plants and arranged flowerbeds.
There was curling, ornate moulding around the tops of the windows and coats of arms had been set into the metal work of the huge wrought-iron gate.
In summer the gardens would have looked colourful and pretty but somehow in the depths of the Provençal winter they appeared melancholy.
Gibeau set the tone of our stay at Garrigues by making us run and crawl around the house, singing all the time.
He wasn't satisfied so we went down on our stomachs and leopard crawled.
Nîmes was unbelievably cold.
One morning I went out into the garden to fetch some clothes from the washing line and walked past Gibeau, who was shooting sparrows with his assault rifle, as they fed on grain he had laid out for them.
All the clothes on the line were frozen solid, as the water in them had iced as soon as we had put them out.
The water in the sinks and basins froze, as well as the shithouses.
There was a sheet of ice out in the courtyard from a burst pipe which had carried all the garbage from the kitchen with it.
This meant that to go for a crap you had to take a shovel and dig a hole which was hard work when the ground was solid.
It was difficult to shit cleanly.
Obsessed as they were with hygiene and cleanliness, the Corporals had been worried ever since we had arrived at Orange that some of us were not adept at emptying our bowels  neatly.
To combat this recurrent worry, they had long since introduced random underpant inspections which could be sprung on us at the most absurd moment.
In this way they assured that those among us who were anally lax or maladroit in the use of the hard, crunchy loo paper we used, would take care not to dirty their underpants.
Since my episode with Moustaine during the first week of training, I had taken due care with my backside; but others hadn't got the point.
At Canjuers we had been on the shooting range one afternoon, zeroing our FA-MASs on targets 200 metres away.
It had been a bitterly cold day, and the gravel underfoot was frozen into tight lumps.
Our hands had gone numb on the triggers of our weapons, and most of the staff, huddled against the wind under a group of scraggy pine trees, had lost their tempers due to our poor shooting.
Suddenly Tambini had run over to where most of us stood, awaiting our turn at the firing point.
He had shouted in French for a moment or two, then had screamed, ‘Drop your trousers!
Underpant inspection!’
We were dressed up in combat jackets, parkas and webbing, rifles slung over our shoulders, and helmets on.
Struggling with flies and belts we had dropped our trousers, taken down our underpants, and stood to attention, upper bodies wrapped against the slicing wind, hairy legs and bollocks going purple with cold.
I was clear.
Marius was clear.
Mike had been lax with the Bronco.
Vermulen, the Swiss man, had obvious stomach trouble and Wilkins's underpants looked as though a wild boar had been sick in them.
Those who had failed had been made to scrub them there and then, using water from their water bottles and stones instead of soap.
At Garrigues, most of us tried to hold out as long as possible, preferring constipation to the risks of having a crap.
Our barrack room was warm and we had a stove in the middle which kept us warm in the night.
I had moved on to selling friends' addresses to the Chief-Corporal, and in return for the names  and numbers of two Sloane girlfriends I had got the bed nearest the stove.
We spent our time at Garrigues doing a lot of shooting, both with FA-MASs and pistols, and learning about explosives and mines.
There was an old shooting range behind the farmhouse and we went up there one morning to put into practice all that we had learnt about explosives.
We had been taught how to set up a simple charge with detonator and fuse.
We had developed this principle by joining lumps of plastic explosive together with some machine gun cartridges to make a simple anti-personnel charge.
We had stalked around the woods practising booby traps and trip devices, using thin wire and nails, and were getting good at setting nasty ambushes.
Mike was adept at all this, and Gibeau, recognising a fellow enthusiast, had made him show us some of the techniques he had learnt in Rhodesia.
We smeared mud (to simulate human excrement, which would infect wounds) on sharpened wooden stakes which we buried in holes in the path covered up with leaves and brush, and Gibeau showed us how to make a mine out of a spring, some ball bearings and a walnut-sized lump of plastic explosive.
The point of this device was to spring the metal balls to stomach height only, so that they would tear through any human bodies within thirty feet.
We ran up to the firing range one morning to try out our destructive techniques for real.
We broke open all the boxes of plastic explosives, fuses and detonators, and walked around with Sergeant-Major Barlerin looking for something to attach our bombs to.
An old car which had been driven across in front of the shooting targets was ideal, so we attached fifteen kilos of the explosive to it in different places, fixed up the detonators, trailed fuse wire back several yards and clipped on the incendiary devices which would activate the firing process.
There was a thick concrete wall which we were all going to hide behind and we had our helmets on in case any car parts came raining down out of the sky.
We had thrown grenades before and used  the LRAC rocket launcher so we were accustomed to the noise and strength of high-impact explosion.
Gathered round the car, we watched Gibeau activate the device.
We had two minutes to get into cover and walked round to the other side of the wall and crouched down with our hands over our ears and our helmets firmly strapped on.
Mike advised me to keep my mouth open to absorb the blast on my ear drums.
We waited for two minutes before the combined strength of thirty-five pounds of EP-12 plastic explosive tore the car apart.
There was an air-displacing percussive whump combined with an ear-thudding explosive crack as the old Renault 4 was blasted thirty feet into the sky.
The shock waves travelled through the wall and slammed into our heads and then there was silence as the dismembered vehicle fell through the air.
Suddenly a hail of earth, stones, metal fragments, pieces of exhaust pipe and car door came down on us in a dust-covered mass.
We all stood up and walked around the wall to where the car had been.
There was a brown, ripped hole in the ground and a buckled, disgust-ingly distorted chassis torn and knotted on the side of the crater.
The rocks and stones for thirty yards around had been flung outwards by the blast and an unlucky gorse-bush had been reduced and stripped to blackened twigs.
We marched back to the farmhouse and had lunch.
The mail was waiting for us.
Among it was a parcel for Mike from Harare.
It contained a letter and some food.
There were biscuits, sweets, chocolate and cigarettes.
The Corporal who was with us at the time, a new one detached from Orange, immediately awarded Mike 2,000 press-ups.
This was the usual practice when mail was given out: a recipient of a letter would normally get 150, two letters 300, and the penalties for a parcel were 500 and above depending on its contents.
The parcel which Mike had received was a perfect target.
In an organisation where a lot of people, through necessity or personal choice, were cut off from their families or friends at home, mail and  letters took on a special importance.
Most people would share their letters, reading them out to everybody else.
We were all conversant with the problems of each other 's friends and relatives.
The Corporal had given Mike more press-ups than he could possibly hope to do, so the penalty had to be shared out among us all.
We did 100 each and Mike shared out his parcel.
We ate the biscuits and cake, and smoked his cigarettes, trying to swap things with him in return for the photo of his girlfriend.
I read the letter.
His girlfriend missed him and was miserable among the other whites in Harare.
She wished he would leave the Legion altogether and come home.
She didn't want to go and live in South Africa either.
His daughter had never seen her father and had no idea of what he would be like.
The girlfriend was miserable.
Mike was silent and withdrawn that evening, and just after ‘appel ’ he beat the shit out of Macier who had put his feet on Mike's blankets.
We had finished everything we had come to do.
The shooting was completed, and we had passed all our physical tests.
We had completed our map reading and compass work and had tramped across the moors at night on a freezing combat endurance test where we map read our way from rendezvous to rendezvous.
At each point we had been required to identify pictures of tanks, strip weapons in the dark, answer questions on mines and explosives, and demonstrate our radio technique.
We were going to be interviewed by a selection team from Castelnaudary who would tell us our placings in the ‘Certificat Technique Élémentaire ’ exams.
We packed up all our kit again and set off back to Orange, across the frozen landscape of southern France, which was having one of the coldest winters in living memory.
Snow was everywhere and there were television reports each night of blocked roads, stranded villagers and thick white fields of frozen cattle.
Our trucks had open sides and Marius, Vermulen and I clung to each other, faces buried in our hoods, as we churned  down the slushy autoroutes, the speed of the trucks sending icy, sawing winds through us at seventy kilometres per hour.
We rested in a village at lunchtime where the phone lines lay across the side of the road and stretched into a field, and where the mayor welcomed us, his red face glowing underneath a huge fur hood.
Flakes of snow settled on the muzzle of my rifle, and smoking a cigarette while wearing leather gloves left a gingery smell of burnt, nicotined hide in my gloved palm.
We got back to Orange as dark fell.
I had come first in our exams and tests.
I could go to Corsica.
I stood in front of the selection team from Castelnaudary two days later.
I told them that there was no doubt in my mind but that I wanted to be a paratrooper.
I felt that although what we had done in Orange had been severe and shitty, in choosing to go to Calvi and the Airborne regiment, I was letting myself in for treatment and discipline I couldn't imagine.
Having come this far, and having made the effort to come first, I reflected only briefly as the Commandant in front of me, with his four gold bars on his shoulders, signed a piece of paper and said, ‘I'm posting you to the 2ème Régiment Étranger de Parachutistes .’