

DO ROUNDABOUTS DRIVE YOU ROUND THE BEND?
ROUNDABOUTS ARE SAFE AND SIMPLE IF YOU KNOW AND USE THESE RULES…
Read this leaflet in conjunction with Rules for Roundabouts in the Highway Code for Northern Ireland.
Many drivers are satisfied with their own ability at roundabouts, but consider most other drivers do it all wrong!
What are the advantages of roundabouts?
When used correctly they assist traffic flow at busy road junctions by allowing drivers to enter and leave by different roads with the minimum of inconvenience or danger.
They are really one-way traffic systems in which several streams of vehicles can mix and circulate in a clockwise direction only.
Before finding fault with other drivers' behaviour at roundabouts, check your own knowledge of the rules.
GIVE WAY is the most important rule — when entering a roundabout give way to any traffic already on the roundabout on your immediate right, unless road markings or road signs indicate otherwise.
Keep moving if the way is clear.
Some drivers stop when entering a roundabout which is obviously clear of other traffic.
This simply slows the flow of traffic and causes unnecessary and frustrating delays.
Give Way signs are not placed at all roundabouts, but the point of entry is marked by a single broken white line across the road to indicate the give way rule.
At some locations road markings or road signs indicate free flow on to the roundabout in specified lanes.
The correct speed, position and signal on the approach to the roundabout, while on the roundabout and when leaving the roundabout are all vitally important driving skills to be considered and applied as necessary.
The approach speed must be correct to allow you to Stop and Give Way at the single broken white line if necessary.
Too fast an approach speed may alarm drivers already on the roundabout why may think you are going to drive onto the roundabout in front of them; if they brake hard or swerve this may cause a following driver to panic and cause an accident.
Too fast an approach speed, with very fierce braking to stop and give way may cause a following driver to panic, brake hard and slide into the back of your car.
Your speed on the roundabout must be related to the roadholding and handling qualities of your car, the radius of the roundabout curves, the nature and condition of the road surface, your driving skills, and the volume of other traffic on or joining the roundabout.
Using the correct position and signals really helps other drivers.
If everyone knows and obeys the rules traffic flow and safety at roundabouts is much improved.
Imagine you are approaching a busy complex roundabout with six converging roads.
Use the diagrams and in all cases assume you are approaching from road (a).
Think of the five other roads as leaving at various times on a clock face; as already pointed out, all movement on roundabouts is in a clockwise direction.
If direction arrows are painted on the approach lanes and on the lanes in the roundabout always obey them.
If the Roundabout itself is completely clear of other traffic you may take the shortest and most convenient lane through the roundabout.
Cancel the signal just after leaving the roundabout.
Now you know the rules, set a good example to other drivers by using them at all times; who knows, they may even copy your driving style and do it right too!
1.
Taking first exit (b) at 8 o'clock
Approach: Left-hand lane
Signal: Left-turn indicator on approach
On Roundabout: Keep in left lane
Exit: Keep left-turn indicator going until just after leaving the roundabout
2.
Taking second (c) at 10 o'clock
Approach: Left-hand lane
Signal: No approach signal
On Roundabout: Keep in left lane
Exit: Use the left-turn indicator when passing exit (b) before the one you want to take (c).
3.
Taking third exit (d) straight ahead at 12 o'clock
Approach: Left-hand lane (use right-hand lane if traffic in left-hand lane
Signal: No approach signal
On Roundabout: Keep in left-hand lane (use right-hand lane if approach was in right-hand lane)
Exit: Use the left-turn indicator when passing exit (c) before the one you want to take (d).
4.
Taking the exit (e) at 2 o'clock
Approach: Right-hand lane
Signal: Right-turn indicator on approach
On Roundabout: Keep in right-hand lane near centre of roundabout; keep right-turn indicator going
Exit: Check mirrors, change to left-turn indicator when passing exit (d) before the one you want to take (e).
Ease into left lane for exit (e).
5.
Taking fifth exit (f) at 4 o'clock
Approach: Right-hand lane
Signal: Right-hand indicator on approach
On Roundabout: Keep in right-hand lane near centre of roundabout; keep right-turn indicator going
Exit: Check mirrors, change to left-turn indicator when passing exit (e) before the one you want to take (f).
Ease into left lane for exit (f).
Advice to the self employed
Health and Safety Agency for Northern Ireland
Health & Safety at Work (Northern Ireland) Order 1978
This leaflet is not an authoritative interpretation of the law, but is intended to help self-employed people to understand their duties and obligations and also to advise them of the protection the Order gives to them.
INTRODUCTION
All people at work are covered by the Order, whether they are employed by others, are in a managerial capacity, or work for themselves without employing others.
The self-employed person may be, for example, a doctor, a dentist, a window cleaner, someone who repairs cars, or an independent subcontractor.
The general requirements in the Order, which came into force on 1 May 1979, will replace parts of earlier Acts such as the Factories Act (Northern Ireland) 1965 and the Office and Shop Premises Act (Northern Ireland) 1966 but they do not supersede the detailed requirements contained in the earlier legislation.
These provisions will be replaced gradually by new regulations and approved codes of practice.
DUTIES OF THE SELF-EMPLOYED
The Order defines a self-employed person as an individual who works for gain or reward otherwise than under a contract of employment, whether or not he himself employs others.
If he employs others, he has additional duties which are outlined in the leaflet HSA 2 — Advice to Employers.
The Order imposes duties on the self-employed person in relation to the effect of his activities on the health and safety of people who are not in his employment.
These are stated in Articles 5(2) and 5(3); in addition to, Article 6 may also affect him if he is control of premises which are used by others.
Article 5(2)
‘It shall be the duty of every self-employed person to conduct his undertaking in such a way as to ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, that he and other persons (not being his employees) who may be affected thereby are not thereby exposed to risks to their health or safety.’
Article 5(3)
places a duty on a self-employed person, in prescribed circumstances, to give persons who are not his employees information about such aspects of the way in which he conducts his undertakings as might affect their health or safety.
The relevant circumstances and the information required would be prescribed in regulations.
These responsibilities apply with respect to the public and others who may be working close by.
DUTIES OF OTHERS TOWARD THE SELF-EMPLOYED
These are the ‘protective’ aspects of the Order.
Article 6
lays duties with respect to health and safety on those who are in control of any non-domestic premises, where people who are not their employees work, or where such people use plant or substances provided there for their use.
Article 6(2)
‘It shall be the duty of each person who has, to any extent, control of premises to which this Article applies or of the means of access thereto or egress therefrom or of any plant or substance in such premises to take such measures as it is reasonable for a person in his position to take to ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, that the premises, all means of access thereto or egress therefrom available for use by persons using the premises, and any plant or substance in the premises or, as the case may be, provided for use there, is or are safe and without risks to health.’
The term ‘premises’ as defined in Article 2(2) ‘includes any place and, in particular, includes any vehicle, vessel, aircraft or hovercraft, any installation on land (including the foreshore and other land intermittently covered by water), any offshore installation, and any other installation (whether floating, or resting on the seabed or the subsoil thereof, or resting on other land covered with water or the subsoil thereof), and any tent or movable structure.’
This is a general provision and the person in control of premises may also have other duties under other enactments, for example with respect to means of escape in case of fire, and general fire precautions, and also with respect to public health.
The self-employed person may, of course, himself have duties under this Article.
DUTIES OF MANUFACTURERS AND SUPPLIERS OF ARTICLES AND SUBSTANCES FOR USE AT WORK
Article 7
places duties on persons who design, manufacture, import, supply, erect or install any article for use at  work, or who manufacture, import or supply any substance for use at work.
Self-employed persons may be affected by these provisions as purchasers and users of articles or substances and, in addition, many will have duties as members of one of the classes of persons quoted in the Article.
An ‘article for use at work’ is defined as:
(a)
any plant (machinery, equipment or appliance) designed for use or operation (whether exclusively or note) by persons at work, and
(b)
any article designed for use as a component in any such plant.
A ‘substance for use at work’ is any natural or artificial substance whether in solid or liquid form or in the form of a gas or vapour intended for use (whether exclusively or not) by persons at work.
Article 7 (1)
‘It shall be the duty of any person who designs, manufacturers, imports or supplies any article for use at work —
(a)
to ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, that the article is so designed and constructed as to be safe and without risks to health when properly used;
(b)
to carry out or arrange for the carrying out of such testing and examination as may be necessary for the performance of the duty imposed on him by sub-paragraph (a);
(c)
to take such steps as are necessary to secure that there will be available in connection with the use of the article at work adequate information about the use for which it is designed and has been tested, and about any conditions necessary to endure that, when put to that use, it will be safe and without risks to health.’
Article 7(2)
‘It shall be the duty of any person who undertakes the design or manufacture of any article for use at work to carry out or arrange for the carrying out of any necessary research with a view to the discovery and, so far as is reasonably practicable, the elimination or minimisation of any risks to health or safety to which the design or article may give rise.’
Article 7(3)
‘It shall be the duty of any person who erects or installs any article for use at work in any premises where that article is to be used by persons at work to ensure, so far  as is reasonably practicable, that nothing about the way in which it is erected or installed makes it unsafe or a risk to health when properly used.’
Article 7(4)
‘It shall be the duty of any person who manufactures, imports or supplies any substance for use at work —
(a)
to ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, that the substance is safe and without risks to health when properly used;
(b)
to carry out or arrange for the carrying out of such testing and examination as may be necessary for the performance of the duty imposed on him by sub-paragraph (a);
(c)
to take such steps as are necessary to secure that there will be available in connection with the use of the substance at work adequate information about the results of any relevant tests which have been carried out on or in connection with the substance and about any conditions necessary to ensure that it will be safe and without risks to health when properly used.’
Article 7(5)
‘It shall be the duty of any person who undertakes the manufacture of any substance for use at work to carry out or arrange for the carrying out of any necessary research with a view to the discovery and, so far as is reasonably practicable, the elimination or minimisation of any risks to health or safety to which the substance may give rise.’
Article 7(6)
‘Nothing in the provisions of this Article shall be taken to require a person to repeat any testing, examination or research which has been carried out otherwise than by him or at his instance, in so far as it is reasonable for him to rely on the results thereof for the purposes of those provisions.’
Article 7(7)
‘Any duty imposed on any person by any of the preceding provisions of this Article shall extend only to things done in the course of a trade, business or other undertaking carried on by him (whether for profit or not) and to matters within his control.’
Article 7(8)
‘Where a person designs, manufactures, imports or supplies an article for or to another on the basis of a written undertaking by that other to take specified steps sufficient to ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, that the article will be safe and without risks to health when  properly used, the undertaking shall have the effect of relieving the first-mentioned person from the duty imposed by paragraph (1)(a) to such extent as is reasonable having regard to the terms of the undertaking.’
Article 7(9)
‘Where a person (‘the ostensible supplier’) supplies any article for use at work or substance for use at work to another (‘the customer’) under a hire-purchase agreement, conditional sale agreement or credit-sale agreement, and the ostensible supplier —
(a)
carries on the business of financing the acquisition of goods by others by means of such agreements; and
(b)
in the course of that business acquired his interest in the article or substance supplied to the customer as a means of financing its acquisition by the customer from a third person (‘the effective supplier’),
the effective supplier and not the ostensible supplier shall be treated for the purposes of this Article as supplying the article or substance to the customer, and any duty imposed by this Article on suppliers shall accordingly fall on the effective supplier and not on the ostensible supplier.’
Article 7(10)
‘For the purposes of this Article an article or substance is not to be regarded as properly used where it is used without regard to any relevant information or advice relating to its use which has been made available by a person by whom it was designed, manufactured, imported or supplied.’
DUTY NOT TO MISUSE
Article 9 places a duty on all persons, whether employers, employees, or self-employed, and states ‘No person shall intentionally or recklessly interfere with or misuse anything provided in the interests of health, safety or welfare in pursuance of any of the relevant statutory provisions.’
ENFORCEMENT
Responsibility for enforcing health and safety at work legislation will rest with the Government Departments concerned unless other bodies are specifically made responsible by enactments for enforcement in certain circumstances.
District councils will continue to exercise their present enforcement responsibilities.
If an inspector discovers a contravention of one of the provisions of the existing legislation or a contravention of a provision of the Order he can:
issue a prohibition notice if there is a risk of serious personal injury, to stop the activity giving rise to this risk, until the remedial action specified in the notice has been taken.
It can be served on the person undertaking the activity, or on a person in control of it at the time the notice was served.
(Article 24)
issue an improvement notice to remedy the fault within a specified time.
This notice would be served on the person who is deemed to be contravening the provision and this could include any person on whom responsibilities are placed, whether he is an employer, an employed person, or a supplier of equipment or materials.
(Article 23)
seize, render harmless or destroy any substance or article that he considers to be the cause of imminent danger of serious personal injury.
(Article 27)
prosecute any person contravening health and safety legislation either instead of, or in addition to, serving a notice.
Contravention of some of the requirements can lead to prosecution in a court of summary jurisdiction.
Contravention of other provisions can result in prosecution either summarily or on indictment.
The maximum fine, on summary conviction, for certain offences is £2,000.
There is no limit to the fine on conviction on indictment.
Imprisonment for up to two years can be imposed for certain offences.
In addition to any other penalty, the Court can make an Order requiring the cause of the offence to be remedied.
If a person on whom an improvement or prohibition notice is served fails to comply with it, he is liable to prosecution, and failure to comply with a prohibition notice could lead to imprisonment.
A person on whom a notice is served may appeal against the notice, or any terms of it, to an industrial tribunal.
CORPORATE BODIES
The Order does not include separate provision for liability of certain officers of a corporate body in the case of an offence  by the body against the Order.
Section 20(2) of the Interpretation Act (Northern Ireland) 1954 applies to this matter.
THE HEALTH AND SAFETY AGENCY FOR NORTHERN IRELAND
The Health and Safety Agency (established under Article 12) consists of a Chairman and not less than six nor more than nine other members.
These members are appointed by the Head of the Department of Economic Development after consultation with appropriate organisations, including organisations representing employers and employees.
The Agency will be a main focus of initiative for matters relating to health and safety at work.
Its principal functions are:
to review, and where appropriate to make recommendations to Government Departments concerned on, the advancement of the general purposes of the Order and the provision of information and advisory services;
to make recommendations to Government Departments concerned on enforcement policies, on special investigations and inquires, and on the making of health and safety regulations;
to arrange for, and encourage others in, research and the provision of training and information;
to prepare and issue codes of practice and approve codes prepared by others;
generally to promote health and safety at work.
(Article 13)
FURTHER INFORMATION
Further information and advice on the provisions of the Health and Safety at Work (Northern Ireland) Order 1978 may be obtained from the Health and Safety Agency for Northern Ireland  
APPENDIX
Existing health and safety at work legislation
Provisions listed in the second column below and those of regulations etc. made under them, remain in existence until replaced by regulations made under the Order.
A full list of the current leaflets published by the Health and Safety Agency is available free from:
Advice to employees
Health and Safety Agency for Northern Ireland
Health & Safety at Work (Northern Ireland) Order 1978)
This leaflet is not an authoritative interpretation of the law, but is intended to help employed people to understand their duties and obligations and also to advise them of the protection the Order gives to them.
INTRODUCTION
The Health and Safety at Work (Northern Ireland) Order 1978 provides a legislative framework to promote, stimulate and encourage high standards of health and safety at work.
The general purposes of the Order are:—
(a)
to secure the health, safety and welfare of persons at work;
(b)
to protect persons other than persons at work against risks to health or safety arising out of or in connection with the activities of persons at work;
(c)
to control the keeping and use of explosive or highly flammable or otherwise dangerous substances, and generally to prevent the unlawful acquisition, possession and use of such substances.
The main provisions of the existing Acts covering health and safety, and regulations made under them, will be retained but will be amended, revised or repealed as necessary over a period of years.
The aim of the Order is to involve everyone — management and workpeople — and to make them all aware of the importance of safety and health.
Large groups of workers are already covered by legislation for the prevention of accidents and ill-health at work.
The Order increases protection and cover and also embraces about two hundred thousand people who were not previously protected.
The Order also protects the general public from work dangers.
DUTIES OF EMPLOYERS
The general duties of employers to their employees are set down in Article 4 of the Order.
Article 4(1)
‘It shall be the duty of every employer to ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, the health, safety and welfare at work of all his employees.’
Article 4(2) (a)
‘the provision and maintenance of plant and systems of work that are, so far as is reasonably practicable, safe and without risks to health.’
This is a general requirement covering all plant, which the Order defines as including any machinery, equipment or  appliance.
It does not supersede the more detailed and specific provisions covering certain equipment contained in existing legislation, but it goes beyond such provisions in requiring a more wide-ranging assessment of risk.
Article 4(2) (b)
‘arrangements for ensuring, so far as is reasonably practicable, safety and absence of risks to health in connection with the use, handling, storage and transport of articles and substances.’
This sub-paragraph is concerned with materials and artificial substances, whether in solid or liquid form or in the form of a gas or vapour, so that the sub-paragraph covers everything used at work and all work activities.
Article 4(2) (c)
‘the provision of such information, instruction, training and supervision as is necessary to ensure, so far as is reasonably practicable, the health and safety at work of his employees.’
Article 4(2) (d)
‘so far as is reasonably practicable as regards any place of work under the employer's control, the maintenance of it in a condition that is safe and without risks to health and the provision and maintenance of means of access to and egress from it that are safe and without such risks.’
Examples of problems covered by this Article are given in ‘The Order outlined’ and in more detail in ‘Advice to employers’in this series of leaflets (see page 10).
No charge may be levied on any employee for anything done or provided to meet any specific requirement of health and safety at work legislation.
(Article 10)
DUTIES OF MANUFACTURERS AND SUPPLIERS
Article 7
places duties on persons who design, manufacture, import or supply articles fur use at work.
They are required to ensure so far as is reasonably practicable that any plant (machinery, equipment or appliance) is so designed and constructed as to be safe and without risk to health.
They must also carry out any testing or examination necessary to achieve this and they must ensure that adequate information will be available about the use for which it was designed and about any conditions necessary for its safe use.
A person who erects  or installs such plant must ensure that the installation is not unsafe or a risk to health.
A person who  manufactures , imports or supplies any substance for use at work must ensure that, so far as is reasonably practicable, it is safe and without risk to health; there are requirements for testing, examination and research.
He must also ensure that there is adequate information available about this and about any conditions necessary to ensure that it will be safe and without risks to health when properly used.
EMPLOYEES
The duties placed on ‘employed persons’ are in Articles 8, 9 and 22 of the Order.
Article 8
‘It shall be the duty of every employee while at work —
(a)
to take reasonable care for the health and safety of himself and of other persons who may be affected by his acts or omissions at work; and
(b)
as regards any duty or requirement imposed on his employer or any other person by or under any of the relevant statutory provisions, to co-operate with him so far as is necessary to enable that duty or requirement to be performed or complied with.
DUTY NOT TO MISUSE
Article 9
places a duty on all persons, whether they be employers, employees or self-employed.
‘No person shall intentionally or recklessly interfere with or misuse anything provided in the interests of health, safety or welfare in pursuance of any of the relevant statutory provisions.’
POWER OF INSPECTORS
The new legislation requires a closer relationship between employers and inspectors.
The powers of an inspector to enable him to undertake his duties are given in Article 22.
They include power to enter, at any reasonable time, any premises which he has reason to believe it is necessary for him to enter for the purpose of carrying into effect any of the legal provisions within the field of responsibility of his enforcing authority.
He may take with him any duly authorised person and any equipment he needs and he may take measurements, photographs and recordings that are necessary for any examination or investigation.
He may take samples and can require any person to give him information relevant to his examination or investigation, to answer questions and to sign a declaration of the truth of the answers.
He can require any person to afford him such facilities and assistance, within that person's control or responsibilities, as are necessary to enable the inspector to exercise any of the powers conferred on him.
An inspector is appointed in writing by his enforcing authority and must when required to do so produce a copy of his written appointment.
Duties are placed on inspectors by Article 30(8) to disclose certain information to persons employed at premises to which the Order applies to assist in keeping such persons adequately informed about matters likely to affect their health, safety and welfare.
This duty is in addition to that placed on the employer by Article 4(2) (c)(see page 4) and may include factual information obtained by the inspector which relates to the premises, or anything being done there, and information with respect to any action which he has taken or proposes to take in, or in connection with, the premises.
The inspector is required to give the employer the same information as he gives to the employed person.
ENFORCEMENT
DRIVERS see AND BE SEEN
FREE VEHICLE LIGHTING CHECKS at any participating garage 18–22 NOV 1991
FREE VEHICLE LIGHTING CHECK
WINTER NIGHTS AND FAULTY LIGHTS
can result in fatal accidents or serious injuries and, at the very least, cause severe damage to vehicles.
They could also involve you in heavy financial commitments.
Remember, it is illegal to drive a vehicle with impaired lighting.
You can be prosecuted and fined.
WHY YOU SHOULD HAVE YOUR LIGHTS CHECKED
The lights on your vehicle not only help you see, but let other drivers see you, both at night and in poor visibility during the day.
SO, BE SAFE…
AND BE SURE
Get your lights checked this winter.
Checks FREE at any garage participating in the ‘SEE AND BE SEEN’ campaign — 18–22 November 1991.
The new law on seat belt wearing for adults
Belt up in the back
Wearing a seat belt saves lives
Wearing a seat belt in the front seat of a car has been the law since 1983.
This has saved at least 200 deaths and 7000 serious injuries each year.
In 1989, it became the law for children under 14 to be restrained in the rear seats of cars.
In the first year it is estimated that the new law saved 200 children from being killed or seriously injured.
The new legislation is expected to save up to 100 lives and 1000 serious injuries every year.
The new law
From 1 July 1991 the new seat belt law means seat belts MUST be worn by adults in the back , as well in the front, if they are fitted and available.
If you are a passenger in the rear of a car or taxi with seat belts fitted and available, you MUST wear one.
It is not only your life which is at risk if you do not wear an available seat belt.
You are also risking the lives of the driver and other passengers.
Adults sitting in the rear seats of cars without wearing a seat belt can be thrown forward in an accident, crushing those in front.
If you do not wear an available seat belt, you are liable to a fixed penalty or a fine if the case goes to court.
Who is responsible for ensuring rear seat passengers wear their seat belts?
You are, if you are an adult passenger.
The driver , if the passengers are children under 14.
Which vehicles does the new law affect?
Cars and taxis.
What if there aren't enough seat belts available?
The law does not require all passengers to be restrained, only those where appropriate restraints are available.
There is no preference in the law between an adult or a child in the use of the available seat belts but it is safer for the adult to be restrained.
Heavier passengers will cause greater injury to others in an accident if they are not wearing a seat belt.
If no appropriate child restraint is available for children aged 1 to 4 years old, it is safer for them to wear an adult belt alone, rather than no restraint at all.
But this is not a legal requirement.
Summary of the law
Drivers and adult or child passengers in the front of cars MUST wear a seat belt.
Children under the age of one, travelling in the front of a car MUST be in an approved baby carrier designed for the baby's weight.
Passengers travelling in the rear of cars and taxis must be restrained where a seat belt is fitted and available.
For children between 1 and 4 years old, an appropriate child seat, or a booster cushion with the adult seat belt, must be used.
Children under one must be in an approved infant carrier designed for the baby's size and weight, or a carrycot restrained by straps.
Approved child restraints must carry the BS ‘Kitemark’ or United Nations ‘E’Mark.
Exemptions from the new law
Passengers in cars and taxis which do not have rear seat belts fitted.
For medical reasons.
Contact your doctor if you think you should not wear a seat belt on medical grounds.
Details of other specific exemptions are included in the Regulations.
Further Information
To find out more about the fitting and wearing of seat belts and road safety in general, please contact your Road Safety Officer through your local Council, or, in Scotland, through your Regional Council offices.
For details about free medical examinations for a medical exemption certificate, please write to 
This leaflet is only a general guide to the new law which is set out in ‘The Motor Vehicles (Wearing of Seat Belts in Rear Seats by Adults) Regulations 1991.’
A copy of the Regulations is available from Her Majesty's Stationery Office or through booksellers who can also supply the Regulations about front seat belt wearing and child rear seat passengers.
Remember, belt up in the back
SAFETY ON THE MOVE
DIRECTORY OF SERVICES
TRAINING & EMPLOYMENT AGENCY
HELPING YOU SUCCEED — THAT'S OUR JOB
DIRECTORY OF SERVICES INTRODUCTION
The Training and Employment Agency, which began operation on 2 April 1990, is the body responsible for the administration and delivery of all Government training programmes in Northern Ireland.
The purpose of this Directory is to bring together in one publication, information on the range of services provided and clear guidance on how to get further advice on the use of those services.
The Directory aims to be simple and helpful in keeping potential customers, both in industry and the general public, informed about who to contact in the Agency to discuss its programmes, schemes and services.
We hope you will find the Directory useful.
Should you have any difficulty finding the information you require or should you require information not covered by the Directory please ring 0800 262261.
Inquiries about this Guide should be directed to    
COMMUNITY EMPLOYMENT
The Training and Employment Agency provides community based work under the following schemes.
1.
ACTION FOR COMMUNITY EMPLOYMENT (ACE) SCHEME
ACE provides temporary employment of up to one year's duration for long-term unemployed adults on projects of community benefit.
Through the work experience gained and training provided, participants should be able to compete more effectively for available permanent jobs.
Projects may be sponsored by individuals or organisations such as community associations, voluntary or charitable bodies, the churches, local authorities and public or private companies.
While projects must meet certain criteria, a wide range of activities can be undertaken.
These currently include environmental improvements, community services and youth work.
Sponsors, as the employers of the ACE workers, are paid grants towards wage costs and overheads.
Where 20 or more workers are employed, a core staff grant is paid to ensure effective management and administration of the project.
2.
ACE ENTERPRISE SCHEME (AES)
AES assists ACE participants prepare for self-employment.
While still employed by their ACE sponsor, successful applicants are given help to develop their business ideas, carry out market research, produce a business plan and undertake suitable enterprise training.
They may also trade commercially for a period not exceeding 13 weeks, during the course of their ACE employment.
3.
COMMUNITY VOLUNTEERING SCHEME (CVS)
Under CVS, unemployed people between the ages of 16 and 64 can undertake a wide range of voluntary activities for the good of the community without loss of Benefits.
Projects are sponsored by community associations, voluntary or charitable bodies and local authorities.
The work undertaken by the projects can be, for example, of an environmental, social or community service nature.
It has, however, to be of benefit to the volunteers and to the community at large.
For further information on any of these Schemes, contact the Community Projects Customer Information Officer at any of the following addresses.
CONSULTANCY AND ADVISORY SERVICE
The role of the Consultancy and Advisory Service is to work in partnership with local industry and commerce to raise the level of awareness and commitment to training as a key element in improving business competitiveness.
The Service provides general advice to companies on all aspects of training including identification of needs and sources of training and the complete range of Agency schemes and services.
Further information on the range of services provided can be obtained from:
THE EDUCATION AND TRAINING INSPECTORATE
The role of the Inspectorate is to promote the highest standards of education and training and of professional practice in training organisations.
This reflects the concern of Government that standards are consistent across all providers whether in the education system or the training service.
Further information can be obtained from the Inspectorate at:
EMPLOYMENT SERVICE
The Training and Employment Agency is responsible for providing an all age guidance and placement service, careers advice and information on training opportunities.
It can provide special help for the long term unemployed and also for disabled people.
The Agency offers employers a fast and efficient recruitment service.
Staff can help with the issue of application forms, shortlisting suitable candidates and interviewing facilities can be provided.
For further information on these services telephone 0800 262261, or contact any of the following offices.
TRAVEL TO INTERVIEW SCHEME
Unemployed people can be helped with the cost of attending job interviews which are more than ten miles from their homes.
For more information contact your local Training and Employment Agency Office,(see pages 7–9) or telephone 0800 262261.
JOBCLUBS
Long term unemployed people can be given practical help with their job hunting efforts.
Jobclubs can give guidance on how to apply for jobs, interviewing techniques etc.
They also provide telephone, typing and photocopying facilities.
Telephone or call at:
EMPLOYMENT REHABILITATION UNIT (ERU)
Disabled persons are given a vocational assessment and are provided with rehabilitation services.
Contact the Customer Information Officer ERU at  
ENTERPRISE SCHEMES
The Training and Employment Agency operates the following schemes aimed at helping people to start their own businesses.
Enterprise Allowance Scheme
Graduate Enterprise Programme
New Enterprise Programme
Get Ready for Business
GRANTS TO EMPLOYERS
Sectoral Policy and Appraisal
This branch of the agency administer the Manpower Training Scheme which is aimed at assisting companies with their adult training requirements.
For further information contact the customer information officer at:
Information on the job introduction scheme and capital grants for adaptations to premises and equipment for the employment of disabled persons can be obtained by contacting the Disablement Employment Adviser at your nearest Training & Employment Agency office (see pages 7–9)
OPEN LEARNING
Open Learning offers a flexible and cost effective alternative to traditional training methods.
It is a recognised method of training in all the schemes of training assistance offered by the Training and Employment Agency.
There is a specific Open Learning Scheme which can assist organisations in areas of training not already covered by existing schemes of assistance.
Open Learning Grants for training are available to all companies in the manufacturing and construction industries, hotel and catering establishments and firms engaged in tradeable services.
The Agency has also funded the establishment of a number of Open Learning Access Centres in Belfast and Londonderry.
These can provide training  in a wide range of subjects and skills, and are specifically aimed at the unemployed, disabled individuals or people wishing to return to the workforce following a period of absence.
Training and advice on Open Learning generally can also be provided (for corporate customers).
For further information contact the Customer Information Officer at:
SKILLS TRAINING
The Training and Employment Agency offers to companies a grant towards the achievement by individuals of recognised standards of training in certain craft based skills.
Further information, contact the Customer Information Officer at 
JOB TRAINING PROGRAMME
The Job Training Programme offers an individually tailored workplace based programme of direct training and practical work experience to longer term unemployed adults.
It is delivered by a network of Managing Agents.
For further information contact the Customer Information Officer at:
LICENSING OF EMPLOYMENT AGENCIES
The Customer Information Officer can tell you how to apply for a licence in order to meet current statutory requirements.
Contact:
MANAGEMENT TRAINING
The Agency's Management Development Division organises and sponsors courses for those entering management for the first time, those already in management and those wishing to take up a management position after a period of unemployment.
Management schemes administered by the Division include:
Industrial Scholarship Scheme
Junior Management Development Programme
Bridge Programme
Management Extension Programme
Export Marketing Training Programme
For further information ask for the Management Training Customer Information Officer at:
SPECIAL PROJECTS
Special Projects Branch acts as an administering agent for the International Fund for Ireland's wider horizons programme in Northern Ireland.
This programme aims to promote economic and social advancement and to encourage reconciliation between the two traditions.
The Branch also monitors and co-ordinates the Agency's contribution to the making Belfast work and Londonderry regeneration initiative programmes.
Further information can be obtained from the customer information officer at 
TRAINING CENTRES
These Centres provide training for adults and young people.
They also provide industry with specialist services including ‘in company’ training, product development and assistance with research and development projects.
Further information about the services available can be obtained by contacting your nearest Training Centre.
They are located at:
VOCATIONAL QUALIFICATIONS UNIT
The Unit provides information on nationally recognised vocational qualifications and liaises with the National Council for Vocational Qualifications and the Training Education and Enterprise Directorate of the Employment Department.
Further information can be obtained from VQU Customer Information at:
WORK PERMITS
Employers can receive assistance with work permits for non EC Citizens taking up employment in Northern Ireland.
Contact the Work Permits Customer Information Officer at:
YOUTH TRAINING PROGRAMME (YTP)
The Youth Training Programme offers an integrated two year programme of full time training and training with employment to all 16 and 17 year olds in Northern Ireland.
Training is provided through training organisations which have fully satisfied the YTP quality training criteria.
For details of the Youth Training Programme, contact the YTP Customer Information Officer at:
ENTERPRISE ULSTER
Enterprise Ulster provides training and work related experience for long term unemployed adults.
The training and work programmes last from 6 to 12 months and are broadly based, ranging from construction, engineering to clerical, information technology etc.
For further information, telephone or call at:
Northern Ireland Driving Licence Application/Renewal Form
This Form should be used to apply for an ordinary driving licence and for entitlement to drive Large Goods Vehicles (LGVs) and/or Passenger Carrying Vehicles (PCVs).
Please read the notes before filling in the application form on pages 3 and 4.
They are intended as a guide to applicants and should be detached from the Application form.
The notes do not set out the full legal requirements.
Please keep them until you receive your licence.
Notes
Note A. About yourself
For driver licensing purposes you are asked to declare your main forename.
If this is not your first name, then you may give the name by which you are normally called .
Only the main forename you declare will be printed on the licence.
You should give your permanent Northern Ireland address.
Please note that a Club, Hotel or Post Office address is not acceptable ,unless you live there permanently.
You must give your correct date of birth, because in many cases it will affect the validity of your licence.
You should state your ‘Town of Birth’ if known.
Driver Number : You will only have a Driver Number if you have already been issued with a New Style (10 Year type) licence.
This number will be personal to you and will remain your Driver Identity for as long as you are entitled to drive.
You should make a note of it and always quote it in any application or enquiries about your driving licence.
Note B. Licence needed
Start Date
A licence will normally start on the date on which a valid application is received or after the expiry of the previous licence if later.
When applying in advance you may indicate a start date (eg birthday).
An application will be accepted up to 2 months before the date the licence is required.
Provisional Licence Entitlement
You should apply for a provisional licence for the categories of vehicles you want to drive (if you have not already passed a driving test for these categories).
You may not need a provisional licence if you hold a full licence which states that it may be used as a provisional licence for driving other categories.
If you are applying for your first provisional licence you must not drive until you get it.
Large Goods and Passenger Carrying Vehicles
Before learning to drive these vehicles you need to have provisional entitlement added to your ordinary driving licence — see Note H .
Full Licence
You may apply for a full licence if:
you have passed a UK driving test during the last 2 years; or
you have held a full Northern Ireland or Great Britain licence during the last 10 years; or
you hold a valid full licence issued by an EC member state or certain designated countries — read Notes K and L .
If this is your first application for a full licence you must send your test pass certificate with the application.
Duplicate
A duplicate licence is issued to replace a valid licence which has been lost, stolen or defaced.
The duplicate will be a copy of the original licence, including any endorsement, and will be valid for the same period.
A recent facial photograph must be sent with the application.
If a lost licence is later found you should continue to use the new licence and the old one must be returned to the Department of the Environment (NI) Driver Licensing Central Office — see Notes G and F .
Additional Category Licence
A full licence holder who has passed a test for an additional vehicle category may have that category added to his/her entitlement but a new licence will have to be issued.
If you need to have an additional vehicle category added, you should enclose with the application the test pass certificate for that category together with your current licence, a recent facial photograph and the appropriate fee (see Note F ).
Optional Renewal
If you would prefer to renew your licence starting a new period, rather than have a duplicate or replacement showing the same period as the original licence, you may do so on payment of the full licence fee.
The renewal licence will commence on the date your application is received in the Driver Licensing Central Office.
Exchange
See Notes K and L .
Note C. Disqualifications and Endorsements
You should give details of all disqualifications.
If there is not enough space, continue on a separate sheet.
You should also give details of all endorsements (without disqualification).
If there is not enough space, continue on a separate sheet.
If you were disqualified for more than 12 months (in certain cases 12 months or more) you can only get a provisional licence until you pass your driving test again.
Endorsements normally remain on a licence for 2 years.
If you were disqualified from driving, this two year period starts when the period of disqualification has ended.
If you were disqualified and must pass the driving test again the two year period begins when you pass the test.
If you hold a full Great Britain licence but are currently disqualified in GB you may only apply for a provisional licence.
Note D. Health
If you have had a licence refused or revoked for medical reasons your application may still be considered.
If you have a limb disability you may still be entitled to a licence, but there may be certain restrictions.
You must declare and give details of any condition likely to affect your fitness as a driver.
Conditions such as diabetes, heart complaints, multiple sclerosis and alcoholism should be declared.
These are only examples.
If a declaration is made the issue of a licence will be subject to a medical recommendation from the Department's Medical Adviser.
Please note that higher medical standards apply if you are requesting Large Goods and/or Passenger Carrying Vehicle Entitlement.
You must tell the Department if you become aware that you are suffering from a disease or physical disability not previously disclosed or which has been disclosed but has become more severe.
Note E. Eyesight
It is an offence to drive when your eyesight is not up to the required standard.
If you need glasses or contact lenses to reach the eyesight standard, you must wear them each time you drive.
Please note that a higher standard is required if you are applying for Large Goods and/or Passenger Carrying Vehicle entitlement.
Continued overleaf
Note F. Fees
A list of current fees for driving licences is on display in Local Vehicle Licensing Offices or you may phone the Enquiries Section at Driver Licensing Central Office  for details.
If you hold a valid DLCO provisional licence it will normally be converted to full entitlement free of charge when you pass the test.
PAYMENT: Cheques and Postal Orders should be made payable to ‘The Department of the Environment for Northern Ireland’ and crossed ‘Driving Licence Account’.
You should print your name and address on the back of the cheque or postal order.
NOTE: Cash or bank notes should NOT be sent unless by registered post.
Note G. Photographs
You must enclose with your application one recent facial photograph of yourself, approx 40 mm × 35 mm, with your name and address on the back.
You may be asked for a replacement photograph if the one you supply is of poor quality.
Note H. LVG and PCV Licences
If you wish to drive Large Goods Vehicles over 7.5 tonnes maximum authorised mass, or Passenger Carrying Vehicles for hire or reward, you must hold a licence indicating entitlement to drive those vehicles.
If you do not hold such a licence you may apply for Provisional LCG/PCV entitlement to be added to your ordinary licence provided it contains full car entitlement.
See also Note D .
If you are a driver with a full licence giving LGV or PCV entitlement and that licence was issued outside the European Community you may only drive an LGV or PCV which has been brought temporarily into the United Kingdom.
If you are a driver with a full licence giving LGV or PCV entitlement and that licence was issued by another Member State you may continue to use that licence for up to 12 months from taking up residence in the UK.
If you wish to drive for longer than 12 months you must apply for a UK licence within 12 months of becoming resident.
Note J. Categories
Category Definitions — The old driving groups have now changed to categories in line with European Community practice 
Description of Vehicle Categories
Motor bicycle (with or without sidecar) or scooter
Moped
Motor car & light goods vehicles up to 9 seats/3.5 tonnes not for hire or reward
As above fitted with automatic transmission
Motor tricycle or 3 wheeled car or van up to 500 kg
Large Goods Vehicles
Goods Vehicles with maximum mass exceeding 3.5 tonnes but tonnes not more than 7.5
Large Passenger Carrying Vehicles
Passenger Carrying Vehicles with more than 8 but not more than 16 passenger seats
Large Trailers
Agricultural tractor
Road roller
Tracked vehicle
Invalid carriage
Mowing machine, Pedestrian controlled vehicle
Electrically propelled vehicle
Vehicle exempt from excise duty
Notes:
1.
16 years is the minimum age to drive a car by a person receiving mobility allowance for disability.
2.
16 years old for small agricultural tractor mounted on wheels and specially licensed or exempt from vehicle excise duty.
Any trailer drawn must have 2 wheels (or 4 close coupled).
Tractors and trailers must not be over 2.45 m wide.
Minimum age for larger tractors is 17 years.
3.
Vehicles up to 3 wheels and not over 410 kg unladen.
*On passing test for this category licence holder will receive entitlement to
Category C1 — for rigid goods vehicles between 3.5 and 7.5 tonnes.
Category D1 —(not for hire or reward)— for passenger carrying vehicles with between 9 and 16 passenger seats which may not be used for hire or reward.
Category E — trailer combination.
Definitions
‘Moped’ a motor cycle which does not exceed: Maximum design speed 30 mph, kerbside weight 250 kg, cylinder capacity (if applicable) 50 cc.
If first used before 1 September 1978 it must also be equipped with pedals by which it can be propelled.
‘Small Agricultural Tractor’— unladen weight not more than 2550 kg may be driven in the course of agricultural operations on any road which is not a restricted road or on any road (other than a Special Road) while taking or going to and from a driving test.
‘Small Road roller’— not steam powered, unladen weight not over 11.68 tonnes, not made to carry loads and with metal or hard roller.
Note K. Visitors to Northern Ireland
You may use your valid national licence or international driving permit but not for more than 1 year from the date of entry into the UK.
Note L. New Residents in Northern Ireland
As a new resident in Northern Ireland you must obtain a Northern Ireland licence .
For convenience you may use a valid licence from your country of origin during the first year .
Within the first year of residence you should make arrangements to obtain a Northern Ireland licence and you may need to take a driving test before a licence can be granted.
Licences from certain designated countries will exempt you from the need to take a driving test.
For full details contact  and as for‘Driver enquiries’.
Note M. Completed forms
Completed Applications should be posted to 
Remember to detach these notes and send only pages 3 and 4 of the application form.
NB The new licence will give you the opportunity to consent to donating any organs you may wish for transplant purposes in the event of your death.
Note N. Further information
If you need more information about driving licence matters you should contact  and ask for ‘Driver Enquiries’.
Now fill in the application form on pages 3 and 4 and detach these Notes .