

Law Making: Politics and Structure
I
Between 1948 and 1991 Parliament passed eight substantive Criminal Justice Acts for England and Wales, one Criminal Law Act which was close enough in content to the specifically criminal justice legislation to be similarly classified, four Scottish Criminal Justice Acts, and several acts dealing with criminal justice administration, international co-operation and minor matters requiring legislation.
Details are shown in Tables 1 and 2.
The result of this legislative output has been the creation of a statutory framework for the administration of criminal justice and the sentencing and treatment of offenders.
In the main the structure is permissive; with some exceptions, setting limits on what can be done rather than laying down by law what must be done.
Successive acts have altered the shape of the structure; either by adding bits on (parole, community service orders, compensation orders, contract prisons), or, less often, by taking bits off (corporal punishment, detention centres, partly suspended sentences, the remand of juveniles to prison).
Other statutes created new offences, amended penalties, re-organized the structure of the courts, re-classified the types of offence tried in them, defined the powers of the police, and set up an independent prosecution service.
If the results did not always work out in the way intended, the blame for the failings of the criminal justice system cannot be attributed to any lack of zeal to legislate.
Although there was no causal connection between the two trends, it became evident that as the volume of legislation increased, public confidence in the ways of bringing offenders to justice and punishing the guilty declined.
Apart from the designated criminal justice legislation, the statutes discussed in the narrative of this book include: the Murder (Abolition of Death Penalty) Act 1965, the Courts Act 1971, the Bail Act 1976, the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984, the Prosecution of Offenders Act 1985, the Public Order Act 1986, and the War Crimes Act 1991.
Each of these measures was confined to a single area of policy, dispute over which sometimes crossed party political lines, as with the abolition of capital punishment and the legislation to enable the prosecution of a handful of elderly men against whom there might be evidence of war crimes committed half a century earlier outside the jurisdiction of the United Kingdom courts.
Certain acts, for example the re-organization of the higher courts in which indictable offences are tried, and the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984, stemmed from Royal Commissions or similar forms of independent inquiry.
What distinguishes the series of Criminal Justice Acts is the comprehensiveness with which they bring together a range of generally disparate proposals, originating from different sources, bearing on the content of the criminal law, the powers and procedure of the courts, and the treatment (in the widest sense) of offenders.
While not necessarily dealing with the most important, nor the most contentious, matters, the criminal justice legislation, by virtue of its comprehensiveness and regularity, suggests more of a systematic approach to keeping in good repair the administration of justice and the working of the penal system than can be substantiated by events.
A conclusion which emerges clearly in the account that follows is how the addition of fresh elements can dilute the purity of the original concept, sometimes leading to unexpected results.
What, then, are the characteristics of the legislative process in this context?
Once introduced, always at the initiative of the Government, Criminal Justice Bills are rolling stones gathering accretions as they travel down the Westminster hillside towards their final destination on the statute book.
Some of the clauses may be abandoned and others amended, but much more is added than is taken away.
The very existence of a bill, invariably with a broad scope, attracts numerous proposals for amendments and additions.
Table 1 contrasts the length of the bills on introduction and at enactment.
When it obtained the Royal Assent, the Criminal Justice Act 1988 had expanded to 173 Sections and sixteen schedules, half as long again as the Bill which had its First Reading in November 1986, allowing for the separate provisions of the 1987 Act.
The reason why the original bill was split into two Criminal Justice Acts is explained in Chapter 4.
Long drawn out and unpredictable as the process may be, it has one great advantage for the policy-maker.
A regular cycle of multi-purpose bills permits adjustments in criminal law and practice to be made without the necessity for each change to have its own bill.
An element of public accountability can also be identified in the recurrent attentions of elected Members of Parliament.
The period of time a bill is before Parliament determines how long the window of opportunity to legislate on criminal justice matters remains open.
Once closed, the Home Office will fall back on the well-worn refrain that legislation is required to make a surprisingly large number of the proposals that are put forward, and that no Parliamentary time is available.
The forum in which the legislation is first introduced is usually the House of Commons, although bills can be introduced in either House of Parliament.
It is curious that the House of Commons is not seen to better advantage during the passage of legislation on criminal justice.
In theory it should afford a text-book instance of the Executive, in the form of the Home Secretary, bringing before Parliament a set of legislative proposals which have been painstakingly prepared by experienced officials in his Department, normally after testing opinion in advance by way of discussion documents and a White Paper.
Members of Parliament then have an opportunity to discuss and amend, accepting or rejecting the proposals in the light of what they consider to be the needs and desires of their constituents.
In reality, little more than the faintest outlines of such a legislative model can be detected.
A blurred shape is perceptible to those who look hard enough, but the process is more amorphous than the stereotype might suggest.
Despite the fact no-one doubts that popular opinions on crime and its containment are extensively and deeply held, whenever Criminal Justice Bills are before the Commons the atmosphere seems detached and wary, with few MPs participating and a majority keeping the subject at arms length.
Except on the big set-piece confrontations, the death penalty above all else, the debates are seldom well attended.
It is true that lengthy and detailed scrutiny takes place in a Standing Committee off the floor of the House, but even then it is typically the special interest groups, briefing Opposition spokesmen and Government backbenchers alike, which provide more of the dynamic than the representation of constituents' views.
Why this should be so is worth pondering.
Constituents may be vocal in demanding what are seen as cruder and more punitive measures than their MP feels comfortable with.
Few MPs are willing to risk antagonizing those upon whose electoral favour they depend, especially where there are no immediately apparent benefits to be earned by the espousal of penal policies in the way that policy changes in health, housing, social security, education and the environment can be of direct benefit to their constituents.
It is an over-simplification to say there are no votes in crime.
Ministers in particular are keenly aware that whereas it is uphill work to gain popular support for specific policies, it is very easy to lose public confidence in the way that crime is handled.
If we accept that public opinion broadly comes in two varieties: the popular and what can be regarded as the informed, each of the two strands is clearly visible whenever Parliament addresses the topic of criminal justice.
Although the House of Commons has always contained some MPs who take an informed interest in the subject, they are in a small minority, irrespective of Party allegiance, being heavily outnumbered by those who are guided more by what they sense to be the prevailing expectations of the public.
There is nothing wrong with this; the Commons is, after all, the nearest thing we have to a democratic assembly, but it does not make for thorough and well-informed debate.
Consequently it is just as well that the injection of expert opinion is one of the functions of the contemporary House of Lords.
As in the Commons, the scrutiny is provided by a relatively small number of peers, lacking in elective legitimacy, but justifying their Parliamentary role by bringing to bear special knowledge of criminal policy or the administration of justice.
By tradition, Lords of Appeal in Ordinary, current or retired, are not precluded from contributing the fruits of their judicial experience and legal expertise to debates in the Lords.
The Lord Chief Justice may on occasion put forward the views of the higher judiciary on the more important issues relating to the criminal law or sentencing in the course of a bill's progress, although his ability to attend is limited by the demands of his court.
Many other peers have experience as magistrates, as members of the Bar, or as solicitors.
A number have had responsibility for the operation of parts of the system of criminal justice, including former Home Office Ministers, retired senior civil servants and police officers, and chairmen of the Parole Board.
Members and supporters of the main penal reform groups are to be found in both Houses, but their presence is most felt in the Lords where some of their officers invariably sit.
Their work is supplemented by that of specialized bodies representing the interests of people such as the victims of crime and those professionally engaged in the administration of justice.
In the first category of penal reform groups come the National Association for the Care and Resettlement of Offenders (NACRO), the National Council for Civil Liberties (Liberty), the Howard League for Penal Reform, JUSTICE, and the Prison Reform Trust.
Examples of special interest groups are Victim Support (formerly known as the National Association for Victim Support Schemes), Parents of Murdered Children, the National Association of Prison Visitors, the National Association of Probation Officers, the National Association of Senior Probation Officers, the Association of Chief Officers of Probation, the Association of Chief Police Officers, the Superintendents' Association, the Police Federation, the Prison Governors' Association, and Prison Officers' Association.
Most of the national organizations have counterparts in Scotland.
Penal reform groups have a long and honourable history and have played an important part in the development of criminal justice policy over the years.
The high point was the abolition of capital punishment which, although finally decided by Parliament after free votes in both Houses in 1965 and 1969, would not have been possible but for the long campaign, outside Parliament as much as inside, mounted by the penal reformers of the day.
More generally in lobbying for changes in policy, by way of briefing MPs and peers and organizing publicity in the media, penal reform groups contribute to the prevailing climate of opinion which is of particular relevance in the pre-legislative stages.
Home Office officials maintain contact with them by attending conferences and meetings, and periodically on a closer and more continuing basis.
A good example can be found in a discussion group of civil servants, academics and penal reformers which met regularly throughout the 1980s.
The initiative in convening meetings at intervals of every two or three months was taken by David Faulkner while an Under-Secretary at the Prison Department in 1981, and continued during the eight years he was the Deputy Under-Secretary of State in charge of the Criminal and Statistical Departments and the Research and Planning Unit at the Home Office from 1982–90.
The focus was originally on prison subjects: a code of standards, justice in prisons, and the treatment and control of dangerous prisoners.
Both the focus and the composition of the group changed in 1982 on Faulkner's promotion to the Criminal Department, being joined inter alia by Bill Bohan, a knowledgeable Assistant Under-Secretary who headed the Criminal Policy Department from 1979 until his retirement in 1989, and the directors of the Cambridge Institute of Criminology and the Oxford Centre for Criminological Research, Professor Anthony Bottoms and Dr Roger Hood.
From then on the group concentrated on issues of sentencing, crime and the causes of criminality, and the criminal justice process.
One member would be invited to introduce a subject (agreed at the previous meeting), followed by a discussion for an hour or so before more general discussion over a buffet supper.
The existence of the group was not advertised, but no secret was made of it either.
Opinions were expressed openly and freely without any breach of confidence.
The group ceased meeting when Faulkner left the Criminal Department to become Principal Establishment Officer at the Home Office in 1990.
It was not the purpose of the meetings to produce or agree upon policy proposals; nor was there any attempt to do so.
They provided a sounding board, enabling the civil servants to keep abreast of the state of reformist opinion, and for the penal reform groups and academic researchers to obtain an insight into current thinking at the Home Office.
In the Parliamentary setting a similar function was performed an All-Party Penal Affairs Group.
Re-constituted in 1979, with a clerk provided by NACRO and administrative expenses funded by a grant from a charitable trust, MPs and peers from all the main political parties met to discuss current issues of criminal justice policy and practice.
Robert Kilroy-Silk, a Labour MP, was an energetic chairman until 1986, being followed by a Conservative,(Sir) John Wheeler.
Political differences were minimized and a wide variety of outside speakers invited to address the group at monthly intervals when Parliament was sitting, normally in a House of Commons Committee Room.
Out of a nominal membership of seventy, the attendance at meetings averaged fifteen in 1991, rising to the mid or high twenties on occasions of particular interest.
This is a larger and more active membership than most other all-party groups can claim.
Four reports were published, backed up by a series of duplicated reports which were circulated to interested parties.
Unlike Faulkner's discussion group, the Parliamentarians could and did agitate for action to be taken on certain issues for which there was all party support.
Its greatest achievement was in devising, and later revising, criteria for the custodial sentencing of young offenders which were incorporated in the Criminal Justice Acts of 1982 and 1988.
Another cause, finally endorsed by legislation in the Criminal Justice Act 1991, was ending the remand of juveniles to penal establishments.
II
The Parliamentary scrutiny to which all bills are subject enables MPs and peers to apply political and expert opinion to legislative proposals.
As this book will show, the approval of Parliament is no rubber-stamp.
The key function none the less lies in the drawing up of the legislation; deciding what should go into a bill and what should be omitted, and how the proposals should be drafted.
Here the initiative rests squarely with the Government, in the person of the Home Secretary as the Minister in charge of the sponsoring department.
The promotion of legislation comes at the top of the catalogue of his responsibilities listed in Table 3.
In addition to functions directly connected with the process of bringing alleged offenders to justice and supervising their subsequent punishment or treatment, the Home Secretary has responsibility for the operation of the Criminal Injuries Compensation Scheme and other provisions for the victims of crime, and for stimulating crime prevention measures.
1.
Promoting legislation to amend the criminal law, or to alter the powers and procedure of criminal courts;
2.
overseeing the administration, financing and efficiency of the police and probation service, with varying powers of central control in respect of each service;
3.
the provision and administration of prisons and young offender institutions;
4.
the release on licence of offenders sentenced to life imprisonment, and the grant of parole to those serving determinate sentences (both on the advice of the Parole Board);
5.
the control of mentally disordered persons found unfit to plead, or subject to restriction orders under the Mental Health Act 1983;
6.
the exercise of the Royal Prerogative of Mercy or other powers to remedy miscarriages of justice;
7.
extraditing fugitive offenders and providing mutual assistance to other states in criminal matters.
TABLE 3
Criminal justice responsibilities of the Home Secretary
High as is the priority for promoting legislation, when the time comes the Home Secretary is not in the position of an artist free to fill the canvas with the products of his own inspiration.
Even if he had the knowledge and inclination to do so, there are too many distractions.
The life of a Home Secretary has been depicted by several former holders of the office as being unduly susceptible to interruption by sudden and totally unexpected incidents which require all his attention:
It is truly said that he can go to bed at night with a clear sky as far as Home Affairs are concerned and wake up the next morning with a major crisis on his hands.
Worst of all, many of these particular events permit no simple solution and provide the Press with marvellous copy.
The unfortunate Home Secretary then receives much advice of a totally impractical nature for the solution of the problem.
At the same time he is blamed for allowing the incident to arise when it is usually inconceivable that he could have prevented it.
Crisis management apart, there is the constant burden of casework which calls for much reading of detailed dossiers before reaching decisions on individual cases.
Lord Callaghan listed the following examples:
…admittance to Britain or deportation; cases where the Home Secretary has to consider an appeal in which wrongful conviction is alleged, or appeals to him from police officers, or prison officers, against disciplinary decisions; and prisoners' petitions to the Home Secretary.
A Home Secretary spends many hours conscientiously reading background papers which set out the whole history of a single police officer's alleged offences, sometimes in a bundle of papers an inch thick, in order that justice and equity may be done.
This quality is lacking in departments such as the Treasury or the Foreign Office which are pre-occupied more with policies than with the handling of individual cases.
The result is that all Home Secretaries are grossly over-worked, although most will have found their own ways of keeping their heads above water.
Nor are officials immune from the narrowing of vision which comes from consistent overwork.
Reputations outside the Office, however, are not built upon application to paperwork or the efficiency with which business is despatched.
No-one could question the diligence of Maxwell Fyfe, Soskice, or Brooke as Home Secretary, but their reputations have suffered grievously from lack of vision and flair.
A further inhibiting factor on the Home Secretary's freedom of action is the pressure on Parliamentary time available to the Government to get its legislative programme enacted.
Other Ministers stake out their claims, urged on by their civil servants.
Even within the Home Office, one of the most heavyweight of all Whitehall Departments, the Secretary of State will have to set his own priorities between immigration and nationality, criminal justice, national security, gambling, the fire service, Sunday trading, dangerous dogs, and many other topics for legislation, some of which may be urgent, and most of which will be controversial.
The portrayal so far is of national politics painted with a broad brush, giving a picture lacking in definition and detail.
To add perspective, we can visualize a Home Secretary taking office, conscious of the weight of tradition, and the reservoir of inherited expertise from which departmentally generated policies are drawn.
The day to day routine of the Home Office in supervising prisons, the probation service and the police, including the handling of prisoners' petitions and applications for the Royal Prerogative of Mercy, gives it a fund of practical experience of how the law is working and what changes ought to be thought about.
Partly due to its history, and partly to temperament, the Home Office is conservative procedurally and cautious in outlook.
Precedent counts for much, especially in the dreadfully slow handling of individual cases.
Caution may arise from the civil servants' commendable desire to protect their Minister from criticism or embarrassment, but it may also result from Ministerial reluctance to contemplate unpopular options.
Financial restraints limit the scope for many otherwise appealing new departures, although the downward pressure on public expenditure is not confined to the Home Office.
What is peculiar, even unique compared with other departments of government, is a special brand of stuffiness.
There is a premium on thoroughness and accuracy.
Every avenue must be explored and each of the alternatives fully considered.
This takes time, and calls for contributions from different parts of the Office, as well as elsewhere in Whitehall.
In the interests of sound administration, it is claimed, all of the financial, practical and other consequences of a course of action must be properly worked out.
The process cannot be skimped.
Through this dense mesh, proposals for change must pass.
In attributing origins it is hard to disentangle the input of Ministers and that of officials, or the operational services, political or Parliamentary influences, or interest groups; nor does the present civil service culture encourage any attempt to do so.
Generally speaking, most Ministers rely on others for most of their ideas.
Examples of internally generated policy proposals can be seen in the formative thinking on crime prevention, with a strong research base, in the 1970s and 1980s; the development of an alternative to the Royal Commission on Criminal Procedure's plan for the organization of an independent prosecution service; proposals for modifying the ‘right of silence’ incorporating new safeguards for the defence; and efforts to improve the situation of ethnic minorities in the criminal justice system.
Not all of these initiatives were welcomed initially by Ministers; indeed in some instances they were greeted with scepticism bordering on suspicion.
But they were sustained and developed, with Ministerial acquiescence, eventually obtaining varying degrees of support.
Internal generation, the energy and will to bring forward proposals for change, or to adopt them from outside, persevering in the face of criticism or indifference, is a crucial element in the policy making process.
The characteristic contribution of the senior civil servant lies not so much in the originality and imagination he or she may display in thinking up new policies — these can be a positive nuisance without the ability to convince and lead those, often outside the service, who will have to put them into effect — but the skills to recognize promising new ideas and the opportunities to develop them, and to exploit the opportunities when they occur.
When it comes to considering legislation, as in managing his Department, the Minister soon faces the first test of the statesman: the reconciliation of political ideology and opinion to the demands of sharply practical situations.
Established ways of doing things are not easily changed; current policies cannot be reversed without disruption; internal and external patterns of relationship are resistant to rapid dismantling.
He discovers very quickly that there are no short cuts.
Only difficult decisions.
Practical constraints crowd round him to limit his room for manoeuvre.
Wherever he turns he finds there is very little uncommitted money to fund new policies.
At times he feels that the most he can hope for is to identify some fissures in the accumulating mass of proposals in their formative stages into which he can try to insert something of his own political values.
The process of fusing Ministerial intentions and departmental expertise in the formulation of policy is a great deal more subtle than it appears to be at first sight.
Proposals seldom spring from a single source, although it is not unknown for them to do so.
In parallel with the manifesto or other commitments of incoming Ministers, Home Office officials will have prepared a list of such internally generated proposals as are ripe for implementation.
Some of these may be of long standing, an example being improving the standard of fire precautions in places of public resort.
Necessary as legislation was in terms of public safety, for years it was unattractive to Ministers since it required considerable expenditure whilst at the same time being unlikely to attract any votes.
More often Ministers are attracted to what is novel, makes only a limited demand on financial resources, and is not already identified with someone else.
Brittan on reparation and Waddington on victims, and Baker on dangerous dogs, joy riding and offending on bail, were all examples of this dictum.
Next there is the proverbial shelf containing what one veteran bureaucrat has aptly called the harvest of the work of various advisory bodies and departmental committees.
Although Governments do not always adopt their recommendations, specialist committees are often a necessary device to investigate the practical implications of proposals for change.
In matters of law reform especially, expert reviews constitute a methodology which broadens the range and depth of inquiry, at the same time enabling the subject to be reviewed from a more independent standpoint.
In the course of a Second Reading Debate on the contentious Courts and Legal Services Bill in December 1989, Lord Hailsham spoke scathingly about the fact that the bulk of the proposals arose from within the Government machine, so disregarding ‘almost every principle of the methodology…which ought to be followed in law reform’.
The final element in the policy making process is the response to developments over which governments have no control.
The Home Office is not alone among government departments in facing challenge from the courts.
On an application for judicial review, the High Court may decide that the Secretary of State has exceeded the powers conferred on him by Parliament, or acted in a way that was irrational or procedurally unfair.
If so, changes in practice or in the legislation may be required.
The possibility of judicial review is constantly in the mind of Ministers and officials when preparing legislation and putting it into effect.
No statutory formula has been found that can make a provision judge-proof, in the sense of inducing the courts to accept it as excluding all opportunity for review, not even providing that a decision ‘shall not be called in question in any court of law’.
At the preparatory stage in drafting legislation civil servants will try to find a way of indicating Parliament's intentions as to the sort of considerations of policy or fact that are to be treated as properly relevant to the decision, and the procedural requirements to be observed, but without tying the Minister's hands too tightly in situations which cannot be foreseen.
Although normally the courts will be reluctant to intervene in ‘matters depending essentially on political judgment’, the prospect of challenge in the Divisional Court is one that any Minister exercising a statutory power, or any official advising on such a decision, is bound to keep in mind.
Guidance on the circumspection required in the day-to-day exercise of administrative powers is provided for civil servants in a booklet ominously entitled The Judge Over Your Shoulder .
Judicial review of administrative decisions by central or local government and certain other bodies is now commonplace.
In both 1989 and 1990 leave to apply for judicial review was granted by the courts in more than 900 cases, with a resulting delay of about eighteen months between the granting of leave and the hearing of the case.
Co-incidental with the growth of judicial review by the domestic courts has been the growth in the volume of applications by private individuals seeking redress from the European Commission and Court of Human Rights at Strasbourg.
If an application is declared admissible, and a friendly settlement cannot be achieved, the subsequent decisions of the Court are binding on the United Kingdom.
The enforcement of the Convention on Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms is the subject of Chapter 8.
It has led to changes in the law relating to the continued confinement of restricted mental patients; the release of discretionary life sentence prisoners;, and regulations on the marriage of prisoners, their correspondence, and access to lawyers.
Revisions have also been made to the prison disciplinary code.
The two streams may on occasion converge.
As a result of challenges to the previous practice, both in the High Court and the European Court of Human Rights, telephone tapping has been subject to legislation since 1986.
The tapping of any telephone call now requires the authority of the Home Secretary conferred by means of a warrant which must be approved (and is normally signed) by him personally.
Any information so discovered must be confined to the authority empowered by the warrant to discover it, and may not be disclosed to private persons or private bodies.
In practice, information gained by interception is only used for the purpose of assisting police or Security Service investigations, and is not tendered as evidence in court.
III
These are the main tributaries from which the flood of initiatives to alter the course of criminal justice derive.
Each calls for political decision, frequently more than once in the course of hammering out a policy.
It is at this stage Ministers must make their distinctive contribution.
Officials, the party political organization, assorted advisory committees, outside commentators and special interest groups may all be clamouring for action, but they seldom do so with one voice.
A successful Home Secretary needs enough versatility and openness of mind to listen to what is said before making a choice between tinkering with the status quo and the more radical alternatives which are open to him.
Indecisiveness, insufficient financial resources, a hostile press, the inability to count on sufficient political support, and lack of creative imagination are the negative factors which will bear on his personal decision.
Moreover, any adept Home Office Minister knows that continuity has to co-exist with innovation.
The interdependence of criminal justice, where the working of one part has an effect on what happens in the other parts, means that to set off too fast, or prematurely, in a given direction, may lead to unexpected reverses.
To an incoming Minister, who may owe his appointment more to adeptness in handling argument on paper or on the floor of the House of Commons, such inhibitions can come as an unwelcome surprise.
With the power to select between policy alternatives; with direct authority over his department and some, although not all, of the component parts of the system of criminal justice, but exercising strong influence over other parts; the Home Secretary still possesses unmatched opportunities for individual decision making.
To take full advantage of these positive factors he needs to deploy the accumulated knowledge of his officials, married to presentational skills, tenacity and a sound grasp of tactics.
Important though each of these qualities is for his survival in office, they are over-shadowed by that most prized of all political virtues: knowing where he wants to go.
Little that is unfathomable or startling passes through the mind of a Minister preparing legislation.
Personalities vary, but typically he will be guided as much by intuition and personal judgment as by precept or regulation as he surveys the political landscape he must traverse before reaching his destination.
The chapters of this book recount the way in which Home Secretaries from both of the main parties handled their assignments between 1947–79 and, in more detail, during the long period of Conservative Administration between 1979–92.
Other Ministers at other times may have acted differently, but the legislative context is one that would be familiar to all of them.
Four features stand out above all else.
First are Ministers' relations with their own party, in Parliament and the constituencies.
Then there is the constant attention given to the more vociferous organs of populist opinion, in particular the tabloid and middle market press.
Such awareness does not govern everything a Home Secretary does or says in public, but it will never be far from his thoughts.
Less pressing, but still ubiquitous, is a sensitivity towards the reactions, actual or anticipated, of the higher judiciary.
Finally the views of other Ministers need to be heeded, most notably those of the Prime Minister.
General elections provide regular milestones in the evolution of party policies, especially on matters falling under the rubric of law and order.
As they draw near the necessity to publish proposals in the form of a manifesto concentrates the minds of Ministers and party leaders on the future.
If success follows at the polls, legislative programmes then have to be drawn up to implement the incoming Government's undertakings.
Thereafter meetings of members of the Cabinet will be held from time to time, complemented by advisers and policy units, in order to review progress.
While the public may be cynical about electoral promises, governments of whatever complexion customarily take pains to demonstrate that they have carried out the main proposals embodied in their manifesto, as well as other commitments or ‘pledges’ given at election time.
A small, but characteristic, exchange recorded in Richard Crossman's diaries reads as follows:
…as I have often noted in this diary, Harold [Wilson]is extraordinarily sensitive on the issue of Party pledges, and when I approached him privately he said, ‘This is a party pledge which has to be fulfilled’.
Between elections the paramount need for any Home Secretary is to maintain the support of his own party members, a task made harder in each of the major parties by the fact that local party workers often hold more extreme views on what should be done than do Ministers.
Even the most popular personalities, as William Whitelaw was in 1981, can run into difficulty.
As he candidly admitted in his memoirs the issue of capital punishment, which re-surfaced in that year at the Conservative Party Conference, and his own handling of the debate, damaged his standing as Home Secretary, making it more difficult to introduce some planned reforms in sentencing policy:
I certainly both dreaded and disliked the prospect of the law and order debate, for the atmosphere was so strangely hostile and so different from that accorded to all one's colleagues…pressure and even bullying by so-called ‘hangers and floggers’ served only to force Conservative MPs who were against hanging to stand up for what they believed to be right.
It was therefore a diversion from some crucial issues, such as sentencing and prison overcrowding.
Twenty years earlier, R. A. Butler had shared the same fate, recalling the ‘blood curdling demands’ made annually at the Conservative Party Conference for the restoration of corporal punishment which had ‘quite clouded’his time as Chairman of the Party.
Capital and corporal punishment, to which majorities in the House of Commons had consistently been opposed, long remained at or near to the top of the short but touchy list of policy issues separating Conservative Ministers from their party followers.
More often it is a matter of tone and stance.
Irrespective of party, Home Secretaries are well aware that there are occasions when they are expected to appear ‘tough’ and take care to adjust their vocabulary and presentation according to their audience.
The effect of this imperative on successive Tory Home Secretaries when legislation was in preparation comes through clearly in later chapters.
It is not only their own party supporters, inside and outside Parliament, that Ministers watch with care.
While policy is in the formative stages there is a constant worry over how a particular initiative, or response to a crisis, will appear in the mass media.
Although the substance of a decision may not be altered materially, it may be trimmed with the timing of its announcement, or the explanations offered, being geared to the anticipated reception by populist opinion, especially as evidenced by the press.
Prediction is made hazardous because of the volatility and diversity of the press.
There is always a possibility that the quality, mid-market, and tabloid papers will take contrary stances making it necessary to select which readership is more important for the purpose.
Without being too censorious about the effects of presentational considerations on policy, the consequences can be double-edged.
Short term advantage gained at the price of keeping alive prejudices and preconceptions may make more difficult, or even preclude, later changes in the direction of policy.
The stereotype of toughness also flourishes at the grass roots in party circles.
In Parliament, as on constituency platforms, Conservative Ministers know they are constantly under scrutiny by some of the more outspoken of their colleagues for any signs of ‘wetness’.
Although in common use throughout the Thatcher years, the expression is not easy to define.
In this context being ‘wet’ embraces what is seen as an insufficiency of robustness in outlook; a suspicion that overmuch interest is being directed towards the treatment of the convicted offender at the expense of the plight of the victim; and a distaste for the infliction of physical forms of punishment.
It is a paradox that the more Ministers learn about the complex and uncertain causes and circumstances of crime, the less dogmatic they become in their opinions at the very moment when, as Whitelaw found to his cost, they are most vulnerable to censure by their own supporters.
Each week when the House is sitting the Home Secretary will confer with the officers of his party's Home Affairs Committee.
The discussion customarily takes place in the early evening in the Home Secretary's room at the Commons, and is intended to keep him in touch with backbench opinion.
Ministerial contacts of this kind are supplemented by the activities of the junior Ministers, the Parliamentary Private Secretaries, and the Government Whips.
Although less visible, these exchanges are as important to a Minister as the ritual confrontations in the Chamber.
Backed by a comfortable working majority, which successive Conservative Administrations enjoyed between 1979–92, any competent Home Secretary has little to fear from the party opposite.
The Opposition invariably will exploit opportunities to denounce the Government and all its works.
Provided a Minister can maintain an effective performance in the House, the Whips see to it that he will get his way.
The critics he must satisfy sit behind him.
The tabloid press tries hard to make a Home Secretary's life a misery.
Strident in tone, punitive in outlook, and personalizing issues in ways that can cause great distress to individuals, the tabloids are the stocks of the modern age.
At the same time, exposure in the press is a powerful weapon against the abuse of authority and wrong doing.
The very fact they are bought and read daily by millions of people gives mass circulation newspapers an undeniable political role.
The views expressed may or may not be shared by their readerships, but they are invested with a special status by virtue of numbers.
The same is true of the mid-market press and the quality newspapers.
The arguments advanced may be somewhat more refined and the ideals more lofty, but here again it is the size of the readership, rather than the merits of the editorial comment, that counts most.
In democratic societies it is inevitable that politicians will be attracted to large audiences.
Readers are simultaneously voters; what appeals to them will be of compelling interest to those who need to do the appealing at election time.
Stephen Koss's verdict on the political press during the twentieth century applies with equal force to its impact on the operation of criminal justice:
At its worst, the political press had mischievously fanned passions and fed prejudices.
At its best it had focused ideas and inculcated democratic values.
IV
Journalists inhabit the outer fringes of the world of politics.
They meet politicians frequently inside and outside the lobby of the House of Commons.
It does neither any harm to be seen to be trying to influence the other.
It is all part of the job.
Ministers ensure that there are well-staffed press offices to promote the most favourable reception for their policies and decisions.
Special relationships with chosen journalists, their editors and proprietors, are cultivated.
Bribery apart, there is almost no method of persuasion which is considered to be out of bounds.
The contrast with judicial contacts is pronounced.
Here it is thought proper to preserve a respectful distance on both sides.
Even in private encounters, judges do not discuss their cases with politicians, and in return politicians should avoid embarrassing judges by involving them in what are essentially political issues.
The dividing line is not easily drawn.
When a judge, particularly one with Lord Scarman's breadth of mind, is appointed to inquire into an outbreak of violence and serious disorders on the streets of Brixton and the policing of the area, it is unrealistic to expect him to avoid any recommendations of a political nature as to the causes.
Similarly, it can be anticipated that a judge investigating a disaster at a football ground in which ninety-five people have been crushed to death will reach out into public policy in putting forward ways of avoiding such tragedies in the future.
Lord Justice Woolf's inquiry into the serious disturbances that erupted at Strangeways and other prisons in the Spring of 1990 extended beyond the immediate causes to an examination of such underlying factors as prison overcrowding, conditions and regimes, and policies towards remand prisoners.
The more serious the incident, the more likely it is that a judge's professional neutrality and independence, as well as his legal training in taking evidence and establishing the facts, will be sought to command public confidence.
Yet it is in identifying the lessons for public policy that the more enduring value of judicial inquiries often lies.
The dissociation between the executive and the judiciary is the legacy of the independence granted to the judiciary in the Act of Settlement.
Judges are bound to uphold the rights of the individual against the Crown which means, for most purposes, the Government of the day.
In the administration of criminal justice the principle of independence from the wishes of government is of supreme importance.
Anyone who is accused of committing a crime is entitled to the protection of the due process of law, not enshrined in any written statute as in the Constitution of the United States, but dependent upon convention and Common Law tradition.
Ever since the thirteenth century a criminal offence, being an infringement of the King's peace, has been seen as a direct injury to the sovereign.
This is why prosecutions are brought in the name of the Crown.
During the last century they came to be conducted largely by the police and lawyers instructed by them, who were replaced for most purposes by the Crown Prosecution Service in 1986.
The right of a private individual, or an agency other than the Crown Prosecution Service, to institute and conduct criminal proceedings on their own behalf was preserved by Section 6 of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985.
Statutory or voluntary agencies such as HM Customs and Excise, the Inland Revenue, the Department of Social Security, the Heath and Safety Executive, and the RSPCA regularly initiate prosecutions in the criminal courts.
Prosecutions by private individuals are much rarer, being brought mainly by aggrieved parties.
In either type of case the Director of Public Prosecutions has the power to take over the proceedings at any stage, either by conducting them himself or discontinuing them.
Of its own motion the court may decide to bring a private prosecution to the attention of the Crown Prosecution Service; indeed a justices' clerk is obliged to do so if a private prosecutor withdraws or fails to proceed in circumstances in which the reason given appears unsatisfactory.
Since virtually all of the agencies which regularly institute criminal proceedings have acquired their own expertise, they are generally well enough equipped to conduct cases and the Crown Prosecution Service will ‘neither wish nor need to intervene’.
Prosecutions brought by determined private individuals may present greater problems.
The Director will not intervene lightly, since it was the intention of the statute to preserve the right of an individual to have some recourse.
Yet awkward circumstances can arise, sometimes raising questions of abuse of process.
In the case of Turner , a convicted defendant initiated a prosecution against his accomplice, who had obtained a prior undertaking from the Director that he would not be prosecuted for his part in the offence.
The Director's action in intervening to offer no evidence, on the ground that it was not in the interests of justice or the public for the prosecution to continue, was upheld by the courts.
In another case, the Court of Appeal held that a prosecution had been properly discontinued when a defendant had taken out a private prosecution for perjury against a witness who had given evidence against him at committal proceedings.
Some well-ventilated cases turn on conflicting interpretations of the public interest.
An example was a private prosecution brought by Mrs Mary Whitehouse against a National Theatre director on charges of gross indecency in the staging of a play titled The Romans in Britain .
In this instance Mrs Whitehouse had drawn the play to the attention of the Director, and instituted proceedings only after he had declined to prosecute.
Her argument was that simulated sexual acts on the stage, an attempted scene of male rape, were not only offensive but constituted a criminal offence under Section 13 of the Sexual Offences Act 1956.
Eighteen months after the prosecution had been launched, and amidst much controversy over artistic expression and theatrical censorship, the case reached the Central Criminal Court in March 1982.
The point of law was never decided, since leading counsel for Mrs Whitehouse withdrew the prosecution and the Attorney General then terminated the case by invoking the nolle prosequi procedure, leaving each side claiming victory.
In 1988 Ian Brady and Myra Hindley, both serving life sentences for murder, were back in the headlines when the Greater Manchester Police re-opened the Moors murders case and discovered the body of another child.
A report was submitted to the Director who declined to prosecute on public interest grounds.
When Oldham Magistrates granted summonses against Brady and Hindley for the murder of the child following a private application, the Director, having already decided that in all the circumstances it would not be in the public interest to institute proceedings against them, used his statutory powers under Section 6 of the Prosecution of Offences Act 1985 to take over the conduct of the case and to discontinue it under Section 23.
Decisions on prosecution can also be treacherous ground for the Law Officers.
The Attorney General and Solicitor General (and the Lord Advocate and Solicitor General for Scotland), are members of the Government.
Despite holding political appointments, in all matters of criminal prosecution they must act independently of the interests of government.
Political prosecutions and political imprisonment may be deemed so far in the past as to be without modern day relevance.
But it has not always been so, and there are occasions when the perennial justification of the over-riding interests of the security of the state re-emerges into public view.
The continued liberty of the subject demands vigilance on the part of the judges in ensuring that no trial on a criminal charge, or appeal, bears any trace of being biased towards an outcome which the Government wants to see.
Terrorist offences, which do not fit easily into systems of justice devised for other purposes, make it doubly important that this ideal is preserved.
It is also vital at times of national emergency such as during the miner's strike in 1984/5.
The most sensitive boundary of all between the executive, in the shape of Ministers, and the judiciary, in the shape of the Lord Chief Justice and puisne judges of the Queen's Bench Division, is the sentencing of offenders.
With very few exceptions the rule is that Parliament determines the maximum penalty and it is then for the courts, having heard the evidence, and seen the defendant in person, and heard what can be said in mitigation on his behalf, to decide upon the appropriate punishment in all the circumstances of the case.
The constitutional separation does not prevent some Members of Parliament echoing the condemnation of the tabloid press in intemperately criticizing individual judges for what they may consider to be an unduly lenient sentence.
It is rare, if not unknown, for the same voices to be heard if a sentence is too severe, although the Criminal Division of the Court of Appeal frequently reduces sentences for just that reason.
In practice the only exceptions to judicial sentencing are fixed penalties and obligatory disqualification for certain Road Traffic offences, and the mandatory penalty of life imprisonment for murder.
The latter has led to serious distortions in the administration of justice which are argued at some length in Chapters 7 and 9.
Where the conviction is murder the sentence is determined by Parliament and simply pronounced by the judge.
The courts may also impose a discretionary life sentence for certain other serious crimes.
Appeal against any non-mandatory sentence requires the leave of the Court of Appeal (Criminal Division), or of a single High Court judge acting on its behalf.
Since 1988 the Crown has also been able to appeal in certain circumstances against lenient sentences.
Under Section 36 of the Criminal Justice Act 1988, where it appears to the Attorney General that the sentencing of a person in the Crown Court has been unduly lenient he may refer the case to the Court of Appeal, with leave, for the sentence to be reviewed.
On such a reference, the Court of Appeal may quash the sentence, or substitute such sentence as it thinks appropriate within the limits permitted to the court below.
The legislative history of this provision is recorded in Chapter 4.
Although the actual sentence passed by the court is out of the reach of legislators and departmental officials, sentencing policy occupies a no man's land between territories claimed by government and the judiciary.
Whereas there is general acceptance that the apportionment of punishment is a judicial function, the legal framework of penalties is the creation of Parliament.
Maximum penalties, and occasionally fixed penalties, are set out in statutes and periodically revised.
Parliament may, as it did in the Criminal Justice Act 1991, lay down criteria governing the use of custody and the length of custodial sentences.
Earlier legislation paved the way by limiting the use of custody as a penalty for offenders under the age of twenty-one.
The Labour Party, backed by a sizeable body of informed opinion, wanted to go further and establish a sentencing council (with strong judicial representation) to define sentencing aims and policies and to produce guidelines for sentencing over ‘a range of cases in an inter-related structure’.
Throughout the 1980s the expanding prison population caused Home Office administrators to question how long it would be possible to go on supplying an unlimited number of places, at enormous cost, for however many convicted or remand prisoners were sent to them by the courts.
It was this factor more than any other which caused officials and Ministers alike to adopt such defensive postures.
With the exception of Douglas Hurd's Indian summer lasting for about two years after the 1987 election, the prevailing mood in the Home Office was one of institutional pessimism.
More positive thinking survived in one or two parts of the monolithic building in Queen Anne's Gate, but the overall impression gained by outside observers was of a dispirited department in which no-one really seemed to know what could be done about crime in general and the prisons in particular.
The most that could be expected of policies, it was implied, was to mitigate the worst effects of criminal offending.
V
Just as the Home Secretary is inhibited in policy making by Parliament, his party, public opinion, the judiciary and the courts, so is the freedom of action of the Home Office restricted within the Whitehall bureaucracy.
There is constant pressure from the Treasury, and to some extent from 10 Downing Street, for limiting public expenditure, and for increased efficiency and the more effective use of resources.
Few in the Treasury believed that it really was impossible to control the prison population if Ministers were sufficiently determined.
Nor was the Treasury convinced by the repeated arguments for the costly increases in police manpower which most Home Secretaries felt they had to secure in order to demonstrate their credibility.
The open-ended commitment to a vastly expensive discretionary scheme for criminal injuries compensation, sanctioned by statute in 1988 but not yet brought into force at the time of writing, was a particular Treasury bête noire, leading to pressure to cut back on other things if Ministers maintained that it was politically unacceptable to curtail the cost.
The hand of the Treasury is never far away.
The Chancellor of the Exchequer will expect to be a member of the Cabinet Committee considering important legislation in any field, including criminal justice, although if at a particular meeting the main Treasury interest lies in resource costs the Chief Secretary to the Treasury might go in his place.
Because of other demands on his time, the Chancellor will not usually be a leading participant on a regular basis.
But in some cases his role will be more active.
For example, Nigel Lawson chaired the Sub-Committee that dealt with Lord Mackay's proposals for reforming the legal system which were later embodied in the Courts and Legal Services Bill.
Because of his responsibilities for taxation as well as the banking system and building societies, the Chancellor had a special interest in the subject of financial fraud.
Hence Lawson also chaired an ad hoc group of Ministers which led to the setting up of the Serious Fraud Office.
Like other Ministers, Chancellors do not confine themselves solely to matters where they have a departmental interest.
They may have views on issues which derive from previous experience.
As an ex-financial journalist, Lawson had opinions about the limitations of trial by jury formed by what he had seen of financial scandals when working as a City Editor.
It was partly because of this experience that he had no hesitation in supporting wholeheartedly the Roskill recommendation to depart from the principle of jury trial in complex fraud cases, against the (ultimately successful) Home Office view advocated by Hurd.
Although the issue of fraud trials was one in which Mrs Thatcher also took a personal interest, she did not normally intervene on the details of criminal policy.
There is no record that the Prime Minister had ever visited a prison, but she was known to be offended by the deplorable conditions and personal indignities caused by overcrowding.
Over her eleven year premiership the only substantial issue of penal policy in which Mrs Thatcher played a decisive part was the privatization of prisons and remand centres, and the contracting out of certain criminal justice services.
The views of his Ministerial colleagues, not least the Prime Minister, will be of particular relevance whenever a subject overruns departmental boundaries and the Home Office is competing for Parliamentary time.
This commodity is always in short supply and it is hard fought for, especially after a general election when an order of priority has to be set in the legislative programme for fulfilling manifesto and other pledges.
In the all important matter of resources, the Prime Minister's outlook can be decisive.
If law and order is seen as a key issue it will strengthen the Home Secretary's arm in his dealings with the Treasury.
Once legislative proposals are sufficiently advanced to be put to Ministers for endorsement they will go before the Legislation Committee of the Cabinet which must give its approval before a place is found in the programme.
Even before that stage is reached, the Cabinet Office will have been monitoring the progress of the more significant proposals by departments in order to alert the Prime Minister or Lord President of the Council of any wider implications.
The Prime Minister personally will authorize the inclusion of each commitment to legislate in the Queen's Speech.
Prime Ministerial power also makes itself felt in less direct, although crucial, ways.
Like all Ministers, the Home Secretary must maintain the Prime Minister's confidence if he is to continue in office.
Dismissal on grounds of incompetence or political differences is far less common than sudden transfers of Ministers to other departments as a result of events quite unconnected with their policies or performance.
At the very moment when Hurd was preparing to unveil the fruits of a long period of gestation in the form of a White Paper on criminal justice, Lawson resigned as Chancellor.
After only three months at the Foreign Office, John Major, previously Chief Secretary, was brought back to the Treasury as Chancellor, leaving the Foreign Secretaryship unexpectedly vacant.
Hurd, a former career diplomat and Foreign Office Minister of State, was the obvious choice as his successor.
In this way, one of the best Home Secretaries of the post-war era was abruptly removed from the Home Office at a few hours notice, leaving behind a collection of unfinished artefacts to be completed by other hands.
VI
In the absence of a Ministry of Justice the Home Office has acquired its responsibilities for criminal justice piecemeal over many years.
It does not let go of them easily, and the aura of permanence and continuity is evidence of its tenacity.
Over the period covered by this book new rivals have appeared on the Whitehall scene.
Until comparatively recently the list of Home Office functions summarized in Table 3 would have been longer than it now is.
It would have included responsibility for the finance, organization and administration of the Magistrates' courts, and for criminal legal aid.
Each of these functions was transferred (or lost, in the eyes of the Home Office) to the Lord Chancellor's Department.
The transformation of what was little more than a set of lawyers' chambers to a fully fledged government department is a story worth telling, with portents still to come.
As late as 1960 all of the ‘officers’, as the Lord Chancellor's legal staff were known, not officials as elsewhere in the civil service, were able to sit around a not particularly large octagonal table in the Permanent Secretary's room at his fortnightly office meetings.
There was enough space for a retired Brigadier, who handled ecclesiastical appointments, and a higher executive officer in charge of the Crown Office, dealing with ceremonial and the passing of documents under the Great Seal.
The work was quite unstructured.
A new entrant, joining in July 1960, had devilled for all but one of the dozen or so lawyers by Christmas.
There was no hierarchical organization in the modern sense, the work being allocated and dealt with in what struck the newcomer, later to become the Department's Permanent Secretary, as being a delightfully haphazard way.
Looking back wistfully three decades later, he recalled that during the summer months the Office followed the Law Courts in observing what were called ‘vacation hours’.
When the volume of work increased, as it did throughout central government, the wind of change hit the Lord Chancellor's Office with particular force because it started from such a tiny base.
In a quiet period after the end of the Second World War in 1945 the Secretary of Commissions, responsible for the appointment of the lay magistracy over the country as a whole, found that days passed when no letter came into his office and no letter went out.
New responsibilities were added, starting with the Legal Aid and Advice Act 1949, which conferred upon the Lord Chancellor departmental responsibility for civil legal aid and advice.
At first the load was trifling, annual expenditure in the 1950s running at about £1 million, rising to around £5 million annually in the mid-1960s.
A big step up came when the Lord Chancellor took over criminal legal aid from the Home Secretary in 1980.
The combined responsibility, and the very large increases that occurred in both civil and criminal work, co-inciding with the Treasury's insistence that expenditure from public funds be kept in bounds, led to acrimonious and repeated clashes with the legal profession over fees and rates of remuneration.
These culminated in unprecedented proceedings in the Divisional Court brought by the Bar and the Law Society against Lord Chancellor Hailsham by way of judicial review.
The controversy over the levels of remuneration for legal aid work, added to the magnitude of the task of creating a new Legal Aid Board and transferring the administration of the Law Society, caused a noticeable increase in the burdens on the Lord Chancellor's Department.
The next strand led back to the notorious case of Crichel Down in 1954.
To allay the disquiet which had been caused, the Lord Chancellor of the day, Lord Kilmuir, set up a committee on administrative tribunals and enquiries under the chairmanship of Sir Oliver Franks.
Such tribunals, generally deriving from statutory provisions, had multiplied as the range of governmental activity spread.
The report of the committee enunciated that whereas tribunals were not courts of law, neither were they appendages of government departments.
Although varying in constitution, function and procedure, tribunals typically dealt with cases in which an individual citizen was at issue with a government department, or some other public body, over his rights or obligations under a statutory scheme.
A few dealt with disputes between citizens, while others had more regulatory than adjudicating functions.
The committee declined to accept the view put to them by the Joint Permanent Secretary to the Treasury that tribunals ought to be regarded as part of the machinery of public administration for which the Government should retain a close and continuing responsibility.
Instead, it considered that they should more properly be regarded as machinery provided by Parliament for adjudication independent of the relevant government department.
To oversee this relationship Franks recommended the establishment of two standing councils, one for England and Wales, and one for Scotland, with a remit to keep the constitution and working of tribunals under continuous review.
The Council on Tribunals for England and Wales should be appointed by and report to the Lord Chancellor.
The recommendation was accepted and implemented in the Tribunals and Inquiries Act 1958.
Thereafter, the Lord Chancellor became responsible for the Council on Tribunals, appointing its chairman and members, staffing it, and sticking up for it when it needed help against recalcitrant departments.
Franks contended it was undesirable in principle that the appointment of so many chairmen and members of individual tribunals should rest with the departmental Ministers concerned, when it was their own departments which frequently would be a party to proceedings before a tribunal.
Misgivings were also expressed about the practice of departments supplying clerks for tribunals from their local and regional staffs on a secondment basis.
This had led to a feeling that tribunals were too dependent on, and influenced by, the departments.
In future the duties of the clerk should be regulated by the Council on Tribunals being confined to secretarial work, the taking of notes of evidence, and advice on the functions of the tribunal.
Unless sent for to advise, the clerk should be debarred from retiring with the tribunal.
In order to stress their independence, Franks wanted the Lord Chancellor to assume full administrative responsibility for the operation of virtually all tribunals.
In the late 1950s, however, his Office was still very small and not equipped to take on the extra load.
The merits of the argument were accepted notwithstanding, and gradually the Lord Chancellor and his staff took over the appointments of the chairmen of most, and the members of many, tribunals.
In addition, rules of procedure were framed and approved.
More recently, as the size of the Department and its financial and manpower resources permitted, it was able to provide a centralized service for a growing number of tribunals.
The late 1950s and 1960s also saw the accession of one venerable institution, the Public Record Office, and the creation of a new one, the Law Commission.
Until the Public Records Act 1958 the care and preservation of public records were in the hands of the Master of the Rolls, an anachronistic responsibility for a senior judge who in his modern incarnation is fully occupied in presiding over the civil work of the Court of Appeal.
Important as they were for historians of the future, and as a source for scholarship generally, public records generated less political and academic controversy then than later.
The principal causes were departures from the thirty year rule for access, and the move of post-1800 government records from the familiar Public Record Office in Chancery Lane to a purpose built, high technology, centre at Kew.
Although it is the Lord Chancellor who makes orders closing records for longer than the normal thirty year period, in practice he is bound to rely on the advice of other departments.
Yet it is he, and not their Minister, who has to defend closure orders in Parliament.
This can leave him in an uncomfortably exposed position, while denying Parliament any effective control.
Neither of the alternatives, to give the responsibility to the Prime Minister or to make departmental Ministers answerable for their own decisions on closure, were pursued.
As on other issues, Parliament as well as the relevant Ministers, preferred to let the Lord Chancellor's gown of fairness and impartiality be thrown over what were essentially governmental decisions on where the public interest lay.
The legislative architect of the Law Commissions was Gerald Gardiner, Labour's Lord Chancellor from 1964–70, and his achievement is remarked on in Chapter 3.
Before that law reform had been handled sporadically.
The Law Reform Committee, a standing body with a Secretary provided by the Lord Chancellor's Office, functioned on a part-time basis producing reports on those aspects of the civil law as were referred to it by Ministers.
A Criminal Law Revision Committee under the aegis of the Home Office periodically considered changes in the criminal law.
Occasionally special committees were set up to inquire into particularly important or topical questions, the Royal Commission on Capital Punishment being a notable example in 1949–53.
But there was no systematic or continuing mechanism for law reform, with frustrations caused by the difficulties in getting Parliamentary time to implement the recommendations of the Law Reform Committee or the Criminal Law Revision Committee.
Gardiner's abiding interest in law reform changed the picture dramatically.
In putting through Parliament the Law Commissions Act 1965 he created separate Law Commissions for England and Wales, and for Scotland, each with a seconded High Court judge as chairman, and a staff of qualified lawyers and others with the obligation to investigate particular questions referred to it, or on its own initiative to conduct a regular programme of inquiry into the general state of the law or any particular question, civil or criminal, which they chose to select.
Not the least of Gardiner's achievements lay in getting Parliamentary Counsel assigned full time to the Commissions.
This enabled reports to be published with draft bills annexed.
With much of the preliminary work already done, Ministers were more amenable to finding the time to legislate.
Between 1979–87, including consolidation and statute law revision, eighty one acts reforming and updating the law were passed through both Houses of Parliament.
Heightened legislative activity on this scale gave the Lord Chancellor and his office enhanced standing in Whitehall.
Additional resources followed in train to handle the consequential work.
The final factor contributing to departmental growth was the most significant of all.
The re-organization of the higher courts once again owed much to Gardiner, and it was he who initiated the appointment of a Royal Commission on Assizes and Quarter Sessions in 1966.
The implementation of the recommendation to set up the Crown Court is recounted in a later chapter, but we should note here the implications for the Lord Chancellor.
When Gardiner was considering the Royal Commission's Report he was asked by its Secretary if he appreciated that, for the first time, a Minister would become answerable to Parliament for the working of the higher courts, including the delays and other initial setbacks that might be expected.
‘I welcome it’ was his answer.
Although before the Courts Act 1971 in theory it could be claimed that government was ultimately responsible for the running of the courts, in practice responsibility was so diffused between local authorities, the High Sheriffs and Under Sheriffs of counties, and the judiciary, that there was no real way in which Parliament could call anyone to account.
Parliamentary Questions and Ministerial Statements were almost unknown.
Today they are commonplace; the Lord Chancellor answering in the Lords, and a Junior Minister representing his Department in the elected House.
Previously, Questions had been replied to in the Commons by one of the Law Officers, although they were neither attached to the Lord Chancellor's Department nor directly subordinate to him.
In the Administration formed by John Major after the General Election in April 1992, a solicitor, John Taylor, was appointed as the first Parliamentary Secretary to the Lord Chancellor's Department.
In addition to answering Questions and the handling of all departmental business in the Commons, the Parliamentary Secretary was given responsibility for legal aid and the development of legal services; relations with the Land Registry and Public Record Office; some budget and resource matters; and equal opportunities and women's issues outside the judicial context.
The Department falls within the purview of the Select Committee system in the Commons and also of the Parliamentary Commissioner for Administration.
In organizational terms the consequences of greater accountability have been pronounced, bringing about changes in staffing, expertise, training and accommodation to respond to the demands made.
Another feature of the courts reorganization was that the Department was no longer located only in London.
National legal administration called for regional delegation.
An Under Secretary was appointed to take charge of each Circuit, assuming all of the responsibilities which had been shared in running the assizes and quarter sessions before.
With their replacement by the High Court and the Crown Court at fixed centres throughout the country, a new administrative structure had to be devised and substantial numbers of non-lawyer administrators were imported from other departments and elsewhere.
By ill fortune the period of upheaval coincided with a large increase in the volume of work of the higher criminal courts, resulting in problems of delay that still are not eradicated.
But, had the changes introduced by the Courts Act 1971 not been in place, there would have been a real possibility that the old system would have collapsed under the strain.
The successive re-organizations have brought the Lord Chancellor's Department, with a total staff of close on 12,000, and the Crown Prosecution Service, with about 2,000 lawyers and 4,000 administrative staff, alongside the Home Office as public instruments for the administration of justice.
The distinction between the responsibility of the Home Office for the criminal law, and the Lord Chancellor's Department for the civil law, has been preserved, but its significance has been lessened by the gloss that it is the latter which exercises control over all court administration for criminal as well as civil cases.
In times of financial stringency, when almost any change in criminal justice legislation or practice is likely to affect court costs, this responsibility gives the Lord Chancellor's Department heightened influence across the penal field as a whole.
The agreed responsibilities of the Lord Chancellor's Department for criminal justice are now fourfold.
They are: the administration of the Crown Court and Court of Appeal (Criminal Division); the financing, organization and management of the Magistrates' courts; legal aid, legal services, and costs from central funds (policy and provision); and the appointment, or advice on the appointment, of almost all judges, judicial officers and magistrates in England and Wales, and in Northern Ireland.
The judiciary is independent of government, although it is the Lord Chancellor who advises The Queen on the appointment of Recorders, Circuit judges and High Court judges.
He also advises the Prime Minister on appointments to the Court of Appeal and certain senior judicial appointments, including the Lord Chief Justice and the Presidents of the Divisions of the High Court.
High Court judges and above hold office during good behaviour until retirement, but the Courts Act 1971, following earlier legislation, gives to the Lord Chancellor a power, seldom used, to remove Circuit judges for ‘misbehaviour or incapacity’.
For these reasons, if none other, the Lord Chancellor, is more than a nominal head of the judiciary.
As well as being a Cabinet Minister and Speaker of the House of Lords he sits as a judge, presiding over the Law Lords in the Appellate Committee when time allows.
When acting in a judicial capacity he is thrown back on his own resources, whereas in his ministerial capacity he is assisted by the staff of a major department of state.
As such, these officials are part of the executive branch of government.
VII
The word in vogue in Whitehall to describe the relationship between the Home Office, the Lord Chancellor's Department and the Crown Prosecution Service is trilateralism.
It was the arrival on the scene of the last named that precipitated a new relationship.
The Permanent Secretaries at the Home Office and the Lord Chancellor's Department decided that the fledgling service had to be welcomed into the fold and helped to become an effective department.
Neither the Cabinet Office, nor the three responsible Ministers: the Home Secretary, the Lord Chancellor and the Attorney General, were party to the initiative, except in the sense of agreeing to the holding of regular meetings by their senior officials.
Even before the advent of the Crown Prosecution Service, the Home Office had extended the hand of friendship to the Lord Chancellor's Department, recognizing that it made no sense for each of them to prepare their annual public expenditure forecasts in isolation from the other.
After the Director of Public Prosecutions (DPP) had taken charge of the Crown Prosecution Service he was invited to join in their discussions, so completing the triangle.
Towards the end of 1987, Ministers decided that the informal links between the three departments should be strengthened and put onto a more systematic basis.
Ministerial trilateral meetings were inaugurated in order to discuss current government business, and not just litigation as had tended to be the case previously.
Their contacts were underpinned by meetings between officials from the three departments at every level between Permanent Secretary and Grade 7.
Two day conferences of the Permanent Secretaries are now held annually, with meetings between Grade 2 officers (Deputy Secretaries) taking place at intervals of two or three months, in each case supplemented by frequent day to day contacts.
The basic premise of the meetings has been that ‘co-operation between the various agencies which comprise the criminal justice system is crucial to the successful operation of the system as a whole’.
Obvious as the proposition may sound, the aim is not always realized, or sometimes attempted, by departments with overlapping interests and markedly different histories and traditions.
Moreover, departmental rivalries are endemic in the style of central government whereby competitive bids are made for limited financial resources.
Trilateralism was certainly an effective antidote to isolationism, even if it did not extinguish the assertiveness shown by the Lord Chancellor's Department in securing a faster growth in the rate of expenditure on the courts and legal aid than did the Home Office on the police and prisons.
The three departments did, however, discuss the figures and assumptions on which their public expenditure survey bids depended, partially in a genuine spirit of co-operation, but also as a defensive tactic against Treasury inclinations towards divide and rule.
Information and opinions are now exchanged on broad questions of strategy, policy and resources; the preparation of legislation and White and Green Papers; the gathering of statistics about the operation of the system; and the uses of technology in the courts and in the preparation of cases.
The efficiency of the Magistrates' courts, the tensions between the Probation Service and the Crown Court over social inquiry reports, and the need to widen opportunities for members of ethnic minorities, were examples of the kind of item which exercised officials in recent times.
There is also a Senior Liaison Committee, which includes representatives from the three departments, and from the Police and the Justices' Clerks, which meets twice a year under the chairmanship of the Director of Public Prosecutions.
This Committee is an operational extension of trilateralism, intended originally to enable the DPP to interpose himself more effectively on the practical interface between the CPS, the police and the courts.
In the formative stages, unavoidably perhaps, relationships were tense and difficult, with a great deal at stake in terms of the resources and status of each service.
As they have settled down, the Committee has concentrated on the specific delivery of services within the system.
In a newer development, which belongs in Chapter 9, the civil service Heads of the Home Office, the Lord Chancellor's Department, and the Department of Health, together with the DPP, sit on the Criminal Justice Consultative Council.
With a wider membership than the committees already mentioned, the Council was established in 1992, initially under the chairmanship of the Permanent Under-Secretary at the Home Office, Sir Clive Whitmore, to implement one of the recommendations of Lord Justice Woolf's Report into the prison disturbances of 1990: the creation of a national forum to promote better understanding, co-operation and co-ordination in the criminal justice system.
The centralized administration of the courts, and the acquisition of new responsibilities, has given the Lord Chancellor's Department more of a leading role in the operation of criminal justice.
None of the transfers were consciously designed to counterbalance or diminish the authority of the Home Office, yet the stature of the new arrival has visibly grown at its expense.
On the victim in court project, for instance, officials from the Lord Chancellor's Department have worked closely with Victim Support, one of the existing ‘clients’ of the Home Office.
It was symptomatic that when the judges were excluded from membership of the area consultative committees in the formative stages by a ruling by Lane, that it was the Circuit or courts administrators from the Lord Chancellor's Department who were identified as being best placed to act as chairmen, rather than Home Office officials who were unable to draw on any existing regional organization.
Despite all the fence-mending that has gone on, relations have been, and remain, strained at times, leading to frequently repeated disavowals of territorial ambition by the Lord Chancellor's Department.
The expansion, it is pointed out, relates solely to administration, with responsibility for the formulation of criminal policy being retained in the hands of the Home Office.
Adherence to same orthodoxy was reflected in the phrasing of the Labour Party's policy review in advance of the 1992 General Election.
In a commitment to set up a Department for Legal Administration, Labour's alternative White Paper stated:
This would replace the present Lord Chancellor's Department which administers a very substantial budget, but which is not directly accountable to the House of Commons.
The new department would be headed by a Minister in the House of Commons and would be responsible for the administration of justice.
The Home Office would retain powers over policing, penal policy, and the criminal law.
Many of the issues raised in this alternative White Paper would fall within the remit of the new department.
Britain is not yet ready for a Ministry of Justice, but if such a change were to come it is unlikely that the distinction between administration and policy would endure for long.
The main argument for a separate Ministry, more extensive in range than a Department of Legal Administration, is that the regulatory functions of the Home Office: the maintenance of public order, the strength of the police, the operation of the prisons and the penal system, immigration control and extradition, create unavoidable conflicts with the promotion of justice.
Many people at the Home Office would deny this, arguing that the imperatives of fairness and justice should permeate every branch of its work and cannot be hived off and left to others.
The debate is a profound one and it is only just beginning to reach out to a wider audience.
In its next, more public phase, it is likely to be dominated as much by events as by concepts.
The remarkable growth of the Lord Chancellor's chambers into a major department of State has been the most telling event yet.
As its rival has acquired new functions, the Home Office, so long a repository for a bewildering assortment of responsibilities, has been losing them.
In April 1992, the month in which responsibility for the financing, organization and management of the Magistrates' courts passed to the Lord Chancellor's Department, machinery of government changes made in the aftermath of the General Election transferred five existing Home Office functions to other departments.
Four of them went to the new Department of National Heritage.
They were: broadcasting policy; safety at sports grounds; the issues of press freedom and privacy which had been considered by a committee under the chairmanship of (Sir) David Calcutt QC in 1989–90, leading to a further review of the effectiveness of newspaper self-regulation; and the proposed National Lottery.
Gambling policy stayed with the Home Office, and although the Department of National Heritage would be responsible for the legislation to create the lottery, it would do so in conjunction with the Home Office.
The list was completed by the transfer to the Department of Employment of responsibility for co-ordinating government policy on issues of particular concern to women and for sex equality policy.
There were no inward transfers.
Although large numbers of staff are not involved, the changes will lead to a reduction in Home Office manpower.
The future of the Prison Service is likely to have far greater impact.
Once it achieves agency status, the Lord Chancellor's Department will outnumber the Home Office.
Numerical strength does not necessarily confer power, but in Whitehall it has always counted towards influence.
Too many signs to ignore are now pointing towards the dawning of a new era in which the dominant hold exercised by the Home Office over the system of criminal justice, the connecting thread of this book, may be lessened if not relinquished altogether.
Ministering to a Gentler Age, 1947–65
I
Commending the Criminal Justice Bill to Parliament in 1947 the Home Secretary, Chuter Ede, said that it followed closely on the lines of a Bill which had been before the House of Commons in the session 1938/9.
The previous Bill had passed through Committee and was well advanced ‘when international affairs so occupied the time of this House that it was impossible to carry the Measure to the Statute Book’.
The circumlocution obscured the compelling fact that the earlier Bill had been abandoned two months after the outbreak of war with Germany.
That all thoughts of penal reform had not been completely shelved for the duration of hostilities was shown by a written answer to a Parliamentary Question addressed to the Home Secretary in April 1944.
Asked whether he would consider re-introducing the pre-war Criminal Justice Bill, Herbert Morrison replied:
I share my hon Friend's appreciation of the value and importance of the large reforms proposed in the Bill of 1939, and when I decided, as I announced on 23rd March, to appoint an Advisory Council to assist in the preparation of a programme of reforms, I certainly had it in mind that many of the proposals in that Bill — improved it may be by further consideration and fresh ideas — might find a place in such a programme.
Two days earlier the Home Secretary had sent a minute to the Prime Minister explaining that he proposed to answer on these lines.
Although pre-occupied with planning the invasion of the continent of Europe (Operation Overlord) which came on 6 June 1944, Winston Churchill devoted his attention to a matter which must have seemed far removed from the great events by which he was surrounded.
On 13 April, in the midst of a period described by his biographer as ‘…these trying, troubled days with ‘Overlord’ looming…’, the Prime Minister responded in unmistakably personal terms:
I should not advise raising this topic at the present time.
So many people are having very hard things demanded of them, and our prisons have been vastly reformed in the last 30 years or so.
I should have thought it was very ill-timed to feature this.
Sir Samuel Hoare was very keen, and in 1937 he insisted on leaving the Admiralty in order to make a great feature of prison reform.
He was pretty well adrift from realities at that time.
I should recommend waiting for a gentler age than that in which we are condemned for a while to dwell.
Sticking to his guns in the face of this majestic broadside called for courage and skill.
In a minute drafted in his own hand, with many crossings out and revisions in the original, Morrison replied:
I hope you will not think that I, too, am ‘adrift from realities’ if I return to the charge and stake out a claim for a Penal Reform Bill in our legislative programme of social reconstruction after the war.
Indeed, I am very conscious of the desirability of avoiding ‘sloppiness’.
The question at issue is not so much prison reform — although our prison buildings are now shamefully antiquated, obsolete and, for the most part, entirely unsuitable for use as penal establishments — as the provision of up-to-date and more enlightened methods of dealing with the problem of treating the offender, and in particular the juvenile offender.
This is not a sentimental journey in quest of ways and means of making life easier for the offender, but a realistic attempt to tackle the economic problem of saving the community from the losses and suffering caused by the anti-social activities of criminals.
The initiative does not rest with me or with the Home Office.
All the organisations interested in penal reform are disappointed that the Criminal Justice Bill did not pass into law before the outbreak of war and will immediately on the termination of hostilities in Europe bring pressure to bear on the Government to reintroduce that Bill, with or without amendment.
Even if the Government do not propose legislation themselves, I imagine that some Private Member will introduce a Bill and I must confess that I can see no way of postponing this issue to a ‘gentler age’.
In these circumstances, I hope you will feel able to concur in my view that this is not an issue which can be postponed and that the Government must face up to its responsibilities of trying to find a solution to an urgent social and economic problem, it being, of course, understood that there should be no interference with the war effort.
And, of course, I realise that when I bring forward proposals they will have to be judged on their merits.
With magnanimity, perhaps mindful of his own ambitious plans for prison reforms more than thirty years earlier, the Prime Minister minuted on 10 May: By all means mature your proposals.
When finally published in 1947, the provisions of the post-war Criminal Justice Bill had a predictable, even inevitable, quality.
Ede was no innovator, and the Bill was regarded as something of a disappointment by some of his Party colleagues, in the Cabinet as well as on the backbenches.
The changes incorporated in the legislation represented the end product of a gradual, and in the event protracted, evolution since the mid-1930's.
Few of the proposals were contentious, leaving the debate to be sharpened by the emotive issues of corporal punishment, which was included in the Bill as presented to Parliament on Second Reading, and the death penalty, which was not.
Under the Bill, whipping was to be abolished as a punishment ordered by the courts, being retained only in prisons (but not in borstals) as a penalty for the most serious infringements of prison discipline.
Having defended the exclusion of capital punishment at Second Reading, the Home Secretary and his Ministerial colleagues conceded a free vote on a new clause moved at Report stage by a private member, Sydney Silverman, which had the effect of suspending the death penalty for murder for an experimental period of five years.
The decision was an uncomfortable one which had troubled Ministers over several months and caused dissension in the Labour Party.
Between June 1947 and July 1948 the Cabinet considered capital punishment six times.
It was not simply the well-rehearsed and deeply felt arguments for and against abolition which exercised and divided its members, but the proper role of the Government on what was seen as a question of conscience.
In a paper dated 2 March 1947, prepared for the Lord President's Committee and later circulated to the Cabinet, the Home Secretary forecast the outlines of the coming controversy:
There are two issues upon which controversy is likely to centre in connection with these proposals.
The first is the abolition of the powers of courts to pass sentence of corporal punishment.
This was the subject of a unanimous recommendation by the Departmental Committee on Corporal Punishment which reported in 1938 after a most careful and exhaustive enquiry into the whole subject.
I propose that the new Bill, like the Bill of 1938, should contain a provision to carry out this recommendation.
The second issue is the question of the abolition or suspension of capital punishment.
During the Committee Stage of the 1938 Bill an amendment was moved to suspend the death penalty for a period of five years.
The Select Committee on Capital Punishment, 1929–30, recommended the abolition of capital punishment for an experimental period of five years, and an amendment in this sense is likely to be moved if a new Criminal Justice Bill is introduced.
I would propose that any such amendment should be resisted on the ground that it is inappropriate that such a far-reaching change in the law should be included in a Criminal Justice Bill, and that, if any such change in the law were to be effected, it should be after full consideration in a separate Bill dealing solely with this subject.
The Cabinet considered the Home Secretary's paper at a meeting on 19 June 1947.
The proposal to abolish corporal punishment as a judicial penalty was approved, although the minutes record the Lord Chancellor, Lord Jowitt, as saying that he was still of the opinion that it would be unwise to abolish the powers of courts to pass sentences of corporal punishment, and would have favoured the retention of the use of the birch.
Nevertheless, he realised that for political reasons it would be very difficult to do less than had been proposed in the Bill introduced in 1938.
The minutes continued:
The Cabinet then discussed the question of the abolition of capital punishment.
It was agreed that it would be impossible to draft the title of the Bill in such a way as to exclude an amendment to abolish capital punishment, and that it would be unconvincing to argue that the inclusion in the Bill of a provision for the abolition of capital punishment would be inappropriate.
On the question whether on merits it would be desirable to abolish capital punishment Ministers were divided.
It was urged, on the one hand, that public opinion was not yet ready for the abolition of capital punishment and that it would be particularly unwise to abolish it at the present time when there was an abnormal amount of robbery with violence.
The judges were convinced that the fear of capital punishment was a real deterrent, and it was difficult to see what effective alternative punishment could be inflicted on murderers.
Moreover, if capital punishment were abolished in this country, it would be difficult to justify its retention in the Colonies and in the British Zone of Germany.
On the other hand, it was argued that the infliction of capital punishment was degrading to the public and that there was no real evidence of its deterrent effect.
Thus, practically all the cases of murder which the Home Secretary had had to consider during the past two years had been unpremeditated.
The attitude of the Bench to past proposals for the reform of the criminal law did not suggest that their judgment in such a matter was reliable, and those Government supporters in Parliament who had given most study to the matter were unanimously in favour of abolition.
In further discussion the suggestion was made that the best course would be to introduce the Bill without any provision abolishing capital punishment and to explain in the Second Reading debate that, since the question of capital punishment was one on which there were differences of opinion transcending Party lines, the Government felt that the matter should be left to a free vote.
It should be made clear, however, that, since the matter was obviously one which should be considered by the House as a whole, it would have to be dealt with at the Report Stage.
THE PRIME MINISTER suggested that the Cabinet should resume their discussion of the question of the abolition of capital punishment at a further meeting.
This would not preclude the Home Secretary from completing the preparation of the rest of the Bill.
A month later, on 15 July, the Cabinet had before it a further memorandum from the Home Secretary which ventilated some alternative strategies:
How should the matter be handled in Parliament?
In view of the evident division of opinion among Ministers, it was suggested at the meeting of the Cabinet on 19th June that the best course would be to introduce the Criminal Justice Bill without any provision abolishing capital punishment and to explain in the Second Reading Debate that since the question of capital punishment was one on which there were differences of opinion transcending Party lines, the Government felt that the matter should be left to a free vote on the Report Stage of the Bill.
There are, of course, objections to the proposal that the Government should not take the initiative in this matter.
To leave it to a free vote of the House might be taken as an indication that the Government had not made up its mind and would be an invitation to the House of Lords to delete from the Bill the clause abolishing the death penalty.
When the Bill came back to the Commons the question whether its reinsertion should be left again to a free vote of the House would raise some very difficult problems.
Unless, therefore, we decide to resist the proposal, however strong may be its supporters in the House of Commons, there is much to be said for taking the initiative and inserting in the Bill, as introduced, a clause for the abolition of the death penalty.
There is an alternative to either of these courses which may be worth considering and that is that the Government should take the line that they have come to the conclusion that, while some restriction ought to be made in the infliction of the death penalty, the time has not yet come for its complete abolition.
On these grounds they would propose to resist the clause proposing abolition, but, in order to enable the House to consider whether there should be a more frequent recommendation for the exercise of the Royal Prerogative, the Government would propose to table a Resolution in the same sort of terms as that included in the conditional recommendations of the Select Committee [of the House of Commons on Capital Punishment, 1929–30], and that if such a Resolution were passed, the practice governing recommendations for the exercise of the Prerogative would be altered accordingly.
The minutes disclose continuing differences of view.
The Lord Chancellor:
thought that,…in preference to the suggestion that there might be more frequent recommendations for the exercise of the Royal Prerogative, it might be possible to introduce a system similar to that adopted in some parts of the United States under which a distinction was made between murder in the first and second degree, the death penalty being reserved for cases of the former kind.
At the end of the discussion the Cabinet:
(1)
Invited the Home Secretary to ascertain whether it would be possible to draft the title of the Criminal Justice Bill in such a way as to exclude any amendment for the abolition of capital punishment;
(2)
Invited the Lord President to take soundings among Government supporters with a view to determining whether it would be possible to persuade those who were in favour of the abolition of capital punishment that in the interests of securing the passage of the Criminal Justice Bill in the 1947–48 Session they should refrain from pressing for this change in the law;
(3)
Invited the Home Secretary to circulate a memorandum to the Cabinet on the suggestion made by the Lord Chancellor that it might be possible to distinguish between certain types of murder for which capital punishment would be retained and other types for which it would be abolished.
The Home Secretary accordingly circulated a further paper on 28 July.
It dealt with the point about the title of the Bill, concluding:
I do not see on what grounds it could be argued that an amendment on the subject of Capital Punishment is outside the scope of a comprehensive Bill amending the law relating to the methods by which the courts are empowered to deal with offenders.
The paper went on to consider the question of ‘The Grading of Murders’, traversing the same ground as a Royal Commission would do six years later, and reaching the same negative conclusions, except that Ede rejected the idea of giving the jury any discretion:
…
The fundamental principle…of our law is that the Jury has only the function of determining the question of guilt or innocence, and is relieved of any responsibility for the subsequent penalty.
As the Select Committee of 1930 pointed out in their Report, ‘the evidence before the court is restricted to what is directly relative to the proof of the charge and excludes many weighty considerations that are thrown into the balance when the Home Secretary is advising on the Prerogative of Mercy’.
The Committee said grading by the Jury ‘would lead to great inequality of judgment and administration’.
There is the further consideration that if after a Jury has deliberately decided that a person ought to be put to death, the Home Secretary should nevertheless find it his duty to recommend clemency, there would appear to be a conflict between the Crown and the Jury.
On 7 August the Cabinet accepted Ede's conclusions that an amendment providing for the abolition of capital punishment could not be ruled out of order on the grounds that it did not come within the scope of the Bill, and that it would be impossible to grade murders into those for which capital punishment would be retained and those for which it would be abolished.
The Attorney General, Sir Hartley Shawcross, agreed with the Lord Chancellor that the grading of murders would be unworkable, adding that he still remained in favour of providing for the abolition of capital punishment in the Bill.
II
After the Summer Recess the Cabinet reverted to the subject of capital punishment on 3 November, with the Lord President of the Council reporting on the results of the soundings of Government supporters which he had taken at the request of the Cabinet at its meeting on 15 July.
Since then he had attended a meeting of the Parliamentary Labour Party at which he, the Lord Chancellor and the Home Secretary had spoken.
It was clear to Morrison, as the chief manager of Government business, that:
…
Government supporters would make no difficulties over the fact that the Criminal Justice Bill, as introduced, contained no provision for the abolition of capital punishment.
It was equally clear, however, that an amendment to abolish capital punishment would be moved in the course of the proceedings of [sic]the Bill in the House of Commons and that it would be strongly pressed by a substantial number of Government supporters.
A majority of those attending the meeting of the Parliamentary Labour Party had favoured the abolition of the death penalty; and the strength of their feeling on this issue was such that it was most unlikely that they could be persuaded to refrain from voting for the amendment.
The Cabinet agreed that in these circumstances it was inevitable that the decision on this issue should be left to a free vote.
Discussion then turned on [sic]the question whether the Government should give any guidance to the House on the merits of the issue, and whether Ministers should also be free to vote in accordance with their personal convictions.
On this question opinion was divided.
Some Ministers felt that this was wholly a matter for the conscience or judgment of the individual, and that Ministers who held strong views on the moral issue should not be asked to subordinate those views to a collective decision of the Cabinet.
Other Ministers argued that, while the moral issue might be a matter of personal conviction, the Government as such had a duty to advise Parliament on the probable consequences of abolishing the death penalty.
The Government were responsible for the preservation of law and order, and must assume the responsibility of a collective decision on the risks to law and order which the abolition of the death penalty might involve.
After an inconclusive discussion, the Cabinet agreed to return at a later meeting to the question ‘whether the Government, as such, should tender advice to the House of Commons on the abolition of the death penalty’.
The debate resumed on 18 November, when the Cabinet had two more papers before it dealing with capital punishment and the role of government.
In the first, the Home Secretary proposed a fixed (ie mandatory) sentence of imprisonment for life as an alternative penalty for murder if the abolitionists' amendment were carried.
The argument that convicted murderers should be subjected to more rigorous conditions than other long sentenced prisoners was rejected, with the implication that detention for more than ten years should be avoided whenever possible:
If the death penalty were abolished it would be possible either to substitute a fixed penalty of imprisonment for life or to give the Judge discretion to pass sentence of any term up to imprisonment for life.
The Select Committee recommended the first course and said that the life sentence should be interpreted and administered in the same way as the sentence to which a reprieved murderer is subject at present.
This course seems preferable.
There are some reprieved murderers whom it is right to release on licence after very short periods of imprisonment (for example, a mother who kills an imbecile child from merciful motives), and it would be undesirable in such cases for a court publicly to pass a sentence of imprisonment for a few months or for a year or two, and thereby to create the impression that the taking of human life may in certain circumstances be no graver a crime than theft.
If, when the jury returns a verdict of murder, the Judge has no option but to pass a sentence of imprisonment for life, it will rest with the Home Secretary to decide when the prisoner shall be released on licence.
In many cases of murder detention would no doubt be necessary for at least ten years.
In some cases longer detention would be requisite, and there may from time to time be murderers who can never be released.
For purposes of prison administration it is essential that the cases where the prisoner is never released should be exceptional and that there should be maintained amongst those serving life sentences a general hope of release and consequent incentive to good behaviour.
Moreover, experience shows that imprisonment for more than about ten years is liable to have so deleterious an effect on the prisoner that longer detention should be avoided whenever possible.
The conditions under which murderers would serve their life sentences must be no more rigorous than those applied to other long-sentence prisoners.
The longer the period of detention the greater is the need for creating in the prison conditions which will keep alive the prisoner's mental interests and social instincts.
It has been suggested that in some countries where capital punishment has been abolished the alternative is the imprisonment of murderers under more rigorous conditions than are applicable to other prisoners, but from the information collected by the Select Committee it appears that this suggestion is unfounded.
The evidence given to the Select Committee showed that in Norway and Belgium it was the practice to keep in solitary confinement prisoners (whether sentenced for murder or for other crimes) who had not a criminal record, but this method was adopted for reformative purposes and for protecting such prisoners from contamination by other prisoners.
In the second paper, the Secretary of State for Scotland (Arthur Woodburn) argued that it was the duty of the Government to give a lead:
On an issue so important as that of the death penalty I feel that the House is entitled to expect a lead from the Government; we fail in our duty unless we give the view of those responsible for maintaining law and security for the citizens.
I have reluctantly come to the conclusion that the lead should be in favour of retaining the death penalty for the present.
But I feel that the policy practised in the Scottish Courts of accepting a doctrine of diminished or impaired responsibility should be encouraged in order that murders which are clearly partly by accident, impulse or temporary madness or passion should be treated differently from those crimes which constitute a deliberate war against society.
This would in effect abolish capital punishment in most cases though it would remain in reserve in case of need and to prevent fear arising from its complete abolition.
The strongly differing reactions to the two papers were recorded in the minutes:
The Cabinet first considered whether it was their duty to advise Parliament that the abolition of the death penalty would involve serious risks to law and order.
On this point THE HOME SECRETARY said that there was no reliable evidence that the abolition of the death penalty in foreign countries had been followed by a significant increase in the number of murders.
It was true that those concerned with the enforcement of the law in this country were apprehensive that the abolition of the death penalty would be followed by an increase in crimes of violence; but their predecessors had in the past opposed for the same reason the abolition of the death penalty for offences less serious than murder and their apprehensions had not in the event proved justified.
On the other hand, THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR SCOTLAND urged that the experience of countries like Norway and Sweden did not justify the conclusion that the death penalty could safely be abolished in this country, where conditions were different.
He attached special importance to the risk that the withdrawal of this penalty might lead to an increase in crimes of violence by gangsters in large centres of population like Glasgow and London.
In further discussion, it was suggested that, even though opinion was divided on the merits and on the question whether the abolition of the death penalty would in normal circumstances give rise to an increase in the number of murders, the Cabinet might be able to agree that this was not an appropriate moment at which to take the risk of abolishing the death penalty.
There was a substantial body of opinion which would support the view that, whatever convictions were held on the merits, it would be inopportune to introduce this experiment in the unsettled conditions following a major war, when the number of violent crimes was abnormally high and respect for the sanctity of human life had inevitably been impaired by the circumstances of war.
It was difficult for the Government to judge in present circumstances whether a majority of the electors desired that capital punishment should be abolished.
Would it not be preferable, therefore, if the Government, while avoiding any expression of opinion on the merits, advised Parliament that this was not an opportune moment at which to make this important change in the law?
The reference to the wishes of the electorate, although seldom recorded in the minutes of the Cabinet, was unlikely to have been far from the minds of those Ministers responsible for the conduct of government business.
As Shawcross later recalled:
It was of course appreciated that the public at large was in favour of retaining the death penalty and that its abolition would be likely to lose votes for the Labour Party.
How far this influenced some members of the government it is difficult to say but I have no doubt it was one of the factors which led to a majority being against abolition.
The measured prose of the final sentence of the Cabinet minute surely deserves a place in The Handbook of Political Fallacies .
Among the fallacies of delay, Bentham listed the Procrastinator's Argument, or ‘Wait a Little, This is Not The Time’:
Under this head belongs every form of words by which, in speaking of a proposed measure of relief, an intimation is given that the time at which the proposal is made, whenever it may be, is too early for the purpose.
The habits and compromises of political life have not much changed since the early part of the last century.
It is still true that the tactic of procrastination is often employed by those who are basically hostile to the purpose of a measure.
Sometimes, however, they prefer not to appear to be opposed, claiming to be generally sympathetic to the proposal, differing only on the appropriate time to bring it forward.
By its nature, the argument of timing is subjective; assertions can be and frequently are advanced on the scantest of evidence.
The doubts and fears of the archetypal political procrastinator were aptly summed up by Bentham:
Rest assured that whatever he finds too soon today, tomorrow he will also find too soon, if not too late.
Cabinet minutes do not reveal the numerical division of opinion for and against decisions which then become Government policy by which, in theory at least, all Ministers are bound.
One well informed historian of the period believes that the Cabinet was in favour of retaining the death penalty by a majority of eleven to five, and this estimate was to be borne out in a vote in the Commons the following April.
Each of the Ministers with their hands on the levers of Whitehall power on the issue: the Lord President (Morrison), the Lord Chancellor (Jowitt), the Home Secretary (Ede), and the Scottish Secretary (Woodburn), was numbered among the majority.
But any minority that included Sir Stafford Cripps, who had succeeded Hugh Dalton as Chancellor of the Exchequer on 13 November 1947, and Aneurin Bevan was unlikely to have gone unheard.
Moreover, they could count on widespread support on the Labour benches of the House of Commons where abolition was a popular cause.
In such a setting, it would not have been surprising if an authentically Benthamite flavour had permeated the debates in Cabinet.
The outcome was that at the meeting on 18 November, the Cabinet:
(1)
Agreed that in the proceedings on the Criminal Justice Bill the Government should advise Parliament that the present was not an opportune time for abolishing capital punishment; and took note that the Home Secretary would define the Government's attitude towards this question when moving the Second Reading of the Bill in the House of Commons;
(2)
Reaffirmed their decision of 3rd November that the decision on this issue should be left to a free vote, preferably on the Report stage of the Bill in the House of Commons; and agreed that Ministers who dissented from the advice which was to be tendered in accordance with Conclusion above should be free, if they so desired, to vote for the abolition of the death penalty, though they should refrain from expressing in debate views contrary to that advice;…
III
The freedom of abolitionist Ministers to vote for Silverman's new clause did not survive the volatile pressures of party politics.
On 9 April 1948, less than a week before the crucial debate at Report Stage in the House of Commons:
THE LORD PRESIDENT invited the Cabinet to review their decision that Ministers should be free to vote against the advice which was to be given on this issue by the responsible Minister as representing the considered view of the Government.
It was undesirable in principle that Ministers who shared a collective responsibility should vote in different Lobbies, even on an issue of this kind…
The Cabinet accepted Morrison's request, agreeing that:
members of the Government (including Law Officers and junior Ministers) who felt unable, on grounds of conscience, to vote against the abolition of the death penalty should abstain from voting in the Divisions to be taken on this issue in the proceedings on the Criminal Justice Bill.
At the start of the following week, James Callaghan, then a young Parliamentary Secretary, was among a group of Ministers outside the Cabinet who were summoned to be told of the Cabinet's decision.
It was a stormy meeting during which Callaghan was one of those who clashed angrily with Morrison, arguing that the abandonment of the free vote meant pressurising them to change their convictions, or at least to keep them in cold storage.
Winding up for the Government when the new clause was debated in the House of Commons on 14 April 1948, Ede faithfully followed the Cabinet's line, expounding the case for retention on the grounds that public opinion was not conducive to any change, adding as a supporting argument that the unarmed police had to contend with a ‘class of gangster and armed criminal which hardly existed at all before the war’.
The House as a whole did not find the Home Secretary's arguments convincing, accepting the clause by 245 to 222, a majority of twenty-three.
Despite the diligence of the Government Whips, an unusually large number of MPs, amounting to 173 including the Law Officers and several Ministers, abstained in the division (or were absent).
The five Cabinet members who indicated their sympathy for the abolitionist cause by abstaining were: Cripps, Bevan, Arthur Creech Jones, Philip Noel-Baker and Harold Wilson.
Eight of their colleagues followed the Prime Minister, Clement Attlee, into the No Lobby.
They were: A. V. Alexander, Ernest Bevin, Ede, George Isaacs, Morrison, George Tomlinson, Tom Williams and Woodburn.
Throughout the debate it was evident that opinions were fervently held and eloquently expressed.
On all sides: the abolitionists, the retentionists, and the abstainers, the vote was recognized as a momentous one in which the consciences of Members of Parliament came up against a profound issue transcending party politics.
The Times described an emotional scene:
Excitement had been steadily rising in the crowded chamber during the closing stages of the debate on a new clause to be added to the Criminal Justice Bill, but jubilation found vent in a roar of cheering when it was evident how the vote had gone…
Excited members stood in their places and waved their Order Papers, while others shook hands with their nearest neighbours.
It was some minutes before the hubbub died down.
When it reached the more sober atmosphere of the Upper House, the clause was decisively rejected, again on a free vote (except for the Government Front Bench), by a majority of 153 (181 votes to 28), despite a powerful plea in its support by Viscount Templewood, who, as Sir Samuel Hoare, had been the Home Secretary so enthused about pre-war prison reform.
By one of those somersaults that can make Parliament so perplexing, whereas Ministers in the Commons had been forbidden to vote for abolition, in the Lords they were instructed to support the suspension of the death penalty for five years.
The reasoning was that in the interval the Home Secretary had announced on Third Reading in the Commons that the Government accepted the decision reached by a majority of the House.
Welcome as the Cabinet's new policy must have been to some Ministers in the Lords, such as Lord Pakenham, then Minister of Civil Aviation and an abolitionist to his fingertips, voting for suspension cannot have been an agreeable experience for the unyieldingly retentionist Lord Chancellor, Jowitt.
Shorn of its new clause, the Bill returned to the Commons.
Now it was the Attorney General, Shawcross, who moved an amendment limiting capital punishment to a number of specific types of murder, a compromise which had been canvassed by Jowitt in Cabinet on 15 July 1947, but favoured neither by Shawcross nor by a majority of the Cabinet at that stage.
His line of argument was the only respectable one open to him: that it was historically consistent with the way the death penalty had been restricted progressively to crimes of murder to propose a further restriction to certain categories of murder only.
After a much interrupted speech that lasted for nearly an hour, he ended resoundingly:
I believe that the best way in which the State can encourage respect for human life is by refraining from taking life itself, unless it is compelled to do so by the direst and most certain necessity.
A heated debate followed in which Churchill, drawing on his own experience as Home Secretary nearly forty years earlier, led for the Opposition.
The outcome, however, was unchanged; the compromise clause meeting the same fate as the amendment suspending the death penalty, being carried in the Commons, but again defeated in the Lords.
This time with the Parliamentary Recess fast approaching, the Government urged the Commons not to insist on its disagreement with the Lords.
In winding up, Morrison stated explicitly that the Whips were on, warning that if ‘this House tonight proceeds to disagree with the Lords…then the Bill is dead’.
With many abstentions, the Commons reluctantly followed his advice, the Government obtaining 215 votes to thirty-four in the division.
On 30 July, the last day before the Summer Recess, battered but relieved Ministers, their policy of retention rejected by the elected House but upheld by the hereditary peers, saw the Act finally onto the statute book in largely the same form as it had been introduced nine months earlier.
The predicament of the Attorney General during the protracted proceedings had been particularly awkward.
Unlike Attlee or Morrison, Shawcross had been firmly opposed to the death penalty for many years as a result of his experience as counsel in a number of murder cases, usually acting for the prosecution.
Before the Cabinet reached its final decision, Shawcross asked for a special meeting with the Prime Minister and Morrison in which he strongly pressed his point of view:
Attlee, for his part, was equally strong in urging me to accept the majority opinion.
In the end I agreed to do this but I remember leaving the meeting literally, I am afraid, in tears and saying that although I would obey the majority I would resign from the Government afterwards as quietly as I could because I should have failed to uphold an almost lifelong conviction…
As to the compromise clause, I think there is no doubt that Morrison was the initiator of this proposal.
I myself thought that the matter was one on which no degrees of murder could be properly invented and was very loath to move the clause, but I was the Attorney-General at the time and it was my duty as Chief Law Officer to carry out the decision of the Cabinet.
Churchill had a great time in leading for the Opposition and made what I thought was a splendid speech — but then he usually did.
Once Shawcross had agreed to lead for the Government in the debate on the compromise clause, the possibility of a damaging resignation receded.
Perhaps Morrison had foreseen this, yet in the event it was a considerate and generous letter, sent from 10 Downing Street in Attlee's own hand, which did much to help to avert the potential embarrassment of losing from his Government not only the Attorney General, but also one of Labour's coming men.
Noting that Shawcross had voted with the Government in not opposing the Lords amendments on 22 July, Attlee said that he was very grateful as he knew the strength of Shawcross's views.
In fact he had sent a message via the Chief Whip telling him that if he felt he must abstain he was at liberty to do so.
The letter continued:
You may, perhaps, have thought that I put my point of view too emphatically to you on a matter on which you hold strong views, whereas I am not a partisan on the question of the death penalty.
Long experience has, however, shown to me the danger of the good being lost through the devotion of some to what they think to be the best.
I was, therefore, necessarily concerned to put the matter before you in what I considered to be its right perspective.
This is the inevitable duty of a Prime Minister or Leader of a Party who wants to keep the team together, having regard to the major objectives of the Party.
We shall now have to consider what is the best approach to the subject in the light of existing circumstances.
With all good wishes, Yours sincerely C R Attlee
IV
In addition to ending corporal punishment as a penalty available to the courts, the Criminal Justice Act 1948 abolished penal servitude and hard labour; established new arrangements for the supervision of discharged prisoners; put preventive detention and borstal training onto a new footing; introduced corrective training, detention centres and attendance centres; and revised the law on probation.
Of direct interest only to the most  rarefied of all constituencies of criminal justice was the abolition of the privilege of peers to be tried before a special court composed of members of the House of Lords if charged with the commission of certain crimes.
A new clause, proposed by Lord Simon, the former Lord Chancellor, had been added at Committee Stage.
The Home Secretary had previously informed the Cabinet that he would have included a provision to this effect in the Bill if he had not thought it preferable to leave it to the Lords to take the initiative.
These measures had resulted from a long period of maturation and fitted into Morrison's 1944 vision of a ‘legislative programme of social reconstruction’ after the war had ended.
Less certain was whether the measures themselves fitted the changed nature and mood of post-war British society.
In the mid-1930s, when the policies were taking shape, the numbers sentenced to imprisonment had declined, the annual prison intake having fallen by more than two thirds between 1910 and 1934.
Prisons and institutions for young offenders were closing down, probation was thriving, and more time was allowed to pay fines.
As a later report on the prisons was to claim: ‘In a variety of ways in the inter-war period, Britain became the centre of the prison reform movement’.
Constructive ideals of training and rehabilitation were translated into penal policies that appeared to be meeting their objectives.
The reformist outlook on the aims of punishment was not seriously challenged by the slow, but continuously upward, movement of indictable crime throughout the 1920s and 1930s.
In 1938, however, a higher proportion of prisoners (51.3%) was still serving sentences for non-indictable offences than for indictable offences (48.7%).
By 1945 the picture was very different.
Indictable offences known to the police had risen by 69% since 1938, reaching a total of 478,394 compared with 283,220 in 1938.
In 1947, when the Cabinet was pre-occupied with the death penalty, the trend was still rising, with an emphasis on crimes against property.
For that year the comparable figure fell just short of half a million at 498,576.
‘The prevalence of crime’,The Times reported, and particularly its increase since the end of the war, was ‘causing grave concern over the whole of the country’.
More frequent criminal offending led to more people being sentenced to imprisonment, although not pro-rata because of the distinction between indictable and non-indictable offences.
The higher proportion of the prison population which had been sentenced to imprisonment for offences triable on indictment meant that the sentences served were longer than before, with a consequent increase in the size of the prison population overall.
The daily average population surged from 12,915 in 1944 to over 17,000 in 1947, compared with pre-war prison population figures in the range between 10,000 and 11,000.
By 1948 another sharp increase to 19,765 had occurred, with the average daily population exceeding 20,000 in July of that year.
Nothing on a similar scale had been seen since 1911.
Whereas the increase up to and including 1946 was not attributed to more people being sent to prison each year, thereafter the pattern changed with a substantial rise in the number of convicted and sentenced offenders being received from the courts.
Prisons, such as Preston and Portsmouth, which had been closed as civil prisons since the 1930s, had to be re-opened to contain the larger numbers.
While the grave concern about the prevalence of crime noted by The Times was often articulated, it was not yet politicized.
Terence Morris has described how the problem of crime:
was not regarded as a political issue in the sense that it had an important place on the agenda of party politics.
Rather, it was a kind of backdrop to everyday life.
It did not touch as many people as it does today and it would have been difficult to see precisely what kind of partisan gloss could have been put on the matter.
In the years immediately after the war there were other, infinitely more pressing, problems facing government…
The predominant atmosphere was that of social reconstruction.
Although subjected to heavy pressure from abolitionists, most of them on their own benches, the Labour Government had avoided giving any commitment on the future of the death penalty.
At the start of the next session, mindful of the head of steam that had built up on the issue, Ede announced that the Government had decided to recommend the appointment of a Royal Commission to inquire into the possible limitation or modification of the death penalty.
A few weeks later when the Prime Minister informed the House of the name of the chairman and the terms of reference, it became clear that the remit to consider ways of ‘limiting’ or ‘modifying’capital punishment for murder excluded the outright abolition of the death penalty.
That, Attlee insisted, was a matter for Parliament to decide and was not suitable for a Royal Commission.
Overshadowed by the intensity of the debates on the death penalty, the ending of judicial corporal punishment was a notable step towards the debrutalizing, if not the humanizing, of criminal justice.
Thenceforth, although punishment was still sometimes described by criminologists in terms of the ‘pain’ endured by a convicted offender as a consequence of the harm he had done, it was no longer true in the literal sense of the lawful infliction of physical injury by the punisher on the punished.
The controversy smouldered on for several years fuelled by the entrenched views of some of the judges.
Speaking in the House of Lords, the most formidable of all criminal judges, the Lord Chief Justice, Lord Goddard, had declared:
Do away with the brutality of the ‘cat’, but keep the birch, which may hurt, which will not injure and which will bring ridicule on the person who receives it.
V
With corporal punishment abolished as a judicially imposed sentence, and capital punishment diverted, at least for a time, to a committee room in Whitehall, the decks were cleared for the first real post-war scrutiny of penal policy and methods.
The need for reappraisal in the 1950s was underlined by accumulating evidence that rising standards of material prosperity, education and social welfare had not been matched by any corresponding decline in offending.
On the contrary, the high levels of crime recorded during the war years had been maintained, and in several categories increased.
Two particularly disturbing trends had emerged.
One was that the total of indictable offences against the person, that is crimes of violence and sexual offences, had continued to move upwards since the end of the war.
The number was still small compared with offences of dishonesty, but it had increased persistently every year.
Second was a startling growth in convictions of young men aged between sixteen and twenty-one.
Offenders in this category had been responsible for more than their share of the increase in crimes of violence, but the enhanced rate of offending at these ages extended to crimes of all kinds.
Overcrowding, an ominous phenomenon, began to occur in some prisons.
It was claimed that this was caused by the greater number of convictions, and the speed at which the increase took place, rather than from any perceptible changes in sentencing practice.
Overstrain in the resources of other criminal justice agencies, the courts, borstals, approved schools, and the probation service, also became apparent.
From now on, the twin claws of the pincer that was to hold the development of penal policy fast in its grip were the remorseless increase in the incidence of crime, and the overcrowding in the prisons.
For the better part of the next forty years they were to be the decisive restraints.
The Home Office, in the skilful hands of R. A. Butler from 1957, responded rationally and empirically.
In the opinion of a senior civil servant of the day, Butler ‘had a genuine desire for prison reform without any very clear concept himself of what he wanted to achieve’.
Generally benevolent intentions, but imprecise objectives, were reflected a White Paper published in February 1959 under the title Penal Practice in a Changing Society .
The stated aim was to relate penal methods to the purposes which they were required to serve:
We need periodically to consider whether existing methods are the best that can be devised for dealing with crime in the context of society as it is at a given time.
As crime is related to the pattern and outlook of the society in which it occurs, so penal methods may need to be adapted to the society in which they must operate.
The White Paper called for a fundamental re-examination of penal methods ‘based on studies of the causes of crime, or rather of the factors which foster or inhibit crime’, supported by reliable assessments of the results achieved by existing methods.
Such a re-examination could be ‘a landmark in penal history and illumine the course ahead for a generation’.
More information was to be obtained on offenders, and their backgrounds, in order that the courts might select methods of disposal ‘most likely to achieve the ends of justice in relation to the individual offender’.
Research into the causes and treatment of delinquency was to be encouraged.
The Home Office had set up its own Research Unit in 1957, in addition to supporting criminological research in the universities and elsewhere.
Interest was aroused when the University of Cambridge declared that it was prepared, if the necessary funds could be made available, to consider the establishment of an Institute of Criminology.
Soon after a gift was announced of £150,000 by the Wolfson Foundation for a chair, and in 1960 the Institute was established under the directorship of Professor Leon Radzinowicz.
Besides carrying out a programme of research, the Institute provided full-time courses of study for post-graduate degrees in criminology and part-time courses for criminal justice practitioners.
A sterner note prefaced another statement of intent, the setting up of a Standing Committee on Criminal Law Revision: ‘In order that those deserving punishment shall not escape owing to defects in the criminal law’.
Because of their higher rate of offending, the White Paper placed special emphasis on the treatment of young male offenders between the ages of sixteen and twenty-one.
Perversely, as it must have seemed to penal reformers, the opportunities offered by borstal training, with its reformative aims, were all too often spurned by young offenders, many of whom preferred a prison sentence to borstal training on the grounds that it was usually shorter and for a more certain period.
Detention centres, dating from 1952, provided a strict regime for selected young offenders, although better suited to those without previous experience of institutional custody.
To avoid any but the worst young offenders being sent to prison, the Prison Commissioners proposed to accelerate the provision of detention centres, backed up by a new sentence of custodial training for a maximum of two years with the chance of being released on licence, subject to after-care, after six months.
The implications of introducing a national scheme of criminal injuries compensation for the victims of violent crime, one of the last causes espoused by Margery Fry, were to be investigated to see if a workable scheme could be devised.
Penal Policy in a Changing Society stands as the high watermark of what later became known as the treatment model.
Eschewing undue optimism, and the constant pressure from the pincers precluded any such temptation, the White Paper irradiated a belief in the importance of scrutinizing the causes of crime, calmly and dispassionately, in order to ascertain more effectively methods of combating it.
In doing so, it was a true reflection of the outlook and political style of the Home Secretary.
Butler had shown a keen personal interest in the preparation of the White Paper which underwent at least four drafts before it reached the finished version.
In his eyes it came to rank on a par with his Education White Paper of 1943.
In the Summer of 1958 the Home Secretary served notice to his Ministerial colleagues that he would be making demands on the Government's expenditure programme to finance his plans for a wholesale prison rebuilding scheme.
He took the precautionary step of warning the Prime Minister in advance that he had ‘no intention of embarrassing the Chancellor by making unreasonable demands on the Exchequer’.
Macmillan replied urbanely that he was all for the plan, adding:
No doubt it will cost money, but I do not suppose the money will be spent very quickly.
I take it, it will mostly be building new prisons, but they will take some time, especially if the Ministry of Works have anything to do with the plans.
The Prime Minister's reply was prescient.
Two decades were to pass before the prison building programme reached a scale that was to become significant in terms of public expenditure.
VI
Butler postponed publication of the White Paper's proposals until after the Conservative Party Conference had met at Blackpool in the Autumn of 1958.
He was not the first, or the last, Home Secretary to be apprehensive of the clamourous demands he was likely to face.
In the event, he survived the Conference debate on crime and punishment without much difficulty, although in the following year back-benchers on his own side of the House of Commons forced open again the politically sensitive question of corporal punishment.
The Home Secretary deftly referred their claims to the expert, and non-political, Advisory Council on the Treatment of Offenders.
While recognizing that opinion was divided on the issue, the Council firmly came out against the re-introduction of any form of corporal punishment as a judicial penalty for any criminal offence.
The report noted that advocates of re-introduction did not wish simply to limit the penalty to the same offences as those to which it had applied between 1861 and 1948.
Rather they wanted to extend it, either to offences of all kinds, or at any rate to offences involving violence against the person, especially those committed by young hooligans.
If that were to be the outcome, it would mean putting the clock back not twelve years, but a hundred years.
Following in the footsteps of an earlier Departmental Committee, the Advisory Council painstakingly analysed the subsequent criminal careers of men who had been flogged, comparing them with those who had been subjected to other forms of penalty.
The conclusion was unchanged: namely, that the evidence did not point towards judicial corporal punishment as having any special or unique influence, and that it was unlikely to affect the incidence of crime.
The Advisory Council's report was published in November 1960, the same month as a Criminal Justice Bill brought before Parliament in legislative shape the main proposals contained in the White Paper.
The timing made it inevitable that corporal punishment, nowhere mentioned in the Bill, should dominate the debates, and it did.
The Annual Report of the Howard League for Penal Reform noted:
Despite the reasoned arguments…based on evidence from all who cared to submit it (including a high proportion of individuals and organizations with direct experience of offenders), demands for corporal punishment became even more vociferous and several amendments to the Criminal Justice Bill were introduced with this in view.
The League supplied factual information on the subject to all Members of Parliament who wanted it and the amendments were soundly defeated in both Houses.
In the face of some trenchantly expressed disapproval from the Conservative benches, the Government refused to yield.
The main challenge came on the floor of the Commons at Report Stage when a new clause, giving the courts power to pass sentences of corporal punishment on young male offenders convicted of crimes of violence on second or subsequent conviction, was rejected by 259 votes to sixty-seven.
The hurdle of the Conservative Party Conference was still to come.
In surmounting it, Butler established ascendancy over his critics.
His recollection of the Conference debate that Autumn, not untypically, combined boastfulness with political insight:
I spoke for forty minutes and carried the whole audience after a prolonged debate.
Iain Macleod had tears in his eyes when he came up to congratulate Mollie.
But, though they hesitated to return to the assault, many members of the party continued to hold this stand against me.
What became the Criminal Justice Act of 1961 was a relatively short statute of forty-five sections and six schedules, with more of a coherent theme than is usually found in comparable legislation.
It was a progressive measure, ministering to the conditions of Churchill's ‘gentler age’.
Its thrust was directed towards revising the powers of the courts to deal with young offenders; their detention and treatment in a range of institutions other than prisons, notably detention centres, borstals or approved schools; and their supervision in the community by the probation service.
All young offenders released from a detention centre were to get one year's compulsory after-care.
VII
Apart from the provisions on young offenders, the Act contained administrative changes, including one dear to the heart of the Home Office which had been tried before, but withdrawn by the Home Secretary in the face of strong criticism when the Criminal Justice Bill 1947 was considered at Committee Stage in the Commons.
Despite some persistent opposition, inside and outside Parliament, the 1961 Act gave a power to make an Order in Council paving the way for the transfer to the Home Office of the functions of the Prison Commission.
Although they were public servants answerable to the Home Secretary, the Prison Commissioners had a separate existence going back to the reforms of the late Nineteenth Century.
Under the Prison Act 1877, three Prison Commissioners had been appointed to re-organize and administer English county and borough prisons.
The following year these prisons came under central government control, their number being reduced by half.
Rules were made uniform, a standardized system of discipline adopted, and the staff co-ordinated into a single service with a regular system of promotion.
For some years the convict prisons, already the responsibility of central government, remained technically separate entities, but both were brought under the dominant authority of one man, Sir Edmund Du Cane.
From 1898 the Prison Commissioners became, as their chairman already was, Directors of Convict Prisons in addition to their responsibilities for the local prisons.
Du Cane was the first in a line of redoubtable and prominent penal administrators of the stature of Sir Evelyn Ruggles-Brise, Sir Alexander Paterson, and Sir Lionel Fox.
Over the years the pattern of recruitment changed with rising Home Office officials being seconded as Commissioners for a spell on their way to the top in Whitehall.
After 1948, the Chairman, with the grade of Assistant Under-Secretary of State, reported to the Home Secretary through the Permanent Under Secretary of State at the Home Office, instead of, as previously, through the Criminal Division at the Home Office.
Centralizing tendencies were already evident in the late 1940s, but they were re-inforced by the arrival at the Home Office of Sir Charles Cunningham as Permanent Under Secretary in 1957.
Formerly Head of the Home Department at the Scottish Office, Cunningham was accustomed to a fully integrated system.
Although one consequence of their detached status was that the Commissioners tended to be remote from the day to day process of policy formulation in the higher echelons of the Home Office, they had the advantage of being perceived by the Prison Service as providing a collective leadership in which the professional element in the service could and did play a significant part.
While the Commissioners were not drawn exclusively from within the Prison Service, by convention three key posts were reserved for people who had been promoted from prison governor grades.
These were the Directors of Prison and Borstal Administration, and the Woman Director.
In the words of Sir Frank Newsam, Cunningham's predecessor as Permanent Secretary at the Home Office, the Directors stood:
…under the Chairman, at the head of a hierarchical service through which the normal flow of promotion may carry a qualified officer from the lowest rank to be a Commissioner.
Few, if any, rose from the lowest rank, but nonetheless there was a career path open to prison governors to progress through the intermediate rank of Assistant Commissioner to a full Commissionership.
Promotion above the rank of governor did not take the successful aspirant out of his own service into a vaster bureaucracy.
On the contrary, it was the administrators coming to the Commission from the Home Office who were seen (and saw themselves) as making a transition, even if a temporary one.
Prison staff felt towards abolition much as the employees of an old established family firm would feel towards merger into an international conglomerate.
While tensions had existed between the Prison Service in the field, their headquarters, and the Home Office since the days of Du Cane and Ruggles-Brise, they were exacerbated by the centralization that took place in the 1960s and 1970s.
Under the new system of administration resentment and lack of trust became commonplace, a situation which was not alleviated by the measures taken in the light of the May Committee's recommendations in 1979 to give the Prison Department greater autonomy.
On the state of the relationship between the Prison Service and the Home Office, the May Committee commented:
We cannot escape the conclusion that many of those employed in the Service feel a deep sense of dissatisfaction with the organisation and management of it as a whole and that a gulf has grown up between the establishments in the field and the staff who work in them on the one hand and headquarters at the Home Office in London on the other.
In quoting this extract twelve years later, the Report of the Inquiry into Prison Disturbances by Lord Justice Woolf found that the management changes which had taken place since 1979 had done nothing to reduce the deep-felt sense of dissatisfaction, and that in many establishments there was a strong feeling of distrust of headquarters.
Prison Department divisions were widely criticized by governors for appearing to operate in isolation, each pursuing their own areas of interest without regard to the priorities of other divisions and establishment needs.
Animosity prevailed between headquarters and the field, heightened by the different career backgrounds characterizing the two groups.
Those whose careers were wholly tied to the Prison Service looked on the generalist civil servants at headquarters as lacking in commitment to the service.
Because their tour of duty usually lasted no more than three or four years their primary loyalties were thought to be to their careers in the Home Office at large.
Conversely, many headquarters staff saw those in the field as too narrowly concerned with the running of their own prison establishments, and resistant to any suggestion that they should be called to account for the extent to which they implemented nationally agreed policies.
The strained relationship between prison governors and the Home Office Prison Department was overshadowed by the even more turbulent staff relations between management and prison officers which came to a head in widespread industrial action in 1978.
It would be a misleading over-simplification to attribute the continuing erosion of morale in the administration of the prisons to the abolition of the Commission in 1963.
Many of the pressures were already latent and would have come to the surface irrespective of the organizational structure.
Yet it is structure which gives to any undertaking its distinctive shape and identity.
A visible structure influences style, facilitating the emergence of shared aims and values, and bearing strongly on the potential for leadership within the organization.
The issue must have seemed finely balanced at the time, but the troubled history of the prisons in the years that followed suggests that Butler was wrong to have accepted Cunningham's advice that the Commission was no longer an adequate body to handle the complexity of the tasks to be performed.
The contention was that a co-ordinated approach was needed towards the treatment of offenders, and that it was not appropriate for the Home Secretary's responsibilities for prisoners to be on a different basis from his other responsibilities.
Additional arguments deployed were that amalgamation with the Home Office would provide a larger pool of staff on which to draw; that it would be more efficient and economical for the establishment, finance and other specialist services of the two bodies to be combined; and that the Scottish precedent had been ‘fully successful’.
The era of the Prison Commission was by no means the golden age that nostalgia sometimes portrayed it to have been, but the verdict must be that its abolition magnified rather than minimized the deepening crisis into which the Prison Service was falling.
By 1991, fuelled by Ministerial exasperation with continuing industrial action and union-led recalcitrance to changed working patterns, the structure of the Prison Service was once more under review.
Official policy was swinging back towards the model of a freer-standing organization, in the shape of an agency fashioned under the Government's ‘Next Steps’ initiative:
…the Government intends to develop the structure of the management of the Prison Service progressively in a manner that is consistent with the principles of ‘Next Steps’.
It will review the question of when agency status for the Prison Service might be appropriate as the changes set out in this White Paper are introduced.
In an interview soon after his appointment as Director General, Joe Pilling, a senior civil servant, was quoted as saying that the transformation of the Prison Service into an executive agency would help to distance it from the Home Office and achieve greater operational freedom, adding:
One of the problems with the prison service is that it is directly driven by civil servants and largely made up of civil servants.
This can produce a certain ambiguity of role for us.
A ‘hands off’ approach was regarded as crucial by Sir Raymond Lygo who was appointed by the Home Secretary in August 1991 to undertake a review of the management of the Prison Service.
A personal letter to Kenneth Baker forwarding his report and recommendations began unambiguously:
When you asked me to undertake a review of the management of the Prison Service, I told you that I thought my recommendations would be easier for me to make than for you to implement, but you assured me you believed the climate was ready for some radical change.
As we discussed at our first meeting and as I subsequently discussed with Angela Rumbold, it was very clear that unless there was a preparedness on the part of the Home Office to take its hands off the management of the Prison Service in its day to day business and allow itself to be constrained by matters of policy only, then it would not be possible to effect the changes which you deem desirable and which have become very clear to me as being necessary during the talks I have had and the visits I have made.
Baker lost little time in accepting the majority of Lygo's recommendations, announcing in March 1992 that the Prison Service for England and Wales would become an agency from 1 April 1993.
Consultations with the trade unions and other interested parties would begin shortly.
In line with the recommended structure a Supervisory Board would be created, which would have responsibility for advising the Home Secretary on strategic and resource questions affecting the service.
This Board would be chaired by the Home Office Minister handling prison matters.
A Chief Executive, appointed by open competition, and directly responsible to the Home Secretary, would chair a Management Board, rather than the part time, non-executive chairman proposed in the report.
Executive agency status, Baker declared, would constitute:
…the right framework for placing the management of the service on a more professional footing, providing the most positive environment for staff to work in and, above all, ensuring the delivery of an improved service both to the public and those held in custody.
Many unresolved problems lie ahead.
What policy advice will the Home Secretary need on prison matters, for example the use of police cells and contracting with the private sector, which are distinct from the operations of the Prison Service, and by whom should it be given?
What will be the relationship between the Supervisory Board, the Management Board, and the central Home Office?
Will reserve powers be retained by the Secretary of State?
What are the implications for the policy of contracting out and privatization?
Will the new agency be expected to make contracts with private sector companies for the management of what would in effect be rival penal establishments, or will this function continue to be performed by the Home Office?
What, if any legislation, will be called for?
Important as they are, such organizational questions are over-shadowed by what Lygo correctly identified as the main issue.
Will Ministers be prepared to surrender the close degree of control over the Prison Service to which they have grown accustomed, and to the extent necessary to allow a Chief Executive the freedom required for true agency status?
Ministerial accountability to Parliament is often cited as a stumbling block, but it is not insurmountable.
Chief Executives of a growing number of agencies are now politically accountable in a variety of ways.
Detailed scrutiny of large scale and complex undertakings on a continuing basis is not a task for which most MPs have either the inclination or the time.
What matters is that Ministers should be ready and willing to come to the House of Commons when expected to do so in order to answer questions from elected representatives on matters of genuine public interest and importance.
In this sense the conferring of an enlarged degree of operational freedom on a professionally directed body need not mean any diminution of true public accountability.
The police have far more operational independence from the Home Office than the Prison Service has ever enjoyed.
No distinction is made for the Metropolitan Police, much the largest force in the country, where the Home Secretary has formal responsibility as the police authority.
The Commissioner is a recognizable national figure, in modern times invariably a career police officer of high ability.
Nevertheless, it is the Home Secretary who has to face Parliament when things go wrong, whether incidents occur in the Metropolitan Police area or elsewhere.
Accountability is not confined to policy matters, as William Whitelaw found when he had to report to an astonished House of Commons that an intruder had got into the Queen's bedroom at Buckingham Palace.
Indeed, he took his responsibility so seriously that he had to be dissuaded from resignation.
VIII
Alongside the milder reforms of the 1950s and early 1960s surged the powerful forces evoked by the death penalty.
The long period of Conservative government from 1951–64 made it easier for Labour MPs, released from electoral inhibitions, to press for abolition.
Speaking in a House of Commons debate on the Report of the Royal Commission on Capital Punishment in 1955, Chuter Ede declared that his time as Home Secretary had not persuaded him either way of the arguments for or against deterrence.
The case of Timothy Evans, however, who had been hanged in 1950 after conviction for murder partly on the evidence of John Christie, also convicted and executed for murder three years later, had convinced him that mistakes could occur.
As Home Secretary, it was Ede who had written on Evans' papers when considering whether there were any circumstances to justify a reprieve: ‘The Law must take its course’.
In the light of the facts which emerged subsequently, he believed that Evans' execution was not justified and that a mistake had been made.
In the following year, Ede moved an amended Commons motion:
That this House believes that the death penalty for murder no longer accords with the needs or the true interests of a civilised society, and calls upon Her Majesty's Government to introduce forthwith legislation for its abolition or for its suspension for an experimental period.
On a free vote the amendment was carried by 292 votes to 246, a majority of forty six.
Ede was not the only former Minister to change his mind.
Each of the retentionist members of the Labour Cabinet in 1947/8 who still sat in the Commons voted for abolition.
They were Herbert Morrison, George Isaacs, Tom Williams and Arthur Woodburn.
As a result of the expression of Parliamentary opinion, which the Prime Minister, Sir Anthony Eden, undertook to respect, the Government provided time for Sydney Silverman's Private Member's Bill for the abolition of the death penalty.
The Second Reading was carried on 12 March 1956 by 286 votes to 262, a majority of twenty four, and passed through all its remaining stages in the Commons, before being heavily defeated once more in the Lords.
Faced with the need to take some action, and willing to restrict the death penalty but not to abandon it completely, a classic step on the road to abolition, the Government turned again to the idea of categorizing murders which the Labour Government had attempted, fruitlessly, as a way out of a previous Parliamentary impasse in 1948.
Since then it had been closely examined, but once more rejected, by the Royal Commission on Capital Punishment.
The Government Bill which became the Homicide Act 1957 restricted the death penalty to five categories of capital murder.
They were:(a) murders in the course or furtherance of theft,(b) murders by shooting or causing an explosion,(c) murders in the course or for the purpose of resisting lawful arrest or of escaping from legal custody,(d) murders of police officers in the execution of their duty and persons assisting them, and (e) murders by prisoners of prison officers in the execution of their duty and persons assisting them.
The death penalty was retained for repeated murders, while a new defence of diminished responsibility, imported from Scotland, allowed a charge of manslaughter to be substituted for murder if a defendant ‘was suffering from such abnormality of mind…as substantially impaired his mental responsibility for his acts…‘.
The measure was inherited by R. A. Butler who became Home Secretary while the Bill was going through Parliament.
Unlike other speakers in the debates, he made no attempt to justify the classification according to any degrees of heinousness or dreadfulness, claiming instead that the categories had been based upon:
the different principle of reducing the scope of capital punishment to the minimum necessary for that preservation of law and order, and confining it to those forms of murder for which it is not only a particularly necessary, but is also believed to be a particularly effective, deterrent.
In Parliament and outside, the distinction between capital and non-capital murders was subjected to much criticism.
Despite its imperfections, which were soon to become well ventilated by the circumstances of individual cases coming before the courts, there were two outcomes which could not be ignored.
The first was that the large majority of intentional killings within the family, or other existing personal relationships, were excluded from the death penalty, leading Professor Glanville Williams to remark:
The Homicide Act has performed the service of removing capital punishment from the picture in nearly all killings of passion and depression.
The second consequence was to limit the number of executions by the early 1960s to no more than three or four a year, so bringing nearer the prospect of total abolition by the classic, if inglorious, means of English penal reform: diminution, disuse, abandonment.
It was the first two categories of capital murder in particular that discredited the Homicide Act.
The death penalty for murders committed in the course or furtherance of theft was intended as a deterrent against the use of physical violence in offences of burglary, housebreaking and robbery.
But away from the highly coloured examples used by both sides to illustrate their arguments in the debating chamber, experience showed that:
…most of the theft-murders that have resulted in capital convictions since the Act have been committed by stupid persons, who had not the sense to see how easily they could be caught, and how much safer it would have been to do the job in a different way.
Murder can never be anything but a most serious crime, although committed in conditions of infinite variety, whereas thefts can be trivial in the extreme.
In 1958, a year after the Homicide Act, for example, a man was hanged for capital murder having quarrelled with an elderly lady about the amount of wages he was to receive for working in her garden.
As she was kneeling to get some tools out of a cupboard he struck her on the head with a hammer, apparently on the impulse of the moment, and then stole a wallet which he found in the house.
It was the last, far more trivial act, that led to his execution, rather than the brutal killing which would not otherwise have attracted the death penalty.
Clamorous criticism of this category of capital murder came simultaneously from an opposing tendency.
Retentionists could not accept that a rapist who breaks into a house, violates his victim, and then kills in order to prevent her giving evidence against him, should be treated as having committed a lesser offence than a burglar who kills in the course of theft.
Murder by shooting also led to indefensible anomalies.
Its inclusion in the categories of capital murder had originally been defended by the Government on the grounds that the presence of a gun was an indication of a pre-meditated offence, but in practice it proved impossible to maintain the distinction between deliberate killings committed with a gun, or a knife or other weapon.
Moreover, death caused by poisoning, the most pre-meditated of all murders, was exempted from liability to capital punishment.
IX
By the mid-1960s the long campaign for ending capital punishment was nearing a climax.
Procrastination, compromise and delay had been the response of successive governments of both political parties.
But while a majority of informed public opinion, the target of persistent lobbying over so long a period, moved decisively towards outright abolition, fortified by the anomalous decisions resulting from the 1957 Homicide Act, the views of the general public continued to be hostile and mostly out of sympathy with the prevailing climate at Westminster and Whitehall.
A Gallup Poll in March 1960 showed that 78% of those questioned favoured the death penalty, with 73% believing that complete abolition would lead to a rise in the number of murders.
There is always a risk that legislative reforms which outpace public opinion will be undermined by reaction.
Timing and preparation of the ground is vital.
Frustrating as the long-drawn out debates since 1948 had been for the abolitionists, when the moment eventually came no-one could claim that Parliament was acting precipitately or foisting a highly controversial measure onto a nation that was unprepared.
The history of penal reform has been marked by resistance to novelty; people need time to get used to ideas, even if they come to oppose them.
The painstaking and unbiased work of the Royal Commission, the failure of the 1957 alternative, the well-directed flow of abolitionist propaganda, and the reliance on factual evidence as well as moral arguments, in particular the recognition that mistakes could, and in all probability had occurred, led to the progressive conversion of Parliamentary opinion.
This was especially noticeable amongst younger Conservatives in the Commons, and amongst the life peers who had begun to join the Upper House in increasing numbers since the Life Peerages Act in 1958.
Coincident with the changing Parliamentary climate was a more positive attitude towards abolition on the part of the Labour Government.
Unlike the Homicide Act seven years earlier, the Murder (Abolition of Death Penalty) Bill of 1964, introduced by the indefatigable Sydney Silverman once again, was not a Government Bill backed by the Government Whips.
Although a Private Members Bill, it had been included in the Government's programme set out in the Queen's Speech.
On a free vote, it received a second reading in the Commons by 355 votes to 170.
Telling speeches in support of abolition were made from the Conservative benches by Sir Edward Boyle and Henry Brooke, the former Home Secretary who had become persuaded by the arguments against capital punishment once free of the cares of office.
The overwhelming support, however, came from Labour members, with the Prime Minister and most of the Cabinet voting for the Bill.
The Government's business managers had to come to the rescue when it looked as though the Bill might be lost at Committee Stage.
The process of scrutiny and amendment which had begun in the usual way in a Standing Committee upstairs, was interrupted when the Bill was returned unexpectedly to the floor of the House.
With an overall majority of only three, the entire legislative programme of the session was jeopardized by the extra demands on the Parliamentary timetable.
The day was saved by the Government's willingness for the House to meet, exceptionally, in the mornings until the Committee Stage of the Bill had been completed.
In the event, no more than a single amendment was made in the Commons.
It was a highly significant one.
On 26 May 1965 a new clause proposed by Brooke, with support coming mainly from Conservative members, was carried by 176 votes to 128 which had the effect that the Act should expire on 31 July 1970, unless Parliament by affirmative resolution of both Houses otherwise determined.
In the Lords the shift in opinion since the earlier attempts to abolish the death penalty had been rejected was even more striking.
After a two day debate, the Bill received a Second Reading, on a free vote, by a majority of exactly 100: 204 voting in favour and 104 against.
Symbolic, perhaps, of a ‘gentler age’ was the presence of the Archbishop of Canterbury and eleven Bishops in the Division lobbies, all of them supporting the Bill, in contrast with the solitary Bishop (Chichester) who had voted for abolition in 1948.
In Committee, the Lord Chancellor, Gardiner, a prominent campaigner against capital punishment, tried unsuccessfully to lessen the impact of the Commons amendment by proposing that the five year experimental period should expire on 31 July, only if Parliament so determined by affirmative resolution of both Houses.
At the initiative of the Lord Chief Justice, Lord Parker of Waddington, who, unlike his predecessor in 1948, had voted for abolition, the Lords debated at Committee stage whether the penalty of life imprisonment for murder should be mandatory or discretionary.
The implications of this question, transformed by the reprehensible way in which the administration of life imprisonment had developed over the intervening years, were to be subjected to critical review by a Lords Select Committee in 1988–9.
The Bill was given a Third Reading in the House of Lords on 26 October 1965 by 169 votes to 75.
Two days later, the Commons accepted the Lords amendments.
On 9 November, the Murder (Abolition of Death Penalty) Act 1965 came into effect, suspending rather than abolishing the death penalty for those categories of murder that had been capital.
The decisive step had been taken, however, and the unworkability of the Homicide Act 1957 was still relatively fresh in legislative memory when the time came for Parliament to consider the continuation of abolition.
In December 1969, after Conservative protests had been disposed of that Parliament was being asked to reach a decision at an unnecessarily early stage (a General Election was in the offing), both Houses agreed that the 1965 Act should not expire.
By this route, indirect and long drawn out as it had been, the long history of capital punishment for murder came to a conclusion.
Although the substance had gone, the shadow remained.
Changing within the Consensus, 1964–79
I
The abolition of the death penalty was a political, not an administrative, reform.
Demand for the restoration of capital punishment is regarded to this day by many politicians as a powerful torrent capable of bursting its banks and flooding the adjoining landscape.
For most of the time since 1965 it has been contained in a separate channel isolated from the rest of criminal justice policy-making.
While the politicians were pre-occupied with the death penalty and corporal punishment in the late 1950s and early 1960s, the civil servants were paddling in the mainstream, adjusting to the implications of the increased volume of crime and trying to get a grip on what was to become a perennial problem for the next quarter century, the growth in the number of persons appearing before the courts charged with criminal offences.
To describe the process as reform would be to claim too much.
Evolutionary modification, generally contained within a broad consensus, is nearer to the mark.
A short (eleven pages of text) and inexpensive (1s. 3d.), but resoundingly entitled, White Paper,The War Against Crime in England and Wales 1959–64 , was published in April 1964 in the dying days of the Conservative Administration which had taken office in 1959.
The Home Secretary was Henry Brooke, previously Chief Secretary to the Treasury and Minister of Housing and Local Government, who had replaced Butler in July 1962.
A conscientious but unimaginative Minister, Brooke never found the touch needed to be a successful Home Secretary.
Although not comparable with Penal Practice in a Changing Society in breadth of vision nor in quality of argument, his White Paper adopted a confident tone.
In doing so it reflected Brooke's belief that the nation was on course to solving the problems of crime through a combination of diligent police methods and technology, the observation and classification of offenders, better informed sentencing decisions, improved treatment regimes in penal institutions, and social work with young offenders and ex-offenders in the community.
A study had been launched into the recording, reporting and presentation of criminal statistics, and research ‘into the causes of crime and the effectiveness of the means of dealing with the criminals’ was going ahead.
As to the judiciary, the prevailing Home Office belief was that the need was simply to get the judges to grasp the facts, revealed by criminological research and the experience of the prison and probation services, about the suitability of various sorts of offenders for the different forms and lengths of sentence which were at their disposal.
The innovation of pre-trial social inquiry reports, prepared by the probation service to assist the sentencing decisions of judges in the higher criminal courts, was a part of this approach.
Yet the presentational imperative to project the policies of government in a positive light masked the existence of inner doubts.
Questioning of the effectiveness of the accepted methods, and the justification for them, was not confined to penal reformers, being shared by no less a figure than the all powerful Permanent Secretary at the Home Office, Sir Charles Cunningham.
His recollection of what lay behind the next step, the establishment of an ill-fated Royal Commission, is illuminating:
By the early sixties…it was clear that neither the efforts made in the first post-war decade nor the developments outlined in Mr Butler's White Paper were reducing — or were likely to reduce — the volume of crime or the numbers of persistent offenders.
This led to increasing criticism of the ineffectiveness of crime prevention and of the accepted forms of penal treatment as well as of the philosophy underlying them.
The results of research were not encouraging.
The old belief that one major source of crime was to be found in poor social conditions, for example, was not supported…
The demands for something to be done were strong and understandable.
But what?
Could new approaches promising better results be found?
The Home Office had, of course, many existing sources of advice…
But there had been no overall review in recent times of the problem of crime and criminals by an independent and authoritative body.
It was thought to be important that Parliamentary and public opinion — and concern — should be reassured by having a comprehensive review carried out by such a body.
At best it might produce recommendations for new and hopeful initiatives.
At worst it could conclude that the Home Office pianist was doing his best and need not be shot.
It was therefore decided to set up a Royal Commission to review the whole problem of criminal behaviour and of the means of dealing with it.
Translated into the sonorous language of the White Paper the stated reasons were:
The fundamental review of the whole penal system for which, in the Government's view, the time is now ripe is of such importance and magnitude that it needs to be carried out by a Royal Commission.
There has been no comprehensive study of this kind since the Gladstone Committee of 1895.
A purpose will be to reassess the value of our penal system as it has been built up until now — but much more than that.
With that as the background, it is the time for a deep study of the philosophy underlying the system — to determine afresh what we ought to be seeking to achieve, to examine how far and in what manner the results of our present practice fall short, and to sift new ideas in order to judge which of them appear both constructive and practicable in operation.
Far more limited in scope, but of immediate practical import, was the question of the re-organization of the courts.
The Whitehall demarcations described in Chapter 1 assigned responsibility for the criminal law and penal establishments to the Home Office, as well as the oversight of certain agencies of criminal justice: notably the police and the probation service.
In the absence of any unified court service, responsibilities for different aspects of the courts of justice were distributed between various Ministers and local authorities.
Judges were appointed by the Crown on the advice of the Lord Chancellor, and magistrates by the Lord Chancellor on the recommendations of locally based advisory committees.
The administration and financing of 842 Magistrates' courts, presided over by about 18,500 lay justices of the peace, assisted by clerks who were mostly full-time and salaried, was in the hands of local Magistrates' courts committees, with the aid of a grant from the Home Office.
The higher courts, Assizes and Quarter Sessions, and the High Court of Justice in London, were independent of central Government.
By the mid-1960s the need was becoming urgent for an overhaul of the traditional tribunals in which the more serious indictable crimes were tried before a High Court Judge, part-time Recorder or chairman of Quarter Sessions, and in 1966 the Government decided that there was substance for another Royal Commission.
Only five years before, an inter-departmental committee set up jointly by the Home Office and the Lord Chancellor's Department, under the chairmanship of a High Court Judge, had rejected the solution of permanent Crown Courts to handle the much increased workload of criminal cases and to reduce the time spent by defendants awaiting trial.
Legal opinion was opposed to exclusive concentration upon criminal work on the grounds that the monotony tended to cause staleness, in judges and in counsel, leading to decreased competence and possibly a tendency on the part of judges to become ‘prosecution-minded’.
Other factors were deployed, but the standpoint of the report was predominantly that of the legal profession and local affinities, rather than the interests of the accused or the more efficient despatch of business.
For the chairman of the Royal Commission Labour Ministers turned away from the legal profession, appointing instead an experienced businessman and ICI director, Dr Richard Beeching.
As chairman of the British Railways Board (1963–5), Beeching had made his reputation in the public sector by the impressive way he had tackled the thankless job of modernizing the outdated rail network.
Lord Gardiner regarded him as being well qualified by this experience to advise on the renewal of another, even more antique, part of the national heritage: the hallowed courts of justice.
In courteously making a special journey to Beeching's home to induce him to accept the invitation, Gardiner incurred the Prime Minister's displeasure: Dr Beeching should have been invited to call on the Lord Chancellor.
The Royal Commission on Assizes and Quarter Sessions was enjoined to inquire into the arrangements for the administration of justice at Assizes and Quarter Sessions, and
…to report what reforms should be made for the more convenient, economic and efficient disposal of the civil and criminal business at present dealt with by these courts…
After bluntly pointing out the shortcomings of the existing system, the Royal Commission recommended a restructuring in which the criminal and civil work of the High Court would be separated.
Ministerial responsibility for running the higher courts, both civil and criminal, should in future be placed in the hands of the Lord Chancellor.
These recommendations were accepted and incorporated into the Courts Act 1971 which merged Assizes, Quarter Sessions and the Central Criminal Court into one Crown Court with two tiers of full-time judges, together with part-time recorders and assistant recorders.
While permanent courts were established in the main centres of population, High Court judges continued to be itinerant, backed up by circuit judges sitting continuously in the main centres.
As recommended by Beeching, the Lord Chancellor assumed overall responsibility for the construction and administration of all courts above the level of the Magistrates' courts.
The re-organization of the courts of justice, long recognized as necessary but not previously attempted, owed much for its implementation to the perseverance of Gardiner.
One of the few lawyers in modern times to have reached the Woolsack other than via membership of the House of Commons and ministerial office, Gardiner was a visionary who came to government late in his career, with the result that his idealism had not been exhausted by previous struggles to get things done.
Joining the House of Lords as a life peer only in 1963, he became Lord Chancellor in the following year when the Labour Administration was formed, remaining in office until 1970.
His abiding concern for law reform led to the creation of permanent institutional machinery in the form of separate Law Commissions, one for England and Wales and another for Scotland, with full-time Commissioners and supporting staffs.
Resolutely opposed by two of Gardiner's less-enlightened predecessors as Lord Chancellor, Simonds and Dilhorne, the Law Commission under its first chairman, Sir Leslie Scarman, soon earned acceptance as a valuable strengthening of the hitherto piecemeal procedures for revising laws which had become outdated or unsatisfactory in practice.
Ignoring the traditional possessiveness of the Home Office towards the content of the criminal law as well as its administration, the Law Commission declined to confine itself to civil law matters.
as if to make the point, the first published report put forward proposals to abolish certain obsolete criminal offences; the Commission's recommendations being implemented in the Criminal Law Act 1967.
Further reports followed on imputed criminal intent, damage to property, forgery, conspiracy and public order offences, defences of general application, the mental element in crime, the territorial extent of the criminal law, and interference with the course of justice.
The Criminal Law Revision Committee, a by-product of Penal Practice in a Changing Society in 1959, continued its work in parallel with the Law Commission, but under the aegis of the Home Office.
Unlike the Law Commission the Criminal Law Revision Committee was a standing committee that was only activated as a result of specific references by the Home Secretary.
In a review of its work over the first ten years, its chairman, Lord Justice Sellers, claimed that the two institutions ‘worked side by side in complete harmony and with some mutual assistance’.
Improbably cosy though the relationship sounds, in fact there is no evidence of overlaps or rivalries.
Eventually the Committee was to wither on the vine; its last reference resulting in the Committee's Eighteenth Report on Conspiracy to Defraud in 1986.
Gardiner's zeal was matched by the transition to the Home Office of one of the most promising of the new generation of Labour Ministers, Roy Jenkins.
Succeeding the ailing Sir Frank Soskice as a young Home Secretary in December 1965, at the age of forty-five Jenkins was on the threshold of a dazzling career.
Always more interested in obtaining results than in political theorizing, the new Home Secretary, in his first Cabinet post (one that he coveted) lost no time in setting his stamp on a Department that had become accident prone.
His arrival precipitated an immediate clash with Cunningham who, in Jenkins's eyes, represented
the guardian, not so much of particular Home Office policies, as of a certain Home Office approach to life which I was convinced had to be broken if future Home Secretaries were to avoid the St. Sebastian-like fate of Brooke and Soskice.
An air of dutiful defeat had become the most appropriate demeanour for a Home Secretary.
‘Poor old Home Office’, Soskice had minuted on one file.
‘We are not always wrong, but we always get the blame’.
The battlefield between the incoming Home Secretary and the veteran civil servant is vividly depicted in Jenkins's memoirs.
His requirements were crystallized into a list of specific organizational demands, twenty-two in all, each one of them hard fought.
Behind his insistence that the intensely hierarchical system of submissions be changed, lay Jenkins's determination that the Home Secretary had to be allowed sufficient scope to use his political judgment in weighing up alternative courses of action.
Cunningham's centralized system did not permit this since all submissions to the Home Secretary were channelled through him, with only one course of action being recommended.
The submissions were brief and lucid, economical of Ministerial time, but unaccompanied by any files or background papers from which alternatives could be devised or warning signals detected.
Sir Charles, a man of mettle, did not surrender his system without a struggle:
Cunningham defended it with every weapon he could muster.
He threw his whole authority and experience behind it.
I remember that at one stage…his eyes filled with tears.
I almost wavered.
Was it right at the end of a distinguished public servant's long career to reduce him to such misery?
It was only later that I realized that the tears were caused by rage and not by sadness.
Jenkins was fortunate that he brought with him to the Home Office an intuitive understanding that it is how issues and incidents are handled, more than the policies which are decided upon, that can make or break a Home Secretary's reputation.
It is a lesson which has been painfully learned, or sometimes never learned, by several of those who went before and came after.
Following a general election in March 1966 which confirmed Labour in power for another Parliament, three main policy objectives engaged the Home Secretary.
The first was a resolute attempt to accelerate the pace of police re-organization, reducing the number of separate police forces from 117 to forty nine.
The second was to make greater headway in the field of community relations, enhancing the pioneering role of the Race Relations Board, and preparing for fresh legislation.
The third was the prospect of a new Criminal Justice Bill.
Work on several aspects of policy for the Bill had already been put in hand in Soskice's time.
In 1965, two White Papers were published:The Child, The Family and The Young Offender in August, followed by The Adult Offender in December.
The appearance of the two documents, and the Government's intention to legislate upon the proposals they contained, dealt a sideways, but nonetheless mortal, blow to Brooke's Royal Commission which was simultaneously subjecting the entire penal system to critical review.
II
Even without the change of Government which brought Labour to power in October 1964 after thirteen years in Opposition, the Royal Commission on the Penal System would have been grievously hampered by its over-ambitious terms of reference and a divided membership.
The terms of reference were:
In the light of modern knowledge of crime and its causes and of modern penal practice here and abroad, to re-examine the concepts and purposes which should underlie the punishment and treatment of offenders in England and Wales; to report how far they are realised by the penalties and methods of treatment available to the courts, and whether any changes in these, or in the arrangements and responsibility for selecting the sentences to be imposed on particular offenders, are desirable: to review the work of the services and institutions dealing with offenders, and the responsibility for their administration: and to make recommendations.
It was a vast task.
The Commission was being asked to frame a philosophy for criminal justice and to measure the performance of penal proceedings against it.
The remit extended to offenders of all ages.
It called not only for an investigation of the sentencing powers and practice of the criminal courts, but of the sentencing process itself.
The injunction to review the work of the services and institutions dealing with offenders included the prisons, young offender institutions, approved schools and the Probation Service.
The whole endeavour was set in an international context, the Commission being charged with acquainting itself with modern penal practice abroad.
The sixteen strong membership, headed by a former Minister, Viscount Amory, contained two judges, a Bishop, two Members of Parliament, a trade union leader, several magistrates, and two of the foremost criminologists of the day, Sir Leon Radzinowicz and Baroness Wootton of Abinger.
From the start there were differences in approach and attitude.
To Professor Radzinowicz and Barbara Wootton, both strong characters unaccustomed to taking no for an answer, any thorough re-examination of the concepts and purposes underlying the punishment and treatment of offenders in the light of modern knowledge of crime and its causes was worthless without a programme of research, including fieldwork by qualified staff, taking anything up to four years to complete.
Other members were conscious of the need to make progress more urgently if the whole enterprise was not to be overtaken by events.
Amory, a likeable and popular man, had been one of the few Conservative MP's to be active in the campaign to end capital punishment in the late 1940s.
For all his experience, he was ill at ease in the chair, and unsuccessful in holding a fissiparous membership together.
At the time of its establishment the Commission had been asked to give first priority to a study of young offenders under twenty-one and their treatment.
Little had been accomplished before the emergence of the new Government's proposals for the treatment of young offenders, spelling the end of approved schools.
A few months later, in the White Paper on adult offenders, the Home Office brought out proposals for the abolition of the special sentences of corrective training and preventive detention, and for the release of prisoners on parole, without making any mention of the Commission.
Assured by the Home Secretary that a report would still be of value, the Royal Commission pressed on with its work, abandoning the young offender study and turning its attention to other things.
Disillusion set in as awareness spread that the Government had its own agenda, much of the groundwork having been prepared in opposition by a Labour Party study group which shortly before the election had published a report titled Crime — a challenge to us all .
Several members of the Government, notably Gardiner and Sir Elwyn Jones, the Attorney General, had served on the study group.
The Minister of State at the Home Office, Alice Bacon, who sat on the Labour Party's National Executive, had been a member, while two others, Mrs Serota and Dr T.C.N. Gibbens, were included amongst the membership of the Royal Commission.
In the Spring of 1966, six of the Commissioners, led by Radzinowicz and Wootton resigned, having become persuaded that, with substantial legislation pending, and in the absence of conclusive research to support recommendations likely to last for a lengthy period, the opportunity no longer existed for the Commission to make a comprehensive report capable of setting the direction for a generation.
According to Cunningham:
The Home Secretary — and the Home Office — were greatly concerned about the Commission's almost unprecedented decision; but it had to be accepted.
On 27 April the Prime Minister, Harold Wilson, informed the House of Commons that on his advice The Queen had approved the dissolution of the Royal Commission.
In its place, the Home Secretary would appoint a standing Advisory Council to report and make recommendations from time to time on such aspects of penal treatment as he might refer to it or as the Council itself, having consulted the Home Secretary, felt that it ought to consider.
Wilson disclosed the split into equally balanced factions when he said that two further members had also resigned on the grounds that a weakened Commission could no longer usefully continue.
The remaining eight, including the hapless chairman, disagreed.
They believed that a fundamental and searching reappraisal of the purposes of a modern penal system, and the methods by which those purposes should be translated into practice, was still entirely feasible.
In their view the Commission should be allowed to complete its task, and that new appointments should be made to replace the members who had resigned.
The same course was endorsed by the Leader of the Opposition, Edward Heath.
Expressing disappointment at the decision to dissolve the Royal Commission, for which the new Advisory Council would be no substitute, Heath contended that such a serious outcome could have been avoided if, after the resignation of the initial six members, the Prime Minister or the Home Secretary had said firmly that they would appoint others to take their place.
Wilson rejected the argument, replying that the Commission had broken down because it was no longer practical to contemplate a once for all look at something that was changing so rapidly.
Given the rambling terms of reference, and the clash of opinion between its members as to how they should be interpreted, the Commission would have faced a bumpy ride at the best of times.
Yet the immediate cause of its demise was the change in Government.
Labour Ministers, newly in office, were raring to go with their own legislative programme.
They were disinclined to be held back by the deliberations of a slow moving and ponderous Commission.
This conclusion is devoid of party political implication; the situation might easily have been the same if the parties in opposition and government had been transposed.
In such circumstances it is natural that Ministers should want to implement without undue delay policies for changes in the legal framework of the criminal law and for dealing with offenders which they may have espoused before coming to power.
The sole memorial left behind by the stricken Royal Commission was the Advisory Council on the Penal System (ACPS).
The presence of an independent standing group to advise the Home Secretary was no novelty since an Advisory Council on the Treatment of Offenders had been set up by Herbert Morrison as early as 1944 as part of the plans for post-war re-construction.
By 1966 the earlier body was dormant, its last flicker of life being a report on after-care in 1963.
The report was not without influence, however, as it contributed to the transition of the probation service from a group of self-employed social case workers into a nationally organized and publicly funded service.
Three members of the dissolved Royal Commission transferred their loyalties to the ACPS with good grace.
Radzinowicz and Wootton were joined by Mrs Serota, who was to succeed to the chairmanship after the death of the first chairman, a former Labour Minister with a keen interest in penal policy, Kenneth Younger.
Avoiding the perils of the grand design, and eschewing broader questions of penal philosophy, the ACPS concentrated its attention on specific references.
For the next twelve years, its reports were to form an important strand in the formulation of policy.
The first remits to the ACPS were reparation by the offender to the victim for the harm he had done, and non-custodial penalties.
There was no evidence at the time, and very little since, that victims actually wanted reparation, although it was a theme with some appeal to Conservatives in Parliament.
Indeed when in Opposition amendments had been moved unsuccessfully to give greater effect to reparation during the passage of the Criminal Justice Bill in 1966/7.
The advantages of non-custodial penalties had long been propagated by penal reformers of a progressive liberal disposition, and had been the subject of two previous reviews by the Advisory Council on the Treatment of Offenders.
Now, once again, the topic was timely as a substantial area of policy that had been within the ambit of the Royal Commission, but one which had not been pre-empted by Government intentions for legislation.
Pragmatists too were attracted by the potential they saw in non-custodial penalties as a method of easing the ominous pressures being caused by the rising prison population.
III
Although political ideology can play a significant part in re-shaping the penal system, as it did in 1964 through the influence of Crime — a challenge to us all , and to a lesser extent as it would have done had the Conservatives regained office in 1966, incoming governments customarily do not pack in their baggage detailed blue prints on criminal policy.
Unlike the economic and social controversies which dominated the election campaigns of the period, and the policy-making preliminaries which preceded them, in penal matters the underlying objectives were accepted by each of the two main parties.
The paramountcy of the rule of law, the maintenance of public order, and the goal of an efficient and humane penal system, were not in question.
Differences occurred as to means, but examination of the electoral manifestos throughout the 1960s and 1970s shows a reluctance to politicize issues which, given the intractable nature of crime and the limited efficacy of measures to counter it, would only have had the effect of exciting popular expectations beyond the capacity of any government to fulfil.
Reasons of this sort dictate that the political impetus accompanying Ministers on arrival at their departments after an election is usually a good deal less noticeable at the Home Office than elsewhere in Whitehall.
Roy Jenkins in 1965 was an exception, having gone on record in a book written for the 1959 general election with his personal, and unauthorized, programme for ‘the wholesale reform of which the Home Office is still in urgent need’.
The accent was on lifting restrictions on individual liberty.
Apart from capital punishment, the laws on homosexuality and abortion, and the decriminalization of suicide, there was no mention of reform of the penal system, or of the prisons.
In implementing such a programme, Jenkins noted prophetically that:
A great deal would depend on the reforming zeal and liberal spirit of the man who became Home Secretary.
And however well endowed he was with these qualities, he might still have difficulty on some points.
More typically, as a senior official writing from first hand knowledge observed:
time and again the Ministerial contribution to penal policy-making…lies not in the Minister's bringing in his own fresh policy ideas, but in his operating creatively and with political drive upon ideas, proposals, reports, etc., that are, so to speak, already to hand, often within the department but sometimes in the surrounding world of penal thought.
Until the watershed of 1979, few restraints on a Home Secretary's freedom of action in the mainstream stemmed from the political ideology of his party or ministerial colleagues.
For Conservative governments as much as for Labour, it was far more common that the inadequacy of resources for allocation to programmes with limited political appeal, in competition with spending programmes by other departments holding out more evident social or financial benefits, set the limits on what could be done.
One constant factor, unaffected by change of government, but never far below the surface, was an extreme sensitivity about the degree of public support for policies which tended to be perceived (however misguidedly) as ‘soft’ on crime.
The period saw few radical departures in penal policy.
When this happened, as it did with parole and financial compensation for criminal injuries, the seedbed was usually found in ‘the surrounding world of penal thought’, rather than in any party political objectives.
Whilst it is true that parole was advocated in Crime — a challenge to us all , it is true also that in the consensual politics of the day party study groups drew freely upon the available sources of expertise and received wisdom: the penal services themselves, the legal and academic communities, penal reform and other related interest groups, and published material from official or academic sources.
Parole was not a new idea, having existed in parts of the United States since early in the twentieth century, and had been canvassed down the years.
But support had been no more than patchy until it was taken up by such a strong party group on the eve of electoral victory.
Then, at last, its hour had come.
In the 1965 White Paper on The Adult Offender the Government had declared:
prisoners whose character and record render them suitable…should be released from prison earlier than they are at present.
Prisoners who do not of necessity have to be detained for the protection of the public are in some cases more likely to be made into decent citizens if, before completing the whole of their sentence, they are released under supervision with a liability to recall if they do not behave.
Other countries have used systems of this kind with success and the Government have concluded that the time has come to ask for powers to adopt a system of early release on licence in this country.
Criminal injuries compensation, the precursor of policies which two decades later were to be matched more closely to the actual situation of victims of crime, their needs and desires, had a mixed provenance towards which penal reform groups, official thinking and party political interests each contributed.
After a long and uphill struggle, lasting for most of the 1950s, Margery Fry had persuaded the Howard League and the newly formed Justice to take up the cause of monetary restitution to be paid out of public funds to those who had suffered personal injury from acts of criminal violence.
Parliamentary support began to coalesce, deriving mainly from the analogy which was seen between compensation for criminal injuries and the existing welfare provision for people who had sustained injuries in the course of their work.
MPs familiar with claims for workmen's compensation, or the operation of the Industrial Injuries Compensation Scheme, took a leading part.
Gradually the Home Office reacted; first with a tentative mention in Penal Practice in a Changing Society ; then with a lukewarm report from a working party in 1961; and finally, when all-party pressure was at its height, with a White Paper on Compensation for Victims of Crimes of Violence , published shortly before the 1964 general election.
In between, both Justice and the Conservative Political Centre brought out reports urging that the State should compensate financially the victims of certain violent offences.
Once the principle had been accepted, the main practical difficulty was seen as how to distinguish between innocent victims of assault and ‘fraudulent and guilty’ victims, such as criminals fighting over their spoils or men beating each other up in gang warfare.
The solution adopted by Brooke was oblique.
Instead of conferring entitlement by way of primary legislation, compensation would be paid ex-gratia without the presumption of State liability.
An experimental and non-statutory scheme would be set up, administered by a Board composed of lawyers who would make discretionary awards based on common law damages.
The offences causing the injury were not specified, although offences committed against a member of the offender's own family would not be compensated.
After a debate in the House of Commons on the White Paper's proposals, which were accepted without dissent, an amended scheme was announced in June which came into effect on 1 August 1964.
Administrative delays and mounting cost were the principal features which marred the subsequent development of what was to become one of the most extensive, and expensive, of all instruments of criminal justice.
IV
The legislation which was to become the Criminal Justice Act 1967, a long statute of 106 Sections and seven schedules, was the most comprehensive since the 1948 Act.
Earlier the same year it had been preceded by a Criminal Law Act which brought to an end the time-honoured division of crimes into felonies and misdemeanours, as well as abolishing certain obsolete crimes and the torts of maintenance and champerty on the recommendation of the Law Commission.
The Criminal Justice Act was more wide ranging, making changes in criminal procedure and the powers of the courts to deal with offenders.
A new power to suspend sentences of imprisonment was added by Jenkins, at the instigation of the judiciary.
Once again, the proposal was not original, having twice been considered by the Advisory Council on the Treatment of Offenders in the 1950s, but rejected on both occasions.
Nevertheless, the Home Secretary was persuaded that anything which might help towards countering the rising prison population by keeping out of prison those who need not be there was worth trying:
By this means [the suspended sentence]we shall substantially avoid sending people to prison for the first time unnecessarily.
Whichever way the outcome goes in an individual case, I do not believe that society can lose.
If no further offence is committed, the deterrent has worked, prison space has been saved, and the offender has not been made used to prison conditions.
If a further offence is committed, the offender will be punished, certainly and surely, both for the earlier and the subsequent offence.
This is a sensible but by no means necessarily a lenient proposition.
On passing a sentence of imprisonment of two years or less the Act empowered a court to suspend the sentence by ordering that it should not take effect unless during a specified period the offender committed another offence punishable by imprisonment.
In the case of a sentence of six months or less, with certain exceptions such as where the offence involved violence, the possession of firearms, explosives or offensive weapons, or indecent conduct with a person aged under sixteen, the court was obliged to suspend the sentence.
Since the maximum term of imprisonment which might be imposed in the Magistrates' court for a single offence is six months, the Act effectively took out of the hands of the magistrates the power to impose sentences of immediate imprisonment on the majority of offenders who had not previously been sentenced to imprisonment or borstal training.
This change was much resented, and the Magistrates' Association, ‘by now a powerful body, and far removed from the fledgling organization founded by Margery Fry almost half a century before, campaigned ceaselessly until the law was subsequently amended…‘.
Before long what has been described aptly by one penologist as a malfunction began to appear as it became evident that suspended sentences of imprisonment were being used in place of non-custodial penalties, especially probation orders and fines.
Probation Officers were overworked, and a suspended sentence was a way of avoiding adding to their case loads.
Fines often went unpaid.
The suspended sentence had the disadvantage of seeming to be not quite one thing or the other, with some sentencers succumbing to the temptation of adding to the length of the term of imprisonment which would have been imposed immediately, so balancing the act of suspension with greater severity in the event of a breach.
Because those who re-offended went to prison automatically, without the possibility of a non-custodial sentence the next time they were convicted of an imprisonable offence, they might remain in custody for a longer time than would otherwise have been the case.
Some might not have found their way to prison at all.
All in all, it was a classic example of what criminologists define as net widening, leading to consequences quite different to those envisaged.
Other factors beside the suspended sentence bore on the size of the prison population in the early 1970s, and the trends were not encouraging.
After reaching a peak of 40,000 in 1970 and 1971, the numbers in prison fell in 1972 and 1973, but the 40,000 threshold was exceeded again in 1975.
July of that year saw a post-war peak of 40,808.
The 1967 Act (in Section 65) also brought to finality one of the most contentious chapters in English penal history.
The last vestige of corporal punishment was eradicated by repealing Section 18 of the Prison Act 1952, which had allowed the infliction of corporal punishment in prison service establishments.
No such punishment had been confirmed by any Home Secretary since June 1962, and it had been used only sparingly before that.
Whilst the provisions authorizing the early release on parole of prisoners under supervision and subject to recall had been generally welcomed in Parliament, as was the power to suspend sentences, two items provoked controversy.
These were the introduction of majority verdicts to avoid the necessity for new trials when juries could not reach unanimous verdicts, and the extension of firearms certificates to shotguns.
The latter was unpopular with farming and sporting interests and was strongly opposed by Conservative members.
Majority verdicts, a mechanical adjustment to the process of criminal trials rather than a genuinely new policy, touched a nerve in the body politic as matters concerning juries often do.
Unlike other more intricate proposals in the Bill, altering the rule that jury verdicts in England and Wales must be unanimous could be, and was, presented by its critics in populist terms as removing a brick from the bastion of liberty.
Press reaction and the Criminal Bar were generally hostile, fed by heightened fears of jury nobbling emanating largely from police circles.
In Parliament Jenkins, whose personal initiative it was, had taken the precaution of conferring in advance with the Conservative front bench spokesman on Home Affairs in advance.
In Quintin Hogg he found a trustworthy ally.
The future Lord Chancellor promised:
to back him through thick and thin, but not before I had consulted the eight or nine senior legal Members (some of them more distinguished at the Bar than myself) and got their promises of support.
In the end, overcome by the superstitious public outcry, all these ratted and voted the other way.
I kept my word to Jenkins and backed his proposals for all I was worth as a welcome, if minor, rationalization of the creaking old eighteenth-century ox-wagon of our criminal law.
Ten to two seemed to be a perfectly adequate majority with the proper safeguards Jenkins offered…
Deserted by Hogg's senior legal colleagues on the Conservative benches, and with a strong challenge mounted by the libertarian left on the Government side, the clause looked in danger.
But at the end of the day, due to skilful management by Jenkins combined with the staunchness of the shadow Home Secretary, the clause survived at Report Stage by 180 votes to 102.
Supporters of the change were fortified by the knowledge, revealed by the Home Secretary in his speech, that of the thirty five judges in the Queen's Bench Division (including the Lord Chief Justice who conducted the poll), twenty-five were in favour of majority verdicts, provided that the majority did not fall below ten to two.
Eight were against, with two undecided and prepared to follow the majority.
It is an error to assume that the higher judiciary is always against reform.
On several occasions when their views have been canvassed, the judges of the High Court and the Court of Appeal have shown themselves capable of contemplating changes that do not necessarily coincide with popular or professional opinion.
A later example can be found in the proposal to substitute discretionary sentences (including life imprisonment) for the mandatory life sentence in cases of murder.
It was the concept of parole, originally at the discretion of the Home Secretary, but amended in the course of the passage of the legislation through Parliament so that he could grant early release on licence to a prisoner only if advised to do so by a statutory Parole Board, that commanded the keenest interest of penal reformers and had the most extensive effects.
Although presented mainly as a measure of penal reform that was desirable for its own sake, officials were more sanguine that parole might lead to the hoped for reduction in the prison population than the dubious promise of the suspended sentence.
The advice of senior civil servants was especially influential at this period.
In preparing the Bill and seeing it through Parliament, Jenkins had at his right hand Cunningham's successor as Permanent Under Secretary of State, Sir Philip Allen.
A former deputy chairman of the Prison Commission, Allen was a sophisticated Whitehall practitioner, knowledgeable about and deeply interested in the reshaping of penal policy.
In their efforts to weld together into a coherent master plan proposals deriving from several different sources: party politics, expert advisers, and Home Office experience, Jenkins and his senior civil service adviser constituted an unusually perceptive and skilful partnership.
Yet in the outcome the Criminal Justice Act 1967, with over 300 amendments to the original Bill having been debated for more than sixty hours in the Commons Standing Committee, suffered the fate of those that went before and came after.
In Allen's own words:
…however worthy the original intention it is almost inevitable that one ends up with a pretty fair rag-bag and that a carefully drawn long title offers no real defence.
V
Out of office for the first time since 1951, the Conservatives threw themselves into policy making after the 1964 election defeat.
The new chairman of the Party's Advisory Committee on Policy, an appointment long held by R. A. Butler, was Edward Heath.
During the short period of nine months which elapsed before he succeeded Sir Alec Douglas-Home as Leader of the Opposition on 2 August 1965, Heath set up policy groups orientated towards issues with strong electoral appeal.
In a letter to a member of the group on crime who had expressed an interest in foreign affairs, Heath replied:
the difficulty quite frankly is that everybody wants to join the Study Groups on foreign affairs or economic policy and I am not at all sure that electorally these are the two most important.
Indeed I am rather coming round to the view that the trouble last year was not that we failed to produce as good policies as our opponents but that we failed to produce policies for the issues the electorate was most interested in.
The terms of reference of the policy group on crime were: ‘to assess post-war trends in crime and their probable cause, to evaluate current and proposed new methods for the prevention of crime and the treatment of offenders and to make recommendations.
Initially the chairman was Sir Edward Boyle, followed by the shadow Home Secretary, Peter Thorneycroft, when Boyle moved on to become deputy chairman of the Advisory Committee on Policy.
Heath took a keen interest in the group's composition, sending out personal letters of invitation.
Because of the necessity to keep in step with the Parliamentary Party, the membership contained four MPs (William Deedes, Edward Gardner QC, William Rees-Davies and Mark Carlisle), as well as the chairman.
There was a former junior Home Office Minister, Earl Jellicoe, from the Lords; with the voluntary side of the Party being represented by Mrs Adelaide Doughty, chairman of the National Women's Advisory Committee, and Mrs Lucille Iremonger, a journalist and wife of a Conservative MP.
Heath was determined to broaden the range of experience and attitudes represented on the group and added Ian Trethowan, then a political commentator for the BBC; Beryl Cooper, a barrister; Timothy Raison, Editor of New Society ; Dr Bryan Wilson, an Oxford sociologist and Fellow of All Souls College; and Dr William Belson from the London School of Economics.
Responding to Heath's invitation, Wilson wrote that he was not a member of the Conservative Party, or of any political party, and while he was willing to assist the Advisory Committee by participating in the work of its study group on post-war crime, he would not wish to do so if the implication of his participation was to become politically committed.
Heath replied promptly and re-assuringly:
I have always felt that on these policy study groups we must avoid restricting ourselves to those who are already fully committed politically to the Conservative Party.
Certainly so far as we are concerned we would completely recognise your position and we are in fact, since your position is shared by several other experts in their respective fields who have been good enough to assist us in this venture, doing our very best to see that the names of those who are taking part in the policy study groups do not become public property.
In the event, Wilson not only joined the policy group, preparing two closely reasoned papers on which the analysis of the social causes of the rising crime rate in the group's report was based, but agreed that his name should be included amongst the authors of the published version.
Only Trethowan's name was omitted, presumably more for reasons of his public reputation as an interviewer and commentator than for any lack of enthusiasm for the Conservative cause.
Indeed, he had urged Heath to set up a policy group on crime, writing:
What, I suggest, is really disturbing people is the problem of law enforcement, something which the Conservatives are traditionally concerned about and the Labour Party is traditionally rather wet about.
The group's secretary was Carol Mather, a retired Guards’ officer employed by the Conservative Research Department and a future MP for Esher.
The working methods were described by the politically uncommitted Wilson:
My impression was of a group of people who were seriously interested in the subject and deeply concerned about it.
Our discussions were serious and, I thought, well informed.
Heath's most ambitious fly was cast over a serving senior police officer, Colonel Eric St. Johnston, then Chief Constable of Lancashire.
In his reply St. Johnston said that the Chief Inspector of Constabulary at the Home Office, whom he had consulted, did not think he should accept the invitation to join the working party, but that there would be no objection to his attending any meeting to which he might be invited.
He added that he would be speaking only as an individual and not as a representative of the Chief Police Officers Association.
His letter is minuted tersely in Heath's hand: ‘They could invite him to every meeting as consultant.
He is a Tory.
E. H.’.
Tory or not, there is no evidence that St. Johnston, who himself became H. M. Chief Inspector of Constabulary in 1967, overstepped the boundaries of propriety.
The minutes of the crime policy group record that, in common with various other expert witnesses, he attended one meeting of a sub-committee which was considering crime prevention.
Accompanied by the Deputy Chief Constable of Lancashire, he opened challengingly, saying that he understood the Committee had already heard the views of the Metropolitan Police Commissioner and the Chief Inspector of Constabulary.
These represented the establishment; whereas the views of his deputy and himself represented those of the rebels.
Members of the policy group later visited the Lancashire Constabulary Headquarters on 18/19 July 1965 for a briefing by the Chief Constable and his senior officers and saw a demonstration of the work of the force.
The first meeting, under Boyle's chairmanship, took place at the Conservative Research Department on 16 February.
On 1 June, Thorneycroft warned that because of the possibility of an Autumn election, Heath had asked for interim reports by the end of the month.
In Heath's personal and confidential letters to chairmen of policy groups he said that interim reports should concentrate on points that might be considered for inclusion in a manifesto for an Autumn election.
His letter went on to outline the procedure, a classic of its kind, for presenting the fruits of policy research to the Conservative Party in Opposition:
The reports should be sent in the first instance to me for submission to the Advisory Committee on Policy.
The ACP will then consider the report at its next meeting, and it may be that you would like to be present at that meeting.
After the reports have been discussed by the ACP I pass the report, together with the views of the ACP to the Leader of the Party who no doubt will then wish to discuss it with his Consultative Committee.
The ACP does, I realise, add to the length of the procedure but it is important.
It is the only method we have of associating with our policy the Party as a whole through a body that is representative of the front and back benches and the Party in the country as well as the Party in the House.
A preliminary draft of the Crime Policy Group's interim report was ready by 23 June, with a second draft following on 29 June.
By 6 July the final version was circulated by the Conservative Research Department, and on 13 July Thorneycroft sent the interim report to Heath, with copies to Sir Alec Douglas-Home and the Advisory Committee on Policy.
In a covering letter he said that some further amendments would be needed:
…including particularly, in the light of recent events, a paragraph on prison security on the general lines that prisons should be better to live in and harder to get out of.
The possibility of publication was raised by Thorneycroft who suggested not only that it would demonstrate the thinking that had been done, but tactically that it would ‘in some degree pre-empt any White Paper which the Socialists may be thinking of producing based on Longford’.
If the report were to be published, he forecast that most members would be willing to let their names go on it.
In reply, Heath expressed his ‘really very warm thanks’ to the members of the policy group.
It was, he said:
…no inconsiderable sacrifice to put in the time and effort that this sort of work requires, particularly when, as I fear has been the case so far, it has to be pursued at rather a breakneck speed.
Heath's initial reaction was favourable to the idea of publication, subject to the report's reception by the Advisory Committee on Policy and the advice of ‘our publicity pundits’.
As Leader of the Opposition, in November 1965 he decided against signing personally a foreword to the report which it had been agreed should be published as a pamphlet by the Conservative Political Centre.
He did, however, ask to see and approve the proposed wording, and on 30 December sent some comments on the proofs accompanied by a brisk command to ‘get this sorted out and cleared as soon as possible’.
Under the title Crime Knows No Boundaries the report was published on 19 January 1966, less than a year after the inception of the policy group.
It contained a comprehensive study of the causes, prevention and treatment of crime.
The implications of some of the social causes were frankly stated as being:
…not particularly comforting, since many of the goals which we as a nation set ourselves, the policies which we pursue and the material objectives to which we attach importance tend to increase rather than to diminish the incidence of crime.
Specific recommendations were aimed at strengthening the police, in manpower, efficiency and pay, and speeding up the process of amalgamating local forces.
The case for a separate traffic corps, strongly resisted by the police, was not worth pursuing.
Arrangements for committal proceedings should be reviewed, and short term imprisonment discouraged as being expensive and of little reformative value.
Powers should be given to the courts to sentence adult offenders to attendance centres.
More probation hostels were urgently needed for young persons, and hostels should be provided for adult offenders who required strict supervision.
The report concluded that substantial financial support should be given to research promoted and co-ordinated by the Home Office and carried out in the Universities and by other agencies.
The early release of prisoners serving long sentences of determinate duration was supported, although in the same way as the Longford report to the Labour Party eighteen months before, the policy group added a proviso that the Home Secretary should in all cases consult an advisory body before doing so.
A leading article in The Times found the general approach tentative, but did not offer any criticism on those grounds.
On the contrary, it commended the authors for resisting the temptation to turn the increases in offences against property and the person into highly inflammable political material with corresponding demands for ‘hard’ as opposed to‘soft’dealings with offenders.
The tone of the publication was moderate and thoughtful; a true reflection of the Heathite aspiration towards social policies that aimed to be humane, practical and vigorous.
The forces of counter revolution had not yet gathered strength.
VI
The Government formed by Edward Heath in June 1970 enacted the main criminal justice legislation of the decade in 1972.
A stronger law and order ticket, although a feature of the Conservative appeal to the electorate, was given no great prominence.
Before the General Election there had been some talk of revising Crime Has No Boundaries , after Quintin Hogg had written to Heath calling for a ‘refurbishment’ of policies towards crime.
Patrick Cosgrave, then at the Conservative Research Department, listed the changes he thought necessary in the text, but the Director of the Research Department, Brendon Sewill, was not happy about the suggestion.
What would be the status of a new document?
Who would sign it?
Was it to be an official Party document or a pamphlet in the name of Quintin Hogg?
If the latter, Mr Hogg would be likely to want to write it himself and not be content simply to sign it.
While the Party wished to give the minimum of specific policy commitments, yet conveying the impression that a Conservative Government would be full of ideas, such a stance would be insufficient to satisfy the press.
The Party officials had their way and with the imminence of the Election the debate became subsumed in the drafting of the manifesto.
No mention of crime occurred until page twenty-six of the thirty page manifesto, where police recruitment, public order offences, prison building, and secure detention for the most dangerous criminals were singled out.
Even the reference to an ‘age of demonstration and disruption’ was balanced by an addendum characteristic of the Leader's outlook:
A tolerant and civilized society must continue to permit its citizens to assemble, march and demonstrate in support of the ideals and principles they believe in.
The change in the political complexion of the Government after the Election did not lead to any sharp change of direction in the thrust of criminal policy.
Although it is arguable that the seeds of dissensus had already taken root in the surrounding world of penal thought, dividing those who advocated a welfare philosophy from those more inclined to place confidence in penalties and the traditional legal apparatus, in the Home Office at least the consensus still held.
The wise hand of Philip Allen was still evident; Reginald Maudling, the new Home Secretary, was an experienced and tolerant man, if no longer the force he had once been.
So it was that the most innovative proposal in the Criminal Justice Bill presented to Parliament on 10 November 1971 stemmed not from the Tory manifesto, nor from Crime Has No Boundaries , but from an official committee chaired by a Labour life-peer.
As long before as November 1966, Jenkins had asked the Advisory Council on the Penal System to consider what changes and additions might be made in the range of non-custodial penalties that were available to the courts.
For adult offenders these had for many years been confined to absolute or conditional discharges, fines and probation orders.
There was a widely held view amongst sentencers at the time that these powers were too limited; while the furtherance of types of punishment not necessitating the deprival of liberty had been a perennial cause of penal reformers.
The 1967 Criminal Justice Act had added the suspended sentence which had been pressed on the Home Secretary by an enthusiastic judiciary.
Unlike a probation order, which was not regarded as a sentence of the Court, a suspended sentence ranked not merely as a sentence, but as a sentence of imprisonment, with a condition attached which activated the element of custodial confinement only if another offence was committed within a stated period of not less than one year nor more than two (originally three) years.
The ACPS had set up a sub-committee, under the chairmanship of Baroness Wootton of Abinger, to carry out the review.
A weighty report was completed by May 1970 covering fines, service to the community, deferment of sentence, attendance centres, disqualification from driving or certain occupations, forfeiture of property, intermittent custody, and the combination of probation with other orders.
One of the earliest communications on penal matters received by Maudling, after taking office as Home Secretary on 20 June 1970, was a letter signed by the Chairman of the Advisory Council on the Penal System dated 30 June.
In it, Younger stressed the need for additional alternatives to custodial sentences, which had been implicit in the decision to ask the Council to undertake the enquiry.
Efforts should be directed not merely towards keeping offenders out of prison, but towards changing their attitudes to society.
The most ‘imaginative and hopeful’ of the Sub-Committee's proposals were that:
the criminal courts should be empowered to require offenders to carry out service to the community.
The Council feel that this scheme, with its emphasis on the reformative value of service in association with volunteers, is likely to be a promising form of new non-custodial penalty and that its effectiveness is likely to be all the greater because it involves the positive co-operation of the offender.
‘Operating creatively’ on a proposal which was in effect another version of reparation, although this time to the community as a whole, Maudling echoed the sentiments of the ACPS in his speech commending the Criminal Justice Bill to the House of Commons on Second Reading.
There was nothing in the Bill which was in any way dramatic or spectacular, he said, rather it was the culmination of much work and thought over many years by people inside and outside the House who were concerned with the problems of crime and punishment and penal treatment generally.
The Bill also incorporated recommendations made by another sub-committee of the ACPS, chaired by Lord Justice Widgery, extending and rationalizing the powers of the courts to require a convicted offender to make financial reparation to his victim.
Criminal bankruptcy orders, designed to ensure that those who committed large-scale crimes, especially fraud, should not be able to benefit from the fruits of their criminal activities, were also included.
Maximum penalties for firearms offences were to be increased.
As an alternative to imprisonment, the courts would have discretion to sentence offenders, with their consent, to between forty and 240 hours of community service work.
To the Home Secretary the idea was:
a wholly novel concept in this country.
It has been tried experimentally in other countries, but it is new to us.
I have high hopes for it…
I like the idea of sentenced persons doing something useful for their fellow citizens rather than mouldering inside a prison.
In fact, such voluntary activity might well lead to their continuing to do it in the future of their own free will.
To the politicians of the 1970s, the notion of community service by offenders was an attractive one.
Combining relative novelty with practicality, it seemed evidently constructive as a way of repaying society for a wrong done, while at the same time bringing the offender within reach of the voluntary organizations which are a peculiarly English way of providing services of value to a wider community.
Perhaps the difficulties of finding suitable work for offenders, and ensuring that tasks were properly performed, were underestimated in the enthusiasm of the initial response.
Nevertheless a new, and in the event permanent, penal instrument had been forged.
As we shall see in a later chapter, much of the same reasoning was to recur towards the end of the 1980s in the search for ways of implementing punishment in the community.
The motivation behind the Criminal Justice Act 1972 lay in the desire of Ministers to be seen to be taking action in the field of criminal justice without any ideologically dominant objectives to fuel the legislation.
While there were some deeply held opinions, as shown in the controversy over the provisions in the 1967 Act which had made the suspension of certain short sentences mandatory, they provided insufficient grist for the legislative mill.
The raw material was stored within the department.
Some of it, notably parts of the two reports from the ACPS chimed with, although were not attributable to, the political beliefs of a number of Conservatives on the back benches in the House of Commons.
The moderate Home Secretary was not alone in contending that offenders should recompense their victims, and through the performance of tasks of value to the community make reparation for the harm they had done.
In the form in which the proposals on community service appeared in the Bill they owed something also to the Government's hope that the new measure would be seen as a credible alternative to custodial sentences, thus contributing towards the aim of bringing down the prison population.
It would be an overstatement to interpret the 1972 Act as a planned and conscious attack on the size of the prison population.
The gravitational field generated in its productive phase by the legislative cycle attracted items from several diverse sources.
The Wootton and Widgery proposals came to hand at the right time; there were pressures from bodies such as the Magistrates' Association and the Justices' Clerks; while the prospect of legislation prompted a clearing out of the pigeon holes of Whitehall.
Parliamentary proceedings, second thoughts about the drafting, and the addition of makeweight provisions, added to and varied the original core as the Bill progressed.
As enacted, a Home Office official traced the origins of the twenty-four Sections comprising Part I of the Act, entitled ‘Powers for dealing with offenders’, in the analysis reproduced in Table 4.
VII
After the passage of the 1972 Act there was no further criminal justice legislation for five years.
In the interval, policies were developed at a slower pace than the rate the problems multiplied with which they were intended to deal.
Delegated legislation, decisions of the courts, and changing administrative practice, amounted to a sluggish dynamic for speeding up the ability of the criminal justice system to respond.
The design and building of a series of new prisons and detention centres, the first comprehensive programme since Victorian times, was embarked upon following Butler's initiative, but after the early stages fell prey to cutbacks for economic reasons.
The most keenly felt was a condition attached to a large scale loan from the International Monetary Fund in 1976 requiring a reduction of £1 billion in public expenditure to support the external value of sterling.
The prison-building programme was among the casualties.
Even the contorted prose of the Prison Department's report for that year could not disguise the import:
the on-going place producing programme begun in 1970 was suspended indefinitely and expenditure is now limited to completing major place producing and redevelopment projects already under way.
Improvements at existing establishments have also been curtailed and will be necessarily confined in the years ahead to the renewal of essential services and repairs to enable establishments to continue in full operation.
Other developments, to become increasingly portentous as time went on, primarily the moves towards stricter control over police powers of arrest and questioning of suspects, and the inauguration of an independent prosecution service, were in their embryonic stages.
A review of the constitutional position of the police and the ‘arrangements for their control and administration’, had been carried out by a Royal Commission under the chairmanship of Sir Henry Willink whose final report had been published as early as May 1962.
Although some well publicized scandals had begun to undermine the respect which the police still generally enjoyed, the majority recommended no fundamental change, contenting themselves with drawing attention to:
…a body of evidence, too substantial to disregard, which in effect accused the police of stooping to the use of undesirable means of obtaining statements and of occasionally giving perjured evidence in a court of law.
Against these criticisms, the Royal Commission noted that it had heard from ‘witnesses representing a wide range of interests a great many tributes to the integrity of the police’.
Conventional and gradualist as its recommendations tended to be, the Royal Commission can take credit for laying the foundations of the practice of bringing in a senior officer from another force to investigate complaints against the police.
It also recommended the appointment of a Chief Inspector of Constabulary answerable to the Home Secretary, and that the post be filled without delay.
Yet by the later 1960s and throughout the 1970s uneasiness over police malpractice in investigating crime continued to grow.
Disquiet arose from a number of notorious incidents, in particular the Maxwell Confait murder case.
In that case the conviction of three youths in 1972 was later overturned by the Court of Appeal in a judgment which by implication raised disturbing questions about police interrogations, especially of juveniles and the mentally handicapped.
The case was the subject of an inquiry by a former High Court judge, Sir Henry Fisher, whose report included forceful criticisms of police officers and of a lawyer in the DPP's Department.
In making specific recommendations on the wording and application of the Judges' Rules and other matters, Fisher observed cautiously, but correctly:
An inquiry such as mine into a particular case is not a sufficient foundation for fundamental changes in the law relating to police investigation and prosecution (such, for instance, as the introduction of a system like that prevailing in Scotland).
If such changes are to be contemplated, then something like a Royal Commission, which could go into all aspects of any proposed changes (including the cost) would be required.
In June 1977, six months before Fisher's report was published, the tide of opinion was running so strongly that the Prime Minister announced the appointment of a Royal Commission on Criminal Procedure.
The time had come, James Callaghan said, for the whole criminal process, from the start of investigation to the point of trial, to be reviewed.
The remit extended to the prosecution as well as the investigation of crime.
The inclusion of the former originated less from public concern over any alleged malpractice than from lack of confidence, felt mainly but not wholly within the legal profession, in procedures whereby ultimate responsibility for prosecuting as well as investigating in the vast majority of cases rested with the police.
Objections were both of principle and of a practical nature.
More than a century earlier, in 1856, a Select Committee of the House of Commons had heard arguments remarkably similar to those which were to convince the Royal Commission:
The Attorney General for England states that cases are often brought to trial which, from being imperfectly got up, break down, and thus cause the acquittal of guilty parties.
Many cases are likewise brought into court, where, on account of the trivial nature of the offence imputed, or the deficiency of proof adduced, prosecutions are undesirable…
Policemen assume the functions of public prosecutors; a practice liable to abuse.
There may often be a good case for conviction, and no deficiency of evidence, yet acquittal ensues because the prosecutor, acting without advice, is not sufficiently informed as to the precise nature of the proof required by law.
In 1970 JUSTICE had published a report of a working party, chaired by Lewis Hawser QC and Basil Wigoder QC, recommending an equivalent of the Scottish prosecution system.
When the idea of a Royal Commission was in circulation, lawyers within the ranks of the Government, notably Sam Silkin, the Attorney General and one of the few front-benchers on either side to have taken a close interest in penal reform, and Alex Lyon, a Minister of State at the Home Office, pressed for the opportunity to be grasped to make an authoritative assessment of the arguments for a public prosecution service independent of the police.
The chance to convert a proposal long mooted into reality was too precious to let slip.
The selection of members was a slow business and the Commission did not begin work until February 1978.
By then it was inevitable, given such wide terms of reference and the thoroughness expected of an inquiry by a Royal Commission, that its report could not be completed and delivered until after a General Election had taken place and, as it turned out, a new Government had come into power.
The Commission was the fourth to be established since 1960.
Details of each are given in Table 5.
Mrs Thatcher did not look with favour on Royal Commissions as a method of resolving difficult issues, and none were set up during her premiership between 1979–90.
VIII
Over the five years since the 1972 Act, the list of items calling for legislation was lengthening.
In the Criminal Law Bill planned for the session 1976/7 Home Office officials saw a vehicle capable of travelling beyond its original destination, the modernization of the outdated state of the law on conspiracy and trespass, by hitching on proposals dealing with the powers of the courts, the distribution of business between the Crown Court and the Magistrates' courts, penalties, and a number of procedural changes.
Ministers agreed, and a Bill was duly introduced in the House of Lords.
With the unforeseen addition of partly suspended sentences when the Bill reached the Commons, the resulting measure became the Criminal Law Act 1977, finally amounting to sixty-five sections and fourteen schedules.
Even the Home Secretary, Merlyn Rees, in his Second Reading speech commending the measure to the House, volunteered that it had no theme.
Other commentators depicted the Act less flatteringly as yet another example of ‘dustbin legislation’.
The law reform parts of the Act were opportune and important.
Conspiracy was an old common law offence, frequently charged and much in need of bringing up to date.
Trespass was, and generally so remains, a civil wrong.
The Act buttressed the law on trespass with two new criminal offences: using or threatening violence in order to obtain entry to any premises, and occupying a house or flat and refusing to leave at the request of the rightful occupier.
Films, whether shown in public cinemas or cinema clubs, were brought within the scope of the Obscene Publications Act 1959.
New offences were created to counter the menace of bomb hoaxes and the reality of threats to kill, whether by the planting of bombs or other means.
The offences of dangerous driving and causing death by dangerous driving, those convicted of the latter killing more people on the roads of the United Kingdom each year than the IRA, were abolished, being replaced by reckless driving and causing death by reckless driving.
The procedural and administrative changes affected remands, young offenders, the disclosure of prosecution evidence to accused persons or those representing them, and coroners courts.
Inflation called for an uplift in many maximum fines, with a power being conferred upon the Home Secretary to adjust financial limits in the future by order, having first obtained the approval of both Houses of Parliament, so as to keep them in step with subsequent changes in the value of money.
The power was brought into force on 17 July 1978.
By the mid-1970s the purity of Gardiner's reorganization of the criminal courts was jeopardized by the Crown Courts becoming overburdened with large numbers of relatively trivial offences.
Lengthy delays occurred; there were about 8,000 cases awaiting trial in the Crown Court in 1974, growing to 12,000 by September 1976.
The Government had responded by setting up an interdepartmental committee under the chairmanship of Lord Justice James to review the distribution of criminal business between the Crown Court and the Magistrates' courts.
The Committee reported in 1975, and its recommendations formed the basis of the re-organization effected by the Criminal Law Act 1977.
All of the existing types of offence were reduced to three categories, classified by the method of trial.
They were: offences triable only on indictment; offences triable only summarily; and offences triable either way.
A procedure was laid down to determine whether an ‘either way’ offence was to be tried summarily or on indictment.
The Magistrates' court must first form a view on which mode of trial appears more suitable, having regard to the nature of the case, whether the circumstances make the offence one of a serious character, and whether Magistrates' powers of sentencing would be adequate.
The case can be tried summarily only if the accused consents.
This option allows a measure of latitude to opt for jury trial on indictment to a person accused of a more serious offence, or one which could have profound effects on him if found guilty.
The decks had not been cleared, however, for a further innovation.
The partly suspended sentence of imprisonment had been omitted from the Bill which had passed through all its stages in the Lords, although it had been under consideration by the ACPS.
Its addition was due to a debating coup by a junior Opposition spokesman, Patrick Mayhew, during Standing Committee in the Commons.
The Minister of State, Brynmor John, who was taking the Bill through the Committee on behalf of the Home Secretary, unexpectedly accepted the amendment to the surprise of his officials.
On the floor of the House at Report stage, the Government tabled a re-drafted new clause which received all-Party support and was agreed without a division.
Only two MP's, Emlyn Hooson, a Liberal QC, and Leo Abse, a Labour back-bencher, sounded a warning.
Since the Criminal Justice Act 1967, the Courts had been able to suspend a sentence of imprisonment, but not to require part of it to be served in custody with part suspended.
Conceptually it was tempting to argue that greater flexibility would allow the sentencing court more discretion if it concluded that full suspension could not be justified, but that a brief experience of imprisonment might have some deterrent effect without first offenders remaining long enough in prison to become acclimatized.
The ACPS saw in this a double deterrent: the deterrent element of actual custody, and a postponed deterrence during the suspension period.
In the Commons debate a sponsor of Radical Alternatives to Prison, Robert Kilroy-Silk, said that penal reformers (he mentioned the Howard League, NACRO, and the ACPS) were in favour of partly suspended sentences, as he was himself, on the grounds that the length of the sentence had little deterrent effect.
The Minister of State spoke about overcrowding and the cost of adding a supervision requirement to the new sentence; with Mayhew, in a phrase that was to gain increasing currency on the Conservative benches, pronouncing that whereas a great many people who get a suspended sentence, and their friends, think that they have got away with their crime, the effect of ‘a short, sharp and I hope, nasty taste of prison’ would linger on.
Far from being a soft option, he contended, the partly suspended sentence would enable the courts to deal more severely with: ‘people who need to have the deterrence of a taste of prison at what is relatively the outset of their criminal experience’.
The possibilities of a more stringent regime during their stay in prison, Mayhew added, should also be considered.
This was the language of the Conservative Right, and it is seldom that it  synchronizes with the tenets of the reformist Left.
The irony was that the two conflicting strands should converge on a proposal that was so unlikely to achieve its ill-defined and contradictory aims.
In the event, the life of the partly suspended sentence was short and inglorious.
Section 47 of the Criminal Law Act 1977, was not brought into force for another five years until 1982, Ministers of both parties having accepted the advice of Home Office officials that the provision was too risky to implement at a time of acute overcrowding in the prisons.
Their doubts arose from the inability to predict or control how the courts would use the power.
A term of x years imprisonment to be served and y years suspended might be imposed, when previously x would have been thought sufficient.
If this were to happen, the activation of only a proportion of suspended terms would amount to a heavy extra burden on the prisons.
Moreover, the workings of the partly suspended sentence were complex and difficult to explain to those who had been convicted; the sentence was not available for young offenders under the age of twenty-one; and there were confusing anomalies with parole entitlement.
Unlike the fully suspended sentence which had become popular, in some ways too popular with the initial enthusiasm of the courts having to be reined in by the Court of Appeal, the partly suspended sentence never caught on.
In 1987 and 1988 only some 2,700 partly suspended sentences were imposed in the whole of England and Wales.
In 1988 magistrates gave 15,900 fully suspended sentences and the Crown Court another 15,000.
Two thirds of the suspended sentences imposed by the Magistrates' courts were for up to three months.
In the Crown Court over 90% were for up to a year, and 50% under six months.
In November 1988 the Carlisle Committee's review of the parole system found the partly suspended sentence to be ‘wholly incompatible’ with the scheme proposed for conditional release in the future, and recommended its abolition.
In the White Paper on Crime, Justice and Protecting the Public , which outlined the Government's plans for legislation in 1990/1, the recommendation was accepted.
Section 47 of the Criminal Law Act 1977 was duly repealed by the Criminal Justice Act 1991.
IX
An insight into the relevance of presentation to parties in Opposition can be found in Conservative policies towards law and order in 1978.
Since May 1977 Labour no longer had an overall majority in the House of Commons, depending on Liberal or Nationalist support to remain in office.
An election could come at any time, and policies across the board were being honed in readiness.
At a Shadow Cabinet meeting held in the Leader's Room at the Commons on 1 March 1978 a policy paper titled Law and Order: a New Resolve was submitted for approval.
Drafted by the Conservative Research Department, it was presented by William Whitelaw, the Shadow Home Secretary, and David Howell, formerly a junior Minister who had worked under Whitelaw at the Northern Ireland Office and was at the time a Front Bench spokesman on Home Affairs.
Mrs Thatcher was in the chair, with fourteen other member of the Leader's Consultative Committee present.
None had previously served as Home Office Ministers, although Lord Thorneycroft had chaired the policy group which had produced Crime Knows No Boundaries in 1966.
Opposition Whips, Party officials, and the Head of the Home Affairs Section of the Conservative Research Department were in attendance.
Introducing the paper, Whitelaw suggested that in place of‘Law and Order’ it should be retitled ‘The Protection of the Citizen’.
There is no record of the reaction to this suggestion, but the phrase ‘law and order’ was too deeply engrained to be displaced from general currency.
The discussion covered police pay, seen as an important but potentially costly commitment, and the undesirability of a referendum on capital punishment ‘because of its implications for other policy areas and the danger of undermining Parliamentary government’.
Suggestions were put forward on corporal punishment, a crime of vandalism, special constables, violence on television, community homes, school activities, controlling obscene displays, and parental responsibility.
It was agreed that the paper should be redrafted and circulated, and that any published statements of policy should make it clear Conservatives ‘did not believe additional resources alone to be the answer to law and order problems, but that the humanizing of our society had an important contribution to make’.
The claim that: ‘the shorter the sentence is, the better’, was regarded as being open to misinterpretation, and should be rephrased.
Although the 1978 policy paper was never published, its main features were incorporated in the manifesto, and the supplementary briefing that accompanied it, for the General Election which came in May of the following year.
The commitments are listed in the next chapter, but they need to be put in the context of their presentation and the way the law and order issue was handled during the election campaign.
A meeting to draw up plans took place in the Chairman's room at the Conservative Central Office on 7 July 1978.
Thorneycroft (the Party Chairman), Whitelaw and Howell were joined by a group of mostly younger professional advisers and party officials.
Gordon Reece, a public relations consultant and personal adviser to Margaret Thatcher, was at the time Director of Publicity at the Central Office.
Tim Bell was Chairman and Managing Director of the Party's advertising agency, Saatchi and Saatchi Garland-Compton.
Christopher Patten was Director of the Conservative Research Department, accompanied by Nicholas True from the Home Affairs Section.
Tristan Garel-Jones and Alan Howarth were on the Chairman's staff at Central Office.
Patten, Garel-Jones and Howarth were later to become MPs and hold office as Ministers under Mrs Thatcher; all were aged in their mid-thirties.
Bell and Reece continued as key advisers to the Prime Minister, on the communication of policy as well as on her personal projection, throughout the election campaigns of the 1980s.
Both were knighted, becoming famous names in the world of public relations.
The discussion concentrated upon the imperatives of effective political communication: the need to prepare a ‘distillation’ of policy in a form that could be used as background for press conferences, speeches and broadcasts, and the language and basic terms that should be employed.
The phrase ‘law and order’ continued to provoke differing opinions.
The Party might talk of ‘safety in the streets’, or ‘violence in the streets’, or ‘protecting the citizen’, or ‘safety in the home’.
Notwithstanding the reservations expressed by Whitelaw amongst others, especially about the impact on younger people, it was hard to find a better comprehensive phrase than ‘law and order’.
What was it that people responded to?
Presumably it depended on who they were.
A pensioner might be particularly concerned about safety in the streets.
A resident in a tower block might be concerned about vandalism.
A parent might be concerned about discipline in the schools.
It was agreed that systematic use should be made of the words ‘safety’, ‘security’(a word Labour was believed to be fond of and which might therefore be turned to advantage), and ‘support’.
Society might be described as ‘overregulated and underprotected’.
Five items identified for use at a press conference and for speeches and broadcasts were:
i)
The Government must support the police .
The police had not received proper support from Labour Ministers, leading to poor pay and loss of experienced manpower.
ii)
People guilty of crimes must be convicted .
The period between arrest and trial for serious offences must be shortened and the question of bail should be looked at.
iii)
Punishments must make sense .
The political background was likely to be a country clamouring for tougher punishments and wanting to be convinced that crime will be dealt with, while expert reports called for less resort to prison sentencing.
Against this background, Conservatives should say: too many prison sentences are given to the wrong people (eg alcoholics); prison regimes are too often wrong, with prisoners staying inside in relatively soft conditions for relatively long sentences; too often violent criminals do not get sent to prison as they should; for young thugs short spells are advocated in glasshouse-type detention centres with a very tough physical regime (but good food); otherwise there should be a greater emphasis on fines, representing a more humane and economical approach.
iv)
The treatment of offenders is important as well as punishment .
The Conservative leadership should show itself as compassionate and imaginative as well as tough where necessary.
The public will not be reconciled to compassion and rehabilitation until they are confident that criminals are in fact being caught and punished.
Firm action is necessary on law and order.
Deprivation must not be an excuse for everything.
Compassion for the victim should come before compassion for the criminal.
v)
As an addendum, it might be worth saying something positive, following public statements by the Metropolitan Police Commissioner, Sir David McNee, about the need for improved discipline in schools and the high proportion of offences committed by 10–16 year old children.
This should be discussed with the Shadow Cabinet spokesman on Education.
It was agreed that capital and corporal punishment should not be volunteered for the list of topics to be projected.
The line to take on capital punishment was that what urgently mattered was not the form of punishment, but making sure that people can live in safety and without fear.
Conservatives were concerned that an old lady can go and collect her pension without coming back to find her gas meter has been robbed, and that a mother can send her child round to a local shop without feat that the child will be molested.
It was important that members of the Party should not come out with calls for a referendum on capital punishment, as some candidates were reported to have done.
Mr Whitelaw would personally repudiate such demands if they were made again.
The question of capital punishment had always been a matter for individual conscience on a free vote in the House of Commons.
It was not thought that there was much demand for corporal punishment.
Mr Whitelaw dealt with the question normally by saying that it was no doubt a suitable kind of punishment for schoolboys, but it did not make sense for judicial use, especially because of the delay between offence and punishment.
A press advertisement prepared by Saatchi's on the theme: ‘Is it safe to vote for another Labour Government?’ was approved.
The copy featured the rise in crime that had taken place under Labour, stressing the need to support the police and the protection of people and property.
As regards television, it was noted that the broadcasting authorities were not willing to make newsfilm of the incidents outside the Grunwick factory available for party use.
Mr Whitelaw would pass on to Mrs Thatcher the proposals for phrases and the presentational priorities, suggesting to her that she might wish to hold a meeting on the subject.
Although there were some variations as the election campaign unfolded, the thrust of the Tory message on law and order did not deviate from the plan drawn up at the meeting on 7 July 1978.
X
Public policy over the three decades separating 1947 and 1979, represented, on the whole, the upholding of a consensual approach towards criminal justice.
The great issues, the ending of capital and corporal punishment as judicial penalties, cut across the parties and were treated as matters of individual conscience distinct from party politics.
At general elections the differences between the parties were magnified, but even in 1979, when the degree of politicization was greater than previously, the divide was more one of presentation and emphasis than substance.
With few exceptions, not all of which were as abortive as the partly suspended sentence, the ground for legislative change was usually prepared by Royal Commissions, Committees of Inquiry or reports from the ACPS or other advisory bodies.
The special interest groups were influential and research was encouraged into the causes of crime and the treatment of those who had offended.
The courts were re-organized and criminal offences re-classified, reforms which affected large numbers of people, but which had been achieved with a minimum of political controversy.
Punitive trends could be identified in the increase of maximum sentences of imprisonment for offences of violence against the person.
Firearms controls were tightened.
In sentencing, indeterminacy fell out of fashion sweeping away borstal training in its tide.
Detention centres survived, despite the erosion of evidence to support the ideals of retribution and deterrence which they epitomized.
The more liberal values of the 1960s were sustained in an unobtrusive, yet pervasive, climate of common attitudes shared by Home Office officials, special interest groups, and a respectable body of informed opinion.
In this environment, the probation service was shaped into a recognizably national system.
Financial compensation became available for the first time for criminal injuries; the community service order raised hopes as an alternative to custody; and an elaborate system of parole, later greatly expanded, was instituted.
These mainly constructive changes in penal policy were not matched by changes within the prison system.
The building of new prisons and the improvement of old ones were low priorities in the aftermath of the world war when scarce resources were concentrated upon houses, schools, hospitals and roads.
Ministers were touchy on accusations of spending public money on making the prisons more comfortable for criminals while so many deserving people were suffering hardship or deprivation.
Home Office officials knew what needed to be done, but were inhibited by the political climate from doing it.
As a result, their efforts were diverted more towards devising non-custodial alternatives than facing up to the intractable problems of institutional confinement.
Some sensational prison escapes in the mid-1960s (including four of the great train robbers and the spy George Blake) led to heightened security and control at the cost of treatment, training and education.
The Report of the Prison Department for 1967 noted:
Staff who had long been encouraged to develop treatment relationships towards prisoners had little time left for this important work after discharging tasks arising from the need to concentrate on security.
There was some curtailment of prisoners' activities, a reduction in the number of outside working parties and of educational classes.
New closed prisons were built for convicted offenders serving long fixed sentences or life imprisonment for the most serious crimes.
In the five years from 1966–71 maximum security prisons at Gartree (opened 1966), Albany and Long Lartin took their places alongside such grim old jails as Parkhurst, Wakefield and Wormwood Scrubs.
Their regimes may have been impoverished by the emphasis on security and restrictions on movement within the prison, but at least the physical settings avoided the squalor and overcrowding which worsened in the local prisons.
There the higher number of offenders sentenced to imprisonment, augmented by a burgeoning population of unconvicted persons remanded in custody awaiting trial, regularly exceeded the capacity of the prison system to contain them in acceptable conditions.
Before the financial axe fell in 1976, occasional shafts of light shone through the darkening sky: the old women's prison at Holloway was demolished and replaced on the same site by a completely new prison stressing medical supervision; whilst at Grendon Underwood the Prison Service pioneered a special establishment for the treatment and management of mentally abnormal offenders who had been sentenced to imprisonment.
The looming prison crisis dominated penal thinking in the latter part of the period.
The nightmare of a breakdown in the prisons, leading to riots and disorder as the pressure of numbers mounted, haunted thoughtful Home Office officials from the most senior to the most junior.
Few had any great faith in prisons as institutions for the reform of the inmates they contained, nor of imprisonment as a means of controlling crime.
Yet the Home Office was powerless to affect the sentencing decisions of the courts.
In reaction it turned to a whole gamut of strategies advocated by advisory committees and penal reform groups in an attempt to counter and check the rising tide of custodial sentences.
The roll call was a lengthy one: fines, probation, parole, community service, compensation, reparation, suspended sentences.
Such unity as they had, however, arose more from the situation in the prisons than from any systematic or co-ordinated plan to alter the course of a penal policy that was increasingly being called into question.
Despite the high hopes of Penal Policy in a Changing Society , recognizable authority in the shape of detection, arrest and prosecution still counted for more than prevention.
Warning signs began to flash that abuses could occur in the police investigation of serious crime.
The stimulant of efficiency led to local police forces being re-organized and amalgamated.
Police pay and conditions were improved, although not to levels that satisfied the Police Federation and its members.
As part of the drive for greater effectiveness the police embraced technology as a means of countering the increasing sophistication of crime.
Officers were switched to specialist tasks leading to a reduction in police presence and visibility on the streets.
Whether or not routine patrolling of neighbourhoods was an economical use of manpower, there was no doubt that it reflected a heartfelt public desire to see more policemen on the beat.
Roy Jenkins, usually so percipient an interpreter of the public mood, became caricatured in popular legend as the libertarian Home Secretary who wanted to insulate policemen in Panda cars.
Whatever generalizations might have been true at the level of national policy, it was becoming evident towards the end of an era that had been marked by political consensus that in Greater London and some of the other metropolitan areas the public accountability and operational methods of the police were no longer consensual.