

Train Times
Introducing TransPennine Services
In this timetable you will find details of our TransPennine rail services.
They form part of our network of services designed to improve rail travel between Britain's main regional centres.
From 11 May we are ‘Changing Our Ways’ with a new service which brings Teesside into the network.
There will be 7 trains a day between Middlesbrough and York, Leeds, Manchester and Liverpool, which also call at Northallerton and Thirsk giving these two towns an hourly TransPennine service.
TransPennine offers direct, fast and frequent services between large towns and cities on both sides of the Pennines, and is complemented by the InterCity network for journeys to other parts of Britain.
Whether your journey is for Business or Pleasure, TransPennine will meet your needs.
Seat Reservations
On all TransPennine services you are advised to reserve your seat in advance to ensure a comfortable journey.
For only £1 per journey, you may reserve the seat of your choice at any Travel Centre or Rail Travel Agent and from many staffed stations.
You should make your application at least 24 hours in advance of travel.
Catering
A trolley catering service at your seat is provided by Paradise Catering, who operate this service on behalf of Regional Railways.
The service is on most trains for either the whole or part of the journey.
Telephone Enquiries
Information about other train services can be obtained by telephoning any of the following TransPennine stations:
Details of full service between Leeds and Hull, Leeds and York, Leeds and Manchester/Liverpool, and between Newcastle and York are published in separate pocket timetables.
Telephone Bookings
Credit and Charge Card bookings can be made using Access, Visa or American Express.
Just ring:
This facility is available during office hours Monday to Friday.
These offices may also be open during the evenings and at weekends.
Customer Representation
If you have a compliment or a complaint about your journey we would like to know, please write to:
If you have a complaint about British Rail services that has not been dealt with to your satisfaction, your local Transport Users' Consultative Committee, set up by Parliament, will help.
The address is on the TUCC notice at rail stations, and is in the telephone directory.
How to use this timetable
1.
The 24 hour clock is used in all guides.
All you need to remember is that after midday, the times shown have 12 added to them.
Eg 4 pm is shown as 16 00 hrs, 5.30pm is 17 30 hrs etc.
The clock shown alongside shows 01 50 hrs in the morning or 13 50 hrs in the afternoon.
2.
Times shown in heavy type denote through services.
3.
Times shown in light type denote connecting services.
4.
Each guide is divided into sections according to days of the week.
Please check you are looking at the correct part of the table for the day you wish to travel.
5.
All trains provide Standard Class accommodation only.
Please ask for details of the full range of tickets available.
Train Service Alterations
WEEKEND ENGINEERING WORK.
Maintenance work is continually taking place to improve services.
There may be train service alterations at weekends.
Station and telephone enquiry bureaux can answer queries on individual services.
BANK HOLIDAY SERVICES.
A modified service operates on and around most Bank Holidays.
There may be alterations and additional train services throughout Holiday periods.
Special timetable supplements will be available from principal British Rail Stations.
Train services shown in this timetable are subject to alteration or cancellation at short notice.
Accompanied Cycles
Accompanied cycles may be conveyed on certain TransPennine services at the following charges:
Reservations should be made at least 24 hours in advance of travel at Travel Centres and large stations.
Space is limited.
Car Parking
Car Parking facilities are available at:
A fee will be payable at some car parks.
Mobility-Impaired Customers
Facilities are being improved to make travel by train easier for mobility-impaired customers.
Principal stations are fully accessible and some are equipped with features to help the hearing and sight impaired also.
Trains operating on the TransPennine route have space for a wheelchair user, and specially designed toilet facilities.
Customers needing special assistance to make their journeys should enquire, and wherever possible make arrangements, in advance.
The following stations have facilities to help:
Manchester Airport
There is a frequent express coach connection between Manchester Piccadilly and the Airport.
For details telephone (061) 489 3000.
Great News for 1993!
From May 1993 there will be a direct train service to Manchester Airport.
TransPennine will serve the Airport hourly from West and North Yorkshire.
Three more trains each hour will operate between Manchester Piccadilly and Manchester Airport.
Watch out for further announcements.
Great days out with packs of discounts when you go by train
For details of great days out on seven leisure lines — plus money-saving Action Packs — ring the ACTION STATIONS HOTLINE — 0532 370555.
We've changed out ways
REGIONAL MOREWAYS
Here's some great news for rail users: Regional Railways have almost doubled the number of trains from Thirsk and Northallerton offering you an hourly service into York, Leeds, Manchester and Liverpool.
REGIONAL QUICKWAYS
A new direct TransPennine service has also been introduced linking Middlesbrough to some of the north's major cities.
Which means you'll be able to relax as you're whisked away at speeds of up to 90 mph. making your journey a good deal quicker.
REGIONAL EASYWAYS
Travelling to York, Leeds, Manchester and Liverpool is even more straightforward because the new trains will continue to provide direct through services.
So with a wide choice of train services, travelling by train is the ultimate in convenience.
REGIONAL SLEEKWAYS
For that finishing touch, Class 158 trains on the TransPennine service incorporate air conditioning, fitted carpets, comfortable seats, smoother rides, toilets, on-board telephones and trolley refreshments to make your journey a real pleasure.
To find out more about how Regional Railways have changed their ways, telephone Darlington (0325) 355111 or York (0904) 642155 or pick up a folder and timetable from your nearest staffed station.
REGIONAL RAILWAYS
BRITISH COAL GUIDE TO STEAM TRAINS IN GREAT BRITAIN AND IRELAND
INTRODUCTION TO THE 1992/3 GUIDE TO STEAM TRAINS
Welcome to this 5th edition of the British Coal Guide to Steam Trains in Great Britain and Ireland which has been compiled by John Jeffery for the Association of Railway Preservation Societies with the generous sponsorship of British Coal.
Within it you will find details of over 130 Steam Railways, Steam Centres and Museums where you can see and, in many cases, ride behind steam locomotives of all sizes from the narrow gauge to main line express types.
There are also details of regular steam trains operating over the main lines of British Rail.
Most of the organisations listed area run by volunteer enthusiasts who give up their spare time to painstakingly restore and operate these fascinating survivors from the great age of steam.
Even the steam trains operated by British Rail are hauled by locomotives privately owned, restored and maintained by enthusiast groups.
Many railways also have collections of historic coaches, freight wagons and other equipment and use the semaphore signals, most of which have now disappeared from use on the modern rail network.
Most sites also have a museum of small relics and railway equipment as well as refreshment facilities and a souvenir shop, the proceeds from which are ploughed back into more restoration and improved facilities.
A new feature this year is the inclusion of details of those attractions who offer concessions to members of the Transport Trust ‘Travelback Scheme’.
This facility, which is one of the privileges available to Private Members of the Association of Railway Preservation Societies, offers reduced entrance charges or concessionary fares on participating railways.
More details of many of the attractions listed are contained in the Association's Yearbook ‘Railways Restored’, published in March by Ian Allan Ltd and available at a privilege price to Association Private Members.
Why not join ARPS and help conserve our railway heritage?
Private membership costs £12.00 per year for residents of the United Kingdom (£15.00 for overseas residents) and offers many benefits including:
Three major weekend meetings (two of which are usually on member railways), a quarterly illustrated journal, membership of ‘Travelback Scheme’, which gives concessions at many transport museums apart from the railways listed here, and ARPS Yearbook ‘Railways Restored’ at a privilege price.
KEY TO SYMBOLS
Length of Operating Line (in miles)
Railway (Regular steam hauled routes)
Museum (Static exhibits possibly with occasional demonstration steamings).
Steam Centre (Regular steamings with short demonstration line).
Site offers special entrance rate or fares to holders of the Transport Trust Travel Back Card.
Special ‘Thomas the Tank Engine’ events planned.
Watch press or ring for details.
Santa or Mince Pie Special trains planned in December.
Watch press or phone for details.
Light Refreshments.
Licensed Bar or Bar on Train.
Special Dining Car trains operated.
Advance booking essential.
Facilities for the Disabled (prior phone call advised).
Car Parking available on or near site.
Nearest station — BR unless otherwise indicated.
(Approximate distance between station and site.
Public Transport may not be available.)
Standard Gauge (4ft 8½in).
Narrow Gauge.
Broad Gauge.
The detail given in this guide is reproduced in good faith.
Whilst every effort has been made to ensure accuracy neither British Coal nor the Association of Railway Preservation Societies can accept responsibility for any inaccuracies.
If travelling long distances and anticipating specific facilities or services it is strongly recommended to telephone beforehand.
CAUSEWAY COASTAL RAILBREAK
Take an NIR InterCity Railbreak to the Causeway Coast for giant value and a relaxing break.
Travel by train from any NIR Station and spend two nights in luxury at the Golf Hotel, Castlerock, with full Irish breakfast and dinner from the À La Carte menu each evening.
You can enjoy the beauty of the Causeway Coast (make use of free local rail travel) and the comfort of your bedroom, colour television and tea and coffee making facilities — all for a breath-taking price of £55 (any two nights between Sunday and Thursday)
No single room supplement or £70 (Friday and Saturday nights)
And children under 12 go free
(Based on sharing accommodation with parents, including Rail Travel and Hotel Accommodation only.
Meals extra)
ENJOY A CAUSEWAY COAST CHRISTMAS!
£160 including
Return Rail Travel
Hotel Accommodation for three nights
All meals and a special Golf Hotel programme to make sure you make the most of Christmas
Causeway Coast Railbreaks are operated by NIR Travel Ltd (ABTA No. 96022) and are subject to the Company's Booking Conditions, which are available for inspection at all Travel Centres.
Prices are based on sharing hotel accommodation and a supplement is payable for a single room.
For details and reservations contact any one of the following NIR Travel Centres:
Roald Dahl's Guide to Railway Safety
Illustrated by Quentin Blake
I have a VERY DIFFICULT job here.
Young people are fed up with being told by grown-ups WHAT TO DO and WHAT NOT TO DO.
They get that all through their young lives.
And now I am going to have to tell you WHAT TO DO and WHAT NOT TO DO, but this time it's a bit different because the DOs and DON'Ts that I am going to give you may easily SAVE YOUR LIFE.
That is the only reason I agreed to write this message to you.
But before I start with the heavy stuff, I'd like to tell you my own theory about grown-ups and their DOs and DON'Ts and why a lot of them are not very good at dealing with children.
I am totally convinced that most grown-ups have completely forgotten what it was like to be a child between say the age of five and ten.
They all think they can remember.
Parents think they can remember and so do teachers.
Some of course actually can, but very few.
It is after all quite difficult to remember exactly what it felt like to be a small person when you yourself haven't been one for thirty or forty years.
That's a long time ago.
I can remember exactly what it was like.
I am certain I can.
If I couldn't then I would not be able to write my sort of books for children.
Let me tell you how I see this whole difficult question because I think it is interesting.
When you are young, you have not finished growing.
You are, therefore, physically shorter, usually by two feet or more, than the grown-ups around you.
This is the first thing the grown-ups have forgotten.
If a grown-up really wants to find out what it is like to live in a young person's world, let him or her get down on hands and knees and go about like that for a week.
The first thing they will then discover is that all the other grown-ups in the room tower above them and they actually have to crane their necks to look at their faces.
It is always like that with a small child.
The child is surrounded by GIANTS, and the trouble with these beastly GIANTS is that they seem to spend most of their lives telling the child WHAT TO DO and WHAT NOT TO DO.
What the child does not understand is that unfortunately the GIANTS have to do this.
It is the only way to bring up a child properly.
When you are born you are an uncivilised little savage with bad habits and no manners and it is the job of the GIANTS (your parents and your teachers) to train you and discipline you.
The child hates this and resists it fiercely.
Yet it has to be done.
It is all part of the process of turning the uncivilised and savage little child into a good citizen.
‘Say please…say thank you…go and wash your hands…take your elbows off the table…don't spit…don't come in here with muddy shoes…turn off the telly and do your homework…’
The stream of orders is endless.
What is the result of all this?
I'll tell you precisely what it is.
Deep down inside the child's mind (subconsciously), the giants become THE ENEMY.
Your teachers become THE ENEMY.
Even your loving parents become THE ENEMY.
Not outwardly but inwardly, subconsciously.
This explains very clearly why Matilda is far and away the most popular children's book I have written and was bought by over half a million children in Britain alone in the first six months.
In it there are a pair of perfectly revolting parents and a foul tyrant of a teacher.
The young reader is invited to hate them all and he does.
He says to himself, ‘Thank goodness we have here a writer who understands our secret feelings.’
Children may not realise it themselves, but that is the real reason why Matilda is so popular among them.
But enough of that.
Having made my excuses, I must now regretfully become one of those unpopular giants who tells you WHAT TO DO and WHAT NOT TO DO.
This is something I have never done in any of my books.
I have been careful never to preach, never to be moralistic and never to convey any message to the reader.
I hate doing it so much that I think I will find just one more excuse to put off the preaching.
So, I am going to spend another two minutes telling you why I have always loved trains and railways.
Sixty-four years ago, when I was a small boy of eight, there were very few cars on the roads and we went everywhere by train.
There were precious few lorries about either.
Nearly all goods traffic went by train.
Our roads were clean and unpolluted, and in our cities the air was not polluted with gases from a  million exhaust-pipes.
It was a lovely world to live in, but now the motor-car has ruined it.
It has also, to some extent, ruined us .
Instead of walking to school as we always used to do in the olden days, even if it was a three mile journey, nearly every child of today gets taken there in a car.
Everyone goes everywhere by car these days, and perhaps in a few hundred years from now our great-great-great grandchildren will be born with hardly any legs at all because they won't have any use for them.
The flood of motor-cars and lorries and trucks onto our roads in recent years is a tragedy for nature and for the environment and for our health.
We never missed them when I was young and we all loved our train journeys.
Oh, how we loved those trains in the good old days!
We used to stand for hours beside the railway line or leaning over a bridge waiting for the next one to come rushing past, and we would write down the numbers of the engines and also their names (King George V, Dunraven Castle).
All the big ones had names.
We also collected pictures of them on cigarette-cards.
Nowadays children worship motor-cars instead, horrible noisy machines made of steel that kill hundreds of thousands of people every year.
Give me the train any day.
And I only hope that in the end our roads will become so clogged with all these fume-belching cars and lorries that everyone will give them up and start going by train again.
I, and indeed a lot of other people, feel that this is going to happen sooner than you think, and that many of you will be happily using the train in the near future, especially for longer journeys.
That is why I want you to listen carefully to the dreaded DOs and DON'Ts I am about to give you.
As I said before, if you ignore any one of them, it could COST YOU YOUR LIFE.
DO NOT RIDE A BICYCLE ON A STATION PLATFORM.
DO NOT USE A SKATEBOARD THERE EITHER.
NEVER CROSS THE RAILWAY LINE TO GET TO THE OTHER SIDE.
ALWAYS USE THE FOOTBRIDGE OR THE SUBWAY.
DO NOT STAND BETWEEN THE PLATFORM EDGE AND THE YELLOW LINES.
KEEP BACK FROM THE EDGE OF ALL PLATFORMS WHETHER THERE IS A YELLOW LINE OR NOT.
IF YOU DROP SOMETHING ON THE LINE, DO NOT JUMP DOWN AND GET IT.
ASK A PORTER OR ANOTHER OFFICIAL TO DO IT FOR YOU.
IF THE TRAIN IS PULLING OUT AS YOU ARRIVE, NEVER CHASE IT AND TRY TO GET ON.
NEVER NEVER NEVER STICK YOUR HEAD OUT OF THE WINDOW OF A MOVING TRAIN.
DO NOT THROW ANYTHING OUT OF THE WINDOWS — I know a true story about this.
A friend of mine, when he was a little boy, was travelling in a train with his father who was a captain in the navy.
The little boy wanted desperately to have a pee, but there were no corridors on the train.
He told his father that he had to go.
He simply couldn't wait.
‘My boy,’ said the naval captain father, ‘a sailor is never at a loss!’
Whereupon he reached for his naval cap and said, ‘Do it in that.’
The boy did as he was told.
The father then flung the contents of the hat out of the open carriage window.
The train at that moment happened to be rushing through a small country station and the boy, looking out, saw the stuff hit a porter smack in the face.
NEVER OPEN A DOOR UNTIL THE TRAIN HAS STOPPED.
NEVER GO ONTO A RAILWAY LINE OR WALK ALONG IT.
— When going for country walks, one often comes across a railway line, and it is tempting to walk along either beside the rails or stepping on the sleepers between the rails.
This is terribly dangerous.
Express trains come rushing down on you far more quickly than you imagine and more than one hundred people are killed every year in the United Kingdom doing this.
Many of them are children.
Another reason why you should never go near the line is that many of them are used by electric trains.
This means that there is always a third rail or an overhead wire carrying an enormously high electric current.
The current is so high that it can electrify (and kill) you even if you don't actually touch it!
So NEVER GO ONTO A RAILWAY LINE.
NEVER NEVER NEVER.
RAILWAY LINES ARE DANGEROUS PLACES.
DON'T DAMAGE THE FENCES THAT ARE THERE TO PROTECT YOU.
If you spot a hole that a child could squeeze through, tell British Rail or the police.
NEVER PUT ANYTHING ON THE RAILWAY LINE — I don't think many of you would be stupid enough to do this but believe me it has been done and still is done quite often.
You can de-rail an entire train in this way.
And even if the driver sees something on the line ahead of him, he usually cannot stop in time.
It takes a high-speed train one and a half miles to come to a stop from 125 miles an hour even if the driver brakes hard!
A train is not like a car.
NEVER THROW ANYTHING AT TRAINS — The smallest stone may break a window and flying glass can kill.
NEVER EVER DANGLE ANYTHING FROM RAILWAY BRIDGES.
THERE MIGHT BE A TRAIN COMING OR THERE MIGHT BE A HIGH VOLTAGE ELECTRIC WIRE JUST UNDERNEATH YOU — REMEMBER YOU DON'T EVEN NEED TO TOUCH THAT DEADLY WIRE FOR IT TO KILL YOU — DON'T GO NEAR IT.
LEVEL CROSSINGS — Many accidents take place at level crossings simply because people lose patience and don't wait for the barriers to open.
So NEVER SQUEEZE ROUND THE BARRIERS IF THEY ARE CLOSED, and DON'T CROSS IF THE WARNING LIGHTS ARE ON, whether you are walking or on a bike.
If your bike gets stuck, perhaps in the rails, while you are crossing, just leave it and keep going.
THOMAS NEWCOMEN
National Railway Museum Fact Sheet 1
The first practical working stationary steam engine was built by Thomas Newcomen, an ironmonger of Dartmouth in Devon.
Newcomen engines worked by condensing steam under a piston, to produce a vacuum.
Atmospheric pressure then forced the piston down the cylinder in which it was sitting.
The engine's correct title therefore was ‘Atmospheric Engine’ rather than‘Steam Engine’.
The idea had first been used in a small toy made by a Frenchman, Denis Papin, in 1690.
Papin did not develop his discovery and never produced a full sized working engine.
In 1698 an Englishman named Thomas Savery patented a device which used atmospheric and steam pressure to pump water out of mines.
The machine was not really a steam engine as it had no moving parts.
Savery described is as a:
‘new Invention of Raiseing of Water and occasioning Motion to all sorts of Mill Work by the Impellent Force of Fire, which will be of great Use and Advantage for Drayning Mines, Serveing Towns with water, and for the working of all Sorts of Mills where they have not the benefit of Water nor Constant Windes’.
Patent law was so loose at that time that the patent covered all kinds of steam engine.
Savery's invention was not very successful but he obtained an extension of the patent until 11733.
We do not know much about Newcomen's early work.
The first we hear about his steam engines is that one was erected near Dudley Castle in the Black Country area of the Midlands in 1712.
This was the first commercially successful steam engine and was used for pumping water out of a mine.
It worked in a similar fashion to Papin's toy except that it had a separate boiler, thus not boiling the water in the cylinder.
Also the steam was condensed rapidly by injecting cold water into the cylinder.
Newcomen must have done various experiments before he erected this first commercially successful engine, but we have no record of these.
The following guesses can be made as to how the engine developed.
Firstly an experimental model was probably made in his workshop.
Once this model was working satisfactorily field trials are likely to have been made, possibly with a full sized version in Cornwall.
The full sized engine would then have been worked on until it became feasible to exploit steam engines commercially.
Evidence from the period is confused but it is likely that Newcomen worked independently and did not know of the ideas of Papin and Savery.
Newcomen came up against Savery's work when he tried to exploit his steam engines.
Then of course he came across Savery's patent and was forced to pay out royalties to Savery on every engine that was built.
In 1715 Savery died.
Newcomen was apparently unable to buy up Savery's rights in the patent.
As the business had become very profitable by then, a syndicate was set up to buy Savery's rights.
They went by the title of ‘The Proprietors of the Invention for raising Water by Fire’, and no one could build an engine without their licence.
By 1715 when the syndicate took over Savery's part of the patent there were engines in use in Staffordshire, Warwickshire, Cornwall and Flintshire.
These were mainly used for pumping water out of mines, thus enabling deeper seams to be exploited.
The first engines to be used in Scotland were erected in 1719 and 1720, while in 1722 the first engine outside Britain was built in Hungary.
At York an engine was installed in Lendal Tower for pumping water from the river.
In the early engines, many of the parts, including the cylinder, were made of brass.
The average diameter of a brass cylinder was 24 in.
At this time it was impossible to bore out a smooth cylinder of this size, so the piston was not therefore a good fit.
Newcomen got round this difficulty by fitting a leather skirt on top of the piston, this being kept supple by filling it up with water.
By this method an airtight seal was made.
To make engines of greater power, a larger cylinder was needed and this was very expensive in brass.
The problem was solved by the Coalbrookdale Company who, thanks to Abraham Darby developing advanced foundry techniques, were able to produce an iron cylinder in 1722.
From then on cylinders were usually made of iron, and much more powerful Newcomen engines were eventually built with cylinders up to 6 ft in diameter.
Thomas Newcomen had been born in Dartmouth in 1663.
He died in 1729, by which time his engines were in use in Hungary, France, Belgium, Germany and Spain.
His invention was one of the main forces that accelerated industrial development into what has been called the Industrial Revolution.
Even though the engines were crude and inefficient (improved versions built by John Smeaton were only 1% efficient), the Newcomen engine was unchallenged for 60 years.
It was the first big step towards mechanising industry and then transport.
Beighton's engraving of Newcomen engine 1717
How Papin's engine worked
Engine at rest — heat applied
Steam equalises pressure on either side of piston and weight lifts piston in cylinder.
atmospheric pressure forces piston down cylinder and lifts weight
The working stroke
Remove heat — cylinder cools — vacuum created.
Diagram of Newcomen's 1712 engine
Sectioned model of Newcomen engine used in France
JAMES WATT
National Railway Museum Fact Sheet 2
From 1712 rather inefficient steam engines using the ideas of Thomas Newcomen were unchallenged for about 60 years, especially as a means of pumping water.
It was James Watt who made the first major improvements to the principles worked out by Newcomen.
Watt was born at Greenock in 1736, his father being a master carpenter and ship-wright.
James was not very bright at school but learnt many manual skills as a boy in his father's workshop.
When James left school he worked for a while with his father.
In 1755 he went to London to train as a mathematical instrument maker.
Then two years later Watt returned to Glasgow hoping to open a shop.
Luckily he had some friends at the University and it was arranged that he would open a shop there and become ‘Mathematical Instrument Maker to the University’.
It was in 1763 that an event occurred which led Watt radically to improve the efficiency of Newcomen type steam engines.
In that year James was asked to repair a model of a Newcomen engine belonging to the University.
After the model had been repaired, Watt discovered that it would only work for a few stroked and then stop.
From this he deduced that the boiler was too small and this led him on to wondering why the engine was so inefficient.
The Newcomen engine worked by condensing steam under a piston to form a vacuum.
Atmospheric pressure then forced the piston down the cylinder in which it was fitted (see Fact Sheet No. 1).
For the steam to be condensed, the cylinder had to be cooled down.
Newcomen had done this by arranging for a jet of water to be squirted into the cylinder at the appropriate moment.
Therefore the cylinder was alternately heated by steam entering and then cooled by the jet of water.
Watt realised that the engine would be much more efficient if the cylinder were to be at boiler temperature when the steam entered, but of course it was cool from the previous condensation.
He also realised that condensation would be better if, immediately after steam was admitted, the cylinder were to be made as cold as possible.
These two opposite conditions of temperature seemed impossible to reconcile.
It took James Watt nearly two years to solve the problem with his invention of what is known as the ‘Separate Condenser’ in 1765.
This is how he described the way the idea came to him.
‘The means of accomplishing these points did not immediately present themselves: but early in 1765 it occurred to me that, if a communication were opened between a cylinder containing steam and another vessel which was exhausted of air and other fluids, would immediately rush into the empty vessel, and continue to do so until it had established an equilibrium: and if that vessel were kept cool by an injection, or otherwise, more steam would continue to enter until the whole was condensed’.
From the initial idea Watt developed an engine with a cylinder kept hot by surrounding it with a jacket of steam and a condenser kept cool by immersing it in a water bath.
He made a model to test his ideas and it lived up to his expectations.
The next step was to obtain finance in order to start manufacturing and selling full-sized engines.
A friend of Watt's at the University introduced him to John Roebuck, an industrialist who was involved with coal mines and iron works in Scotland.
Roebuck was very interested in Watt's invention and suggested that he take out a patent for it.
This Watt did in 1769, the patent being for ‘A New Method of Lessening the Consumption of Steam and Fuel in Fire Engines’.
An engine was then built at Kinneil near Roebuck's home; Roebuck acquiring a two-thirds interest in Watt's patent for his financial help.
It now seemed that Watt was well on the way to developing the engine for the commercial market.
Unfortunately though, Roebuck's support was soon withdrawn as he got into financial difficulties and eventually was declared bankrupt in 1773.
This set-back was soon resolved however, as Matthew Boulton, a Birmingham industrialist, took an interest in Watt's work.
Boulton happened to be a creditor of Roebuck and to cover the debt he agreed to take Roebuck's two-thirds share of Watt's patent.
In 1774 Watt moved to Birmingham and started the partnership with Boulton that was to prove so successful.
Watt took the Kinneil engine with him to Birmingham and by the end of 1774 it was working satisfactorily.
By this time the patent for the separate condenser had only 8 years to run.
Boulton realised that if Watt's engines were to be exploited commercially the patent would have to be extended.
Therefore in 1775 Watt petitioned Parliament and was granted a further 25 years for the patent, thus extending it until 1800.
The arrangement between Boulton and Watt was as follows;
Watt gave two-thirds of his patent rights to Boulton and was responsible for all design work.
Boulton would provide all finance and keep the books.
The profits were divided two-thirds to Boulton and one-third to Watt.
As soon as these arrangements had been made, manufacture of engines began, the first one being a pumping engine for Bloomfield Colliery in Staffordshire followed by a blowing engine for blast furnaces at John Wilkinson's iron works at New Willey Staffs.
Watt used a cylinder closed at both ends to keep it as warm as possible.
Therefore Newcomen's method of sealing the piston with leather and water could not be used.
Consequently it was important that the bore of the cylinder was very smooth.
It was John Wilkinson who first enabled Watt to build engines with large accurately-bored cylinders.
This was due to the fact that Wilkinson had invented a boring mill in 1774 which could bore out cannons to very fine limits.
This was easily adopted to bore engine cylinders, and Wilkinson became Boulton & Watt's main cylinder supplier.
This accurate boring mill also meant that it was easy to convert the engine to a double acting one, i.e. one where the piston is pushed both ways in the cylinder.
This in turn made it a simple matter to adapt Watt's engine to provide rotary motion.
Once production was under way there came a great demand for the engines from the ore mines of Cornwall.
This was because Watt engines consumed about one-third of the amount of coal that Newcomen engines did and coal had to be transported to Cornwall.
The market for engines in Cornwall was so important that eventually Boulton & Watt employed a very able engineer called William Murdock who was permanently based in Cornwall supervising the erection of their engines.
Boulton realised that there was great potential for an engine which could drive factory machinery and he encouraged Watt to devise a method for producing rotary motion.
During 1781 and 1782 therefore, Watt made the engine double-acting and produced rotary motion using his sun-and-planet gear shown in the drawing of Watts rotative beam engine of 1788.
The reason this cumbersome arrangement was used was because the simple crank had already been patented in 1780.
Murdock is believed to have originally suggested the sun-and-planet idea.
This rotative engine soon became greatly in demand and had a big effect on the mechanisation of factories.
When Watt's master patent for his separate condenser expired in 1800, he retired from active work.
He spent much of his later years experimenting in his Heathfield workshop in Birmingham, one of his main interests being in designing a machine to copy sculptured heads.
James Watt died at his Heathfield home on 25th August 1819.
He had improved the efficiency of pumping engines by about 300% and also provided the machine that effectively mechanised industry and was hardly improved upon for about 50 years.
Watt's rotative engine preserved in the Science Museum
This is how Watt's engine worked
Valves 1 and 2 are opened and valve 3 shut.
Steam circulates on both sides of the piston, meaning equal pressure on both sides of the piston.
The weight of the pump rods therefore lifts the piston to the top of the cylinder.
At the same time the air pump removes waste water and air from the separate condenser thus maintaining a vacuum in it.
Valve 2 now shuts and valve 3 opens.
Steam beneath the cylinder therefore rushes into the separate condenser because of the vacuum and is condensed by an injection of cold water.
Once all the steam is condensed a vacuum is formed under the piston and the piston is forced down the cylinder by steam from the boiler.
Once the piston is at the bottom of the cylinder, valve 3 is closed and valve 2 opened.
The whole process is then repeated.
Watt's double action sun and planet engine 1788
WILLIAM MURDOCK
National Railway Museum Fact Sheet 3
William Murdock was the first person in this country to build a moving steam engine.
This was a small three-wheeled locomotive model.
He was also the first person to use coal gas for lighting purposes.
Murdock is rather over-shadowed by his famous employers, Matthew Boulton & James Watt, but was a very talented and gifted engineer.
Born in 1754, Murdock was brought up to the trade of his father who was a millwright and miller.
The family lived at Bellow Mill near Old Cumonck, Ayrshire.
By his early twenties William decided that he wanted more engineering experience than could be got in his own area.
Having heard of the firm of Boulton & Watt and their new engine, he decided to travel to Birmingham and try to get a job with the firm at their Soho Manufactory.
Evidently, James Watt, who was a Scotsman himself, did not think that Scotsmen were capable of becoming good mechanics.
Luckily when Murdock called at Soho in 1777, Watt was away and Boulton interviewed him.
At first Boulton was rather off-putting and told Murdock that business was slack.
There seemed little chance of his being taken on.
During the interview Murdock had been nervously twiddling his hat.
This drew Boulton's attention to it and he noticed that it was rather unusual.
On being questioned, Murdock told Boulton that he had turned the hat out of wood on a lathe that he had designed himself.
This impressed Boulton so much that he asked Murdock to call again.
On returning to the Soho factory, probably the next day, Murdock was immediately taken on trial.
He was very soon found to be a satisfactory workman, and was engaged initially for a period of 2 years.
The wages were 15 shillings (75p) a week at home, 17 shillings (85p) away from home and 18 shillings (90p) in London.
Beginning as an ordinary mechanic, Murdock soon proved to be an excellent worker and rapidly rose to be Boulton & Watt's most trusted worker and adviser.
Murdock worked at Soho for a short time and then in about 1779 he was sent to Cornwall as the firm's chief mechanic and agent in all technical matters.
This was a relief to Watt who had been in Cornwall for a while supervising the engine business there.
Cornish miners were buying a lot of Watt engines.
Watt found great difficulty in working with the Cornish mine captains and obtaining from them full payment for the engines they had built or modified.
He also hated the Cornish weather.
Murdock stayed in Cornwall for about 19 years and got on much better with the miners than Watt had done.
It is said that Watt was rather jealous about this.
It appears that Murdock was the only one of the Soho workmen in Cornwall that Boulton & Watt could rely on.
If anything went wrong with any of the Cornish engines it was always Murdock who was called for, and he is described as ‘flying from mine to mine’.
His wages in 1780 were 20 shillings (£1) a week and he asked for an increase to 2 guineas (£2.10) a week.
Boulton did not refuse outright but managed to get some mine owners to donate 10 guineas (£10.50) to Murdock for the good work he had done on their engines.
To this Boulton put another 10 guineas (£10.50).
So Murdock received a gift of 20 guineas (£21) but did not have his wages raised.
Even so Murdock remained faithful to the firm of Boulton & Watt.
Various offers of other employment did not tempt him away, even a job at £1000 per year.
It was while Murdock was living in Cornwall that he did his experiments with the model locomotive and his work on gas lighting.
These projects were done in his spare time.
James Watt had thought about moving steam engines, having had the idea suggested to him by various people.
He had also considered the use of high pressure steam but dismissed it as too dangerous.
Murdock had found these ideas rather attractive and set to work to build a locomotive model.
The model was finished in 1794 and Murdock looked for a testing ground.
He was living in Redruth at the time and the long drive up to the parsonage seemed a very good place for the test.
One evening Murdock set his model going up this drive.
It soon went too fast for him and the village pastor who appeared from the other direction was nearly frightened to death!
Murdock lost no time in setting out for London to take out a patent for his model.
Boulton happened to meet him at Exeter however, and as it did not coincide with the ideas of the firm to lose the services of their best engineer in this fashion, Murdock was persuaded to return.
Writing to his partner, Boulton said:
‘He hath unpacked his carriage and made it run a mile or two up and down in River's great room, making it carry the fire shovel, tongs and poker.
I think it fortunate that I met him as I am persuaded I can cure him of his disorder or turn the evil to good’.
From this letter it is clear that Boulton had no great opinion of steam-carriages and their possibilities, and the result was that Murdock's idea was left undeveloped.
There is a model of Murdock's locomotive in the National Railway Museum which is thought to embody some of the parts of the original.
It was also while Murdock was living in Redruth that he started his experiments with coal gas.
Murdock's investigations of coal gas were a direct result of his search for materials to preserve the bottom of ships.
He tried tar made from the distillation of coal and in the distillation process became interested in the gas given off.
By 1792 he was lighting his Redruth house with gas.
Also he produced a portable lantern using a gas-filled bladder.
Murdock was not the first to realise that the gas given off by heated coal could be burnt.
He was however, the first to put his knowledge to use.
In 1798 Murdock was recalled from Cornwall to the Soho Works.
Before 1800 he had installed gas apparatus to light the factory and the first public appearance of gas lighting was in 1802. this was when the outside of the Soho Manufactory was illuminated for the Peace of Amiens.
By 1805 the firm of Boulton & Watt were selling their first commercial gas plants.
The first of these was installed in the Manchester Cotton Mills of Phillips & Lee.
Boulton & Watt gave up the gas side of their business in 1814, and the development of more efficient gas apparatus passed into other hands.
After returning to Soho, Murdock was put in charge of the mechanical department and was regarded as the right-hand man of Boulton & Watt.
Over the years he invented many improvements for Watt's steam engines, including a D-shaped sliding valve which later came into common use for many types of steam engine.
He also probably invented the sun and planet gear used to obtain rotary motion on Watt engines.
Other experiments included driving machines by compressed air, firing shot by high pressure steam and a cast-iron cement to make steam-tight joints.
Murdock was a man of considerable genius and is often not given enough credit for his contributions to science and engineering.
He was rather an unambitious man as regards fame and position, being content to remain with the firm of Boulton & Watt until his death.
He died at his house at Sycamore Hill, Handsworth, Birmingham on 15th November 1839 aged 85.
Replica of William Murdock's model locomotives on display in the National Railway Museum
Redruth, where Murdock lived while working in Cornwall.
This is where he tested his locomotives and his ideas on gas lighting.
Murdock's sun and planet gear to obtain rotary motion from Watt's beam engines.