

THE CREATION OF AN AFFINITY
When Richard duke of Gloucester seized the throne in 1483 he did so at the head of the largest noble affinity of its day.
The ducal retinue as it then stood was the creation of the previous fourteen years, during which Gloucester, with royal backing, had built up his power from negligible beginnings to become the acknowledged lord of the north.
Gloucester did not, however, create a following out of nothing.
Political society formed a complex network of lordship and service, in which all but a few misfits had some place.
A newcomer to the political scene, whether lord or man, could not hope to operate outside this existing network, but had instead to find himself a place within it.
For a lord this meant securing the service of men who were already the servants of others.
To do this on a significant scale he had either to supersede another lord or outrank him so that the following of one lord became a component in the retinue of a superior lord.
The primary determinant of service was still land, in the sense that a lord normally drew the core of his following from the area where his estates lay, although the men who looked to him for lordship would not necessarily be his own tenants.
Thus the Gowers of Stittenham (Yorks.) served the lord of nearby Sheriff Hutton, although they held Stittenham itself from the prior of Malton.
This strong territorial element meant that when a major estate changed hands, whether by inheritance or forfeiture, the affinity of the previous owner would tend to turn to his successor for lordship.
But land ownership was not the only factor.
National influence could give a lord a local following greater than his land alone would warrant, as Gloucester's own career was to demonstrate.
The same was true of major office holding within a region.
In the reign of Henry VII, Sir Thomas Lovell was able to raise a military contingent in Nottinghamshire, where he held no land, on the strength of his office holding in the county.
The size of a lord's following could also be determined by less tangible considerations.
Personality evidently played some part.
So could regional loyalties.
A lord taking over a forfeited estate could not entirely take for granted the good will of the affinity, at least in the short term.
This play of factors meant that a major retinue was never just the sum of its territorial parts.
Gloucester's affinity can be characterized in terms of the political antecedents of its members, including, for instance, members of the de Vere, Neville and Clifford retinues.
But these identifiable elements were blended into a new pattern, which owed its existence to Gloucester himself.
He was responsible for shaping the material at his disposal into an effective unity, and the success with which he did so can be seen in the cohesion of the retinue in 1483.
Gloucester first came to prominence in 1469.
Only eight at the time of his brother's accession in 1461, he spent the early years of Edward IV's reign in relative obscurity, overshadowed by his elder brother George duke of Clarence.
There is no explicit reference to Gloucester's attainment of his majority, but Clarence was deemed to have come of age when he was sixteen and Richard's sixteenth birthday fell in October 1468.
It was probably around this time that he left the household of his cousin Richard Neville earl of Warwick, where he had been placed in 1465.
By February 1469 he was in the company of his brother the king and took an active role in the trial for treason of Henry Courtenay and Thomas Hungerford.
In the following May his new independence is reflected in his agreement with Margaret lady Hungerford, whereby Gloucester, the main beneficiary of the Hungerford attainders, promised to protect Margaret's dower rights and to be her good and gracious lord.
But although Gloucester was thus becoming politically visible for the first time, he was as yet of only limited importance.
As the youngest royal brother, Richard had received a relatively modest endowment from Edward IV.
His estates were, moreover, a heterogeneous collection, put together with an eye to providing him with an income rather than creating a political niche for him at a regional level.
Unlike his  brother Clarence, he acquired no ready-made affinity which he could exploit when he came of age.
The royal grant which had offered Richard the best chance of a viable power base had been that of the forfeited de Vere estates, made in August 1462, but these had been restored to the earl of Oxford at the beginning of 1464.
His other holdings included the lordship of Chirk in the Welsh marches and land forfeited by Henry Beaufort duke of Somerset, although this was encumbered by the claims of two dowagers.
This rather unpromising collection was augmented with grants from the duchy of Lancaster.
The first of these, which formed part of Gloucester's original endowment, was the manor of Kingston Lacy in Dorset, which he apparently held for the rest of the reign.
In 1465 he received the most valuable component of his early endowment, the duchy lordships of Bolingbroke (Lincs.),
Pickering and Barnoldswick (Yorks.), to the annual value of £1,000.
This went some way towards closing the financial gap between Gloucester's endowment and that of his brother Clarence, but income is probably all that the grant was designed to provide.
There is no suggestion that Gloucester enjoyed any influence within the lordships, where the royal officials remained unchanged.
The grant was perhaps intended to give Gloucester a suitable income when he entered Warwick's household and it may be no coincidence that the sum involved was exactly that which Edward later granted the earl towards the duke's expenses.
This emphasis on income rather than influence was appropriate in the endowment of a royal duke who was still a child, but once Gloucester came of age his lack of a suitable power base was less acceptable.
Edward IV made a first attempt to remedy the situation within weeks of his brother's sixteenth birthday, when he gave Richard the land of Robert lord Hungerford, lying mainly in Somerset and Wiltshire.
Alone among Gloucester's holdings this represented a coherent entity, but it was again  burdened with dower rights and other charges.
In May 1469 Edward tried again, turning once more to the resources of the duchy of Lancaster.
Gloucester was given (during the king's pleasure) a major collection of duchy land in Lancashire and Cheshire, including Clitheroe, Liverpool and Halton.
This time the grant specifically included all rights and offices in the lordships concerned.
It thus cut across existing interests in the region, notably those of the Stanley family, whose landed interests in the north west had been augmented by several key duchy offices.
Their resentment at Gloucester's insertion into the area manifested itself in open rivalry with the duke and early in 1470 Edward was obliged to intervene in the quarrel.
The episode spells out very clearly the difficulties in finding an appropriate niche for the duke.
However generous Edward wished to be — and his willingness to challenge the Stanleys suggests that he saw Richard's endowment as a matter of some urgency — there was a limit to how much he could afford to do for his brother.
It had been a recurrent problem of Edward's early years that he lacked the resources to reward all his leading supporters, and by 1469 he was left with very little room for manoeuvre.
A major new endowment for Gloucester could only be achieved at the expense of existing interests, and this was politically unacceptable.
It was only the office holding of the Stanleys which was threatened, but even that may have been enough to drive them into opposition to Edward by 1470.
In May 1469 the prospect of more large-scale gains for Gloucester was accordingly remote.
It was a situation from which he was rescued by the rebellion of Clarence and Warwick in July 1469, an event which marked a turning point in his career.
This was not primarily because their rebellion allowed Gloucester to demonstrate his usefulness to the king.
Although the defection of Clarence, in particular, can only have enhanced Richard's standing in the king's eyes, the real contribution of the rebels to Gloucester's advancement lay in opening up the existing power structure by removing several of Edward's closest supporters.
The beneficiaries were, of course, intended to be Clarence and Warwick themselves.
The two men had become increasingly  resentful of the circle around the king, and their rebellion was specifically directed against the ‘covetous rule and guiding’ of this group, identified in the rebels' manifesto as the family of queen Elizabeth Woodville, the earls of Devon and Pembroke, John lord Audley and Sir John Fogge.
On 26 July the rebels defeated part of the royalist forces at Edgecote and in the aftermath of the battle several of the king's allies were captured and executed, among them Devon and Pembroke and two of the queen's family, her father earl Rivers and her brother John.
Edward IV himself fell into the rebels' hands and was sent prisoner first to Warwick castle and then to the Nevilles' northern stronghold of Middleham in Wensleydale.
But although the rebels had thus far outmanoeuvred the king, they found themselves unable to translate their military success into long-term political supremacy.
Their attempts to rule in the king's name were a failure and by the end of September, if not earlier, Edward had reasserted his freedom of action.
In the middle of October he staged a triumphant return to London and set about rebuilding his position, a process from which Gloucester emerged as the main beneficiary.
The outbreak of trouble had found Gloucester with the king in East Anglia, on pilgrimage to the shrines of St Edmund at Bury and Our Lady of Walsingham.
The first indication of danger was a growing unrest in the north of England.
There had been trouble there as early as April, but that had been dealt with for the king by Warwick's brother John Neville.
During June a more threatening outbreak developed under the leadership of ‘Robin of Redesdale’(almost certainly Warwick's associate Sir John Conyers) and by the middle of the month Edward had decided to go north himself.
On 18 June he wrote from Norwich to set preparations in train for equipping an army and he and his circle began to raise men locally.
Their efforts were observed by John Paston III who, however, was watching events round the king almost entirely with an eye to how they might affect his family's dispute with the duke of Norfolk, and recorded the flurry of activity without noting its cause.
His letter provides the earliest surviving evidence of Gloucester retaining men.
Paston names four local men sworn to the duke's service, of whom the most important was William Calthorpe of Burnham Thorpe (Norf.).
The context makes it likely that Gloucester was offering a short-term military contract; in other words, that he was acting as recruiting officer for his brother's army rather than laying the foundations of a personal following in East Anglia where, at this date, he had no interests of his own.
None of the four can be definitely linked with Gloucester in the 1470s, although the Calthorpes may have kept some connections with him.
If in this respect Gloucester was still very much his brother's agent, it is clear that his closeness to the king had already made him a person of some consequence.
The decision to go north found the duke short of money and he wrote to Sir John Say for a loan of £100 to tide him over.
He added a postscript in his own hand: ‘I pray you that ye fail me not at this time in my great need, as ye will that I show you my good lordship in that matter that ye labour to me for.’
Say, the chancellor of the duchy of Lancaster, was a close associate of Edward IV and it is significant that he should already consider Gloucester's lordship valuable.
So did even more eminent figures.
An undated letter from John Howard to the duke of Norfolk, which can probably be assigned to 1469, assured Norfolk of Gloucester's good will: ‘I did remember your lordship to my lord, promising you I found my lord as well disposed toward you as any lord may be to another…whereof I was right glad to hear it.’
Gloucester's contribution to later events is obscure.
If the Howard letter does belong to 1469, it shows that the duke was at Colchester on 21 July and was then planning to travel northwards to Bury St Edmunds.
This may mean that he had remained in the region when the court set off for the midlands at the end of June.
It is, however, more likely that he had accompanied the king to Nottingham and had then, like the Woodvilles, been sent away as the news grew more threatening.
The queen's eldest brother, lord Scales, apparently returned to East Anglia, where his own land lay, and Gloucester may have accompanied him, perhaps (as the Howard letter seems to imply) with the intention of raising more men.
There are, however, no more references to him until Edward's return to London in the autumn.
In the interim  Gloucester presumably continued his efforts on his brother's behalf, either in East Anglia or elsewhere.
Polydore Vergil later claimed that Edward's chamberlain lord Hastings raised a force for the king in Lancashire.
This was an area where, in theory, Gloucester now enjoyed considerable influence, and it may be, therefore, that he was also involved.
But whatever Gloucester's exact contribution, his part in the crisis had confirmed his emergence as a political force, and once Edward had regained power his brother's loyalty was duly rewarded.
On 17 October Gloucester was made constable of England, an office formerly held by the executed earl Rivers with remainder to his son lord Scales, who must have waived his claim on Gloucester's behalf.
Two days later, Gloucester's arrival in the inner court circle was further emphasized by the queen's grant to him of the stewardship of her land with an annual fee of £100.
A month later the king gave him the castle and manor of Sudeley (Glos.).
These grants, although valuable, were not much more than flourishes on an already diverse collection.
Gloucester's major gain from the events of 1469 was his acquisition, for the first time, of a recognized sphere of action.
This was in Wales, where royal authority had been dangerously undermined by the execution of William Herbert, earl of Pembroke.
The exercise of that authority had proved a recurrent problem for late-medieval kings.
Edward IV's solution had been to build up Herbert power until the family and their allies dominated most of Wales on the crown's behalf.
The policy had aroused the hostility of the earl of Warwick, himself a landowner in the south march, where he held Glamorgan and Abergavenny in his wife's right.
Within the south march the two men quarrelled over Newport, but their rivalry also had wider manifestations: Warwick felt threatened by Herbert's matrimonial ambitions, which had the backing of the king.
Pembroke's execution, on Warwick's orders, has the air of a private act of revenge, as do the other executions which followed Edgecote.
As far as Wales was concerned, Warwick also took the opportunity offered by his control of Edward IV to help himself to some of Pembroke's key offices: justiciar of south  Wales, constable of Carmarthen and Cardigan and steward of Cantrefmawr and Cardiganshire.
The scale of Herbert's power in Wales made his removal a major set-back to royal influence there, as was indicated by the immediate flare-up of trouble in the north and west of the region.
A rapid reassertion of royal authority was essential, and this provided Gloucester with an opening.
The first indication of the duke's new role was his appointment, at the end of October, to head commissions of array in the border counties of Shropshire, Gloucester and Worcester.
On 7 November he was made justiciar of north Wales for life in place of Hastings to whom Warwick had given the office in the previous August.
At the end of the month he was made chief steward, approver and surveyor of the principality of Wales and the earldom of March, and in mid December steward of Monmouth.
The latter had been given only a month previously to John lord Dudley, and its transfer suggests that Gloucester's role in Wales was still evolving.
So far Edward had been careful to avoid any appearance of an attack on Warwick's own gains, but on 16 December Gloucester was authorized to subdue the rebels who had seized the castles of Cardigan and Carmarthen — castles of which Warwick was still technically constable.
Finally, in February 1470, the king regranted the offices which Warwick had taken for himself in the previous August, with Gloucester again the main beneficiary.
The duke was made justiciar of south Wales and steward of Cantrefmawr and Cardiganshire, which completed his collection of the major offices formerly held by the earl of Pembroke.
Gloucester's position in Wales, however, was fundamentally different from that of Pembroke.
Although Herbert's power had been enormously enhanced by royal backing, it was rooted in regional loyalties which Gloucester, as a newcomer, could not command.
Moreover, the duke's authority was expected to be only temporary.
William Herbert had held several of his key posts in tail male and they were accordingly only granted to the duke during the minority of the young earl of Pembroke, William Herbert 11.
In the event Edward was to have no qualms about  dismantling the power of the second earl in the 1470s, but in 1469 he wanted to keep his options open and, in particular, to keep the support of the surviving members of the Herbert connection.
His aim was thus to keep the Herbert hegemony intact, while ensuring that it continued to be used in the royal interest.
Gloucester's role was basically to preserve the status quo by taking on the temporary leadership of the connection, rather than to carve out a new power base for himself.
A similar policy is evident in the disposal of the Herbert lands.
They, together with the custody of the young earl, were given to the dowager countess and so remained under Herbert control.
But the countess was the sister of the long-standing Yorkist servant Walter Devereux lord Ferrers, which no doubt helped to ensure that the patrimony was handled in ways acceptable to Edward IV.
As far as the Herbert interest was concerned, therefore, Gloucester was put at the head of an existing connection which he was expected to do little to modify.
He seems to have occupied the same position with regard to other royal servants in Wales, men like John Donne, Hugh Huntley and John Milewater, who were associated with the duke on a commission of 6 January 1470 to enquire into rebellion in south Wales.
Such men would inevitably develop links with Gloucester (Milewater was to die in his service at Barnet), but they were primarily the king's servants rather than the duke's.
Among their other responsibilities, Donne was steward of Kidwelly and an esquire of the king's body; Huntley was one of the duchy of Lancaster receivers in Wales; and Milewater was receiver general of the duchy lands in south Wales and the march.
Such men gave continuity to royal activity in Wales and there was no question of their being superseded.
Even had Gloucester wished to take a more independent line in Wales, it is doubtful how far he had the necessary connections.
His own territorial base in Wales was relatively small, although in 1470 he was retaining men from his lordship of Chirk.
Nor did he yet have much of a following elsewhere which he could import into Wales, although he was probably responsible for the arrival in Wales of the Yorkshireman John  Pilkington, who served with the duke on the January commission.
Essentially, Gloucester was intended to provide a royal presence in Wales which could give weight and a focus to the activities of the king's servants and supporters there.
This is not to belittle the importance of his role.
Herbert's career had demonstrated how valuable it was to have a focus for royal efforts in Wales and the council of the prince of Wales was to serve the same purpose in the 1470s.
Gloucester could not rival Herbert's local connections, but he did have the status to make an acceptable figurehead and he seems to have put considerable energy into the role.
He probably left for Wales in November 1469 and may have spent most of the next few months there.
He was certainly in Wales in mid June 1470 when, as justiciar, he presided at the Carmarthenshire great sessions.
By this date Edward IV had faced, and apparently overcome, further opposition.
Unrest had surfaced in Lincolnshire in late February and proved to have been fomented by Clarence and Warwick with the aim of placing Clarence on the throne.
The Lincolnshire rebels were defeated near Stamford on 12 March and the two noblemen headed north in the hope of receiving support from the Neville affinity in the north east or Thomas lord Stanley in Lancashire.
None was forthcoming, and the rebels fled south, escaping into exile in France.
As in the previous year, Gloucester's contribution is unclear.
On 26 March, at the height of the crisis, he was at Hornby (Lancs.).
This was well north of any line of march from Wales to the north east, which suggests that Gloucester had business in Lancashire and was not just en route to join his brother, who was then at York.
Hornby castle was part of the patrimony which the Harrington family was holding against strong opposition from the Stanleys, and this, coupled with a reference on the previous day to variance between Gloucester and lord Stanley, rather implies that Gloucester had made common ground with the Harringtons against Stanley influence in north Lancashire.
Gloucester may subsequently have joined the king in pursuit of the rebels, but the next firm reference to his presence in his brother's company is not until July, when he accompanied the king into Yorkshire to deal with the rebellion of Warwick's kinsman lord Fitzhugh of Ravensworth.
As this demonstrated, the defection of Warwick had opened up gaps in the king's authority and Gloucester was again an immediate beneficiary.
In August 1470 he was made warden of the west march towards Scotland, an office previously held by the earl of Warwick.
With hindsight, this can be seen as the first step in the transformation of Gloucester into the lord of the north, but this is to read too much into a single grant.
Warwick's chief stewardship in the duchy of Lancaster went not to Gloucester but to Hastings and the implication seems to be that at this stage the king was more concerned to reward his allies than to undertake a major reconstruction of royal authority in the north.
However, his ultimate intentions must remain doubtful because in September Warwick and Clarence invaded with French backing and Edward and his brother had to flee into exile in the Low Countries.
This reverse proved short-lived.
Edward returned to England in the following spring with Burgundian support and defeated first Warwick at the battle of Barnet and then the Lancastrian army at Tewkesbury.
Gloucester fought in both battles and was later to endow prayers for those who had died there in his service.
The endowment gives a glimpse of Gloucester's retinue at this early stage in his career and reveals the blurring which existed between his affinity and his brother's servants.
Of the five men commemorated by name, two were royal administrators who had been drawn into Gloucester's orbit by his activity in Wales.
One, John Milewater, has already been mentioned.
The other was John Harper, a royal auditor whose responsibilities included the duchy of Lancaster lands in Wales.
A third was a member of Edward IV's household, Christopher Worsley, a marshall of the hall, who had been sheriff of Somerset and Dorset in 1470 and whose links with Gloucester are unknown.
The other two were both northerners.
One, Thomas Parr, was the brother of the king's servants William and John.
Both the  surviving brothers were to be linked with Gloucester in the 1470S, and Thomas (together with Milewater) was specifically described at the time of his death as Gloucester's esquire.
The remaining northerner was Thomas Huddleston, a younger son of Sir John of Millom (Cumb.).
The family were to be closely associated with Gloucester in the 1470s, but in the 1460s they were Neville men, and Thomas and his brother William suffered forfeiture in 1470 for their support of Warwick and Clarence.
Thomas seems to have reconsidered his allegiance by 1471, although it is possible that he actually died on Warwick's side and that his inclusion among those remembered springs from his father's later links with Gloucester.
Sir John acted as Gloucester's attorney in a 1477 grant to Queens' College, Cambridge, and it was Queens' which was placed under an obligation to pray for Thomas and the rest.
The royal background of so many of Gloucester's known associates at this date is to be expected.
The duke's first establishment as a junior member of the royal family had probably been created by secondment from the royal household, as had also been the case for his brother Clarence.
The attainment of his majority would naturally have heralded a larger and more independent following, but Gloucester's early influence was in areas where there was an established network of royal servants and this shaped his developing retinue.
His major territorial acquisition, the duchy of Lancaster estates in the north west, was already staffed by royal servants who would now look to the duke while retaining their links with the crown.
In Wales also Gloucester was expected to set himself at the head of existing officials.
It was only with the political readjustments which followed Edward IV's return from exile in 1471 that Gloucester can really be said to have acquired an independent power base.
These readjustments, carried out between June and August, laid down in outline the areas where Richard was to be active for the rest of the reign.
They also allowed a reconsideration of the duke's earlier endowment, some of which was surrendered.
The massive duchy land grant of May 1469 was replaced by a more limited package of office, although even this was subsequently whittled down further, presumably under pressure from the Stanleys, and  parts of the grant of 1471 seem never to have taken effect.
In Wales the second earl of Pembroke was allowed to enter his father's offices without proof of age in August 1471, which marked the end of Gloucester's overall authority.
Although the duke was later to acquire further interests of his own in Wales he never resumed the position of his brother's leading representative there.
Gloucester's major acquisitions in the reshuffle of 1471 lay in the north.
This was a region which posed particular problems for medieval kings of England.
As in the case of other peripheral areas, there was the practical difficulty of trying to exert authority at a distance; but this problem was compounded by the north's proximity to what was by this date England's only land boundary with another state.
The north's position as a border region had contributed to the emergence and survival of a powerful nobility whose position was underpinned by strong regional loyalties.
Given this background, medieval and Tudor kings recognized the necessity of accepting, and then attempting to exploit, the power of dominant local noblemen.
For Edward IV, however, this familiar problem had been given an additional twist by the Lancastrian sympathies of two of the leading northern families, the Percies and Cliffords.
His response had been to build up the power of his supporters the Nevilles: Richard earl of Warwick and his brothers John, who was made earl of Northumberland, and George, who became archbishop of York.
The defection and death of Richard and John Neville therefore reopened the question of how royal authority could best be exercised in the north, as well as raising the issue of what should be done with the Neville connection, which was now leaderless.
Edward IV answered both questions by putting Gloucester into Warwick's place.
The duke was to be heir both of the earl's own northern estates and of his ‘public’ role as the leading royal agent in the north.
In the first capacity Gloucester was given, on 29 June, the key Neville strongholds of Middleham, Sheriff Hutton and Penrith.
On 14 July this was superseded by a comprehensive grant of all the lands in Yorkshire and Cumberland entailed to Richard Neville and his heirs male: in other words, all the land in those  counties which formed part of the Neville patrimony, as distinct from land which had come into Warwick's possession from his mother or wife, and which was held in tail general.
This northern land was to remain in Gloucester's possession for the rest of his life, in spite of disputes over the descent of the rest of the Warwick inheritance, and formed the centrepiece of his influence in the north.
In his second capacity, as heir of Warwick's public role, Gloucester took over the major royal offices which the earl had held in the north.
He had already, in 1470, been given the wardenship of the west march.
He was now made chief steward of the duchy of Lancaster in the north, an office which passed the duchy seal on 4 July, but which must have originated earlier since Gloucester was acting as steward early in June.
The stewardship constituted a significant extension of Gloucester's sphere of influence.
In Yorkshire, the duchy estates included the lordships of Pickering and Tickhill, in the north and south of the county respectively.
Another major block of duchy land lay along the Aire, from the soke of Snaith in the east, through Pontefract to Leeds and Bradford, with the forest of Knaresborough an outrider further north.
Across the Pennines the duchy included the forest of Bowland (regarded as lying in Yorkshire), the county palatine of Lancashire and land in north Cheshire.
There was a significant duchy interest in the north midlands, centred on Tutbury (Staffs.) and the High Peak (Derbs.), and estates in Lincolnshire, including Lincoln itself and land along the coast administered from Bolingbroke.
In addition, Gloucester was made master forester of the duchy forests in Lancashire, together with the forest of Bowland.
He was also made surveyor of the forest of Galtres, to the north of York, which was not itself part of the duchy but included the duchy manors of Easingwold and Huby, of which the duke was also made surveyor.
The manors were the natural complement to Gloucester's lordship of Sheriff Hutton and he was later to farm them both from the crown.
In establishing himself in the north, Gloucester was able to build upon existing foundations.
The events of 1470/1 had not  entirely destroyed Edward IV's authority in the north.
There remained a core of committed supporters who had accompanied Edward into exile or who rallied to him after his landing in Yorkshire in 1471.
Among the former was the yeoman of the chamber Nicholas Leventhorpe of Bramham (Yorks.) who acted as go-between for the exiled king and Henry Percy, whom Edward had restored to the earldom of Northumberland in 1470.
On his return to Zeeland, Leventhorpe was accompanied by a servant of Sir Ralph Ashton, which implies that Ashton too was an ally of the king, as does his omission from all the Readeption commissions.
Most examples of Yorkist support in the north, however, come from the period after Edward's landing.
At Doncaster the king was joined by his esquire, Gloucester's associate John Pilkington, who lent him 100 marks.
Ralph Snaith, a yeoman of the crown who was bailiff of Pontefract, lent £40 of his own and a further £30 from the revenues of his office.
At Nottingham Edward was joined by two more northern household men, Sir James Harrington of Brierly (Yorks.) and Sir William Parr of Kendal.
Both men were presumably accompanied by their brothers, since Robert Harrington and John Parr were later knighted by Edward at Tewkesbury, and Thomas Parr died at Barnet.
Other northerners knighted at the same time included two Westmorland men, Christopher Moresby of Windermere and Thomas Strikland of Sizergh.
Finally, the commissions appointed in July 1471 to arrest Warwick's associates provide the names of other northerners regarded as reliable by Edward IV, among them Ashton's son-in-law John Nesfield and Edmund Hastings.
Some historians have been dismissive of this northern support.
Edward IV himself was reputedly disappointed by the turn out, probably because he had hoped for the backing of the Percy connection, which the restored earl of Northumberland proved unable to mobilize.
In another respect, however, the king had grounds for satisfaction.
The defection of the Nevilles could have  done considerably more damage to the royal affinity which had developed in the north in the 1460s.
In the event, although the affinity was perhaps slow to rally, it held up reasonably well.
Some of it was in any case independent of the Neville influence, notably the element deriving from the duchy of York.
At least two of the men mentioned above had links with the duchy.
John Pilkington's home was near the duchy lordship of Wakefield and Ralph Snaith had close links with a leading duchy family, the Savilles of Thornhill.
But in other respects the royal affinity was potentially vulnerable.
Several of its leading members had a background of service to the Nevilles.
This was a consequence of the blurring of the two affinities in the early 1460s when Warwick was a loyal servant of the crown and when his men were in a sense the king's men at one remove, a relationship formalized in some cases by entry into the royal household.
These double loyalties presented no problems as long as Warwick's interests and those of the crown were broadly in agreement, but as the earl moved into outright opposition such men had to decide where their loyalties lay and in 1470/1 some backed Edward.
Ashton had been a servant of Warwick's father, the earl of Salisbury.
The Harrington brothers had been feed by Warwick, and their father had been feed by Salisbury.
Thomas Strikland's father Walter, who died in 1467, had also been retained by Salisbury.
Although Warwick's defection meant that the Neville connection as a whole was no longer at the king's disposal, Warwick was not able to carry all its members with him into opposition.
Warwick's defection also called into question the loyalty of royal retainers within the duchy of Lancaster.
The duchy provided a rich fund of patronage which Edward tapped to provide fees and office for his northern supporters.
Among the men who backed him in 1471 Pilkington was steward of Rochdale and James Harrington steward of Amounderness (Lancs.).
Edmund Hastings and Ralph Snaith were bailiffs of Pickering and Pontefract respectively.
Ashton was receiver and forester of Pickering.
At the same time the duchy administration had provided new recruits for Edward's service.
Nicholas Leventhorpe came  from a family active in the duchy since the beginning of the century.
The result was that, in Yorkshire and Lancashire at least, the duchy connection virtually was the royal affinity.
Warwick's position as chief steward of the duchy in the north, and steward and constable of all the key Yorkshire lordships, meant that he stood in a position of authority towards all the other northern duchy servants and Edward IV would have been very seriously weakened if Warwick had managed to win them over.
This, however, he entirely failed to do.
Leventhorpe and Ashton, receivers of Knaresborough and Pickering (where Warwick was steward), actively supported the exiled Edward IV.
Even more telling is the example of Ralph Snaith, the bailiff of Pontefract.
Warwick's brother John was based there in 1471 but Snaith was still able to join Edward IV, taking his revenues with him.
John Neville's inactivity in the face of Edward's advance surely owed something to awareness that he could not rely on duchy support.
In making Gloucester chief steward of the duchy of Lancaster in the north, Edward was thus effectively putting him at the head of the surviving royal affinity there.
As chief steward, Gloucester had access to significant patronage.
Although annuities and major office remained in the gift of the crown, with the issue of letters patent under the duchy seal warranted by royal signet or sign manual, these grants were the result of lobbying by interested parties and the chief steward was well placed to have his wishes heard.
The same was true of farms and leases, which were generally authorized by the duchy council.
Alongside this influence on others the chief steward could also make direct grants.
Like any office holder, he could appoint his own deputy.
He seems also to have had the right to appoint deputies to act for him in individual duchy lordships.
Thus Gloucester made Hugh Hastings his deputy as steward in the soke of Snaith.
It is not clear how such appointments related to the right of the steward of a specific lordship to appoint his own deputy, but it is possible that two deputies coexisted.
Thus in the lordship of Pickering the steward was William lord Hastings, confirmed in office by Edward IV for life in 1471.
In 1476 there were two deputy  stewards: Sir Edmund Hastings and William Chamberlain.
The latter was a member of Gloucester's Sheriff Hutton connection and may be a ducal appointment, in which case it is likely that he was acting as deputy chief steward in the lordship.
Distinct from this was the chief steward's right to appoint the stewards of some lesser estates within the duchy.
In 1474 William lord Hastings was made steward of Tutbury, Castle Donington (Leics.) and the Peak by Edward IV; but it was Gloucester who, by his own letters patent, made him steward of Ollerton (Notts.).
The right to that appointment was presumably an established perquisite of the chief steward.
When, as king, Richard twice regranted the stewardships held by Hastings in the duchy, neither grant included Ollerton or the associated manors of Plumtree and Risley.
These are unlikely to have been the only offices in the gift of the chief steward and the total may have been substantial.
In addition, he had the right to make grants at farm, although again the extent of the right is unknown.
In 1473 Gloucester ordered Thomas Molyneux, the hereditary steward of West Derbyshire (Lancs.), to farm the park of Croxteth to William Molyneux.
Access to such patronage gave Gloucester the possibility of rewarding his own men from the duchy.
His deputy as chief steward, for instance, was his councillor Miles Metcalfe.
But far more valuable was the chance it gave him of widening his sphere of influence.
It gave him a role in parts of the north where he held no land of his own.
In 1472, for instance, Robert Bolling of Bradford turned to Gloucester for help in achieving the restoration of his land.
It also made his good lordship attractive to men outside his immediate circle.
The Molyneux grant is a case in point.
Thomas Molyneux of Sefton, who was probably the prime mover on William's behalf, was a leading figure in south Lancashire.
He was an esquire of the king's body and had links with other lords in the north west and north Wales, including the Stanleys and Anthony earl Rivers, for whom he acted as deputy  of Beaumaris.
He was thus never exclusively Gloucester's man, but by 1480 had developed sufficiently close links with the duke to stand surety with other ducal retainers for Gloucester's associate John Huddleston.
This was a connection which would almost certainly not have developed but for Gloucester's duchy office.
However, it should not be forgotten that Molyneux was also a royal servant, and that in securing patronage for his kinsman in 1473 he was receiving a reward appropriate to his position as a leading local member of the king's household.
A similar ambiguity is apparent in the grant in the same year to Sir John Pilkington of the farm of a messuage and vaccary in the forest of Rossendale (Lancs.).
The duke's influence is clear.
He was himself master forester of Rossendale, and Pilkington was his chamberlain.
Significantly, two out of three sureties for Pilkington's payment of the farm were leading ducal retainers.
But it would be unrealistic to leave out of account the fact that Pilkington was a knight of the king's body and one, moreover, owed a favour for his support of Edward in 1471.
The duchy resources were still used on behalf of the royal retinue and it is striking that most of the best offices and farms went to the king's household.
As a result, those of Gloucester's associates who gained most from duchy patronage were those who were also royal servants, men like John Pilkington's brother Charles, an usher of the chamber, or the king's knights John Huddleston and Ralph Ashton.
As these examples suggest, it becomes increasingly difficult to disentangle royal and ducal retinues.
Because of Gloucester's influence in the duchy, royal servants naturally looked to him for lordship.
Less obvious, perhaps, is the other side of the equation.
Because Gloucester was the king's man, his own associates, whether promoted through the duchy or elsewhere, were in effect part of the royal affinity.
This integration benefited both sides.
The advantage to Gloucester is obvious.
His position within the duchy had brought him the support of men who would otherwise  have been outside his sphere of influence, as well as making him the better lord for his own servants.
The king gained because Gloucester's power was at his disposal and therefore any enhancement of the duke's position strengthened royal authority.
This basic premise also dictated Edward's policy elsewhere.
In the 1460s it lay behind his development of the Herbert hegemony in Wales and his consolidation of Neville power in the north.
In the 1470s the closest parallel is to be found in the north midlands, where Hastings' possession of the key duchy of Lancaster offices put him at the head of the royal connection in the region.
Here one can see the same assumption that Hastings' power is the king's power, with a consequent blurring of the two retinues.
But, with hindsight, Gloucester's position within the duchy seems to differ from that of Hastings or Warwick in one important respect.
It is clear that neither of them could call on the personal loyalty of the royal servants in the duchy.
In 1471 Warwick failed to turn the duchy servants against Edward IV and in 1483 Hastings' death was followed immediately by the transfer of the royal connection to his successor in office.
In both cases loyalty was owed to the crown rather than the steward.
When Gloucester deposed Edward V, by contrast, he apparently carried his brother's servants with him.
To some extent this distinction is illusory.
The usurpation of 1483 happened so quickly that many of the duchy servants were presented with a fait accompli , whereupon as usual they backed the crown (which now happened to be worn by their erstwhile chief steward).
But this is not the whole story.
By 1483 some at least of the royal servants were sufficiently committed to Gloucester to play an active role in his coup.
One who did so was Charles Pilkington, who was involved in the arrest of Hastings.
Pilkington, the brother of Gloucester's retainer John, had been a royal servant since the early 1460s and had been rewarded with land in the north midlands, bringing him within the duchy connection.
As a result he developed links with Hastings as well as Gloucester, but it was the latter which dictated his actions in 1483.
Also involved in the arrest was the duchy official Robert Harrington, whose brother James was one of Edward IV's knights.
Both  brothers had chosen to back Edward rather than Warwick in 1471, in spite of their Neville links, but by 1483 their connection with Gloucester was uppermost.
Gloucester's lordship was thus, at least in some cases, attractive enough to displace that of the crown.
An obvious explanation is the patronage which he had at his disposal as chief steward, for although this derived from the crown its exercise was a manifestation of the duke's own good lordship.
However, both Warwick and Hastings had access to duchy patronage without, it seems, managing to create a strong personal following within the duchy connection.
Gloucester's success implies a more effective use of the patronage at his disposal, and there are some suggestions that he was running the duchy in his own interests.
In 1482 the duchy council complained that Gloucester and his subordinates were wasting the assets of the duchy.
Support for the accusation comes from two cases where associates of the duke were dismissed by the council for failing to render account, but then remained in post.
Sir John Pilkington's removal as escheator of Lancashire was ordered in 1476, but no replacement is recorded until after his death three years later.
Sir Ralph Ashton, the receiver of Pickering, was dismissed in 1480, but remained in office until after Richard's death.
Their survival in office challenged efficient management of the duchy and may have entailed actual financial loss if they had been keeping revenue in their own hands.
But such cases were not, as the council claimed, the result of slack administration by the chief steward.
Gloucester was, on the contrary, exercising his good lordship.
‘Waste’ usually meant profit in someone's pocket.
What really lay behind the council's complaint was Gloucester's willingness to put the maintenance of an affinity before financial considerations.
Gloucester was thus strengthening his grip on the duchy connection, but it was also in the interest of the crown for him to preserve the connection: an ambiguity emphasized by the fact that Ashton and Pilkington were royal as well as ducal servants.
As long as Gloucester was the loyal servant of the crown, what was good for him was good for royal authority, and Edward's acceptance of that fact enormously strengthened the duke's hand.
It is unlikely that Gloucester could have flouted the council's wishes without at least tacit royal approval, and it is this which distinguished the duke from his predecessor as chief steward.
For his final years in office, Warwick was known to be out of favour with the king, something which must have reduced his authority within the duchy.
Gloucester, by contrast, kept the king's full confidence.
He could thus rely on royal backing while he used the duchy as an arena in which to demonstrate his own good lordship.
This is not to say that Gloucester was consciously building up his own authority at the expense of the crown — the distinction is meaningless in Edward IV's lifetime — but by 1483 the duchy connection was Gloucester's as well as the king's.
The strength of Gloucester's hold on the duchy connection cannot, however, be explained only by reference to the situation within the duchy itself.
His influence there was underpinned by territorial interests elsewhere in the north.
The importance of these becomes obvious by comparison with Hastings, whose claim on the loyalty of the duchy servants in the north midlands was weakened by the fact that in much of the region his authority rested only on duchy office.
It is also significant that Gloucester's hold on the duchy servants in Lancashire, where he had no land, was weaker than in Yorkshire.
The main component of Gloucester's landed influence in the north was the former Neville land centred on Middleham, Sheriff Hutton and Penrith.
Here, as in the duchy of Lancaster, Gloucester was able to draw on existing loyalties.
In the course of the previous two generations the junior branch of the Nevilles, Warwick and his father Salisbury, had established an important northern affinity within the three lordships.
That connection was now leaderless and it was in the interests of both the affinity and Gloucester to come to a rapid agreement.
The former Neville men wanted a new lord, a need particularly acute for those who had supported Warwick in 1470/1 and who therefore faced possible recriminations.
Indeed, the low level of northern attainders after the Yorkist victory of 1471 is itself in part testimony to the successful take-over of the Neville connection by Gloucester.
The duke himself, meanwhile, wanted to establish himself in the north as quickly and as fully as possible, and control of the Neville affinity offered one means to  that end.
He had begun retaining from Middleham (the only one of the three lordships for which evidence survives) by August 1471, when he feed the earl's auditor and councillor Thomas Metcalfe, and further indentures followed in the course of the autumn and winter.
These reveal that Gloucester already had the backing of the linch pin of the Middleham connection, Sir John Conyers of Hornby (Yorks.).
He was related, through his immensely prolific family, to many of the northern gentry and the Conyers family tree is virtually a roll call of the Neville retinue.
When Gloucester took Sir John into his service he acknowledged his importance by doubling his wages: the knight was confirmed as steward of Middleham with his fee increased from £13 6s 8d to £20 and he was also made constable of the castle with a fee of £16 13s 4d.
The money was well spent.
Conyers evidently formed a bridge between the Middleham affinity and its new lord: the first men whom Gloucester retained there were virtually all kinsmen of Sir John.
Given the pressures on both sides it is not surprising to find considerable continuity between Gloucester's affinity and that of the Nevilles.
Again, Middleham is the best documented of the three lordships, with lists of fees extant for both Neville earls as well as Gloucester himself.
Many examples are to be found among local families, who probably had little practical alternative to accepting any change of lordship at Middleham.
Two Wensleydale families, the Conyers and Metcalfes, feature in all three lists.
Another, the Wycliffes of Wycliffe, provided retainers for Salisbury and Gloucester, while the Burghs of Catterick served both Warwick and Gloucester.
Middleham, however, was not only a focus for local families.
It was also a source of fees for more distant associates and although such relationships were more vulnerable to dynastic change, because less bound up with the territorial dominance of the lord of Middleham, some did nevertheless survive the transfer of power in 1471.
Gloucester continued, for instance, to fee Thomas Talbot of Bashall (Yorks.).
If one looks beyond the surviving lists of fees to less formal evidence of affiliation, more instances of continuity are to be found.
The Mountfords of Hackforth (Yorks.) provided feed retainers for both Neville earls, and although no fee is recorded  from Gloucester they had links with him also.
Thomas Mountford, Warwick's retainer, acted as guarantor of an arbitration by Gloucester and was given an annuity by him after his accession, while his kinsman John was one of the duke's chaplains.
Conversely, Gloucester inherited the services of the Tunstalls of Thurland (Lancs.) from Warwick, although the first formal record of a fee is apparently that granted by Gloucester to Thomas Tunstall in autumn 1471.
Thomas had received a royal pardon in the previous April, just one week after Barnet, which implies a Neville connection.
So, probably, does the fact that his concubine of several years' standing, whom he subsequently married, was the illegitimate daughter of archbishop George Neville.
His two brothers, Richard and William, followed him into Gloucester's service.
Sir Richard, the eldest, was probably the ‘master Tunstall’ who was one of the duke's councillors and William was one of Gloucester's feoffees.
In the other two Neville lordships indirect evidence of this kind is now all that is available and continuity is accordingly harder to prove, although there is no reason to believe that it was any less marked.
At Sheriff Hutton, as at Middleham, the core of the affinity consisted of men whose own estates lay close to the castle and it is among these that continuity is likely to have been strongest.
Within a radius of three miles were the Withams of Cornborough, the Gowers of Stittenham, the Leptons of Terrington and the Hardgills of Lilling; a few miles further away were the Constables of Barnby by Bossall, a cadet branch of the Flamborough family.
All had probably served the Nevilles, although firm evidence survives only for the Withams, Gowers and Constables.
The Gowers had backed Warwick in 1470/1 and were still in opposition in June 1471, when a commission of arrest was issued for the head of the family, Thomas, and his uncles Robert and George.
It was probably not long after this that they made their peace with the Yorkists and entered Gloucester's service.
Thomas Gower became a leading figure in the Sheriff Hutton connection and was almost certainly constable of the castle itself, although this is nowhere explicitly stated.
Thomas Witham  became one of the duke's councillors.
For the other families, however, association with the duke can be inferred only from grants made after his accession.
Beyond this  central group evidence of continuity is even more fragmentary.
Among Gloucester's known associates in the area, only one, Ralph Bulmer, can be linked to the Nevilles with any confidence.
His family took their name from a manor near Sheriff Hutton and held land within the lordship.
Slightly more evidence survives from the north west, although here again there was probably more continuity in 1471 than is now apparent.
The centre of the Neville interest was the lordship of Penrith, including land to the east of the town, along the Eden, and Plumpton Park within the forest of Inglewood to the north.
The only formal evidence of continuity comes from this area in the shape of grants of an annuity to Thomas Hoton of Hutton John by both Warwick and Gloucester.
But other local families are likely to have served both lords, among them the Musgraves of Edenhall.
Richard Musgrave, the head of the family under the Yorkists, had been retained by Salisbury as a young man.
There is no specific reference to his serving Gloucester until after the duke's accession (when he became an esquire of the body), but his brother John was given land by the duke, which implies a close connection.
Penrith also served as a source of reward for more scattered retainers.
There had been an important group of Neville associates further south, centred on Sir William Parr of Kendal.
In 1471 Parr declared for Edward IV and carried his brothers-in-law Christopher Moresby and Thomas Strikland with him.
They subsequently turned to the duke, and by the following year Moresby was installed as Gloucester's steward at Penrith, with his younger brother James acting as bailiff.
Other examples of continuity, in the north west include the Redmanes of Levens, who also held land in Yorkshire and were feed by both Warwick and Gloucester from Middleham, and probably the Dogets of Grayrigg who fought for Warwick in 1469 and subsequently provided Richard with a chaplain.
Another family to serve both lords was the Huddlestons of Millom on the  Duddon estuary.
The head of the family, Sir John, was related by marriage to Warwick's allies the Fitzhughs of Ravensworth, and two of his sons married Neville wives.
The eldest, Richard, married Warwick's illegitimate daughter Margaret, and the earl endowed the couple with his manor of Blennerhasset (Cumb.) and land in Penrith.
His brother, William, married the daughter of Warwick's brother John.
The family was later to be among Gloucester's closest associates.
Such continuity was valuable to Gloucester, but it is important not to exaggerate the extent to which he simply took over a ready-made connection.
Although former Neville men were predisposed to look to the duke, Gloucester still had to work at being a good lord in order to give substance to the relationship.
Nor was Gloucester's northern connection ever just that of the earl of Warwick.
Noble affinities were in any case constantly evolving as their members came of age, married and died, but Gloucester's lordship brought other changes.
As he acquired further land and office in the north, the affinity inevitably widened.
Not only were men from other areas drawn into Gloucester's circle but, by a cumulative process, the duke's new interests made him a more attractive lord within the Neville lands themselves.
The 1471 grant of Middleham, Sheriff Hutton, Penrith and their members did not give Gloucester control of all the northern estates formerly held by Warwick.
One notable omission was Barnard Castle in County Durham, which Warwick had acquired by his marriage to the Beauchamp heiress Anne.
The descent of her inheritance was the object of intense rivalry in the early 1470s between Clarence, who had married one of Warwick's coheiresses, and Gloucester, who married the other.
In the case of Barnard Castle their struggle was complicated by the involvement of a third party, bishop Bothe of Durham, who claimed the lordship as part of his palatinate.
Edward IV had conceded this claim in 1470, at a time when he was willing to limit Warwick's northern influence, but the question was inevitably reopened once Gloucester had taken Warwick's place.
Exactly how the matter was resolved is obscure, but there is no doubt that Gloucester took possession of the lordship, presumably with royal backing.
The castle became one of the duke's main northern  residences and local families turned naturally to him for lordship.
These included the Brackenburys of Denton, a younger son of whom, Robert Brackenbury of Selaby, became Gloucester's treasurer of the household.
The Brackenburys' near neighbours, the Hansards of Walworth, probably also had links with Gloucester although, as with many northern families, this can only be inferred from Richard's willingness to use them in sensitive assignments after his accession.
Richard Hansard was then one of a group of northerners sent to restore royal authority in Hampshire.
Among his colleagues there was his feoffee John Hoton of Tudhoe, who should probably also be numbered among Gloucester's Durham associates.
Once Gloucester was established in the south of County Durham, his influence began to reach further into the bishopric.
By 1474 the prior of Durham, Richard Bell, could refer to Gloucester as the convent's dominus specialissimus .
This enthusiasm was not, however, shared by the bishop, Laurence Bothe, who was clearly unhappy at the arrival of so powerful a neighbour.
Only in the last few months of his pontificate, before his promotion to York, did Bothe recognize the duke's local interests by appointing ducal servants to office within the bishopric, not only at Crayke (which lay within the duke's sphere of influence in the forest of Galtres), but within County Durham itself, where Gloucester's retainer John Redmane was made bailiff of Bishop Auckland.
This cool relationship between duke and bishop was, however, transformed by the arrival of William Dudley as Bothe's successor in 1476.
Dudley, a trusted royal servant, was prepared to see an expansion of ducal influence in the county.
Immediately after Dudley's elevation, Gloucester was appointed to the commission of the peace, where he played an active role.
Dudley also proved more willing to appoint ducal servants to offices in his gift and to employ them in his own administration.
Richard Hansard, for instance, was made constable of Durham castle, while the commission Dudley appointed to survey his land included numerous ducal associates, among them Sir William Parr, Thomas Witham and Thomas Metcalfe.
Metcalfe, one of Gloucester's councillors, was to become one of the key financial administrators in the bishopric.
Durham had thus become another sphere in which Gloucester could exercise his good lordship and, with Dudley's backing, the duke seized the opportunity with both hands.
By the end of the decade it was Gloucester, not the bishop, who dominated the region and contemporaries knew it.
When Gerard Salvin wanted redress against the men who had attacked his house at Croxdale, just a few miles south of Durham itself, it was Gloucester to whom he appealed.
Barnard Castle was Gloucester's major gain from the division of the Beauchamp inheritance, but it was not the only one.
His other direct gain in the north was part of Cottingham in the East Riding, which was in his hands by 1472.
The final partition of the inheritance in 1474 also brought him Chesterfield and Scarsdale (Derbs.) and Bushey (Herts.) which in the following year he exchanged with the crown for more land in Yorkshire: a further piece of Cottingham; the royal castle and lordship of Scarborough; and land in Falsgrave, with the fee farm there.
The meat of the grant was Scarborough, which formed a useful complement to Gloucester's duchy interests.
It was an enclave within the duchy lordship of Pickering, which came down to the coast at Filey Brigg in the south and at Scalby, just north of Scarborough, before continuing along the coast towards Whitby.
The grant was part of a consolidation of Gloucester's position around this time, which may have been linked with plans for Gloucester to lead a raid into Scotland.
In February 1475 the duke's standing in the north west was strengthened by his appointment for life as sheriff of Cumberland.
In the following June the terms of the grant were amplified.
Gloucester was to have the right to appoint his own deputy, an office he is said to have given to Sir John Huddleston.
He was also to enjoy all issues of the shrievalty, the demesne lands of the castle of Carlisle  and the city's fee farm.
The grant explicitly excluded the royal forest of Inglewood, but this was probably only to avoid setting a precedent for future sheriffs.
Gloucester seems already to have had control of the forest, and granted a fee from two closes there in 1473, which suggests that it may have been assigned to him as warden of the west march, although this is nowhere explicitly stated.
The summer of 1475 brought one other addition to Gloucester's northern land.
In June the duke and the heirs of his body were granted the Clifford barony in the West Riding, consisting of Skipton and Marton in Craven and associated land.
The Cliffords had forfeited their estates at the beginning of the reign for their adherence to Lancaster.
In 1462 their land in Westmorland, including Brougham and Appleby, had been granted to Warwick and the Yorkshire estates to William Stanley.
In 1475 Stanley surrendered his share to the crown, receiving in lieu the castle and lordship of Chirk, in the march of Wales, and the manor of Wilmington (Kent).
Chirk had been held by Gloucester and although it is not stated in the grant the king was evidently promoting, or at least sanctioning, an exchange of interests.
Chirk was now peripheral to Gloucester's main concerns but complemented Stanley involvement in Cheshire and Flint.
Wilmington, also part of the Beaufort lands, seems to have been included as a makeweight.
As with the Scarborough grant, Gloucester was surrendering land of little value to himself in return for a significant acquisition.
Skipton and its members rounded out his trans-Pennine duchy interests, as well as giving him his first territorial stake in the West Riding.
It is clear that the duke took his interest in Skipton seriously.
He is known to have resided there and in 1480 he extended his Craven estates by buying the manor of Carleton in Craven and associated land from William Singleton.
Among the local families who had dealings with the duke were the Ratcliffes of Bradley near Skipton, one of whom was retained by Gloucester for service in the Scottish campaign of 1480.
He may also have developed some connections with the Tempests of  Bracewell.
The third brother, Nicholas, is described as of Marton in Craven in 1478 and had married the sister of Gloucester's associate Sir John Pilkington.
But Gloucester's acquisition of Skipton was as much a matter of strengthening existing connections as of creating new ones.
Although Warwick had not held Skipton itself, he had had connections with some of the local families (perhaps through his possession of the Clifford estates elsewhere) and these Gloucester seems to have taken over.
Thomas Talbot of Bashall was among those feed by both Warwick and Gloucester from Middleham.
The Hertlingtons of Hartlington, previously Clifford associates, may have been inherited by Gloucester from Warwick.
Their first recorded connection with Richard is after his accession, when the second son Roger became a yeoman of the crown.
He was unusually well rewarded and this, coupled with the fact that he was employed to seize rebel lands, strongly suggests that he had been associated with Richard before 1483.
An earlier Neville connection is implied by the marriage of Roger's sister Alice to Thomas Metcalfe, a match which must have taken place by the mid 1460s.
But the clearest evidence that Gloucester's links with the Clifford connection preceded his possession of Skipton is his grant of a fee to one of the surviving Clifford brothers, Robert, in 1471.
In spite of this, Gloucester's links with the Cliffords themselves do not seem to have been close.
Robert's interests shifted to Hertfordshire in the late 1470s when he married the widow of Sir Ralph Josselin, but even before this he is never recorded as acting with the duke in the north, and after Richard's accession he was to move into opposition, along with his brother Roger.
Gloucester again relinquished peripheral holdings in exchange for the last addition to his Yorkshire estates in March 1478, shortly after the execution of Clarence.
This time he received the castle and fee farm of Richmond, the manors of Harome and Carlton by Helmsley, and the reversion of Helmsley itself, in exchange for Sudeley (Glos.),
Farleigh Hungerford (Wilts.) and  Corfe (Dorset).
The Yorkshire land had all been held by Clarence and the scale of the alienations made in exchange suggests that Gloucester set considerable store by its acquisition.
The castle of Richmond filled an obvious gap in Gloucester's domination of Richmondshire, although the lack of it had made little practical difference to his position there, since Clarence seems to have played no part in northern affairs after 1471.
Clarence had been given the honour of Richmond in 1462; or, more strictly, had been given the two thirds then in the crown's possession and the reversion of the remaining third on the death of the dowager duchess of Bedford.
But this grant cut across the claims of the Nevilles, who already held two thirds of the honour's land in Richmondshire in tail male and had the reversion of the other third.
In practice, Clarence's grant was a dead letter in Richmondshire, although it gave him extensive interests elsewhere, notably in Lincolnshire and East Anglia.
In 1471 the Neville share passed to Gloucester, with Warwick's tail male lands, and he also took possession of the remaining third in 1472 when the reversion fell in.
This gave him all the honour's lands in Richmondshire except, it seems the castle itself, a deficiency made good in 1478.
The remaining land had come to Clarence by the forfeiture of Thomas lord Roos, although dower rights had prevented him enjoying Helmsley itself.
Gloucester was more fortunate, the dowager dying within days of the grant.
Again, the grant consolidated existing ducal interests, rounding out Gloucester's influence in the honour of Pickering further east.
It may also have brought some families into his service for the first time, among them the Pulleys (or Pullowes) of Helmsley, whose head, Henry, was to be one of Richard's yeomen after his accession.
Although it is convenient to treat Gloucester's northern acquisitions separately, the affinity they produced was a unity.
This can be seen most clearly in the case of men who entered Gloucester's service in one context and were then employed or rewarded in another.
The Metcalfes of Nappa near Askrigg in Wensleydale were members of the Middleham connection, holding numerous offices within the lordship.
Under Gloucester they  expanded into other parts of the north east.
Thomas Metcalfe was Gloucester's auditor of Richmondshire and became, with ducal backing, one of the auditors of the bishop of Durham.
His brother Miles, one of the duke's legal counsel, was Gloucester's deputy as chief steward of the duchy of Lancaster in the north.
He also became recorder of York, an appointment made on the king's recommendation but probably owing more to Gloucester.
At a more modest level, the office of clerk of the works at Middleham was filled by a Westmorland man, Michael Wharton of Kirkby Thore, whose home lay a few miles from Gloucester's lordship of Penrith.
A Cumberland man, Richard Ratcliffe, was made constable of Barnard Castle and also acquired land in Richmondshire by his marriage (probably achieved with the duke's support) to the widowed sister of John lord Scrope of Bolton.
The Huddlestons of Millom were active on Gloucester's behalf throughout Cumbria, but their own land led them to look rather to north Lancashire, where they had dealings with the Harringtons.
The coherence of the retinue was not, however, just a matter of ducal fiat .
It was underpinned by the interests and aspirations of its members themselves.
Only the least significant of retainers would fit neatly into a single sphere of ducal influence.
Many had wider tenurial interests.
The Redmanes of Levens held land in both Westmorland and Yorkshire, while several ducal associates, including the Harringtons, held land in Lancashire and Yorkshire.
At the same time, personal connections naturally developed between individual members of the affinity.
These are most visible when ducal retainers stood surety for each other.
When John Pilkington farmed land in Rossendale (Lancs.) his sureties were John Huddleston of Millom, William Plumpton of Plumpton and William Hopton of Swillington (Yorks.).
Sometimes other hints of friendship between men from different elements of the connection survive.
The two lay founders of a chantry in  Richard's honour at Riccall on the Ouse were James Charleton of Riccall, feed from Sheriff Hutton, and Richard Bank of Allerton Bywater in the duchy of Lancaster honour of Pontefract.
For the duke's servants, as for Gloucester himself, there was a single connection of which they were all part.
Several of the examples quoted above emphasize the extent to which each of Gloucester's acquisitions, as well as bringing new families into his orbit, consolidated his influence elsewhere.
Thus his possession of Barnard Castle gave him the service of Robert Brackenbury, but also the means to reward Richard Ratcliffe.
As Gloucester's power grew, it made him a better lord for the affinity as a whole.
This development also had a wider dimension.
By the mid 1470s, Gloucester's lordship was attracting men outside his immediate circle.
One example is provided by the extension of the duke's influence into south Yorkshire, an area where he held no land of his own.
The major landowners were the duchy of York, with which Gloucester had no formal connection, and the earls of Shrewsbury.
The latter were represented after 1474 by a minor in the custody of William lord Hastings, who does not seem to have played much part in south Yorkshire.
This may have strengthened Gloucester's hand in the region, but it is not in itself an adequate explanation of his arrival there.
In part it is due to the proximity of the duchy of Lancaster lordships of Pontefract and Tickhill, which provided an additional source of reward for a number of royal servants in south Yorkshire.
The most influential family to hold office in both duchies, of York and Lancaster, was the Pilkingtons, but lesser families shared the spread of interest, including the Snythales of Barnby on Don.
The duchy of Lancaster affiliations of such families brought them within Gloucester's orbit and gave him a point of contact with other duchy of York families, such as the Savilles and Wentworths.
But the mere existence of such contacts did not mean very much.
Given the interrelationships of medieval gentry families, any lord could claim a range of connections shading away from his immediate circle, most of which were, for all practical purposes, irrelevant.
Gloucester does, however, seem to have been in a position to activate his links with south Yorkshire.
In some cases, again, his links with the local gentry can be inferred  only from his readiness to use them on sensitive business after 1483.
The head of one of the leading duchy of York families, John Saville of Thornhill, was put in charge of the Isle of Wight by Richard as king.
But in at least one case it can be shown that Richard was retaining in the area in the 1470s.
An undated ducal warrant survives ordering William Fitzwilliam of Sprotborough to meet Gloucester at Doncaster with eight horses and accompany him to London.
Fitzwilliam's brothers-in-law also seem to have had ducal connections, although these are more tenuous.
Gloucester headed the feoffees of one, Richard Wentworth of Bretton, in 1476.
The other brother-in-law, Sir Thomas Wortley, was linked with Gloucester after his accession, and the contact had probably been made by 1479 when Wortley married as his second wife the widow of Gloucester's ally Sir John Pilkington.
He was later to repudiate her but not, significantly, until after Richard's own death.
Fitzwilliam's initial link with Gloucester can be traced.
He had married one of the daughters of Sir John Conyers, the central figure of the Middleham connection.
However, the fact that Gloucester was able to forge a real link with Fitzwilliam, in an area where the duke's territorial influence was minimal, is testimony less to the strength of the Conyers bond than to Gloucester's own growing dominance in the north as a whole.
His lordship was attractive enough to give substance to otherwise tenuous connections.
This was only partly explained by Gloucester's territorial interests in the north, which by their very nature gave him authority only in defined areas.
More important in establishing his general dominance was his closeness to the crown.
The duke's role as the leading royal agent in the north brought a merging of his connection with that of the crown, not only within the duchy of Lancaster but also, to some extent, in the areas where Gloucester had less direct interests.
This helps to explain his involvement in the duchy of York, where John Saville, for instance, was a royal esquire in the late 1470s.
In the north west the Parrs came into Gloucester's circle through royal service as well as former Neville links, and gave him an influence  in Westmorland greater than he might otherwise have enjoyed.
In more general terms, too, Gloucester's local standing was enhanced by his court connections.
It is often claimed that a lord on the spot was of more immediate relevance to local men, especially in outlying regions, than the king at Westminster.
But although many of the expectations of the gentry could indeed be met locally, others could not, and men were alert to the advantage of a reliable line of communication with the king.
Gloucester was ideally placed to satisfy this need — something which has been underemphasized since Kendall's romantic portrait of him as an isolated northern figure.
For his contemporaries, Gloucester clearly filled a double role, as is illustrated by his dealings with the city of York.
His help was called for in purely local matters, such as the corporation's attempts to clear fishgarths from the Ouse, but he also pressed the city's claims at court, and in 1476 was credited with the preservation of York's liberties by his great labour to the king.
It was this royal backing which turned Gloucester's territorial influence into a regional hegemony.
One manifestation of his dominance was his ability to draw other local noblemen into his own orbit, which he could hardly have achieved on the strength of his landed interests alone.
The most striking example is Henry Percy, earl of Northumberland.
He had been restored to the earldom in 1470 as part of Edward's measures against Clarence and the Nevilles, who had been the main beneficiaries of the Percy forfeiture.
The Percy connection had taken no part in the events following Edward's return from exile in 1471 — an inactivity which, given their Lancastrian background, was probably regarded as tantamount to support for Edward IV.
Certainly Percy was not penalized and his restoration was allowed to stand.
In spite of this, his position in 1471 was rather different from that in 1470.
Then, his restoration had been intended as a counterbalance to Warwick's influence in the north, but in 1471 the Nevilles had been replaced by Gloucester.
This was to tip the balance of power decisively against Northumberland.
Gloucester was the king's trusted supporter and brother.
Moreover, although both men faced the job of rebuilding their followings, Percy had  the harder task since his family's traditional support had fragmented in the previous decade.
Whatever Edward IV had initially envisaged as the relationship between the two men, Gloucester gained the upper hand almost immediately.
This is confirmed by the only formal record of their relationship: an indenture drawn up between the two men in 1474, but embodying an agreement made in the previous year before the king and his council.
In the indenture, Gloucester undertook to be the earl's good and faithful lord and promised not to claim any office or fee granted to the earl by the king or others and not to take into his service any men retained by the earl.
Clearly Percy had felt himself seriously threatened by Gloucester's position in the north.
Of the two promises made by the duke, it is the second which has received most attention, implying as it does that the duke had been poaching the earl's retainers.
But the first is also significant, suggesting that the duke had had designs on some of the earl's patronage.
Together, they point to aggressive empire-building by the duke in the north.
The agreement was designed to protect Northumberland from direct encroachment and to defuse a potentially dangerous rivalry.
In the latter, at least, it seems to have succeeded.
For the rest of the reign the two nobles apparently co-operated, and were in particular careful to avoid being drawn into disputes between their men.
William Plumpton, cultivating Gloucester and his retainer John Pilkington in the hope of bringing pressure to bear on Northumberland over a Knaresborough office, was firmly warned off by a more sophisticated associate.
But this harmony was not the modus vivendi of two equals.
It rested unmistakably on Gloucester's superiority and recognition of that fact was the price Northumberland paid for his protection.
Contemporaries recognized it too, and although after 1474 there is no suggestion of outright ducal poaching, men from families with Percy affiliations did apparently continue to enter the duke's service.
One clear example comes from near the forest of Knaresborough, where Gloucester had influence through the duchy of Lancaster and where Northumberland held land.
Among the earl's possessions there was the lordship of Spofforth, the home of the Middletons of Stokeld, who as a result naturally looked to the Percies for lordship.
By 1480, however, one of the younger brothers, Richard, was in Gloucester's household.
Another example is provided by Richard Ratcliffe, whose father and brother were both feed by Northumberland.
Such examples testify to the attractiveness of Gloucester's lordship.
They are also a reminder that although the 1474 agreement had forbidden the two nobles to retain the same men, this left open the possibility of other forms of shared allegiance.
Different members of one family could have links with both lords.
An individual could have formal links with one but still keep informal connections with the other.
Sir Hugh Hastings of Fenwick seems to have been primarily Northumberland's man, but his land in south Yorkshire had brought him into contact with Gloucester as early as 1471, when the duke made him his deputy steward of Snaith, and to judge by his choice of feoffees Hastings maintained links with the duke's circle.
This was hardly surprising in an area where both lords were influential.
Only families whose own interests were limited to a single area of ducal or comital influence could afford to ignore the other lord.
As a result there was in practice considerable blurring between the two retinues.
This most frequently benefited Gloucester, as the dominant lord, but this was not invariably the case and the ducal councillor Edmund Hastings of Pickering placed one of his sons in Northumberland's household.
As the agreement of 1474 had made clear, Gloucester was Percy's lord.
It followed that Northumberland's men were in a sense Gloucester's men, even though the duke could not retain them directly.
This sanctioned the informal merging of the Percy retinue into Gloucester's, and it is likely that these examples of men with a Percy background entering Gloucester's service owed as much to Northumberland's good lordship as to private enterprise.
The evidence for Richard Middleton's membership of Gloucester's household comes from his marriage licence, which shows that he was marrying within the Percy connection.
His  wife was a kinswoman of the earl's councillor Sir John Pickering, which implies that Middleton did not see service to Gloucester as an alternative to Northumberland's lordship.
Ratcliffe's position is comparable.
His mother was a Parr, which may have given him an independent entree into Gloucester's service, but he could equally well have come to the duke's attention through the Percy connection.
His marriage, too, although it presumably owed much to Gloucester, also allied him with the Percies, since his new brother-in-law lord Scrope was not only a neighbour of the duke but also a Percy retainer.
The retinues of other northern lords can also be seen as components of the ducal connection.
The most explicit example is that of Thomas lord Scrope of Masham and Upsale, who inherited the title in 1476, when he was about sixteen.
The affiliations of his father are not known, but Thomas was immediately committed to the duke's ‘rule and guiding’ by his mother.
In an indenture drawn up in January 1476 Gloucester undertook to be a good and loving lord to Thomas and his mother.
Thomas was to be retained by the duke, and all the servants, tenants and inhabitants of the Scrope estates were to be the duke's men.
The relationship is unusual in that Scrope's men were set directly under the duke.
Normally the duke's lordship was exercised at one remove although, as in Northumberland's case, some blurring of the two retinues might ensue in practice.
This last pattern is also found in Gloucester's relationship with the Lovell/Fitzhugh connection.
The Fitzhughs of Ravensworth were a North Riding family closely linked with the Nevilles.
Richard Fitzhugh did not take seisin of his lands until 1480 and did not become politically active until after 1483, but it is clear that he was already a satellite of his cousin the duke.
Fitzhugh was the brother-in-law of another of Gloucester's close associates, Francis lord Lovell, whose inheritance included land in the North Riding and who had been a Neville ward in the 1460s.
Both lords also had interests further south, along the Ouse valley, which formed an extension of Gloucester's Sheriff Hutton connection.
The ducal retainer James Charleton of Riccall was probably introduced to Gloucester's service by the Fitzhughs, while Geoffrey Franke of Escrick (later Gloucester's receiver in  the northern Neville lands) belonged to a family which had Lovell as well as Neville links.
As this suggests, Gloucester's relationship with other northern lords not only endorsed his authority in areas where he was already influential, but allowed an extension of that authority.
It is therefore significant that by the late 1470s most northern lords can be linked with the duke.
Ralph lord Greystoke was a member of the ducal council and probably contributed to the extension of ducal influence across the Derwent into the Wolds, where he held land and where the ducal associate Ralph Bigod had Greystoke connections.
Humphrey lord Dacre of Gilsland acted as Gloucester's deputy on the west march, while in Durham Gloucester retained George Lumley, heir of lord Lumley, whose father had once been a retainer of the earl of Salisbury.
Meanwhile, his relationship with Northumberland brought other nobles into his orbit, most notably John lord Scrope of Bolton.
Scrope was feed by Northumberland, and his heir Henry married the earl's sister, but after 1483 lord John and his brothers emerge unequivocally as Richard's close allies.
The most striking recruit to Gloucester's circle, however, was Ralph lord Neville, nephew and heir of the elderly earl of Westmorland.
Ralph was associated with Gloucester by 1477, possibly after an earlier flirtation with Northumberland, and his arrival in the duke's service marks the end of a feud which had split the Nevilles for over forty years.
The first earl of Westmorland had married twice and had dismembered his patrimony to provide for his family by his second wife, Joan Beaufort, granting them the lordships of Middleham, Sheriff Hutton and Penrith.
Gloucester was thus territorially the heir of the junior line, and the willingness of lord Neville, heir of the senior line, to ally with him is eloquent testimony to Gloucester's domination of the north.
That domination brought a unity to the north which had been notably lacking since the end of the previous century.
Gloucester had not only ended the division within the Neville family but, through his relationship with Northumberland, had called a halt to the long-standing hostility of Neville and Percy.
The north, moreover, was not only united but united behind the king since Gloucester was pre-eminently the king's man.
This was a major achievement, and can be considered the outstanding success of Edward IV's regional policy.
Edward's contribution to that success was obvious.
He gave Gloucester the Neville lands which formed the core of his influence, and then continued to augment his holdings of land and office.
Even more important was Edward's tacit approval of the use his brother made of his northern power.
Without this continuing endorsement Gloucester could not have maintained so wide a hegemony.
But the duke's own contribution, although less tangible, was no less crucial.
One obvious element was his willingness to work at being a good lord.
This was not only a matter of saying yes to petitioners and having the resources to say yes often, although Gloucester was well placed in this respect.
Effective lordship was, rather, a matter of judging when yes was the right answer; of balancing his own needs against those of others; and of deciding between competing claims.
Such decisions must have been the daily stuff of lordship, but they are now usually only visible in the formal context of legal disputes.
Gloucester was much in demand as an arbiter and as a source of legal redress, and it is clear that he took the matter seriously.
In one dispute he is twice quoted as saying, on different occasions, ‘we intend, nor will none otherwise do at any time, but according to the king's laws’— and there is no reason to suppose that he did not mean it.
On another occasion he was prepared to decide against one of his own retainers.
As this suggests, the duke recognized a wider responsibility than to his own servants.
His lordship was regional, not simply territorial.
The examples are also a reminder that lordship had a personal dimension.
A good lord brought to the role his own abilities and charisma which are now impossible to quantify but which were vital to his success.
In this intangible sense also, Gloucester's lordship clearly succeeded.
Even after his death, when most of his servants had come to terms with the new regime, several remembered him with respect and affection.
William Malyverer bequeathed to Our Lady of Walsingham a little ring with a diamond which Richard had given him.
More striking is the example of Ralph Bigod who, safely transferred to the service of Henry VII and his mother, still refused to criticize his old  master.
Even when due allowance is made for the material advantages of Gloucester's lordship, there is no doubt of his personal attraction.
The duke's success, however, could not have been foreseen in 1471.
In spite of his enthusiastic involvement in Wales, he must then have been something of an unknown quantity and it is possible that his role in the north was originally envisaged as that of one among equals.
The additions to his power in the course of the 1470s may have constituted a reassessment of his position, with the king's perception of his role developing as the duke matured.
But whatever the exact chronology of Gloucester's emergence as lord of the north, by the end of the decade the process was in effect complete.
Either in his own right, or through his links with other lords, Gloucester dominated the entire north east and the north-western counties of Cumberland and Westmorland.
In these areas Gloucester's appointment in 1480 as the king's lieutenant in the north did not do much more than recognize existing realities.
The grant was made specifically in the context of a projected campaign against Scotland and was designed to avoid damaging disputes over military authority by setting Gloucester firmly above the other northern peers.
It thus formalized the inclusion of other noble retinues within Gloucester's affinity but probably conferred little additional authority.
The king's own influence in the north rested primarily on the support of local men, and the appointment of a lieutenant could do little more than seek to transfer that support, something which had already been largely achieved through recognition of Gloucester's role as his brother's agent in the north.
But the commission did clarify Gloucester's position in one area of the north where it had previously been somewhat equivocal.
This was in Lancashire, where Gloucester's authority in the duchy of Lancaster confronted the influence of Thomas lord Stanley and his brother William.
Stanley interests had first been brought into conflict with Gloucester by Edward's grant of extensive Lancashire land to the duke in 1469.
After his return in 1471 Edward tried to limit the damage to the Stanleys by modifying Gloucester's grant.
On 4 July the duke was made chief steward of the duchy of Lancaster in  the north; steward of Rochdale and Tottington in the county palatine; of Clitheroe and Penwortham (Lancs.) and of Halton (Ches.); and master forester of the Lancashire forests, together with the forest of Bowland, then regarded as lying in Yorkshire.
This still, however, posed a threat to Stanley influence.
Thomas lord Stanley had held the stewardship of Halton since 1461.
He had also been made steward of Tottington, Rochdale and Penwortham just two weeks before the grant to Gloucester.
Edward apparently intended the later grant to stand, and on 7July ordered Stanley and his servants to cease meddling in the offices granted to Gloucester.
After the Stanleys' ambivalent behaviour in 1469–71 Edward may have seen his brother's presence in the region as a useful counterbalance, but it is unlikely that he wanted to see the Stanleys totally eclipsed.
In the next few years, as Gloucester's power elsewhere in the north grew, his influence in Lancashire became more narrowly defined.
To some extent this may have been due to the Stanleys' own efforts, since they had the firmer territorial base in the region, but it must also reflect the king's wishes.
Gloucester's position in the north east reveals how greatly his standing was enhanced by royal backing, and his failure to achieve similar dominance in Lancashire strongly implies that the king had chosen to support the Stanleys instead.
The exact chronology of this development is unclear, although it is likely that the erosion of the duke's power began immediately, with some of the provisions of his 1471 grant a dead letter from the outset.
In Halton, where lord Stanley was receiver, the duke never received his fee as steward, and Stanley continued to pay himself the fee as both constable and steward on the authority of the 1461 letters patent.
He may also have kept the stewardship of Tottington and Rochdale, in spite of Edward's orders to the contrary.
Gloucester was more successful in asserting his claims to the stewardship of Clitheroe and its members.
The honour was historically linked with the honour of Pontefract and together they formed a single trans-Pennine power bloc.
The reality of Gloucester's influence there is also reflected in the fact that, of all the master foresterships he had been granted in 1471, the only two he seems to have exercised were those which best complemented this trans-Pennine interest: Bowland to the north and Rossendale further south.
The forests further west remained in the control of  the Stanleys and others.
In effect, therefore, Gloucester's offices were concentrated in the east of Lancashire, where they formed an extension of his West Riding interests, and elsewhere he yielded place to the Stanleys.
This is the arrangement formalized in Edward's territorial reordering of 1473–5, which saw Lancashire as the northern end of a Stanley power bloc stretching through Cheshire into north Wales, rather than as one more component in Gloucester's northern hegemony.
Part of that reordering was Gloucester's exchange of Skipton in Craven for Chirk in 1475, endorsed if not actually organized by the crown, which was a tacit acknowledgement of the division of power between the Stanleys and Gloucester.
The most sensitive touchstone of effective influence in Lancashire was, however, the dispute over Hornby castle, which was also finally settled in 1475, probably under the impetus of Edward's planned invasion of France.
The dispute had its origins in the battle of Wakefield, at which Sir Thomas Harrington of Hornby and his eldest son John were killed on the Yorkist side.
John's heirs were his two daughters, whose wardship passed to Edward IV after his accession.
That of the eldest girl, Anne, was granted to Geoffrey Middleton, the head of a Lonsdale family.
But Geoffrey proved unable, or unwilling, to resist the claims of the girls' uncles, James and Robert Harrington.
The brothers seized both heiresses and hung onto the family lands themselves.
Their action was not seriously challenged until 1468, when the king's attorney called them into chancery to answer the charges against them.
This long immunity undoubtedly owed something to their impeccable Yorkist background, and its termination may, conversely, be partly explained by the fall from favour of their other patron, the earl of Warwick.
Edward IV now gave the girls' wardship to the Stanleys, a family powerful enough to resist the Harringtons' claims.
The Stanleys promptly married the girls into their own family, but in the short term they were unable to dislodge the Harringtons from Hornby, and the dispute dragged on into Edward's second reign.
By this time the Harringtons had a further hold on Edward's gratitude, having joined him promptly on his return in 1471, and they had also secured a new and influential patron in the person of the duke of Gloucester, who may already have intervened on the Harringtons' side in 1470.
The king, however, also had reason to conciliate the Stanleys and in 1472 the matter went to arbitration.
The decision went against the Harringtons, but they still refused to capitulate, presumably confident of ducal backing, and the matter was not finally settled until 1475, when Hornby was confirmed to the daughters and hence to the Stanleys.
By 1475, therefore, the Stanleys had in effect been confirmed as the leading royal agents in Lancashire.
Gloucester's immediate influence was mainly restricted to the edges of the county: to the lordship of Clitheroe in the east and to Furness in the north — both areas where his influence was in a sense overspill from more substantial interests elsewhere.
Gloucester's reaction to this arrangement is unknown, but Lancashire was the one area of the north where Edward failed to endorse his power and the duke may well have resented his exclusion; recent work has emphasized that he never entirely abandoned claims to grants which he had once held.
There was a local tradition that Gloucester and the Stanleys came to blows over the division of authority, and their continuing rivalry may lie behind a royal command in 1476 that the tenants of Congleton should attend ‘only upon the king's highness and in his absence upon the lord Stanley’.
It is significant that there was little overlap between the ducal and Stanley affinities, although some royal officials necessarily had dealings with both lords.
There was, however, overlap between the Stanley connection and the royal household, which confirms that the Stanleys were seen as part of the royal affinity rather than as part of Gloucester's.
This identification was emphasized in 1483 when Gloucester took the precaution of arresting lord Stanley as a prelude to his usurpation.
Stanley was thus distinguished from Gloucester's other northern satellites, several of whom, including Northumberland, apparently co-operated in his coup.
The growing hostility between Richard and the Stanleys after 1484 can be explained in terms of the king's policies, but it may also have owed something to the frictions of the previous fifteen years.
Even without Lancashire, Gloucester's domination of the north is impressive.
It is also unique in the late Middle Ages, and the novelty of the duke's position is reflected in the creation, in the  parliament of 1482–3, of a northern county palatine for him — the first since Lancashire was made a county palatine in 1351.
It was to consist of as much land as Gloucester was able to win in the Scottish dales along the west march.
At the same time his wardenship of the march was confirmed and made hereditary, and to support the office he was given specified royal lands and rights in Cumberland together with 10,000 marks.
The grant has led one historian to question Edward's mental state, but this is an over-reaction.
The creation of a new county palatine was indeed a grand gesture, and a notably archaic one, but on examination the gesture is more than the substance.
Palatine status was restricted to former Scottish territory, where Gloucester's chances of carving out a significant holding for himself were at best uncertain.
The duke's campaign of the previous season, which had won Berwick for the crown, may have whipped up enthusiasm for future conquests, but it had also been a lesson in the expense and difficulty of winning a small piece of land and the cost of keeping it thereafter.
For most practical purposes, therefore, the meat of the grant lay in the clauses relating to Cumberland, and these were more modest.
To some extent they were also a confirmation.
As well as warden, Gloucester was already sheriff of Cumberland for life and had possession of Carlisle and its fee farm.
The grant of 1482/3 made these hereditary, and also gave the duke and his heirs all other royal land in the county, together with the right to appoint the escheator.
This represented a significant increase in Gloucester's power in the region, but not necessarily a corresponding decrease in royal authority.
The remoteness of the county must always have meant that kings remained particularly dependent on local good will.
In the short term, with the loyal Gloucester in control, Edward IV may even have felt that the grant would strengthen royal authority in the region rather than diminish it.
In the longer term, of course, this would not necessarily have been true, simply because the loyalty, and the ability, of Gloucester's successors were an unknown quantity, but it is significant that the terms of the Cumberland grants were less generous than those north of the border.
In his planned county palatine Gloucester was to hold in  fee simple, in Cumberland the grants were to him and the heirs male of his body.
This grant was to be Edward's final contribution to his brother's northern empire.
It forms an appropriate conclusion, not only in its scale, but in its embodiment of the principle that what was good for Gloucester was good for royal authority.
This assumption shaped Edward's policy of establishing regional hegemonies and it was vindicated by Gloucester's control of a notoriously difficult region.
It is only with hindsight that Gloucester can be seen as another overmighty subject, wilfully created by a king who should have known better.
At the time he probably seemed instead a manifestation of resurgent royal authority.
Although the heart of his empire was the Neville land, it would be wrong to cast Gloucester in the role of hereditary northern magnate, whose estates made him an independent regional force.
The land alone cannot account for the size of the region Gloucester came to control; that derived from royal office and royal backing.
It is in the north that Richard's power was greatest and he is now usually regarded as a northern figure.
But his interests were never exclusively northern.
Although there was no other region which he dominated for the king, he did have other land which allowed him to exercise lordship on a more modest scale.
The most important of these subsidiary holdings lay in East Anglia where, as in the north, the centrepiece of Gloucester's influence was the land of a single family, in this case the de Veres, the earls of Oxford.
Their Lancastrian sympathies had resulted in the forfeiture of their land early in the 1460s, when much of it was granted to Gloucester, but the de Veres had subsequently reached an accommodation with the new regime and had regained their land before Gloucester came of age.
The de Veres' change of heart, however, proved short-lived and by the end of the decade the family was again involved in opposition to Edward IV, this time in support of the earl of Warwick, whose sister Margaret had married the thirteenth earl of Oxford, John de Vere.
Oxford was an active supporter of the Readeption of Henry VI in 1470/1, and on Edward IV's return the family lost their estates for a second time.
The beneficiary was again Gloucester.
He received a formal grant of the land in December 1471, although he had perhaps been promised it earlier, since one of his associates was promoted to a  benefice within the estate in the previous October.
This time the land remained in the duke's possession.
Oxford had fled into exile in 1471 but was arrested after his involvement in the unrest of 1473 and sent prisoner to Hammes, one of the Calais fortresses, where he remained until his escape in 1484.
The 1471 grant gave Gloucester the lion's share of the forfeited property, including all the Cambridgeshire land, all but one of the Suffolk manors and all but four of those in Essex.
The land in the king's gift, however, did not include the estates held in her own right by the countess Elizabeth, widow of the twelfth earl, which included substantial further holdings in Suffolk and Essex.
Gloucester opened negotiations with the dowager almost immediately, apparently claiming that he had been given custody of her and her land by the king, and by January 1473 the countess and her feoffees had agreed to make an estate to Gloucester in all the dower lands.
The countess' heir, the attainted thirteenth earl, had the transaction annulled after his restoration by Henry VII and later brought witnesses to depose that the countess had submitted under duress.
According to one deponent, the duke had threatened to remove the countess to Middleham, at which she yielded, ‘considering her great age, the great journey, and the great cold which then was of frost and snow’.
Although the depositions must be somewhat suspect, it is likely that the countess did feel herself under pressure to agree, and it may be significant that her feoffees, after agreeing in principle to the transfer, then dragged their feet over finalizing it and had to be sued in chancery by Gloucester and, nominally, the countess.
Gloucester's petition embodies the only surviving details of his side of the agreement, which are, however, too vague for one to be sure how hard a bargain he had driven.
The main provision was that he would pay the countess an annuity of 500 marks for her life — an open-ended commitment which in the event did not prove particularly onerous since the countess died soon after  Christmas 1475.
Gloucester undertook to settle the countess' debts to a total of £240 and to give her unspecified sums for the performance of her last will.
He also promised to promote her son, then studying at Cambridge, to appropriate benefices and to make other benefactions.
Finally, he agreed to meet various costs and charges of the countess' children and grandchildren at her request.
None of these elements is specified, and only one can be identified with any confidence.
In April 1477 the duke's feoffees granted the countess' manor of Fowlmere (Cambs.) to Queens' College, Cambridge, for prayers for the good estate of the king and queen and of Gloucester, his wife and son, and for the souls of John de Vere late earl of Oxford and Elizabeth his consort.
The de Vere lands were not Gloucester's only East Anglian acquisition.
The grant of 1471 also included land in the region forfeited by Lewis Fitzjohn, John Darcy and Robert Harleston, as well as estates in Lincolnshire forfeited by Sir Thomas de la Laund and Sir Thomas Dymmoke.
This diffuse collection was, however, considerably pruned in 1475, when the de Vere estates held by the duke were also reordered.
Of the subsidiary grants, Gloucester lost all but the de la Laund estates, although this grant was widened to include the reversion of the land held by the knight's widow Katherine Tempest.
By this date Darcy's attainder had been reversed and Gloucester had surrendered his estates.
The Fitzjohn land went to the queen, who was also the main beneficiary of the readjustments to Gloucester's holdings of de Vere land, enshrined in new letters patent of August 1475.
Gloucester gave up all the Suffolk manors which he had been granted in 1471 and individual manors elsewhere, including Castle Hedingham and Earl's Colne (Essex), receiving in return further de Vere land scattered over five counties.
Of the land he had surrendered, all the Essex land and Lavenham (Suff.) went to the queen and her feoffees, with the rest of the Suffolk land going to John Howard.
Lesser pickings from the reorganization went to William Stanley and Walter Devereux lord Ferrers.
This revision was a further stage in the territorial reordering which Edward undertook between 1473 and 1475.
As far as  Gloucester was concerned, it was a recognition of the fact that the north had now emerged as his main sphere of interest, and his surrender of land in East Anglia was to some extent the corollary of the consolidation of his northern interests which was taking place in the same year.
It did not entail the abandonment of his eastern interests.
He still kept a significant share of the forfeited de Vere lands in Cambridge and Essex as well as the lands of the countess Elizabeth which, as a private acquisition, were unaffected by the reordering.
But the reorganization does seem to have marked the end of any assumption that East Anglia might become another major sphere of ducal influence.
The land which Gloucester surrendered included the main centres of de Vere influence in the region, which suggests that Gloucester was resigning any political role, while preserving his financial position.
This change of emphasis is also reflected in his receipt of other patronage.
Initially Edward had been prepared to augment Gloucester's landed interest with further grants and had given him the custody and marriage of two local heirs, Henry Marney and William Walgrave.
It was also Gloucester, rather than Clarence, who received most of the Warwick inheritance in the region.
After 1475, however, Gloucester made no further acquisitions, either through royal grants or private enterprise.
On the contrary, he was prepared to consider alienations.
In about 1479 he offered to sell a de Vere property in London to the royal servant John Risley.
The property had been part of the countess' lands, and when Risley asked the king's advice on the matter Edward warned him off: ‘Risley, meddle not ye with the buying of the said place, for though the title of [it]be good in my brother of Gloucester's hands or in another man's hands of like might, it will be dangerous to thee to buy it and also to keep it and defend it.’
Gloucester had more success with John lord Howard, who in 1480 bought Wivenhoe (Essex) and other lands for 1,100 marks.
After his accession Richard parted with all his East Anglian estates to Howard, an indication that he regarded them as a peripheral part of his power base.
East Anglia may have been peripheral, but it was not ignored.
No lord could afford to turn his back on an opportunity to demonstrate good lordship and extend his connection, particularly as lordship was cumulative, with each sphere of influence strengthening others.
The nature of Gloucester's involvement in East Anglia was, however, profoundly different from that in the north.
He never developed a major following there — even, as far as can be seen, in the early 1470s when there was still a possibility that he might take on a political role.
The obvious core of such a following would have been the de Vere supporters, and there was a degree of continuity within the estates, with former de Vere associates like John Coke of Beaumont continuing to farm manors.
But in a wider context Gloucester failed to establish himself as the heir of the earls of Oxford.
The Pastons, who had been associated with the earl during the Readeption and renewed the connection after 1485, did not turn to Gloucester in the interval.
Edmund Paston, it is true, was retained by the duke in 1475, but this was specifically for the campaign against France, and his letters give no hint of a more extended relationship with the duke.
This lack of continuity can partly be explained by the characteristically flexible patterns of association in the region, where the existence of several major landowners with overlapping interests militated against the formation of long-standing connections.
Gloucester thus did not, as in the north, have the benefit of traditional loyalties as a foundation upon which to build.
But much of the explanation lies in the duke's own position.
Gloucester was simply not sufficiently involved in the region to maintain a large-scale connection against competition from local lords.
It was clearly his national eminence, rather than any claim to be a natural arbiter of local affairs, which made his lordship attractive.
Significantly, the one recorded local dispute in which he was concerned (a violent struggle over the manor of Gregories in Theydon Garnon) shows him drawn in as a political heavyweight to counterbalance strong support on the other side.
Although some ducal servants were heavily involved, Gloucester emerges from the mass of evidence as a fairly distant figure, who settled immediately  once he realized that the dispute had pitted him against his mother.
The fact that Gloucester's role in the region was that of a national rather than local figure is also reflected in the fragmentary nature of his following.
His most important retainer was Sir James Tyrell of Gipping (Suff.), although Gloucester employed him mainly elsewhere.
At first sight Tyrell looks like an example of continuity from the de Vere connection since his father had been executed for his involvement with the de Veres in 1462.
But the family were also linked tenurially with the house of York, and after William Tyrell's execution it was the dowager duchess of York who had custody of James and his land, although she granted both to William's widow and her feoffees.
James Tyrell had evidently committed himself to the Yorkists by 1471, when he was knighted at Tewkesbury, and it may have been links with the crown which eased his passage into Gloucester's service.
The same was probably true of Gloucester's steward in the region, Sir Robert Chamberlain of Capel and Gedding (Suff.), who had been a knight of the king's body since the mid 1460s.
But Gloucester's contacts were not only with his brother's men.
He is said to have feed Thomas Heveningham, son and heir of Sir John Heveningham, and the Heveninghams had probably been drawn into Gloucester's circle through their kinship with the Hoptons.
William Hopton, the son of John Hopton of Blythburgh (Suff.), was one of Gloucester's most active associates.
A ducal esquire by 1475, when the London mercers thought him a man worth cultivating, he was also the duke's feoffee and after Richard's accession became treasurer of the royal household.
His connection with Gloucester was probably rooted in the north rather than Suffolk.
The family was an illegitimate branch of the Yorkshire Hoptons, being descended from Sir Robert Swillington by his mistress Joan Hopton.
They accordingly had interests in the north as well as East Anglia, and the Yorkshire lands were probably the particular responsibility of William, who is regularly described as ‘of Swillington’.
The manor, in the Aire valley just  outside Leeds, was held of the duchy of Lancaster, which may first have brought William to Gloucester's notice.
In Norfolk Gloucester had links with the Boleyns.
Thomas Boleyn had acted for the duke in 1469, and his brother and heir William witnessed a ducal charter in 1480 in company with known retainers of the duke.
In 1483 John Howard duke of Norfolk made William Boleyn his deputy as admiral for the coasts of Norfolk and Suffolk, and it is possible that Boleyn had initially held the post as Gloucester's deputy.
Apart from these men, only one East Anglian can definitely be identified with Gloucester: William Harmer, esquire, of Beechamwell (Norf.), who was a gentleman of the duke's household.
Beyond this the composition of the retinue can only be inferred, in itself evidence of the low level of ducal involvement.
The Hoptons could have introduced other local families to the duke.
They were particularly closely linked with the Calthorpes and Wentworths.
Sir William Calthorpe had been retained by the duke in 1469, while the Wentworths were another family combining Yorkshire and Suffolk interests, so both were plausible ducal associates in the 1470s but there is no hard evidence in either case.
Also involved with the Hoptons was Philip Bothe of Coddenham (Suff.) a second generation emigrant from the north west who suddenly rose to local prominence after 1483 — which seems to imply an earlier connection with Richard.
The same argument can be used to add a few more names to the list, but the total is still not large.
Nor does the list display much unity, apart from the suggested group around the Hoptons.
The geographical background of the men concerned does not even correspond particularly closely with the duke's territorial interests in the region.
Even allowing that the list is incomplete, East Anglia seems to have contributed individuals rather than a connection to the ducal retinue.
Given this apparently patchy local following, it is not surprising to find signs of a steady drift of members of the duke's northern connection into the region.
Gloucester seems to have turned to his northern allies in first asserting his possession of the land.
Early in  1472 Arthur Pilkington, the illegitimate son of Sir Thomas, head of the Lancashire Pilkingtons, was described as of Hedingham (Essex).
It is significant, too, that at around this time a royal commission of arrest in Essex was headed by a Yorkshireman, John Nesfield, who was probably already a ducal associate.
The de Vere lands remained a source of reward for northern servants of the duke.
Gloucester's bailiff of Newton, for instance, was Edmund Carre, who in 1474 is described as of Earl's Colne, one of the de Vere manors then still in Gloucester's hands.
But Edmund was almost certainly one of the northern Carres, since the 1474 reference is to his acting with Ralph Burnant of Yokefleet (Yorks.) as surety for Sir Thomas Markenfield, one of Gloucester's Middleham retainers.
Another outsider who probably arrived in the area under Gloucester's aegis was Ralph Willoughby, a younger son of the Willoughbys of Wollaton (Notts.), who acquired landed interests in East Anglia through marriage to the widow of Henry Castell of Raveningham (Norf.).
Willoughby witnessed a ducal charter in 1480 and was Richard's first sheriff of Norfolk and Suffolk.
Such examples could be taken to demonstrate the homogeneity of the ducal retinue, except that there is no firm evidence of movement in the opposite direction.
To some extent the East Anglian lands seem to have been exploited for the benefit of the northern retinue, and the same attitude can be seen in the use of some of the de Vere lands to endow Gloucester's new college at Middleham.
The duke's local supporters in East Anglia appear not only disparate but also relatively insignificant.
As a group they are eclipsed not only by the connections of local magnates, but by the affinity which developed around the queen and her brother earl Rivers.
Rivers, through his marriage to the heiress of the Scales barony, held a significant block of land in Norfolk.
The core of the connection, however, was provided by the queen's possession of the duchy of Lancaster estates in much of the south, including East Anglia.
With the estates came the service of the existing duchy officials, but the queen was also able to establish her own  connection there, and several of her servants and kinsmen were subsequently rewarded from the duchy.
The territorial readjustments of 1475 suggest that by then the queen's interest in East Anglia was regarded as the main instrument of royal authority there.
The connection received a further boost early in 1478, when the heiress of the last Mowbray duke of Norfolk married the king's second son, Richard duke of York.
This allowed an amalgamation of the Mowbray retinue with the royal interest in East Anglia and the result was an immensely influential grouping.
It was also a notably cohesive one, since ties of kinship linked its leading members with the queen's family and with each other.
The nexus embraced, for instance, the Brandon, Wingfield, Darcy, Haute and Fitzlewis families, and was further strengthened by the marriage of Rivers to Mary Fitzlewis.
But in spite of this personal dimension, the connection was never exclusively the queen's, nor even the Woodvilles'.
Many of its members, particularly within the duchy of Lancaster, were men with a tradition of service to the crown, compared with which their Woodville connection was only transient.
Conversely, the queen's servants were ipso facto the king's men (many in the literal sense of being also members of the king's household) and it would be unrealistic to ignore this dimension of their loyalty.
It is more accurate to see the East Anglian affinity as a court connection rather than a narrowly Woodville one.
This becomes obvious in 1483, when the usurpation of Richard III split the connection into those whose loyalties remained with the crown and those prepared to back Woodville opposition to the new regime.
It is important, however, not to project this split back into the 1470s.
There is no evidence that the court circle in East Anglia, including those elements most closely identified with the queen, was inimical to Gloucester, or that the duke regarded them as rivals for power in the region.
On the contrary, ducal influence in East Anglia should probably be seen as another component of this influential court connection.
There were certainly points of contact between members of the two circles.
The Tyrells of Gipping, for instance, were closely related to the Darcies and through them with other members of the court group.
The  most intriguing example, however, comes from the surviving receiver's account for Gloucester's land in the region, in which the only annuity, other than fees to ducal officers, was one of £5 to Katherine Haute, a kinswoman of the queen.
Her connection with the duke is not explained, but it is possible that she was his mistress since Gloucester's illegitimate daughter bore the same Christian name.
Other members of the queen's family were also associated with the duke in the 1470s, among them Richard Haute junior, who was knighted by Gloucester on the Scottish campaign of 1482.
He was sworn in as one of the duchy of Lancaster council in February 1483, presumably with Gloucester's support.
His wife Eleanor Roos, meanwhile, was in the queen's service — a clear demonstration that the two circles were not incompatible.
It is only viewed in retrospect that such dual loyalties seem strange: in the context of Edward IV's reign they made very good sense.
In Wales, too, Gloucester can be seen as part of a wider court interest.
The duke's initial influence in the region had rested on his role as caretaker of the Herbert hegemony and had ended with the readjustments which followed Edward's return in 1471.
But in the partition of the Warwick and Salisbury lands which was finally achieved in 1474 it was Gloucester who secured the Welsh estates.
The most important of these were Abergavenny and Glamorgan, which together gave Gloucester a significant interest in the south of the country.
In the 1477/8 parliament his position there was further strengthened by the exchange of Elfael, which had come to him with the Neville land but which was peripheral to his main Welsh interests, for the duchy of Lancaster lordship of Ogmore, which complemented his holdings in Glamorgan.
It is not clear who initiated the exchange, which benefited both sides, but the transaction demonstrates that the king was willing to strengthen Gloucester's hold on the region, and the result was a compact power base.
Ducal influence in the region has, however, been judged remote and ineffectual, a verdict based largely on Gloucester's inability to get to grips with the problems caused by the decaying system of local office holding.
Certainly, by the time Gloucester secured these Welsh estates, the north had emerged decisively as his main sphere of activity.
Whereas East Anglia might have become a second power base in the early 1470s, Gloucester's Welsh lands were never expected to be more than peripheral.
How far Gloucester built up a local following is unclear.
His key agent in the region, Sir James Tyrell of Gipping, was an outsider, as were at least two more of his officials: his constable of Ogmore, William Houghton of Birtsmorton (Worcs.), and his constable of Caerphilly, Nicholas Spicer of Bristol, who was to become one of Richard's leading administrators in Wales after 1483.
However, this was a commonplace in Wales and the fact that Tyrell received numerous grants from local landowners anxious to have his good will implies that he at least was a force to be reckoned with.
There are a few apparently local men in the ducal retinue, such as the Richard ap Robert ap Ivan Vaughan who was rewarded as a ducal servant in 1478 and who may be the Richard Vaughan who held office on the duke's Buckinghamshire estates.
Presumably, like Warwick before him, Gloucester developed connections with local families like the Stradlings of St Donat's.
John Stradling was receiver of Ogmore when it came into Gloucester's hands and, unlike the steward and constable, was kept in office by the duke.
Beyond this, one can add as likely members of the retinue a few men who suddenly became visible after Richard's accession, such as David ap Guillim Morgan or, at a humbler level, David ap Jenkins who migrated to England to become a yeoman of the crown and hold office in Pontefract.
The list, however, is hardly impressive and, as in East Anglia, it looks as though Gloucester was acquiring the service of individuals rather than building up a coherent connection — although, in the absence of receivers' accounts for the duke's Welsh lordships, this can only be inference.
Gloucester's connection in no way compares with that of the prince of Wales, whose council at Ludlow was the focus for royal  servants in Wales from the mid 1470s.
But rather than seeing Gloucester as a weak independent power eclipsed by a strong court connection, one should probably, as in East Anglia, think of him as part of that connection.
He was himself a member of the prince's council, and although he is unlikely to have played much part in its activities this is only to be expected from a nobleman of his rank and does not mean that he remained aloof from the king's plans for the region.
As the loyal brother of the king, his possession of Glamorgan and Abergavenny formed a useful pendant to royal possessions in Wales and the march.
This explains why Clarence was forced to disgorge the Neville lands in Wales, which he had held since 1471, in favour of his brother.
The assumption that Gloucester would be a more satisfactory component of royal authority in Wales proved justified, and on the rare occasions for which evidence survives he does seem to have co-operated with the council.
He also seems to have developed connections with the circle around the prince.
He was on sufficiently good terms with the prince's chamberlain, Sir Thomas Vaughan, for Vaughan to lend him his London house in the 1470s, and although this relationship did not survive Richard's usurpation, other servants of the prince transferred to Richard's household after his accession.
The most important was Richard Mynours, who had been a gentleman usher of the prince's chamber in the mid 1470s and entered Richard's household in the same capacity.
He had been active in south Wales under Edward IV, being made chamberlain there in 1479, and it may have been this which brought him to Gloucester's attention.
He held the same office under Richard III (apart from a few months when it was held by the duke of Buckingham) and as the main financial officer in south Wales was largely responsible for funding royal servants such as Tyrell and Richard Newton.
At least two of Mynours' colleagues in Richard's chamber were also inherited from the prince's circle, the gentleman usher Walter Harvard and the yeoman usher Robert Jenkin.
The pattern of lordship to be found in Gloucester's dealings with East Anglia and Wales is repeated, on a still smaller scale, within his holdings elsewhere.
All made some contribution to the ducal retinue.
Most offered rewards for Gloucester's servants.
At Sudeley (Glos.), for instance, which Gloucester held between 1469 and 1478, the key offices went to John Huddleston junior of Millom, initiating a family connection with the county which endured for several generations.
But land also brought new men into the duke's orbit.
Lesser offices remained the preserve of local men, although they were usually people of limited importance.
Thus Gloucester's possession of Chesham (Bucks.) gave him the service of the Wedons, who had held land in the manor since the thirteenth century and who acted as his bailiffs there.
More valuable, and usually more visible, were the regional gentry attracted to the duke's service.
Outside the north these rarely constituted a coherent connection, but as individuals they provided a necessary point of contact with the area concerned, through which the duke could take action.
The duke's Lincolnshire land, for instance, brought him into contact with Robert Ratcliffe of Tattershall, who acted as his steward in the county.
At a humbler level, it gave him the service of Richard Barnby of Great Gonerby, whom Richard was to add to the Lincolnshire commission of array in winter 1484.
It probably also explains why the brothers Alexander and Richard Quadring entered his household after he became king.
The duke's lordship cannot, however, be discussed only in terms of his land.
His power had a wider dimension.
Throughout his brother's second reign, Gloucester was constable and admiral of England and was active in both capacities.
The constable's traditional competence lay in military and chivalric matters, and thus in 1478 it was Gloucester, ‘in his own person’, who dealt with the refusal of four new knights to pay the customary fees to  the officers of arms.
As an extension of this military competence, the constable was by this date the established authority in cases of treason which had involved raising war against the king.
Edward IV also seems to have been interested in broadening the constable's jurisdiction to cover other forms of treason and disaffection.
This first became apparent in the 1460s, under John Tiptoft, but was continued under Gloucester.
In 1473 the king ordered him to look into a dispute between two members of the goldsmiths' company.
After lobbying by the company (the only extant reference to the matter) Gloucester found that it was a matter of mutual rancour, of no danger to the crown, and remitted it to the goldsmiths.
He was equally active as admiral, and in the previous year admiralty business had taken him along the south coast, where his presence was noted at Southampton and Lydd.
These two offices, coupled with the less formal influence Gloucester derived from his closeness to the king, ensured that for contemporaries the duke's importance was national rather than purely regional.
This did not mean that Gloucester developed a nation-wide affinity.
Given the value attached to a lord's maintenance of his servants' local interests, national eminence could not, in itself, create a significant connection in areas where the lord had no other influence.
Lordship without a local dimension was not particularly attractive and the lord himself would not be as interested in service outside his immediate sphere of activity.
The effect of Gloucester's national importance was thus largely to reinforce his regional connection.
But, like any major retinue, his affinity did have a non-regional component.
The dependence of service on mutual local interest was true only of the gentry service discussed so far in this chapter.
Full-time menial servants could presumably be drawn from anywhere.
So could men offering other professional service.
Gloucester's receiver in East Anglia and the east midlands, Richard Pole, was from none of the duke's land.
He came from Wilton (Wilts.), although the family's residence there was itself the result of a career move by an earlier professional administrator; they had come originally from the  north west.
Another of the duke's professional servants was the victualler and purveyor Richard Forthey of Faversham (Kent), while one of Gloucester's physicians was a Nottingham man.
Among a lord's professional servants the lawyers formed an important category.
Common lawyers tended to develop regional specialisms, however, and there was thus often some correlation between a lord's areas of interest and those of the lawyers who advised him.
Gloucester's legal council accordingly displayed a marked northern bias, including among its members Guy Fairfax, Robert Danby, Richard Pygot, Miles Metcalfe and John Vavasour.
The Thomas Molyneux feed from the duke's Lincolnshire lands was probably the lawyer of Haughton (Notts.) rather than his kinsman and namesake of Sefton (Lancs.).
Lincolnshire also provided a fee for William Huse, later one of the royal justices, while Gloucester's East Anglian lands supported the Suffolk lawyer John Suliard of Wetherden.
For all these men, service to the duke was only one of a number of consultancies.
Fairfax, for instance, was also retained by the earl of Northumberland, the dowager duchess of Norfolk, the duke of Buckingham and the city of York.
Lawyers for whom ducal service constituted a major part of their career were more likely to have been drawn from outside the duke's regional orbit.
Morgan Kidwelly, the duke's attorney, seems to be in this category; he was in Gloucester's service by August 1471 and stayed there until Bosworth forced him to find a new master.
Morgan came from a family of professional administrators who took their regional colouring from the location of their service, but the family came originally from Wales and one of Morgan's uncles, Owain ap Cadwgan, still held office in the lordship which gave the Anglicized members of the family their surname.
The Welsh connection may have brought Morgan to the duke's notice during his control of the Herbert lands, but it was Morgan's legal expertise rather than any regional pull which Gloucester valued.
Only after  his accession did Richard seek to exploit Morgan's Welsh connections, and by then Morgan's private interests had shifted firmly to the south of England, where marriage had brought him land in Dorset and Hampshire.
Once one looks away from the north, Gloucester's connection appears to fragment.
But the disparate elements which made up his southern affinity were linked, both to each other and to the northern retinue, by the same bonds of ducal patronage and personal relationship which gave internal cohesion to the northern retinue itself.
Ducal servants from all areas acted together.
When John Armourer, from Robert Chamberlain's manor of Gedding (Suff.), needed sureties, he found them in James Tyrell (himself from Suffolk but active in Wales), Robert Fiennes (also of Suffolk), Arthur Pilkington (from Lancashire but then resident in Essex) and William Houghton (of Worcestershire).
In the 1480 Scottish campaign, Gloucester's ship the Anne of Fowey was captained by the northerner William Blakeston and victualled by the duke's Hampshire servant Thomas Greenfield.
For outsiders, too, there was one ducal connection, not several.
When Thomas Clifford, acting for John Prince in the dispute over Gregories, approached Gloucester in the matter, he found himself dealing not only with the East Anglian, Tyrell, but with Pilkington, Tunstall and Harrington (all northerners) and with Kidwelly.
The same unity can be seen after Richard's accession.
In his search for loyal men to reassert royal authority in the aftermath of Buckingham's rebellion Richard did not, as is often implied, turn to northerners as such.
He looked to the former ducal retinue, including such non-northerners as Pole, Tyrell and Houghton.
That retinue was one of the great affinities of the Middle Ages, both in scale and cohesion.
Traditionally its importance is demonstrated by the fact that it underpinned Gloucester's usurpation and his brief reign.
But to see it from this perspective is to distort it.
Because Richard usurped the throne, his retinue is inevitably seen as inimical to the crown and therefore in an important sense independent of royal authority.
In the context of Edward IV's reign, in which the retinue was created, neither assumption is true.
The development of the retinue would have been impossible without royal backing and reflected, rather than negated, the king's authority.
Within the north itself, Gloucester's connection subsumed that of the crown.
Elsewhere, in East Anglia and Wales, that focus for royal servants was provided by others, but Gloucester was still part of the royal connection, not remote from it.
In the rest of England, as constable and admiral, he had contributed to the enforcement of royal authority.
When he seized power in 1483 he did so not from outside the prevailing political structure but from its heart.
The Usurpation
On 9 April 1483 Edward IV died at Westminster.
Until the onset of his final illness, some ten days before his death, there is no evidence that his health was failing.
His death was, on the contrary, so unexpected that it found several of the key political figures away from court.
Gloucester was in the north.
The prince of Wales, with his uncle Anthony Woodville, earl Rivers, was at Ludlow.
Whatever one's interpretation of the events of the next two and a half months, there can be little doubt that they represent an improvised response rather than a matured plan.
It is unlikely that anyone had seriously anticipated a minority.
At Edward's death his heir was aged twelve and the king would only have needed to live a few more years to have handed power to an adult heir.
As it was, the prince's age could hardly have been more awkward.
Too young to rule effectively in person, he was too old to make a minority an attractive prospect.
Although conventional wisdom sees a long royal minority as the most daunting prospect any medieval state might face, in many respects a short minority posed more intractable problems.
Any distribution of power could be only temporary and everyone involved knew it: a situation which brought its own tensions.
In addition, an adolescent king needed to be taken into account in a way that an infant did not.
Even if the king himself did not press for an early political role, others might well do so on his behalf as a way of strengthening their own position.
Control of an almost adult king was a potent political weapon.
Edward IV's own solution to this problem is unclear-the first difficulty in a notoriously controversial period.
It is likely that he did express a preference, for although his collapse was dramatic enough for premature reports of his death to reach at least two  cities, he then rallied sufficiently to add codicils to his will.
Whether or not these actually related to the disposition of his kingdom, the implication is that Edward was in a position to make his wishes known.
However, no formal record of those wishes now survives.
Edward's only extant will is that made before the French expedition of 1475, and on internal evidence it had been modified, if not superseded, by 1483.
The only references to Edward's intentions are thus to be found in the various chronicle accounts of the period, of which the most nearly contemporary is that of Dominic Mancini, an Italian visitor to England in 1483 who recorded his impressions shortly afterwards.
Mancini also gives the most circumstantial account of Edward's wishes and their reception, and it is his version (with slight modifications) which has become the standard treatment since the rediscovery of his manuscript earlier this century.
Mancini believed that Edward IV had designated his brother Gloucester as protector — a statement which he first introduces with a cautious ‘as they say’, but which then becomes the cornerstone of his argument.
In the absence of formal evidence, this claim cannot be checked, but it has always been recognized that the choice of Gloucester to head the government was an obvious possibility for the dying king.
If Edward wanted a protector, the duke was, indeed, the inevitable candidate.
Gloucester's position as sole surviving brother of the king, coupled with his outstanding record of service to the crown, would have made it impossible to pass him over, even in a society aware of the dangers which guardianship by a paternal uncle posed to the interests of the heir.
But Mancini does not leave the story there.
He claims that the council chose to ignore Edward's wishes, preferring the immediate coronation of the young king to a formal minority.
Their decision was prompted by fears that the protector might usurp the throne, although Mancini adds that it was supported by the queen's family, who wanted to prevent power passing to Gloucester.
Having carried this initial point, the Woodvilles  then proceeded to dig in militarily and financially.
Mancini records the council's decision to put the queen's brother, Sir Edward Woodville, at the head of a force to be sent against Philippe de Crevecoeur, who had started an informal war in the Channel.
He also notes that the late king's treasure was divided between the queen, Sir Edward and the marquis of Dorset, the queen's eldest son by her first marriage.
The picture is thus one of overt factions, with the Woodvilles manipulating the majority of the council against Gloucester and the small group of councillors who supported the idea of a protectorate — an element usually identified with the dead king's friend and chamberlain William lord Hastings, who had personal reasons for fearing an increase in Woodville power and therefore for backing Gloucester.
The stability which had characterized Edward IV's last years had thus collapsed, almost overnight, into a struggle for control during the minority which was in the end to lose his son the throne.
At first sight, Mancini's account appears to be supported by other evidence.
It is clear, for example, that the council was planning an immediate coronation, with 4 May the chosen date.
Sir Edward's military appointment is confirmed by an extant financial memorandum, which also reveals that, alongside Edward's force of 2,000 men, his nephew Dorset was paid for keeping the sea with 1,000 men.
There is no way of telling how many of these men were actually raised, but Sir Edward certainly went to sea with a fleet at the end of April, and Dorset was thought to have accompanied him.
The same memorandum shows that these measures, costing £3,670, absorbed all Edward IV's cash reserves, and this is likely to be the origin of Mancini's story of the Woodvilles' raid on the king's treasury.
Mancini's emphasis, which implicitly accuses the Woodvilles of theft, is particularly interesting in the light of More's comment on the same episode.
Describing Gloucester's subsequent attack on the Woodvilles, More continues: ‘[Gloucester and Buckingham]said that the lord marquis had entered into the Tower of London and thence taken out the king's treasure and sent men to the sea.
All which things these dukes wist well were done for good  purpose and necessary by the whole council at London.’
There are other indications that Mancini's account, for all its overt criticism of the duke, may be based on a version of events originating in the circle around Gloucester.
It casts the Woodvilles as the aggressors and Gloucester as the victim of circumstance.
The duke was virtually forced into some sort of counter-offensive to protect his own interests, and his seizure of prince Edward at the end of April could even be justified, although Mancini does not say so, as a return to Edward IV's original wishes.
This raises the interesting possibility that Mancini's insistence that Edward IV wanted his brother to be protector also derives from a version of events put about by the duke after he had seized the prince and was seeking recognition as protector.
Certainly one of the shakiest parts of Mancini's account is his attempt to explain why, if Edward wanted a protector, the council sought to overturn his wishes.
His suggestion that the council feared a usurpation displays the hindsight to be expected from someone writing after June 1483, when Gloucester had indeed used the protectorship as a stepping-stone to the throne.
It is difficult to believe that anyone in April seriously feared that Gloucester had designs on the crown.
The duke had a record of close cooperation with the Yorkist establishment, something at least as important in the context of 1483 as his much-emphasized loyalty to his brother.
He was not an alien, northern magnate from whom anything might be expected, but a key figure in the reconstructed royal authority which now needed to be preserved for the young king.
This weakness in Mancini's argument has, however, gone unremarked, largely because most commentators have chosen to emphasize Mancini's second point and argue that the real reason for what happened was Woodville hostility to Gloucester.
Mancini himself is clear that there was long-standing rivalry between the duke and the queen's family, and this has been accepted by almost every subsequent writer.
A clash of interest was therefore inevitable once Gloucester had been chosen protector.
But Mancini is here guilty of reading back into Edward IV's reign the tensions which he observed after the king's death.
There is no contemporary evidence of hostility earlier than the end of April 1483.
Although the personal attitudes of the protagonists are  unknown, it is clear that their working relationship was one of cooperation.
In particular, Gloucester apparently acquiesced in the Woodville attack on Clarence in 1477/8, the very issue which is usually seen as grounds for their animosity.’)
This does not preclude the possibility that the Woodvilles turned against their former ally in 1483 and cynically excluded Gloucester from the protectorship in order to secure more power for themselves.
But this would make nonsense of events at the end of April, when Gloucester was able to seize possession of the prince from an unsuspecting earl Rivers.
The earl, who had apparently dispersed his men before meeting the duke, clearly expected no trouble from Gloucester — confidence which would be incredible if Gloucester had just been the victim of a Woodville coup.
Doubts about Mancini's version are reinforced when it is compared with the account produced early in 1486 by the anonymous continuator of the Crowland chronicle.
The author was a councillor of Edward IV and is in general a far more reliable source than Mancini.
His facts (although not always his glosses) cannot usually be faulted, and he was ideally placed to give the definitive account of events after Edward's death.
Although he evidently knew what the king had planned, he nowhere states it explicitly, and his silence has left the field to Mancini's version.
But this very silence casts doubt on Mancini's central point that the council actually voted down the king's expressed wishes.
As a councillor himself, the author would surely have drawn attention to such a reversal.
Instead, he allows it to be assumed that the council's plans for the coronation of Edward V were in line with the king's sagax dispositio as embodied in the codicils to his will.
This makes it unlikely that Edward had sought a protectorate.
The implication instead seems to be that Edward's ‘wise ordering’ did not envisage a formal minority at all, but entailed the immediate accession of his heir — for which there was a precedent in 1377, when the eleven-year-old Richard II had succeeded his grandfather.
This is perhaps also implied by the chronicler's comment that all the councillors ‘fully desired the prince to succeed his father in all his glory’.
The remark could be no  more than a pious platitude, but the context allows a more specific reading: that the council had agreed to accept the nominal rule of the young king.
This is not a possibility which seems to have been considered seriously hitherto, perhaps because the 1377 precedent was such a disastrous one.
But in the circumstances of 1483 an immediate accession may have seemed to offer real advantages.
Edward IV's last years (unlike those of Edward III) had seen a return to political stability.
His territorial reordering of the 1470s had apparently been a great success, creating a nexus of trusted associates prepared to work in the crown's interests, while those outside the charmed circle seemed, by the end of the decade, to have acquiesced in their exclusion.
Against this background, it is likely that Edward's ordering of his kingdom aimed above all to secure continuity.
This was already an element in the 1475 will, in which Edward left instructions for the continuance of grants made to ‘divers of the lords as well of our blood as other, and also knights, squires and divers other our true loving subjects and servants’.
This was in part an act of Yorkist pietas , since those who had suffered on the king's behalf are particularly remembered, but it was also a plea for political continuity.
That continuity, however, demanded some focus and in 1483 Edward may well have felt that the most effective focus would be provided by his son.
This implied no criticism of Gloucester, who, as the recent grant of a palatinate had shown, was still high in his brother's favour.
Any elevation of Gloucester to a position of supreme authority during the minority would, however, have destroyed the very continuity which, on this interpretation, Edward was seeking.
What was needed was someone outside and above the territorial nexus, requirements fulfilled only by the young king.
This reading of events gains some support from what little is known of the council's role during April, before Gloucester and the prince reached London.
Whereas Mancini's version assumes a council increasingly split by faction, as the Woodvilles manipulated it against Hastings and other supporters of Gloucester, the council seems in fact to have been successfully holding a balance between the various elements in government.
This can best be seen in the appointment of commissions to assess the subsidy on aliens granted in Edward IV's last parliament, one of the few cases  where the council took positive decisions about personnel rather than(as with the sheriffs, for instance ) simply confirming Edward IV's appointments.
The commissions were not of much political importance themselves, but each of the thirty-two county commissions was headed by a national figure whose selection gives some idea of the balance of power.
A distinctively ‘conciliar’ feature of the commissions is the number headed by leading Yorkist bureaucrats, notably John Russell, bishop of Lincoln and keeper of the privy seal, and John Alcock, bishop of Worcester and president of the council in the march of Wales.
Gloucester does not feature at all, something which has been read as a sign of Woodville control of the council.
But his omission is because no northern commissions were appointed — something more likely to reflect a readiness to wait for Gloucester's advice than an intention to snub him.
That the council had not come under factional control is suggested by its careful regard to the interests of William lord Hastings and the Woodvilles.
These were the only elements on the council between which there is any contemporary suggestion of hostility and it is thus significant how evenly they were balanced on the commissions.
Hastings headed seven (the highest individual total), while the Woodvilles jointly managed eight, of which Rivers headed three and Dorset five.
On the available evidence, the council's policy after Edward's death can best be summed up as a strenuous effort to preserve the balance of power established in the king's second reign, and this was surely (pace Mancini) in response to the dead king's own wishes.
The policy thus ensured the Woodvilles, and indeed Gloucester, a continuing place in government and makes it unnecessary to see the events of April 1483 in terms of an immediate power struggle.
This does not mean, however, that there were no political tensions.
Although the council might have been prepared to accept the Woodvilles' present position, its desire for continuity would have made it unwilling to see Woodville influence extended.
It was recognized that the young king was particularly close to his mother's family, and there was therefore a danger that the coronation of the young king would be followed by an increase in the family's power.
Anxiety over this question surfaced almost immediately in a dispute about the size  of retinue to accompany the king from Ludlow to his coronation.
As any retinue would be under the command of the prince's governor, earl Rivers, a large force might tilt the balance of power too far in the Woodvilles' favour.
Demands for a modest retinue were led by Hastings, who, as the Crowland chronicler makes clear, feared for his own position if the queen's family were allowed to dominate the government.
But he had the backing of what the chronicler calls the ‘more foresighted’ part of the council, and this tacit approval suggests that the argument was not simply that of an ‘anti-Woodville’faction, but represented a genuine attempt to avoid rocking the political boat — an attitude in line with what is known of council policy.
In the short term, the squabble was resolved, although the seriousness of the issue is indicated by Hastings' threat to withdraw to Calais, where he was captain, if his demands were not met.
According to the Crowland chronicler, the settlement was the result of an initiative by the queen and there is no reason to doubt this.
Even if(as seems likely) the Woodvilles were anticipating an increased role after the coronation, it was still important not to alienate the council in the meantime.
The queen's apparent reasonableness does indeed seem to have paid off, and the granting of military commands to Dorset and his uncle met with no recorded opposition.
But the fears of Hastings and his allies are unlikely to have been entirely removed.
Although the council had so far managed to hold a balance, its ability to do so once the king was crowned was more doubtful.
It is even possible that a few councillors were sufficiently worried by the prospect for them to advocate a protectorate as a way of blocking Woodville pretensions.
There is no hint of this in the Crowland chronicle, but it would correspond with Mancini's picture of a minority on the council wanting a protector, while the majority backed an immediate coronation and conciliar authority.
Mancini's account is an inversion of that suggested here, but it is possible that he had the spectrum of conciliar opinion right and then misread its implications.
Whatever the council's response to Edward IV's death, it was soon overtaken by events.
At the end of April Gloucester took possession of the young king.
The episode is described by all the chroniclers and although their accounts differ in detail, the  outlines are clear.
Gloucester, travelling south from Yorkshire, proposed a rendezvous with the prince and his escort so that they could enter London together, and the prince's route was modified accordingly.
The duke was also in contact with Henry Stafford, duke of Buckingham, and the two men entered Northampton together on 29 April.
They were joined there by earl Rivers, who had left the prince at Stony Stratford and ridden north to greet the dukes, having first dispersed his men among neighbouring villages to ensure accommodation near the prince for the new arrivals.
Rivers was warmly received by the dukes, but was arrested early the next morning before the party set off to join the prince.
Gloucester and Buckingham then rode to Stony Stratford to take possession of Edward V. His escort was dismissed and some of his closest associates arrested, among them his stepbrother Richard Grey and his chamberlain Sir Thomas Vaughan.
The prince himself was taken back to Northampton, where he remained while Gloucester consolidated his position.
An extant letter of 2 May, written from Northampton nominally by the prince, requests the archbishop of Canterbury to see to the safe-keeping of the great seal, the royal treasure and the Tower of London.
Steps were also taken to postpone the coronation on 4 May, the day on which Gloucester and the prince entered London.
The events at Stony Stratford clearly took the political community by surprise, and their reaction makes it likely that the seizure of the prince was a pre-emptive strike by Gloucester rather than(as Mancini's scenario would suggest) a retaliation for his exclusion from power.
The episode should, in other words, be seen as a new departure rather than one more stage in a faction struggle initiated by the Woodvilles, and this places responsibility firmly on Gloucester's shoulders.
His action could simply be explained by ambition: his career in the north had shown that he was a man who liked and understood power.
But his motives cannot be viewed in isolation from the contemporary situation.
Gloucester may well have shared the current anxieties about how the Woodvilles' role would develop after the coronation.
A marked increase in their power would challenge what he surely considered his rightful position within the Yorkist polity.
It would also threaten the stability of the polity itself, and Gloucester's public pronouncements in this period consistently  present him as the defender of his brother's achievements against the machinations of the Woodvilles.
It was thus the disruptive potential of the queen's family which Gloucester chose to stress in justifying his action.
Before reaching London, Gloucester apparently wrote to the council and to the city's mayor, explaining that he had taken possession of the prince because the circle around the boy had been inimical to the safety of king and kingdom.
He gave visual expression to the same point during his entry into the city, when the procession included cartloads of weapons which criers identified as having been captured from the Woodvilles.
Gloucester claimed that the weapons had been intended for use against him, a story that he was later to use in an attempt to have the captured Woodvilles executed, although Mancini comments that no one took it seriously.
The underlying message of the weapons, that the Woodvilles, by planning a resort to force, threatened the political stability which the council had been struggling to maintain, may, however, have been more persuasive.
When news of Stony Stratford reached London, the Woodvilles had tried to whip up resistance to Gloucester.
The attempt had failed, and the queen had withdrawn to sanctuary with her youngest son, the duke of York.
But the fact that the attempt had been made at all must have given credibility to Gloucester's claim that the Woodvilles were prepared to use force in pursuit of their ends.
Gloucester's justifications for his actions were, however, less important than the underlying realities of the situation.
By the time he entered London he was in a commanding position.
He and Buckingham had a significant force behind them, and they also had control of the young king.
The only way to reverse the situation was by force, and the failure of the Woodvilles' efforts in that direction had demonstrated that no one wanted to risk a slide into civil war.
The council thus had little choice but to accept Gloucester's claim to be protector.
A few of its members may already have persuaded themselves that a protector was the most reliable counterweight to Woodville influence.
Hastings, at least, was reported to be delighted with the turn of events.
The rest of the council, whatever their reaction to the initial seizure of the  prince, must have recognized that Gloucester now offered the best hope of stability in a difficult situation.
No formal record of Gloucester's appointment survives, but his title of protector was in use by 8 May, confirming Mancini's claim that the duke took immediate steps to have his position formalized.
Once the council had recognized Gloucester as protector, the duke set about consolidating his position by dismantling the power of the Woodvilles and their allies.
His first move was to try and persuade the council to agree to the execution of the imprisoned Rivers and Grey on the grounds that their alleged plan to murder him constituted treason.
The tactic, however, failed.
The council apparently argued that as Gloucester had not been protector at the time, any attempt on his life could not be construed as treason.
The duke therefore had to be satisfied with rather less permanent methods of limiting the Woodvilles' power.
From around the middle of May he began to order the confiscation of the family's land, although there were no legal grounds for its forfeiture.
The questionable legality of the move may explain why two of the earliest confiscations were authorized by Gloucester personally rather than in the king's name.
These are stray survivals, but it is likely that other forfeitures were authorized in the same way.
There is, for instance, no recorded order to seize Rivers' land, but its forfeiture was effective by 28 May (when money from it was paid into the exchequer) and on the following day a steward was appointed for the earl's Norfolk land.
With the exception of the queen herself and her brother, Lionel bishop of Salisbury, the whole family apparently suffered forfeiture.
On 19 May Gloucester ordered Robert Pemberton to seize Wymington (Beds.), the land of Rivers' brother Richard, and on 21 May the tenants of Thorpe Waterville (Northants) were notified that the manor had been granted to Gloucester's ally Francis viscount Lovell.
The casualty in this case was Richard Grey, the queen's youngest son by her first marriage.
The lordship had been settled on him in Edward IV's final parliament, together with other manors of the duchy of Exeter, as part of a distribution of the duchy lands among the queen's family.
The main beneficiary  had been Grey's brother Dorset, whose heir had been married to Anne, the daughter of the dowager duchess of Exeter by her second husband.
Gloucester was clearly intent on overturning the settlement, and as well as seizing Richard Grey's share, he ordered the young duchess to be handed over to his leading supporter the duke of Buckingham, presumably as a preliminary to resuming the whole duchy.
Some of the Woodvilles' associates also came under attack.
The only one to suffer the loss of his land seems to have been the queen's cousin Richard Haute, who was among those arrested at Stony Stratford.
Gloucester ordered the seizure of Ightham Mote (Kent) on 14 May and the doubtful legality of the move is suggested by the duke's use of one of his northern associates, Sir Thomas Wortley.
Several men connected with the queen's family lost office.
The most eminent was Thomas Rotherham, archbishop of York, who was replaced as chancellor on 10 May by John Russell, bishop of Lincoln.
This prompt removal suggests that he was identified with the Woodvilles, although More is alone in the story that Rotherham had delivered the great seal to the queen when she went into sanctuary.
The archbishop remained out of favour.
He was one of those arrested in June, when Richard was moving towards the throne, and this was apparently accompanied by some more or less official seizure of his temporalities.
In September Richard wrote to the tenants of the archbishopric ordering them not to withhold their duties from Rotherham: ‘We not willing any of his said rents and duties so to be withholden from him for any thing displeasing us.’
At the least, the order suggests that the archbishop was so out of favour in high quarters that his tenants had risked withholding their money.
Among others who lost office at this time were two of the sheriffs inherited from Edward IV, who were replaced on 13 May.
In Southampton, Robert Poyntz was replaced by William Berkeley of Beverstone (Glos.).
Poyntz had married the illegitimate daughter of earl Rivers and was clearly suspect as a result, although the choice of Berkeley, a kinsman, to replace him perhaps implies a wish not to antagonize Poyntz's associates.
Berkeley had earlier, on 9 May, replaced Poyntz as constable of Carisbrooke castle — a politically sensitive office at a time when Sir Edward Woodville's fleet was lying in Southampton Water.
Finally, on 21 May, the office of constable of St Briavel's (Glos.) which Poyntz had held with Rivers and Thomas Baynham was regranted to Baynham and Richard Williams.
Baynham was a local man, of Westbury (Glos.), and his survival in office again suggests that Gloucester was anxious to avoid upsetting local interests unnecessarily.
In Kent, Edward IV's sheriff had been William Haute, brother of the arrested Richard Haute, and he was now replaced by Sir Henry Ferrers of Peckham, a former servant of Edward IV and a nephew of William lord Hastings.
Another Haute, Edmund, lost an annuity to Walter Hungerford, who petitioned for it at the end of May: an indication that the family's gains from royal service were recognized as being available for redistribution.
At this stage, however, only a small number of men were so closely identified with the Woodvilles that they were perceived as a threat by Richard.
Most of Edward IV's servants had accepted Gloucester's appointment as protector and were prepared to acquiesce in his attack on the Woodvilles.
The new chancellor, John Russell, traditionally seen as no friend to Richard, was prepared to make pointed and hostile references to earl Rivers in his draft speech for the opening of parliament.
Former servants of Edward IV, and of the queen herself, were among the beneficiaries of the Woodvilles' disgrace.
Robert Pemberton, used by Gloucester to seize Woodville land, had been one of Edward IV's ushers of the chamber (a post he was also to hold under Richard III) and had been appointed by the queen as parker and warrener of Higham Ferrers (Northants) in 1468.
John Reynsford, made parker of Dorset's forfeited manor of Woodham Ferrers (Essex) on 22 May, was the son of one of the queen's annuitants.
The use of such men probably again reflects a desire  to minimize local upheaval and, more specifically, to avoid alienating the circle of royal servants beyond the immediate Woodville group.
But the appointments were presumably also made on the assumption that the men concerned could be relied upon to obey Gloucester rather than the Woodvilles, an assumption which, during the protectorate, seems to have been vindicated.
This can be seen particularly clearly in the measures taken against Sir Edward Woodville, who, according to Mancini, had left London the day before news of Rivers' arrest reached the city.
Gloucester immediately recognized the threat posed to his own position by Woodville and his fleet, and the first recorded actions of the new regime include an overhaul of the officials in strategically important castles around the Solent.
On 9 May William Berkeley was put in charge of the Isle of Wight, and the lieutenant of Porchester, of which Woodville was constable, was ordered to deliver the castle to William Ovedale.
But Woodville had the council's authority for his command of the fleet and there are signs that Gloucester at first felt the need to move cautiously.
On the next day Sir Thomas Fulford and John Halwell were ordered to sea with all haste, ‘to go to the Downs among Sir Edward and his company’.
The phrasing is ambiguous, perhaps deliberately so, but suggests that for the moment only surveillance was intended.
Not until 14 May did Gloucester come into the open, and Edward Brampton, John Welles and Thomas Grayson were ordered to take Woodville.
William Berkeley, William Ovedale and Roger Kelsale were made responsible for victualling the ships, and were also authorized to receive all those prepared to make their peace with the new regime except Woodville himself, Dorset (the only indication that he might have joined his uncle) and Robert Ratcliffe, a former associate of Rivers at Calais.
Ironically, on the same day an unsuspecting Woodville, describing himself as ‘uncle unto our said sovereign lord and great captain of his navy’, was signing an indenture with the patron of a carrack lying in Southampton Water.
Woodville had seized £10,250 in English gold coin from the vessel on the grounds that it was forfeit to the  crown, and by the indenture bound himself to give the patron its value in English merchandise if that proved not to be the case.
Gloucester's move against Sir Edward proved only partially successful.
Most of the fleet surrendered, but Woodville himself, with two ships, managed to make good his escape, presumably with the gold coin, of which nothing more is known.
The interest of the episode lies in Gloucester's ability to command his brother's men, even in controversial assignments.
With the possible exception of Fulford and Halwell, all the men concerned had been in Edward IV's household.
Grayson was a Plymouth merchant and yeoman of the crown, who had recently been involved in maritime activity against pirates in the south west.
Brampton was a gentleman usher with extensive mercantile interests, and Welles another yeoman of the crown.
The men made responsible for victualling were all active in and around Southampton.
Berkeley, an esquire of the body, was constable of Southampton itself.
Ovedale, another esquire of the body, was from Wickham, a few miles to the east, while Kelsale, a yeoman usher, was customer of Southampton.
Gloucester also employed Kelsale on another sensitive task around this time, sending him to Beaulieu abbey in case the marquis of Dorset should seek sanctuary there.
The apparent willingness of such men to support Gloucester casts doubt on Mancini's claim that the fleet only deserted Woodville because they were tricked by the Genoese crews of the commandeered vessels.
Although the story is probably a fair reflection of the Italians' unwillingness to find themselves in the middle of an English war, most Englishmen seem to have acknowledged Gloucester's authority.
The attacks on the Woodvilles should not be taken as typical of Gloucester's approach as protector.
In most other respects he seems to have been anxious to preserve the status quo, and there was relatively little reshuffling of office.
The major change in the central administration was the removal of Rotherham as  chancellor.
Russell, who replaced him, had been keeper of the privy seal, and that office was in turn filled by John Gunthorpe, clerk of parliament and dean of the late king's household.
This amounted to little more than a regrading of established Yorkist bureaucrats, and the same can be said of the exchequer, where the office of treasurer, left empty by the death of the earl of Essex, was filled by the earl's former deputy John Wood.
Gloucester's commitment to continuity can most clearly be seen in the signet office.
Royal secretaries were notoriously vulnerable to dynastic change, since they were so close to the king, but Edward IV's secretary, Oliver King, remained in office until mid June.
Another confidential royal servant, however, fared less well.
Edward's treasurer of the chamber, Sir Thomas Vaughan, had been arrested at Stony Stratford in his capacity as chamberlain of the prince of Wales and was apparently not replaced.
At a local level, Gloucester's changes were largely confined to filling gaps left by the removal of the Woodvilles.
In the duchy of Cornwall (part of the patrimony of the prince of Wales), Rivers' office of receiver went to John Sapcote, one of Edward IV's esquires of the body, who had been active in the Fitzwarin estates in the south west since at least 1477.
The stewardship of the duchy was given to John lord Dynham, who had been one of Edward IV's leading associates in the south west and as such had already had dealings with the duchy.
The office of controller of the coinage of tin, previously held by Sir Thomas Vaughan, passed to another of Edward IV's household men, Avery Cornburgh, who had been feodary of the duchy and occupier of the mines in Devon and Cornwall.
In the prince's earldom of Chester there were even fewer changes.
Thomas Fouleshurst of Crewe replaced Richard Grey as constable of Chester.
At a lower level, the portership of Beeston went to William Brenner after the death of the previous holder.
Brenner was the prince's man rather than Gloucester's, and was to be removed from office after Richard's accession.
His appointment is a further indication that Gloucester was not indulging in a witch-hunt outside the immediate Woodville circle.
Other servants of the prince who continued to hold office in the earldom were his steward of the household, Sir William Stanley, and Robert Roo, his gentleman of the pantry.
In all these appointments Richard was choosing men who were acceptable to Yorkist opinion and probably to the prince himself.
The same attitude can be seen in the matter of Edward V's household.
When Gloucester had taken control of the young king he had dismissed the boy's personal attendants and arrested at least two of them: Vaughan, the chamberlain, and Richard Haute, the controller.
But this was not the prelude to surrounding the new king with the duke's own men.
In the period before Edward V's deposition only a handful of references to his household survive, but all the men named were former servants of Edward IV.
Among those assigned a specific household office, rather than loosely designated as ‘our servant’, are the esquires of the body John Norreys and Walter Hungerford, and the usher of the chamber Edward Hardgill.
All three had attended Edward IV's funeral in the previous month, as had several other former royal servants who can be associated with Gloucester in this period.
The implication is that the dead king's household had stayed together more or less formally and that these were the servants into whose care Edward V was given — an approach consonant with Gloucester's apparent desire to preserve the status quo.
One corollary of that desire was that, apart from the Woodville forfeitures, little patronage became available for redistribution.
With so little at Gloucester's disposal, it is striking that most of his grants went to former servants of his brother.
It has to be assumed that the recipients were at least acceptable to Gloucester, and some can be shown to have had dealings with him in the previous reign.
Cornburgh, for instance, had organized the finances of the 1481 expedition against the Scots, which had been led by the duke.
Also involved on that occasion was John lord Howard, whom  Gloucester now made chief steward of the duchy of Lancaster in the south in place of the dead earl of Essex.
But, as a key figure in his brother's polity, Gloucester probably knew most of his brother's leading servants.
It is more significant how little patronage was going to men who were primarily the duke's own servants.
Among those who did receive grants, moreover, most received them in areas where they already had influence.
Gloucester's associate Francis viscount Lovell, whose estates included land in Oxfordshire along the Thames valley, replaced Richard Grey as constable and steward of the duchy of Cornwall honour of Wallingford (Oxon.), with the right to appoint officers there.
In the north west, Richard Huddleston, the heir of the Huddlestons of Millom, was made receiver of Dorset's estates in Lancashire and Cumberland.
Gloucester showed no desire to unleash a northern invasion of the south, although a few northerners did receive minor pickings there.
William Tunstall, kinsman of Richard's councillor Sir Richard Tunstall, was made water bailiff of Winchelsea early in the protectorate, for instance.
This judicious and modest distribution of patronage is, however, overshadowed by the massive grants made to Richard's leading supporter, Henry Stafford duke of Buckingham.
Chroniclers are undecided as to who took the initiative in joining forces, but all are clear that once the two dukes had met at Northampton, Buckingham became Gloucester's alter ego .
The Crowland chronicler, in his discussion of events at Stony Stratford, makes no distinction between the contribution of the two dukes.
Mancini is more concerned to emphasize Gloucester's role, but adds that Buckingham ‘was always at hand ready to assist Gloucester with his advice and resources’.
This equality technically came to an end when Gloucester was made protector, but Buckingham's importance continued to be recognized and his reward was on a commensurate scale.
Indeed, ‘reward’ is a rather weak description  of something which has the appearance of a deliberate partition of authority.
Gloucester was protector, but Buckingham was given an independent satrapy consisting of Wales, the March and three southern English counties.
The series of grants which implemented this transfer of power began on 15 May.
Buckingham was made constable and steward of all the royal land in Shropshire, Herefordshire, Somerset, Dorset and Wiltshire and was given power of array in the same counties.
He was made justiciar and chamberlain of both north and south Wales and was to take over the offices of constable and steward of royal lands in Wales as they fell vacant.
The grant specifically included the right, during the royal minority, to exercise the king's patronage throughout the area concerned.
The Welsh estates put under Buckingham's control in this way included the earldom of March and, in case there should be any doubt about Buckingham's quasi-regal status, the chancellor of the earldom was told to take his orders from the duke.
On the next day, 16 May, a separate grant gave Buckingham the offices of constable, steward and receiver of the duchy of Lancaster honour of Monmouth.
A warrant issued on the same day makes it clear that Buckingham's authority extended over the duchy of York lordship of Ludlow, not specifically mentioned elsewhere.
In the following ten days a series of warrants authorized payment for these various responsibilities, including a fee of 1,000m as justiciar.
Finally, on 26 May, the duke was granted the rule of the Gower lands, the Mowbray estates in Wales, previously controlled by Thomas Vaughan and Richard Haute junior.
In political terms, the grants to Buckingham can be partially justified by the need to replace the council of the prince of Wales which, apart from the attack on its Woodville members, had lost its focus with the accession of Edward V. But the scale of the grants leaves no doubt that the primary aim was the aggrandizement of Buckingham.
Power which under Edward IV had been distributed through a network of royal servants would now gradually become concentrated in one man.
The abnormality of these grants in the context of the protectorate is not, however, only a matter of scale.
They are the first indication that Gloucester was willing to make significant changes in the power structure  inherited from Edward IV.
The wholesale nature of the grants also threatened the interests of men not recognized as opponents of the regime, something which Gloucester was careful to avoid elsewhere.
Although Buckingham was to take possession in most cases only as offices fell vacant, the existence of such a powerful reversionary interest could only be seen as a threat by existing office holders.
Their fears are unlikely to have been eased by the outright grant of office in Monmouth to Buckingham, which dispossessed the holder, John Mortimer.
He was one of Edward IV's servants and went on to become an esquire of the body of Richard III, but he never regained office in Monmouth and deserted Richard before Bosworth.
The distribution of patronage and the related question of internal security were not the only problems exercising the protector during May and early June.
Edward IV's financial legacy was not as healthy as is usually assumed and the administration seems to have found itself juggling income and expenditure with more than usual anxiety.
At the root of the problem were the Scottish campaigns of 1480–2, which had not only been expensive in themselves but had brought continuing expenditure on defence, notably through the acquisition of Berwick.
This border town, captured by Gloucester and clearly close to his heart, was reckoned by the exchequer to cost £700 a month in defence — a charge which brought relatively little by way of increased security in return.
On top of this recurrent expenditure, Gloucester was pressing for a major rebuilding programme, to include not only repairs to the castle and town walls, but the construction of 120 new houses at an estimated cost of £1,600.
Before his death Edward IV had also initiated military activity against France, following Louis XI's renunciation of some of the key terms of the 1475 treaty of Picquigny.
By the time Gloucester arrived in London the council had already committed a considerable amount of money.
The fleet sent against de Crevecoeur, together with arrangements to send an expeditionary force to France, cost around £3,670 — money which was probably wasted since the duke disbanded the fleet as part of his measures against the  Woodvilles.
The council had also sent an extra 300 men to Calais immediately after Edward's death, pushing the monthly wages bill there up to £627.
On top of this military expenditure, the government had to find the cost of Edward IV's funeral (£1,886) and the cost of Edward V's coronation, now rescheduled for 22 June.
By the time Gloucester took control, the cash left by Edward IV had been absorbed by these military costs and there was relatively little money coming in.
There are signs that the system of chamber finance had collapsed following the death of the king and the arrest of his treasurer of the chamber, and this may have meant that in the short term royal receivers were retaining issues in their own hands until the situation clarified.
Edward's parliamentary grant of tonnage and poundage had automatically lapsed at his death, although the government attempted to go on collecting it, apparently on the assumption that it would be regranted in the next parliament, summoned for 25 June.
The London mercers petitioned the council against collection of the subsidy and Gloucester sent word to the treasurer of the exchequer that collection should be halted.
The king's death had not, however, cancelled the grant of a tax on aliens granted in his last parliament and this fell due at Midsummer, although £400 was already assigned to the household and the remainder apparently earmarked for the coronation.
Against this background of financial strain it is not surprising that one of Gloucester's first recorded actions as protector was to summon convocation in the hope of raising money from the clergy of the southern province.
In fact the meeting was forestalled by the deposition of Edward V, but by then the government had raised some £1,680 from the bishops in anticipation of a grant.
Gloucester was also to some extent underwriting the costs of government himself.
He received no payment for his attendance on the young king and he also paid £800 towards the king's expenses, including the cost of the royal household — a contribution which must have enhanced his political prestige.
This period of about five weeks, in which Gloucester and the  council governed in apparent harmony, provides an unfamiliar perspective from which to view Gloucester's subsequent usurpation.
It is a period almost entirely ignored by the chroniclers, whose emphasis on the dramatic has the effect of telescoping these weeks.
In Mancini, for instance, the removal of York from sanctuary in the middle of June follows immediately upon the measures taken against Sir Edward Woodville in mid May, with the events seen as consecutive steps by Gloucester towards the throne.
The result is to make more plausible Mancini's claim that from the seizure of the prince at the end of April some men were suspicious of Gloucester's ultimate intentions.
But this version is shaped by hindsight.
It is more likely that by mid May contemporaries had recovered from any anxieties prompted by the seizure of the prince and were prepared to accept Gloucester's protectorship at face value.
Certainly Polydore Vergil seems to have fallen victim to his own condensed chronology when he argues that it was the events at Stony Stratford which caused Hastings to mistrust Gloucester and so led to Hastings' opposition and execution.
Apart from the inherent illogicality of this version, when all the available evidence suggests that Hastings had wanted Gloucester to take a major role, it ignores the weeks of apparently good relations between the two men which followed Gloucester's arrival in London.
It is true that Hastings' own gains in this period were modest, consisting only of the mastership of the mint, but his interests were respected.
One of the two new sheriffs was his nephew, while two of his feoffees received royal patronage: Thomas Kebell was made attorney of the duchy of Lancaster and William Chauntry replaced John Gunthorpe as dean of the king's chapel.
The grant of the chancellorship of the earldom of March to William Catesby may also have owed something to Hastings, although, given the location of the office, probably more to another of Catesby's patrons, the duke of Buckingham.
As late as 5 June, the candidates for knighthood at the impending coronation included a number of Hastings' men and that this was in response to Hastings' own wishes is suggested  by the fact that most were not subsequently knighted at Richard's coronation.
This peaceful interlude between Gloucester's assumption of the protectorship and the events which culminated in his accession challenges those historians who see his usurpation as a panic response to growing insecurity.
By mid May the duke had been accepted as protector by most of the Yorkist establishment.
The support of his brother's men gave him a nexus of servants throughout the country, the value of which can be seen in his measures against Sir Edward Woodville.
Gloucester's strength is also reflected in the choice of knights of the shire for the county of Cornwall, one of the few elections to the planned parliament of Edward V for which returns survive.
Gloucester had had some links with the county through the former de Vere estates, but he does not seem to have been particularly active there and his influence was overshadowed by the duchy of Cornwall interest.
In spite of this, one of the knights chosen in 1483 was Gloucester's close associate Sir James Tyrell.
The other, John Beaumont, may also have been to some extent Gloucester's man since he and his putative father Sir Henry Bodrugan went on to become supporters of Richard III in the region.
Gloucester's influence may also have been at work in the selection of a duchy of Lancaster lawyer as the new recorder of London in June 1483, although the man concerned (Thomas Fitzwilliam of Mablethorpe, Lincs.) preserved a studied neutrality when, only days after his appointment, he found himself in the middle of the deposition crisis.
All this is not to say that Gloucester faced no problems, but none of them seems to have threatened his tenure of the protectorship.
Finance was clearly an anxiety, but it may even have strengthened Gloucester's hand.
The queen's presence in sanctuary with her second son, the duke of York, was an embarrassment and one which the council, at least, probably wanted to resolve.
Towards the end of May the leading figures in  government, headed by Gloucester, published an oath to respect the queen's safety if she came out of sanctuary.
Their offer was, however, refused and Gloucester may not have been sorry.
The queen dowager would probably have been considerably more of an embarrassment at large, and the Crowland chronicler implies that Gloucester did not really want to resolve the question.
The other potential problem was what would happen to Gloucester's authority after the young king's coronation, but even this seems to have been settled to the duke's advantage and John Russell, in his draft speech for the opening of parliament, assumed that Gloucester would remain in overall control — although he clearly also felt that this was a departure from precedent which needed to be justified.
Given the apparent strength of Gloucester's position, it is difficult to argue that he was panicked into seizing the throne.
Throughout May the protectorship had seemed viable.
It was Gloucester who chose to put an end to it.
The date by which that choice had been made can be defined fairly precisely, although the motives behind the decision remain obscure.
Government was still proceeding as normal on g June.
The council meeting on that day tackled the question of how to pay for the coronation and the longer-term problem of household expenses.
Later the same day, a London correspondent could write to William Stonor that he had nothing new to report.
On the next day, 10 June, Gloucester wrote to York under his own signet for military help.
He evidently also wrote to the earl of Northumberland for the same purpose since the earl was raising men in the East Riding on 16 June (the day after the duke's letter reached York).
He also approached Ralph lord Neville and perhaps others.
Only the York letter, however, offers any explanation for this sudden burst of activity.
In it Richard appealed for help:
against the queen, her blood, adherents and affinity, which have intended and daily doth intend to murder and utterly destroy us and our cousin, the duke of Buckingham, and the old royal blood of this realm and, as is now openly known, by their subtle and damnable ways forecasted the same, and also the final destruction and disinheritance of you and all  other the inheritors and men of honour, as well of the north parts as other countries that belong [to]us.
Whether Richard had really uncovered a Woodville plot against himself is doubtful.
The family, as the main sufferers under his regime, clearly had every reason to seek his overthrow, and it would hardly be surprising if they had been hopefully dabbling in witchcraft — although this was a standard late-medieval smear.
What is difficult to believe is that they had suddenly become a real threat to Gloucester.
Their attempt to whip up opposition to him when news of Stony Stratford reached London had proved abortive and since then they had apparently been a spent force.
Even Gloucester's attack on their inheritance, usually a sensitive issue with the political community, does not seem to have met with resistance.
If they had now become dangerous, the only plausible explanation is that they had received significant new support.
For many writers this is indeed what had happened, and they point to the execution of Hastings on I 3 June as evidence that Hastings (and perhaps by implication other members of the Yorkist establishment) had made common ground with the Woodvilles against Gloucester.
This argument has received wide currency, in part because it again presents Gloucester as the victim of circumstances rather than their manipulator.
If there really was a conspiracy against Gloucester, his subsequent actions can be seen as a matter of self-defence, culminating in his seizure of the throne as the only way of achieving long-term security from Woodville recriminations.
But this interpretation is open to criticism on two main grounds.
One is the difficulty of explaining Hastings' apparent volte-face .
Most authors who accept the conspiracy also accept Vergil's argument that Hastings was alienated by the manner in which Gloucester made himself protector.
This then presents the entire period from May to mid June as a slippery slope down which Gloucester plunged, his attempts to achieve security committing him to progressively more desperate measures.
But Vergil  is here, as argued above, the victim of his own telescoped chronology.
It is clear that if Hastings did become disenchanted with his erstwhile ally, the split did not develop until later and therefore, presumably, for other reasons.
There are various possibilities.
One is that Hastings was unhappy with Gloucester's wish to extend his power as protector beyond the coronation, but this seems illogical when the available evidence suggests that Hastings had earlier welcomed Gloucester as a bulwark against the increase in Woodville power likely to follow the young king's nominal assumption of authority.
Somewhat more plausible is the possibility that Gloucester had decided to proceed to the execution of the captured Woodvilles (as his letter to York perhaps implies) and that Hastings, while willing to see Woodville power limited, was not prepared to countenance their execution.
Finally, Hastings may have got wind of Gloucester's designs on the throne.
This is the most likely, in so far as the threatened deposition of Edward V would provide the strongest reason for Hastings to switch sides, but in that case any conspiracy becomes the result, and not the cause, of Gloucester's decision to take the throne.
A more fundamental difficulty in the way of accepting the conspiracy, whether as cause or effect, is the complete lack of contemporary evidence.
No contemporary, except Gloucester himself in his letter to York, mentions a revival of Woodville opposition, and not even Gloucester links it with Hastings.
The first writer to make the connection was Polydore Vergil, whose version became, with flourishes, the standard Tudor account.
According to Vergil, Gloucester announced to a meeting of the council that the Woodvilles were using witchcraft against him and then formally denounced Hastings for his involvement before calling in men at arms to arrest him.
This is broadly the version adopted by proponents of the conspiracy theory.
But Vergil's presentation of the episode makes it clear that he thought the accusation had no validity and was merely an excuse for Hastings' execution.
The more nearly contemporary Mancini shares this view of Hastings' removal as an unprovoked attack, but presents it without any reference to the Woodvilles.
In his version, Gloucester met with Hastings and his allies in the Tower, and  cried out that he had been ambushed, whereupon waiting soldiers rushed in and cut down Hastings on the spot.
This has usually been rejected, on the grounds that other sources suggest that Hastings was executed rather than murdered-Armstrong going so far as to suggest that such a murder would be un-English and that Mancini has been led astray by Italian precedents.
But Mancini's basic point — that Gloucester had set up a fake attack on himself as an excuse to deal with Hastings — seems eminently plausible.
It was the very tactic which he had tried to use against the Woodvilles after Stony Stratford and which had then failed because the council refused to sanction their execution.
For Gloucester to go one step further and actually stage the ambush so that his enemies could be dealt with there and then would seem a logical refinement of the earlier scheme.
The exact mechanism of Hastings' fall is, however, less important than the motives behind it.
The most likely explanation of the episode is that it was a pre-emptive strike, designed to smooth Gloucester's way to the throne.
But if Gloucester chose to act against Hastings, rather than being stampeded into it by his discovery of a conspiracy, why did he choose to show his hand before his troops reached London and before he had control of the other possible claimants to the throne?
Edward V was in his hands, and so probably by this date was Clarence's son, Edward earl of Warwick, who was barred by his father's attainder, but whose title was otherwise better than Richard's own.
But that still left Edward IV's second son, Richard duke of York, who was in sanctuary with his mother and did not emerge until 16 June.
One recent solution to this apparent illogicality was an attempt to reorder the two key events, so that the removal of York from sanctuary preceded the execution of Hastings.
But this, although attractively tidy, is also clearly incorrect.
For all its problems, the traditional order must stand.
It is this which strengthens claims that Richard's usurpation was a series of panic responses  rather than a coherent scheme.
But this is not the only explanation.
It is possible that Richard's letter to York did mark the beginning of a planned chain of events but that something then forced his hand and he found himself having to deal with Hastings before his plans had matured.
What the ‘something’ was can only be speculation.
News of Richard's letter to York may have leaked out and alerted Hastings.
Or perhaps Gloucester had simply discovered that Hastings' distaste for Woodville authority would not, after all, extend to the deposition of Edward V. Mancini, as well as later sources, has references to Gloucester sounding out the loyalty of Hastings and others, and a clumsy enquiry may have alerted Hastings to the duke's intentions as well as warning Gloucester that Hastings would not co-operate.
Whatever one's interpretation of these events, however, attempts to explain away the chronological oddity of the attack on Hastings should not be allowed to obscure the fact that in practice it did not stop Richard taking control of the duke of York.
It is even possible that Gloucester's claims of another plot against him were intended not only to justify Hastings' removal but to impress the council with the gravity of the situation and make them more disposed, not less, to back Gloucester's leadership as the one hope of stability in a worsening political climate.
With hindsight, the Crowland chronicler goes further and sees Hastings' death as a cynical move pour encourager les autres : ‘with the rest of [Edward IV's]faithful men expecting something similar these two dukes thereafter did what they wanted’.
But if the death of Hastings was a sign that Gloucester had made up his mind to take the throne, this was not yet something which could be admitted.
In public, the duke continued to make plans for the coronation of Edward V, still scheduled for 22 June.
At some point over the weekend of 14–15 June, Gloucester persuaded the council that the presence of York was needed for the coronation.
On Monday 16 June the council, including Thomas Bourgchier, archbishop of Canterbury and John Russell of Lincoln, duly waited on the queen at Westminster and persuaded her to hand over York.
Neither Gloucester nor Buckingham put in an appearance until the surrender was safely accomplished, and the inference is that the business had been left to Bourgchier, a respected elder statesman, as a demonstration of Gloucester's good  faith.
That Elizabeth Woodville submitted is therefore perhaps not very surprising.
She was probably prepared to trust the cardinal archbishop when he undertook to guarantee her son's safety and, even if she had doubts, she may have preferred an arrangement involving Bourgchier to the risk of forcing Gloucester into unilateral action.
It is more surprising that Bourgchier accepted the role of go-between.
Mancini suggests that it was to prevent Gloucester breaking sanctuary, and there are other indications that the duke was prepared to resort to force if negotiation failed.
The Crowland chronicler goes further and states bluntly that Bourgchier was compelled to play his part.
Either may be true.
But it is possible that both views were influenced by hindsight and that matters seemed less clear-cut at the time.
Since Gloucester's arrival in London he had seemed to offer the stability which the council wanted.
They may simply not yet have accepted that Gloucester now had his own ambitions beyond the preservation of his brother's polity.
Even if the unwelcome possibility was beginning to dawn on them, they may not have wanted to be the first to break the consensus.
Bourgchier may well have thought, as Mancini implies in a narrower context, that to co-operate with the duke rather than opposing him still offered the best hope of warding off disaster.
If this were the case, the council must have been rapidly undeceived.
Later the same day, Gloucester issued writs of supersedeas cancelling the parliament summoned for 25 June.
He also postponed the coronation of Edward V until 9 November.
From this point contemporaries recognized that Richard was moving to take the throne.
Business began to wind down as men tacitly awaited the new regime.
In the signet office, the last dated document to survive was issued on I I June.
Here business was likely to have been dislocated by the arrest of the king's secretary Oliver King on 13 June, but departments without that problem show a comparable running down of business.
The last grants to pass the great seal (although others were in the pipeline) were the appointments of the chief baron of the exchequer and two  serjeants at law on 14 and 15 June — a last attempt by the establishment to pretend that it was business as normal.
This prompt response to political crisis reflects the fact that the progress of grants through the system relied on the initiative of the recipients, who must have realized that grants from Edward V would shortly become worthless.
In other departments business ran down more slowly.
In the exchequer, 16 June was an average business day but 21 June saw only two small receipts from the customs recorded.
The last extant chancery bond is dated 21 June.
The next day, Dr Ralph Shaw publicized Richard's claims to the throne in a sermon at St Paul's Cross.
The justification for Gloucester's assumption of power confused contemporaries and has continued to arouse controversy.
The fullest version of Gloucester's arguments is to be found on the parliament roll of January 1484 and purports to be the petition presented to Gloucester when he was asked to take the throne in June.
It is, however, doubtful whether this genuinely represents the ideas circulating in 1483.
The 1484 act is scathing about the misrule of Edward IV:
the prosperity of this land daily decreased, so that felicity was turned into misery and prosperity into adversity and the order of policy, and of the law of God and Man, confounded; whereby it is likely this Realm to fall into extreme misery and desolation, which God defend, without due provision of couvenable remedy be had in this behalf in all goodly haste.
Such attacks on the corruption of the previous regime were the stock in trade of usurping rulers, but it is not the line Richard took in 1483.
He was then anxious to win the support of the Yorkist establishment and, both as protector and during his early weeks as king, represented himself rather as the only hope for the continuance of the good government of Edward IV.
It was only after the rebellion of autumn 1483 had demonstrated that Richard had lost the support of a significant number of his brother's men, that it made political sense to indulge in general criticism of Edward IV's  reign.
In June 1483, to judge by Mancini (the only chronicler writing without hindsight in this respect), Gloucester preferred instead to emphasize that he was the legitimate heir of York.
According to Mancini, the sermons preached on 22 June declared that Edward IV himself was illegitimate.
This argument seems, however, to have been soon dropped, and in the 1484 act survives only in the oblique remark that Richard, unlike his brothers, had been born in England.
It was apparently replaced with the claim that Edward's children were illegitimate, because Edward, before his marriage to Elizabeth Woodville, had been betrothed to another woman.
The promulgation of this version seems to have been largely in the hands of Buckingham, who lectured the lords and the mayor and aldermen of London on the subject — the latter for a ‘good half hour’ according to the Great Chronicle.
Mancini reported that the woman in question was a foreigner whom Edward had married by proxy on the orders of the earl of Warwick, a reference perhaps to Bona of Savoy.
Mancini may be guilty of garbling the story here, since the woman who later emerged as Edward's betrothed was Eleanor Butler (nee Talbot), the widow of Thomas Butler of Sudeley.
But it is possible that the details took time to be formulated.
Certainly, when Richard himself wrote to the Calais garrison on 28 June, setting out his title, his claim was vague to the point of invisibility.
He simply announced that although Edward V had been recognized as the rightful heir, this was only because men were ‘then ignorant of the very sure and true title which our sovereign lord that now is, king Richard III, hath and had the same time to the crown of England’.
The details of that title are nowhere given, beyond a statement that they were set out in the petition of the three estates which besought Richard to take the crown.
This, as suggested above, is probably not the petition enshrined in the 1484 act, but instead, as the Crowland chronicler claims, a straightforward statement of the pre-contract story.
Whatever the validity of the various claims advanced in 1483–4, they were surely justifications for a decision taken on other  grounds.
Contemporaries certainly regarded them in this light.
By the time Shaw preached his sermon, informed opinion recognized Gloucester's accession as inevitable, and this helps to explain the apparent lack of interest with which the most nearly contemporary chroniclers treat the grounds for Edward V's deposition.
They are equally brief when it comes to the details of Richard's accession, Mancini in particular treating Gloucester's actual assumption of the throne as something of a tailpiece to the real story.
The constitutional issues thus become not much more than flourishes to a fait accompli .
Gloucester's justification is presented as the armed force at his disposal, and it is against this background that he was petitioned to take the throne by the three estates.
To this petition Gloucester agreed and on 26 June, in a ceremony consciously modelled on his brother's accession, he took his seat at Westminster and began his reign.
Within three months of Edward IV's death, therefore, his brother had deposed his son and taken the throne for himself.
It is a dramatic reversal and one unparalleled in English history.
The reasons behind it, however, and the related issue of where responsibility lies, have still not been entirely explained.
Traditional accounts place the blame squarely on Gloucester's shoulders, assuming in effect that his own ambition is an adequate explanation for what happened.
Most modern historians, by contrast, have argued that Edward IV himself must take much of the responsibility for the deposition of his heir.
The king's willingness to build up the power of his trusted allies, it is argued, set up tensions not only between the beneficiaries and those excluded from power, but within the circle of royal supporters itself.
These tensions were held in check by Edward IV but he did nothing to resolve them, and after his death they erupted into the faction struggle which cost Edward V his throne.
The interpretation is a valuable reminder that the crisis of 1483 did not exist in a vacuum.
Inevitably it had its roots in the previous reign and some of Edward IV's actions made their contribution to events after his death.
But the exact nature of the contribution is perhaps less straightforward than is now often assumed.
Modern discussion of the issue has normally centred on the role of the Woodvilles, who are identified as the cause of a split within the ruling group which lay at the root of the crisis.
Their contribution is perceived as threefold: they were long-standing rivals of Gloucester, which virtually guaranteed a power struggle in 1483; the favour shown them by the king had made them unpopular with the rest of the Yorkist establishment; and they were so closely identified with the young king, Edward V, that any limitation of their power could only be made permanent by his deposition.
Taken to its logical conclusion, this would present the deposition as a side-effect of the political community's attempt to rid themselves of an unpopular group of upstarts.
There are, however, difficulties with this interpretation, some of which have already been mentioned.
There is no contemporary support for the suggestion that Gloucester and the Woodvilles were rivals before Edward IV's death, and that the king should therefore have taken steps to remedy the situation.
The argument to the contrary is largely an argument from silence, but the silence is suggestive.
The local interests of the duke and the Woodvilles coincided at several points, notably in Wales and East Anglia, but also (briefly) in Richmondshire, where the queen's mother, the dowager duchess of Bedford, held one third of the honour until 1472.
Had the two interests been hostile, one would expect some evidence of local friction, but there is none.
It was only the circumstances of the minority which brought them into conflict, and even then the rivalry should probably not be seen as inevitable.
Rivers, by all accounts no fool, apparently still expected co-operation from Gloucester as late as the end of April.
Similarly, it is difficult to accept that hostility towards the Woodvilles from the rest of the political community was a major issue at the time of Edward's death.
This is not to deny that they had enemies.
They seem to have been an unscrupulous family, willing to exploit their closeness to the crown.
But this is a long way from arguing that they were such political pariahs that the deposition of Edward V could seem preferable to a regime dominated by them.
It is doubtful whether they had ever been such a serious liability to the Yorkist regime.
Their emergence in the mid 14605 had alienated Clarence and Warwick, and for a time, in 1469–70, hostility to the family had become a political  issue.
But most of the Yorkist establishment had remained loyal to Edward IV and the rebels ultimately achieved a precarious viability only by looking outside the realm for support: to Louis XI of France and the exiled Lancastrians whom he harboured.
After Edward IV's restoration in 1471 opposition to the Woodvilles became even less effective as a rallying cry, as Clarence's isolation and ultimate downfall suggest.
This is not because the family had become less powerful.
On the contrary, the birth of sons to the queen in 1471 and 1473 had given her and her kinsmen a more secure political status.
But this in itself had made overt opposition less likely.
The Woodvilles' assimilation into the political community was further eased by a less aggressive manipulation of royal patronage on their behalf.
There is nothing in the second reign to compare with the king's exploitation of the marriage market as a means of endowing the queen's siblings in the first reign.
In part this was simply no longer necessary, but it also represents a shift of royal policy, and members of the family without an adequate endowment did not have the deficiency made good.
The only major royal intervention in the land market on the family's behalf was the parliamentary act which allowed the Holland estates to be used as a patrimony for younger generations of the family.
The queen's eldest son by her first husband, Thomas Grey, had in the first reign married the king's niece Anne Holland, the daughter and heiress of Henry Holland duke of Exeter by Edward's sister Anne.
Anne Holland died without issue by Grey, who remarried the Bonville heiress and had a son, another Thomas.
Anne Plantagenet, meanwhile, had divorced Exeter and married Thomas St Leger, by whom she had a daughter, also called Anne.
This second Anne was betrothed to the younger Thomas Grey and the bulk of the Exeter lands settled on them, with some reserved to endow the queen's second son, Richard Grey.
The arrangement was of dubious legality, as the resort to an act of parliament implies, but it did not challenge other interests.
Exeter had been a committed Lancastrian who had suffered forfeiture of his estates to the crown, so that in effect the endowment of the Greys was being made out of the royal lands.
Although Richard III later reversed the settlement, he apparently did so only as part of his dismantling of Woodville influence and not out of any sense  that the disposal of the lands had been inequitable.
In particular, he did not take the opportunity to restore the land to the heir general, his close ally Ralph lord Neville, but simply added it to his fund of patronage.
There was thus little in the second reign to stir up renewed animosity towards the Woodvilles.
They may not have been popular, indeed subsequent events suggest that they were not, but they were tolerated, and there is no evidence that Edward IV's death was followed by an attempt to dislodge them.
The council was prepared to give significant military commands to members of the family, and blocked Gloucester's attempts to have Rivers and Richard Grey executed.
The only council member who can be seen to be motivated by hostility to the family is William, lord Hastings.
The ill feeling between him and the Woodvilles apparently had its roots in the previous reign and it is significant that even those chroniclers who emphasize the Gloucester/Woodville animosity, consider that it was the Hastings/Woodville feud which was worrying Edward IV on his death bed.
Mancini claimed that the king then tried to reconcile Hastings and Dorset, and this is echoed by Tudor sources.
The story does not appear in the Crowland chronicle, which confirms the existence of ill will between Hastings and the Woodvilles, but without offering any explanation.
Mancini, as usual, sees the situation in exclusively personal terms, and explains the animosity between Hastings and Dorset as rivalry over mistresses.
There may have been personal antipathy involved, although Mancini's account reads rather like an attempt to rationalize a hostility which he could not explain — as does More's bland assertion that women commonly hate their husband's best friends.
In the non-chronicle sources there are suggestions of rivalry over Calais, where Hastings had replaced Rivers as lieutenant in 1471, and there may also have been some friction over the Ferrers inheritance, although this does not seem to have been a major issue.
Indeed, the evidence in general is so slight that it implies that any animosities had been held in check by Edward IV and only surfaced fully after his death.
The speed with which they then became an issue, however, shows that they were real enough.
What is less clear is their effect on the situation.
According to Mancini, it was Hastings who stirred up Gloucester against the Woodvilles by sending him letters in which he stressed the pretensions of the queen's family.
He also outlined what action the duke should take, providing what was in effect a blueprint for events at Stony Stratford.
It is unlikely that Gloucester needed Hastings to prod him into action, although if Mancini is even partially correct it would be significant that the duke's view of events in London was coming from so biased a source.
Hastings' contribution more probably consisted of stirring up others by articulating anxieties about the future role of the Woodvilles and, perhaps, by canvassing the possibility of a protector as a viable alternative.
Hastings apart, the degree of opposition to the Woodvilles is difficult to gauge.
Although the political establishment apparently accepted that the family was entitled to some role during the minority, its closeness to the young king gave rise to anxiety about how that role would develop.
It is significant that whenever Gloucester took a controversial step, such as seizing the prince or sending north for reinforcements, he justified it by reference to a Woodville plot to subvert the state.
This was, of course, intended to give him grounds for proceeding against the family, which was potentially his main rival for power during the king's youth, but it was necessary that the accusations be taken seriously and Gloucester presumably thought the Woodvilles plausible scapegoats.
Even if, as Mancini thought, not all the details of these ‘plots’ commanded belief, the Woodvilles' background of aggressive opportunism must have given credibility to the claim that they intended to dominate the young king.
Mistrust of the family's ultimate intentions may also explain the ease with which Gloucester was able to dismantle their power.
His illegal confiscation of their estates was the sort of action to which the landed classes were normally extremely sensitive but, in the short term, it met with no resistance.
This, however, is not necessarily a fair test of the family's unpopularity.
By this stage Gloucester was securely in control, while the Woodvilles' influence had collapsed with their loss of the prince.
Support for the family against Gloucester must have seemed at best futile, at worst likely to precipitate the  slide into factional conflict which the political community was most anxious to avoid.
The completeness of the Woodville collapse casts doubt on any suggestion that Edward IV had deliberately built up their power as a bulwark for his son — something which would have been tantamount to a conscious factionalization of politics.
The family had certainly enjoyed the king's favour, and their identification with the prince of Wales and his brother had brought them a recognized political role.
The main beneficiary in both cases was the head of the family, Anthony earl Rivers.
His own estates lay mainly in Northamptonshire, but his marriage to the Scales heiress had brought him a group of manors in East Anglia, a regional connection maintained by his second marriage, to Mary Fitzlewis.
His influence in those areas was complemented by the queen's possession of the duchy of Lancaster estates in the east midlands and by the marriage of his nephew Richard duke of York to the Mowbray heiress, which gave Rivers a substantial role in the duchy of Norfolk.
His strongest formal links were, however, with the prince of Wales.
Rivers was the prince's governor and, by the end of the 1470s, steward and receiver general of his estates.
This gave him authority not only in Wales but in the earldom of Chester and duchy of Cornwall.
Other members of the family were found niches in this empire.
Richard Grey, for instance, was made constable of Chester and of the duchy of Cornwall honour of Wallingford, as well as being given the castle and lordship of Kidwelly.
On paper, the Woodville empire is impressive, but it is doubtful whether it can be considered an independent power base.
Much of the family's influence derived not from land, but from office holding within the royal demesne, and the implications of this tend to be overlooked.
Discussions of Woodville influence usually start from the premise that men with whom the family had dealings were ipso facto members of a Woodville affinity, an equation which puts the family at the head of a very impressive connection within the royal government.
Thus in Wales, men active within the prince's council are categorized as Woodville associates, as are the officials of the duchy of Lancaster estates held by the queen.
Sometimes this is valid.
Robert  Ratcliffe, who was given office in Sheen (Surrey) by the queen, can be identified with the Woodville interest.
But many of the men concerned were primarily royal servants, whose independent connections with the Woodvilles were very tenuous.
As long as the Woodvilles were identified with the crown this distinction was unimportant, but if the two interests split, as they did in 1483, the loyalties of such men would tend to remain with the crown.
John Bardfield is a case in point.
He was of Margaretting (Essex) and in 1470 was made receiver of the duchy of Lancaster lands in the south west.
This brought him to Rivers' attention, and he became the earl's deputy as receiver of the duchy of Cornwall.
In 1483 it was the royal connection which held firm.
Under Richard III he was made receiver of the Lancaster lands formerly held by Elizabeth Woodville and was granted the farm of valuable land within the duchy.
The Woodvilles' personal following was thus smaller than is sometimes assumed.
In fact, rather than talking of an explicitly ‘Woodville’ affinity, it is probably more realistic to see the family as part of the royal connection.
This, of course, could be said of any of Edward's leading associates, since it was their relationship to the crown which allowed them to draw lesser royal servants into their service.
Hastings' retinue was essentially the duchy of Lancaster connection in the north midlands.
Gloucester drew on the support of the northern duchy servants.
There are, however, differences of emphasis.
Gloucester's possession of the northern Neville lands meant that if Edward had withdrawn his favour the duke's power would have been much reduced, but he would still have had a following.
The duke, in other words, contributed to the royal connection as well as providing a focus for existing royal servants.
The Woodvilles' power, by contrast, was almost entirely derivative, so much so that their identification with the prince was more of a bulwark for them than vice versa.
It was perhaps their awareness of this, rather than their arrogance, which led them to emphasize the relationship so strongly after Edward IV's death.
When they could no longer claim to act with royal backing they were dangerously vulnerable.
The commission of  array authorizing Rivers to raise men in the marches, for instance, would have become valueless once it became known that he was out of favour.
Similarly, Edward Woodville's fleet posed a threat to Gloucester only as long as the duke's own position was uncertain; once he had been recognized as protector the matter could be dealt with.
It was not until Gloucester had seized the throne, and the Woodvilles could again claim to be acting in Edward V's interests, that the family, at least in some circles, regained their political credibility.
It is impossible to make a final assessment of the Woodvilles' contribution to the crisis.
Given Mancini's scenario, their role is clear: they selfishly overturned Edward's wishes and set in motion the train of events which led directly to Edward V's deposition.
But if it had been Edward IV who wanted the immediate accession of his heir, the events after his death say relatively little about the Woodvilles' intentions.
In the short term it was in their interest to co-operate with the rest of the council, and the real test of their ambitions would come after the coronation, when they would be in a position to exploit their closeness to the new king.
Any plans they may have had, however, were forestalled by Gloucester's seizure of the prince at Stony Stratford.
In taking this action, the duke showed himself to be several jumps ahead of the rest of the political community.
Although doubts may have been growing about the Woodvilles' ultimate intentions, there are no signs that anyone else was contemplating direct action against them — or that the family had yet done anything to warrant it.
The Woodvilles, in short, may constitute a potential weakness in Edward's scheme of things, but it was Gloucester who actually dictated events, first by seizing the prince and then by taking the throne, and the Woodvilles' importance becomes a question of how far it was they who triggered Gloucester's actions.
The duke's motivation is one of the most controversial aspects of the period.
One explanation, at least, can be dismissed: Gloucester was not reacting against his position in the previous reign.
Kendall's influential picture of Gloucester as the outsider, alienated from a Woodville-dominated court, will not do.
Gloucester was very much an insider, and the rest of those inside, including the queen and her family, were his allies and associates.
He was arguably the most powerful man in England after the king  and his influence over Edward IV, whether employed on his own behalf or that of others, is beyond question.
Given this power, it is possible that Gloucester simply yielded to temptation in 1483, first to dominate the minority and then, when that proved easy, to make himself king.
Both his coups began with a ruthless pre-emptive strike from a position of strength.
The Woodvilles had given no grounds for complaint when he moved against them at the end of April, and the protectorate was still viable in mid June when he chose to end it.
Gloucester may also have feared that the accession of Edward V would bring a diminution of the power he had enjoyed hitherto.
Although he was more powerful than the Woodvilles, they were closer to the prince.
This had not been an issue as long as Edward IV was in good health, and his death was so unexpected that it was not preceded by a political regrouping around the heir.
It inevitably became an issue, however, after the king's death, and Gloucester's vulnerability was further increased by the death of his kinsman George Neville on 4 May — something which immediately converted the duke's title to the northern Neville lands into a life interest only.
Once Richard had launched his attack on the Woodvilles, moreover, he exposed himself to recriminations should Edward V come to power, and this in turn may have played some part in deciding him to take the throne.
But his actions were perhaps not entirely a matter of cynical expediency.
He may well have believed that the factionalization inherent in Woodville control of the heir posed such a threat to political stability that his own rule was preferable — he may have persuaded himself, in fact, that he was acting for the good of the realm.
This was the line he took in his propaganda, but this does not necessarily mean that he did not believe it himself.
Which motive was dominant can only be a matter of opinion, but it is in any case unrealistic to grade them too rigorously.
Probably they were all present to some degree.
Gloucester's actions after his brother's death are traditionally seen as the triumph of an over-mighty subject, and it follows that Edward IV had been making a rod for his own back when he allowed Gloucester to become lord of the north.
There is an element of truth in this.
Gloucester's power was largely his  brother's creation and that power underpinned his success in 1483.
It was, not surprisingly, to members of his own affinity that Gloucester turned for the performance of sensitive tasks.
The men arrested at Stony Stratford were sent north for safekeeping.
Rivers was taken to Sheriff Hutton, where Sir Thomas Gower and other ducal retainers later witnessed his will.
Gloucester used his own men in the arrest of Hastings and the confiscations which followed.
It was a northern servant of the duke, John Nesfield, whom More credits with stage-managing Richard's acclamation by the citizens of London.
Alongside these individual contributions, Gloucester's northern connection also provided the muscle behind his coup.
He wrote north for reinforcements on 10 June and the army assembled at Pontefract a fortnight later, where it witnessed the execution of Rivers, Vaughan and Grey before moving south under the command of Northumberland and Sir Richard Ratcliffe.
In the event they were never called upon to fight, reaching London only after Richard had been declared king.
But the army's approach was already public knowledge when Gloucester advanced his claim to the throne, and the threat, as Mancini suggests, may have helped to ensure that Richard's usurpation met no overt resistance.
Richard himself was certainly grateful for the northern backing, and several of his grants as king were made ‘for service done at great labour and charge, in particular about the acceptation of the crown and royal title of this kingdom’.
Richard's coup cannot, however, be presented simply as the achievement of a powerful and independent northern magnate.
His own connection may have given him military credibility, but his political credibility derived from his role as a central figure in his brother's polity.
This made him an acceptable candidate as protector and, once he held that office, helped to ensure that he could call on the backing of the Yorkist establishment.
Although he turned to his own men for a number of controversial assignments, he was able to use his brother's servants for hardly less sensitive duties.
Royal household men were sent against Edward Woodville and to search for Dorset.
Even when Gloucester was apparently exploiting his own connection, his hand was strengthened by his status as representative of the young king.
The northern reinforcements were thus not strictly a private army, but were summoned to aid the protector against insurrection, although there may have been contemporary doubts about the validity of the distinction.
York seems to have hesitated over raising men, probably for this reason since it decided that its contingent should wear the city's badge until they reached Pontefract, and then Gloucester's as well.
It is, indeed, doubtful how much help Gloucester could have commanded explicitly in order to take the throne: some, almost certainly, but much (if not most) of the backing he enjoyed was given to the protector for the maintenance of stability — a distinction of which Gloucester himself seems not to have been fully conscious.
Although Gloucester's power, both in the north and more generally, derived ultimately from Edward IV, it is difficult to argue that the king was wrong in what he did.
His advancement of Gloucester can be criticized only by those who believe that the only good nobleman is an impotent nobleman.
Medieval kings did not think in those terms.
Gloucester's power was valuable because it ensured royal control of a significant and troublesome part of the country.
Nor can Edward be blamed for not foreseeing the ends to which Gloucester might put his power.
The duke had been a loyal upholder of the house of York, a central figure in Edward's polity; there was no obvious reason why he should not occupy the same role under Edward V. In this respect, precedent was on Edward's side.
Previous minorities had seen squabbles over the distribution of power, but no young king had ever been deposed.
Even royal uncles traditionally drew the line at that, something which explains why Gloucester's action seemed so  shocking to contemporaries and, perhaps, why he got away with it so easily in the short term.
In an immediate sense, Gloucester must take final responsibility for what happened in 1483.
However one explains the motives behind his actions, things happened because he chose that they should: there is nothing in the previous reign which compelled him to act as he did.
But although earlier events cannot be said to have caused the crisis, they did have some bearing on how it developed.
Like any reign, Edward IV's had produced its share of the disgruntled and disenchanted hoping for better times.
There was a legacy of forfeitures from the conflicts of the 1460s.
Edward had created a further group of dispossessed by his readiness to manipulate property descents, either to endow his family or to advance the creation of regional hegemonies for trusted supporters.
The latter policy could also entail a drastic withdrawal of royal favour from those who did not fit into Edward's plans.
The Herbert influence in Wales, for instance, was ruthlessly dismantled in favour of the prince's council at Ludlow.
In practice, few grievances against Edward IV became an issue in May-June 1483.
This owed something to the thoroughness with which Gloucester outmanoeuvred the opposition, which meant that he did not need to hunt for extra support.
But Gloucester also insisted throughout that he stood for the continuance of Edward IV's regime, an emphasis which inevitably played down the political significance of the ‘outs’.
It is possible to identify something of a backlash against Edward's policies, but it occurred in October, rather than May, 1483 and was subsumed in the rebellion against Richard III.
There are, however, two cases in which Edward's actions may have created allies for Gloucester.
One is the king's treatment of the Mowbray inheritance.
Edward IV's second son, Richard duke of York, had married the only daughter of the last Mowbray duke of Norfolk in 1478.
The bride died without issue in 1482, at which stage the land should have reverted to the heirs general, since a widower had no title in his wife's land unless there were children of the marriage.
Edward IV, however, was unwilling to see it go.
He had already persuaded one of the heirs, William Berkeley, to release his claims in return for the cancellation of his debts to the Talbots, and York's hereditary title to that moiety  was embodied in an act passed by Edward IV's last parliament in 1483.
The same act gave the prince a life interest in the remaining moiety, so deferring the inheritance of the other heir, John Lord Howard.
As the prince was still only nine, and Howard in his fifties, this meant that Howard himself, and probably his son, Thomas, stood relatively little chance of ever acquiring the property.
This disendowment of a loyal servant is reminiscent of Edward's shabby treatment of John Neville in 1470 and had similar consequences: Neville rebelled at the first real opportunity and the Howards backed Gloucester in 1483.
There is no way of knowing at what stage the Howards discovered that they were supporting a usurpation, but there are no signs of second thoughts.
John Howard received his dukedom, supported Richard against rebels later the same year, and died with him at Bosworth.
His descendants continued to regard Richard III as the founder of the family fortunes and the fourth duke kept a portrait of him in the long gallery at Kennington.
The other ally whom Gloucester gained as a result of Edward IV's policies was to prove an altogether more dubious asset.
This was Henry Stafford, duke of Buckingham, who had come of age in 1473 but had been refused any political role by Edward IV.
The areas of traditional Stafford influence, the Welsh march and north midlands, had been otherwise provided for during the duke's minority but there was a degree of political reorganization in both areas in 1473, which could have been exploited to allow the duke a role there had the king wished.
In Wales, the prince's council, established in 1471, was expanded in 1473 by the appointment of ten new councillors.
Neither then nor later was Buckingham made a councillor or involved in the council's activity.
In the north midlands, the dominant figure in the 1460s had been the king's brother Clarence, who had been granted the important duchy of Lancaster estates in the region centred on the honour of Tutbury (Staffs.).
He had drawn into his orbit John Talbot, earl of Shrewsbury, whose retinue constituted a significant part of the ducal connection.