

STRUCTURAL CHANGES
The new diplomacy we sketched in chapter 1 has three critical and intertwined ingredients: the bargaining among states for power and influence, the competition among firms contesting the world market and the specific bargaining between states and firms for the use or creation of wealth-producing resources.
All three are critically influenced by and in turn influence the world structures of security, finance and knowledge (Cox, 1987; Strange, 1988).
The changes in these structures during the last few decades have altered the ground rules for everyone.
Structural change has not, however, had a uniform effect on either firms or countries.
Though the experience of structural change is common to all, the consequences have been sharply different for both countries and firms.
To make the point, consider the striking contrast during the period 1973–85 ‘between the serious economic setbacks suffered by the newly oil-rich Mexico and the notable strides made by the oil-poor and oil-hungry Brazil’(Hirschman, 1986).
While Mexico's political weakness was excused and its economy helped out by the US, Brazil's relationship with Washington steadily deteriorated and its policies came under American attack.
Hirschman's explanation, influenced by the radical Brazilian economist, Antonio Barros de Castro, lay in the fortunate coincidence for Brazil of the 1983 devaluation with the moment when prior investments in heavy industry and infrastructure planned by the military government in the 1970s came to fruition (Lowenthal, 1987).
Growth resumed strongly after the hiccup of the debt shock, and expanded industrial exports combined with harsh decisions to reduce imports financed enough of the debt service to maintain trade credit.
By contrast, Mexico allowed imports to flood the domestic market and to crowd out capital investment so that growth was slow to get started again on a scale sufficient to keep pace with population growth and urbanisation.
Though there were other factors involved, as we discuss in chapter 4, one may conclude that Mexico ‘was one of the most active   borrowers and one of the most careless in its use of funds’(Congdon, 1988: p. 121).
The central argument in this chapter is that change in world structures has created both new possibilities for creating wealth, and new dilemmas for governments as to how to balance the conflicting demands of their domestic and international agendas.
Though all three sides of the new diplomatic ‘triangle’ are interconnected, all too often, states find less connectivity and more a sense of contradictory pulls among the imperatives of choices that cannot be avoided, as figure 2.1 illustrates.
Economic imperatives drive change in the structure of product and financial markets and affect the international division of labour.
Competitive imperatives drive firms' choices of strategy and may, as we illustrate later on, have little to do with short-run considerations of national economic factors.
The political imperatives are those choices faced by states, either solely or in alliance with others.
Whereas many developed countries are learning to resolve the contradictions and find new sources of advantage, we found that in our three countries the choices forced on them were not readily perceived as necessarily beneficial.
To explore why developing countries have such difficulty in resolving these contradictory pulls, we first review some of the most pressing economic and competitive shifts.
The combination of greater mobility of critical factors of production, notably technology and finance, creates tensions and uncertainties for firms as they develop their global strategies.
These tensions also inform the nature of the political imperatives, both international and national.
For example, greater capital mobility has permitted many governments, for good or ill, to initiate development projects that previously had been  starved by capital shortage and has helped raise the levels of ambition for future competitiveness and importance on the world stage.
Most critically, the clash between mobile resources and the largely immobile labour base of an economy has changed the ground rules for determining the attractiveness of a country to potential investors.
It is here that the nature of the structural changes raises troubling questions about what defines the ‘state’ and creates great uncertainty about the validity of many previous ideas and policy prescriptions.
The emphasis throughout the chapter is on developments at the world level to provide the backdrop for the more detailed discussions about individual firms and individual states in subsequent chapters.
ECONOMIC AND COMPETITIVE IMPERATIVES
The economic and competitive imperatives that shape the world system are born of two fundamental shifts that have in turn spawned a raft of consequential changes that affect deep-seated attitudes and behaviour.
We single out technology and the structure of international finance as the primary driving forces for change.
It is impossible to be certain, however, whether it is always technology that has caused change or whether technical innovation has been spurred by changes elsewhere.
Causality irrespective, we argue that many of the competitive innovations made possible by new technology could not be realised in corporate strategy without the simultaneous changes in finance.
Both, in tandem, have transformed who does what and where they do it to create the wealth governments now seek.
Technology shapes the division of labour
‘The international division of labour’ is only a fancy way of describing what people do when they go to work.
It is no more than the sum of forces — institutions and markets — which determine who is going to produce what goods and services, on what terms and by what combination of the four major factors of production: land, labour, capital and technology.
Of these, technology has had by far the greatest impact, by permitting structural changes in internationally linked production systems.
These could be described as a New Form of production.
Accelerating change in technology has enhanced the capacity of producers to supply the market with new products and services, and to produce old ones by new processes.
For example, recall that when anyone aged thirty today was born, computers were  rare; the standard equipment in all offices was a manual typewriter; jumbo jets were only at the development stage; transatlantic phone calls went by cable, not satellite; and television was virtually unseen outside the developed world.
Rapid change in the new supply possibilities unleashed by technical innovation has increased the risks for corporations of equally rapid elimination from the competitive game.
Choosing the wrong technology, or failing to take the necessary adaptive measures in management, production or marketing can quickly lead to falling profits, dwindling market shares and finally to takeover or closure.
Like the Cheshire cat, many great industrial enterprises, such as Firestone and Dunlop in tyres, have already vanished, leaving behind only their brand names as images to be exploited by their new owners.
Many have failed by being slow to realise that commanding a high market share in a single country is seldom enough.
As product lives shorten, there is less time to recoup investments in new processes or new products.
Besides, investments in innovation are becoming costlier.
The combination has impelled manufacturing and service enterprises in almost all sectors to search for larger markets abroad, and to establish themselves there in an ‘insider position’(Best, 1990: p. 260; Milner and Yoffie, 1989).
It is that, or go under.
Everyone, it would now seem, is in the race to build positions abroad.
Though it used to be thought that internationalism was the preserve of the large, private corporation, today they have been joined by small firms and many state enterprises.
Declining barriers to trade and investment have made this possible.
Not all are American, Japanese or European; some have bases in Taiwan or Korea, or India or Hungary even.
The net result is that enterprises with some form of linkage to the global market now account for the largest part of the global production structure — in raw materials, manufactures and services.
As vertical integration between producer and seller grows, so the ability of governments and systems such as the GATT to regulate trade declines.
Global production has not become integrated overnight.
Though the antecedents are ancient, it was not until the 1960s that one could begin to see the beginnings of what we now call global competition in other than oil and similar natural resource-processing industries.
There had, to be sure, been many cross-border investments, but in the main these were to replace imports and were based on exploiting competitive advantage only within a particular country.
In the 1960s some firms started investing abroad in forms that linked together production, trade and finance.
These linkages provided a source of   new competitive advantage for the entire corporate system and threatened the foundations of powerful national firms.
The beginnings were slow and limited to a few sectors where differences in labour costs were important.
From the 1970s onwards, however, the moves began to accelerate and involved quite different factors.
Table 2.1 suggests, in simplified form, the changing factors that have shifted particular industries at different times towards global competition.
The first wave of export-creating investments were predominantly in developing countries.
Led by, but not restricted to, the Japanese, these were what Michalet (1976) labelled ‘workshop’ affiliates, to distinguish them from the earlier ‘relay’affiliates that ‘cloned’the business in the foreign country.
These workshops were responsible for only that part of the production process or those components of the final product most sensitive to labour cost differentials, and have been located principally in South-East Asia and parts of Latin America (Grunwald and Flamm, 1985).
The gains in the host countries have sometimes proved short-lived, with the initial advantages being eroded by competition from other countries, as we elaborate in chapter 4.
Some countries like Malaysia have, however, managed to hang on to the advantages of being early recipients of such investments by virtue of their installed base of experienced workers who could help attract later entrants.
It is the developments from the 1970s onwards that have provided the greatest impetus to transform industries by linking activities ever more tightly across borders.
There has been continuous and continuing innovation in competitive strategy to change the ‘rules of the game’, as we show in the next chapter.
Three critical developments were needed to make these innovations possible.
One was the impact of information and transport technologies on lowering the real costs — and risks — of managing at a distance.
A second has been the creation of new technologies that have altered the scale needed for efficient  operation.
The third has been the provision of an ever-increasing variety of financial instruments needed to support the growing complexity of cross-border transactions.
Not surprisingly, these developments have been most widely exploited among the developed countries where the barriers to integration have been least.
Some of them, particularly in the information-intensive industries, had to wait until deregulation took hold.
For example, the deregulation of brokers' commissions on Wall Street in 1975 started a revolution in other financial capitals — the ‘big bang’ in London — and made possible the rise in international competition in sectors previously reserved for nationals.
Japanese security houses such as Nomura now challenge such US financial giants as Merrill Lynch in their own back yard, while the US giants together with the Japanese challenge the European leaders each in their own chasse gardée .
Similarly, the global development of the telecommunications industry was blunted until the land-mark US anti-trust decision in 1984 to dismember its monopoly supplier, AT&T.
With matching moves in Britain and Japan designed to galvanise their moribund monopolists, all the leading players have been propelled into a global contest.
The European moves towards 1992 have had similar consequences on a regional scale in those sectors, like defence, pharmaceuticals and informatics, where the barriers of regulation and restrictive public purchasing has been greatest.
In other sectors, the regulatory barriers were lower, allowing an earlier flowering of innovative, integrating strategy.
The consequence has been an explosion of FDI flows among the developed countries, as we noted in chapter 1.
Only Japan remains relatively isolated in terms of its low receipts of inward investment.
The attraction of the USA as a site for 60 per cent of the 1980s investment flows is not only the size of its market but also its favourable and stable political environment for business.
just the opposite, in fact, of corporate perceptions of many developing countries.
Indeed, so strong have the differential views on advantageous locations become that one recent assessment of the total stock of foreign capital in developing countries suggests that it is less today than it was in 1900, measured in relation to GNP (Maddison, 1990).
It is noticeable, however, that whereas the G-5 countries now account for 75 per cent of the world's FDI flow, their position as the five major exporters is a much less concentrated 45 per cent.
The implications of the imbalance for the future growth of FDI in developing countries and for an expanded trading role are considerable and discussed later on.
Where information technology permits operational integration across borders, other forms of technology are transforming what happens within each operation.
They have created new capabilities for the production of widening ranges of goods and services without paying the cost penalties or producing variety in yesterday's inflexible plants.
Moreover, system technology is capable of reducing the time needed to respond to changes in demand or to serve orders.
These systems apply both within the factories and in the linking of the factories to the markets.
Where technology may have reduced the minimum efficient scale within factories, the creation of corporate-wide systems of communication and control have served in many instances to increase the minimum efficient scale of the enterprise as a whole.
As chapter 3 shows, however, such developments have been possible in only some industries and to varying degrees.
These New Forms of Production (NFP) have caused significant adjustments within leading multinationals that spell both good and bad news for developing countries.
The bad news has at least three components.
The first is that, where they exist, they have created a new barrier to entry, making it more difficult for third world firms to compete.
Second is that, as the costs of developing the NFP has risen, many firms have had to face up to hard choices of priority about where to concentrate their efforts.
Few can afford to compete everywhere, and many have chosen to concentrate on those businesses and markets they know best.
Some have withdrawn from smaller territories.
Burned by their experience of the volatility of the capital markets, many leading banks such as Bank of America and Lloyds are pulling back from the periphery of their systems to defend their home bases.
The third negative applies in the high-technology sectors.
Even if— which in some cases is a big ‘if’— the patent system does not give away the vital clue to an innovative product of process, innovating enterprises now increasingly prefer to keep their knowledge to themselves in order to preserve their options on when, where and how to market it.
For developing countries, this internalisation of innovation makes it more desirable to strike a bargain with the innovator, because the alternative of paying patent fees simply does not exist.
Offsetting this cost is the possibility for some to make their own developments off the back of previous transfers of knowledge.
As Lall (1985) and others have noted, some developing countries have been able to create ‘localised technical advances’ that emphasise their relatively greater knowledge of low-wage countries and so establish advantage in neighbouring markets.
But these offsets are seldom adequate to  compensate for the inability to afford the technological investments needed to compete globally.
The good news for developing countries is that change has opened up unforeseen opportunities.
One comes from change in the methods of manufacturing.
In the 1960s, for example, it was often argued that the prospects of developing a car industry in Latin America were poor because the small size of the local market meant that small local plants could never compete on cost with imported cars.
What this argument did not anticipate was that new, flexible methods of manufacturing made possible by electronics sharply reduced the minimum economies of plant scale.
These opened up new opportunities of producing components either for export to the big car companies in America or Europe, or for sale to the local affiliates of those same companies.
In Brazil, for example, the change has meant a vast increase in the added-value part of the supply chain in local hands.
Their exports of auto components have risen sharply as VW, Ford and other majors have altered their supply policies.
These exports are still, to be sure, ‘dependent ‘, in the terms of the matrix in chapter 1, but they are none the less valuable and help to explain the asymmetry of the multi-nationals’ share of investment and their share of trade.
A second source of opportunity has been created as innovative third world firms such as Comcraft from Kenya have found that the systems of their much larger, multinational rivals have become overly complicated and expensive and can be simplified.
The consequently enlarged margins, especially when tied to the acquisition of operations shed by their rivals in peripheral territories, open up new avenues of growth unsuspected by ‘rational’ calculations of advantage.
A third source of opportunity has opened up by the increased willingness of many firms to contemplate non-traditional forms of investment (NFI), also in their marginal territories.
Similar attitudes may be adopted by newer, weaker rivals as they seek novel forms of alliance to overcome the disadvantages they face in tackling the world leaders head-on.
These opportunities have risks and costs as well as gains.
A fuller discussion of the balance of effect is, therefore, deferred until chapter 5 when a greater range of consideration can be entertained.
Managing all these new systems and new options places great demands on executive ability.
To develop adequate and growing capability requires investment in human skills and provides a new kind of barrier to the entry of more newcomers into the international system.
As later chapters show, these barriers are beginning to differentiate the corporate winners from the losers.
There are, however, limits to the capability of any one firm to cope with all the  new challenges.
Many of the largest firms, such as Fujitsu and General Electric, are finding that they have had to enter into alliances with competitors to create an adequate spectrum of global advantages.
Alliances bring new problems: as the Japanese say ‘same bed: different dreams’.
Learning how to reconcile the conflicting interests of the partners is a new challenge that is as yet imperfectly understood.
Like ministers new to government, managers are learning how to become statesmen and to reject the certainties that ‘winning’ strategies can endure without new alliances.
No matter how skilled the executives, these shifts in the production structure would not have been possible without complementary adjustments in the way firms can organise their financial affairs.
As competition shifts towards a more frenetic pace of activity, so the need to clear the cash balances speedily increases.
Inefficiency in the financial function can erode the benefits offered by the new technologies.
The communications and information revolution has permitted progressively greater central control over their financial affairs.
Moreover, the leading multinationals have been able to gain critical efficiencies in financing the whole system.
They now go to international markets, especially the Euro-currency markets, not just their national ones.
With more recent developments such as currency swaps and loans based on a basket of currencies, they have been able to lower their cost of capital and reduce the risks of their asset exposure in multiple currencies.
Thus, it is to the financial structure that we now turn.
INTERNATIONAL FINANCIAL STRUCTURE
By the international financial structure we mean the system by which in a market-based economy, credit is created, bought and sold and by which, therefore, the use of capital is determined.
This is not to be confused with the international monetary system which is usually understood to mean the system that governs exchange rate parities.
The two may interact with one another— for instance when countries try to control capital outflows in order to maintain a given exchange rate.
But, conceptually they are quite different.
Both are important in affecting state-enterprise bargaining, but they need to be assessed separately.
It is in the international financial structure that change in the past two decades has proceeded fastest, away from nationally-centred credit systems toward a single system of integrated financial markets.
Instead of a series of national financial systems linked by a few  operators buying and selling credit across the exchanges, we now have a global system, in which national markets, physically separate, function as if they were all in the same place.
The balance has shifted from a financial structure which was predominantly state-based with some transnational links, to a predominantly global system in which some residual local differences in markets, institutions and regulations persist as vestiges of a bygone age.
The pressures for greater convergence of national policy, at least among the developed countries, are irresistible.
Peter Drucker may have overstated his case when he observed that ‘capital movements rather than trade…have become the driving force of the world economy’(Drucker, 1986: p. 768), but he has pointed the finger at a central issue in the global environment.
The world economy controls events, not the macro-economics of the nation state.
Consequently, developments in the international financial structure have had a decisive influence on how wealth-creating activities are divided among nations.
Twenty years ago, many of the smaller economies were more or less cut off from the world market economy.
Today, there are virtually none, apart from extreme cases such as Albania and Myanmar.
Yet, though most developing countries have created ties to the international system for sovereign borrowing and for accommodating the demands of the World Bank and others for the adoption of more ‘outward-looking’ policies, many retain features of the old system of financial isolationism and inefficiency (Dooley and Mathieson, 1987).
Elaborate systems of exchange control, combined with politically-influenced procedures of domestic credit rationing can serve to keep critical parts of the domestic economy sheltered from the demands of the international economy.
Where these domestic effects are strong, the country has prevented any far-reaching adjustments of the domestic economy at the micro-economic level.
In particular, national desires to shift from import-replacing investments to export-creating ones may be confounded by administrative impossibility.
In short, failure to adjust fully to the demands of the newly-integrated global financial system can be a specific handicap to future development.
The consequences of structural change in international finance can be summed up in two words: Innovation and Mobility.
Together they were the necessary and sufficient conditions for the surge in bank loans to the developing countries in the 1970s, and together they provide much of the explanation for the reverse flow of funds, from South to North, that followed in the 1980s (see figure 1.3).
Innovation
To gauge the full significance of recent innovations in the international financial system, recall that in all market economies, it has always been possible to ‘buy’ money, like any other commodity.
Money for use today can be bought in exchange for money to be repaid some time in the future.
(By contrast, in a socialist or command economy, credit, like any other commodity, is allocated by the agencies of the state; the market does not come into it.)
In market economies, the key is that the very process of trading credit actually creates money.
The money-traders (bankers) take deposits from savers and then issue promises-to-pay to borrowers.
Ever since the Middle Ages, bankers' promises-to-pay, issued first as instruments of credit, have turned into money by being used as a means of exchange in their own right.
The same thing happened later with governments' promises-to-pay.
These too started as promises to exchange paper for gold, but soon became currency, a normal medium for exchange of goods and services.
After a while, and usually in wartime, governments were able to suspend the promise, so that the paper became simply paper money.
Over the last thirty years or so, a similar evolution by which credit instruments become money has rapidly taken place for the world market economy as a whole.
It began with the Eurodollar market.
By creating new credit instruments — at first Eurodollar loans, then Certificates of Deposit and more recently all sorts of commercial paper (i.e. more promises-to-pay issued direct by enterprises), banks began creating money in a new, unregulated international banking system, thus adding to the world's money supply.
For, as before, the credit instruments soon became used as means of exchange.
The availability of credit sustained investment and lubricated the channels of trade.
The results were all good for so long as the growth in output kept pace with the expansion of the new ‘money’.
While much economic theory ascribes the sustained economic growth of post-war decades to the liberalisation of trade and the lowering of tariff barriers through GATT negotiations, it seems far more likely that the real engine of growth has been credit-creation, begun by governments through the Marshall plan and other state-initiated measures but continued through the combined efforts at financial innovation of transnational corporations and banks in issuing tradeable commercial paper.
Trouble came after 1973 when much of the credits landed up in the hands of oil-producing sheiks who did not know how to spend all this new-found wealth.
The world economy was given a deflationary jolt.
The unwillingness of oil-consuming societies to check their spending resulted in the phenomenon of stagflation: slow growth combined with inflation.
The stagnation would have been much worse had the banks, with whom the sheiks deposited their unspent dollars, not quickly recycled them to governments and enterprises in developing countries where rates of return on invested capital were high and the potential growth seemed relatively high, at least initially.
Such rapid recycling simply could not have happened either in socialist systems (dependent on credit-by- fiat ), or by Western governments attempting to get the taxpayers' democratically elected representatives in government to vote the funds for expanded government-to-government loans, i.e. foreign aid.
Nor could it have happened on such a scale had the banks' powers of credit-creation been constrained by the prudential rules governing national financial structures.
This is not to deny that — as the rude awakening for the debtor countries of 1982 showed only too clearly — there were risks in unregulated credit creation.
The risks, as always, are of two kinds: that too much credit is created and inflation results; or that too little credit is created and deflation results.
The expanded scale of the banks' operations depended on two significant types of innovation: technical and structural (Enkyo, 1989).
Technical innovations have included the idea of arranging money transfers by issuing chequebooks, the use of plastic credit and cheque cards or the automatic, electronic transfer of funds and cheque-clearing systems between banks.
Structural innovation means the introduction of new credit instruments or the development of new kinds of business by banks, such as the invention by Citibank of Certificates of Deposit in 1965 or the introduction of Money Market Funds and NOW accounts by Merrill Lynch in the mid-1970s.
Structural innovation began with the creation of offshore, relatively unregulated Eurocurrency markets in the 1960s, as US banks searched for ways to get round irksome (and costly) domestic restrictions.
The second stage brought in much more fundamental and hard-to-reverse changes.
The banks developed a new role as providers of financial services, such as arranging leveraged buyouts, marketing commercial paper for corporate clients or advising LDCs on their rescheduling strategy.
They ceased to act solely as intermediators between savers and investors.
They became suppliers of financial services and more or less autonomous, internationally spread, gatekeepers to the Aladdin's Cave of the financial markets.
Further innovation began in the 1970s as banks came to regard their foreign branches as profit centres in their own right, not just as  overseas service counters for domestic clients with overseas interests.
The enhanced mobility of dollar funds and other short- and medium-term credit enlarged opportunities for commercial enterprises.
But at the same time, it increased risks for national governments, both as helmsmen for the national economy and as the ultimate authority responsible for maintaining or improving the creditworthiness of the state as a debtor seeking finance from the system.
This was the scenario of the 1980s against which the mini-dramas of our company-government bargaining was played out.
The bargaining was affected both by the new opportunities opened up in the 1970s and by the growing risks attendant on the 1980s.
In both periods, the decision making of governments and enterprises was greatly complicated by the changes in the financial structure.
Mobility
The altered financial structure greatly enhanced the mobility of capital.
Instead of most loans being made and credit instruments issued and traded within national systems under national authorities and in accordance with recognised, fairly stable rules, the new system is a worldwide network of banks and financial operators linked together by cheap, reliable and instant means of communication — but operating under far less well-defined and exigent rules.
The opportunities opened up by the technical innovations are so large and exciting that it is hard to grasp the full extent of the change.
Instead of a world of national economies linked mainly by trade, we have a world linked more closely by flows of funds across national frontiers.
In any week or month, these international financial flows are fifty times greater in value than the flow of goods (Spero, 1988).
By comparison with the mobility of labour or of goods, the accelerated mobility of capital in the world market economy is of an altogether different order.
Greater mobility has bred greater volatility.
Whereas conventional economic theory predicted that a change to flexible exchange rates would eliminate financial crises and allow markets to ease and soften adjustment to change, the opposite happened.
Volatility increased, and the extent as well as the direction of change became less predictable.
Expert advice proliferated, but in contradictory ways.
Where, and how far up or down, exchange rates or interest rates would go became matters of great importance to government and business.
For developing countries, volatility increased the direct impact on their domestic policies and plans.
Openness, urged on them by the  hegemonic power, the United States, and the international organisations it dominated, and implicitly accepted by their own decisions to borrow heavily from foreign banks, multiplied their vulnerability.
Corporations, having greater advantages of physical and financial mobility were also exposed, but to a lesser extent.
The sense of impotence and frustration experienced by the policy makers in developing — as, indeed, in developed — countries, has often encouraged nationalist reactions.
As with so many other aspects of the new international political economy, weak international institutions will continue to allow the divergence and unpredictability of the impact of global change on individual nations.
The debt crisis
Structural change combined with greater mobility increased the role of financial markets (and market operators) at the expense of states.
By facilitating the recycling of resources from surplus to deficit economies, the system's stability was placed in jeopardy unless the flows could be maintained.
The consequences of this dependence were seen when the flow was cut off so abruptly after 1982.
The banking system — and with it the whole world market economy — was subjected to new risks of insolvency if debtors defaulted or delayed repayment.
The uneven impact of the debt crisis on developing countries can be seen in each of four groups.
The first group includes those countries, like India, that had not borrowed heavily in relation to their size.
Though they missed the opportunity for a rapid spurt in growth in the 1970s, they were spared the social and political strains of vulnerability to the subsequent cut-off in bank credit.
India's foreign debt per head in the early 1980s was about $30; Brazil's was $480 (Nunnenkamp, 1986: p. 25).
In the second group, there were those countries, like Kenya, who had never been able to borrow much from the banks.
Their needs for funding, however, grew as interest charges rose, commodity prices fell and competition for export market shares from the indebted countries intensified.
The international organisations and aid donors did what they could to fill the gap by giving them special status and new credit facilities, but it was only just enough to keep them financially afloat.
This closer relationship incidentally increased the role of the state in most of these economies, but subjected it to the risks inherent in the political strings which the lending institutions attached to their ‘aid’.
The other two groups were the ‘heavily indebted’ borrowers.
They  can be divided into the safe and the unsafe.
Some were ‘safe’, because, like Malaysia, they had not borrowed beyond their capacity to repay.
Others were also ‘safe’ by virtue of being able to count on diplomatic help during the post-1982 adjustment.
The United States, moved by geo-political motives, came up with massive government aid for Mexico.
South Korea also got special help from Japan under the formal guise of reparations.
The fact that the postwar treaty had been a dead letter for many years did not worry either party.
The Japanese government was aware that putting up $3 billion to help Korea service its large foreign debt was going to be in the long-term interests of the many Japanese companies with investments and joint ventures in Korea.
The result was that in subsequent phases of the debt ‘crisis’, the Korean government never had to negotiate with foreign bankers or with the IMF.
The ‘unsafe’, heavily indebted countries were those who had over-borrowed but got no special international diplomatic help.
For these countries, the impacts of what has been dubbed the ‘forced adjustment phase’(Mentre, 1984) were reflected internally, with the main burden of adjustment often falling on wage-earners.
In the first two years of the debt crisis, Brazilian per-capita GDP fell by 8 per cent, unemployment rose by 13 per cent , and consumer prices doubled.
The large role of foreign banks in Brazilian development in the 1970s earned them a central role in the later adjustment period.
Their behaviour in Brazil was, however, complicated by the monetary authorities and policies of their home government — primarily, that of the United States since it was US banks who had taken the lead and were therefore the most exposed (Frieden, 1987; Nunnenkamp, 1986).
It was thus the internal policies of the United States that determined to a great extent who among the indebted nations won and who lost out in the long debt crisis of the 1980s (Wellons, 1987).
A recent study of US banking supervision policies in the 1980s shows how domestic policies, adopted to safeguard the solvency of the domestic banking system, could exacerbate the pains of adjustment for the debtors (Pauly, 1990).
In theory, the US prudential rules prevented banks from lending more than 15 (later 10) per cent of their capital to any one borrower, But in practice these rules were not properly enforced, allowing banks to ‘pretend’ that loans to state-owned enterprises were not loans to a ‘country’.
Though an Interagency Country Risk Exposure Review Committee was set up in 1978 to assemble the facts, no one insisted that the banks took notice of them or acted accordingly.
Instead of reducing their exposure to Brazil, for example, after the  second oil shock in 1979, some US banks who had already lent 100 per cent or more of their capital to Mexico and Brazil, actually increased their exposure.
They did so under pressure of increased competition.
Greedy for profits and market share, they shaved profit margins and incurred unwarranted risks.
Fearful of the growing possibilities of default, the US monetary authorities then pulled sharply on the reins by insisting on tougher capital/asset ratios.
This forced the US banks to set aside more of their profits as reserves.
With lesser ability to lend, they exacerbated the plight of their indebted customers.
As Pauly (1990: p. 41) concluded, ‘regulatory reforms designed to enhance market efficiency and institutional competitiveness…effectively provided distinct incentives for most banks to get out of the business of development finance’.
This would not have mattered if the US government, instead of giving special bilateral help only to Mexico had taken earlier, bigger steps to ease the pain of adjustment for all the major debtors.
The Baker Plan of 1986 was a move in the right direction but came only after what the IMF called the painful adjustment phase of 1983–4 was over.
Besides, the plan was not big enough to convince the banks that the risks of co-financing were acceptable.
The 1989 Brady plan proposed financial support from the Fund and Bank, supplemented by Japan, to relieve the debtors, provided they initiated economic reforms.
It, too, sounded good but eighteen months later had been applied to only four favoured countries — Mexico, Venezuela, Costa Rica and the Philippines.
The prime concern for the adjustments was the preservation of the banks and the international financial system.
The impact of the credit famine on indebted countries was secondary.
This indifference was naturally felt most acutely by the countries like Kenya in the second group of borrowers and by countries like Brazil in the fourth.
The knock-on consequences were even more severe.
The various plans failed to restore the confidence of either foreign banks or foreign investors.
They became less willing to transfer capital to the most troubled borrowers by the conventional means of foreign direct investment.
For example, many of the foreign firms we talked to in Brazil had adopted policies of limiting their capital budgets to locally generated profits, less dividends remitted home.
Such risk-avoiding moves did not, however, stop them from continuing to deepen their involvement in the economy by other means.
Alternative financial transfers
As the UNCTC notes, ‘the sharp decline in FDI flows to developing countries does not mean that TNCs have been ignoring those areas.
In fact,…they have expanded their contacts with developing countries through the use of a variety of business arrangements other than direct investment.
[These non-equity arrangements]include licensing agreements, franchising, sub-contracting, management contracts and joint ventures.’
Quite how much these New Forms of Investment (NFI) have expanded is open to debate, for there are no reliable estimates.
None the less, they are an important new feature of the global financial structure.
They are ‘invisible investments’, just as earnings of foreign exchange by the sale of banking, insurance and other services to foreigners are described as ‘invisible exports’.
Essentially, what the firm is doing is to reap an additional return on the capital already invested at home in developing the product by transferring its know-how across frontiers.
However disembodied, it is still capital.
From the host country's point of view, although no capital has been transferred, the licence payments are the exact equivalent of dividends paid on debenture shares or to payments of interest on a loan.
But there are no hard and fast definitions of NFI; the distinction between a sale by the investor which represents some sort of invisible investment and one which does not is not always easy to see, especially with turn-key contracts.
Oman (1984, 1989) suggests that the crucial test is whether the arrangement involves some element of risk to the seller — and some prospect of a share in future income.
But, unlike equity investments of the traditional kind, there need not be in NFI arrangements a direct correspondence between the degree of risk assumed by each party and the degree of control exercised by them.
This would be something to be bargained over.
Where the NFI is very important to the multinational, it may be in a position to exert total control.
An example is how NFI-type arrangements have made possible the development of Brazil's automobile component industry.
General Motors has increased its sourcing of components from local subcontractors.
To make sure that these components met the quality standards needed by the main plant, the company despatched, at its own expense, what they described to us with only mild exaggeration as ‘a regiment of engineers’ from Detroit, some of whom stayed down in Brazil for months advising the subcontractors on how to meet the company's standards.
In corporate accounting, this would go down under salaries or labour costs; while  for Brazil it represented an investment of time and resources as well as a transfer of technology.
GM has reduced its financial exposure in Brazil, but it has not reduced its long-term commitment: the continuing success of its assembly plants there depend crucially on the quality and reliability of its local suppliers, all of whom need continuing sources of assistance to upgrade their capabilities as technologies and competitive standards shift.
In other cases, as we more fully discuss in chapter 5, the use of NFI alternatives to capital transfers incur distinctly second-best solutions to the problem.
None the less, the fact that such alternatives are being employed means that one must look beyond both debt and FDI flows to capture a fuller sense of how multinationals are extending their reach into even the most troubled countries.
The decline of LDC's share of the investment flows reflects the uncertainties consequent on the debt problem and is the counterpart to the strikingly increased concentration in intra-OECD FDI noted earlier.
But that would not necessarily be inconsistent, in some sectors at least, with an expansion of multinationals' activities in developing countries where growth rates were better or markets protected and where they could do so without transferring fresh capital.
Whether by some form of contract or by increasing local capital, firms can continue expanding their economic involvement.
They are also changing the nature of the risks they choose to manage.
Yet, however disembodied, these are still transactions involving foreign capital.
POLITICAL IMPERATIVES
We turn now to the third of the imperatives that shape the bargaining climate: the political context.
For developing countries especially, the contradictory tugs from the imperatives of economics and competition pose dilemmas of choice.
In many instances, the choices are not of their own making, but the product of the world system, and are often perceived as contrary to the national interest.
To explore why this should be so, we first have to be a bit more precise.
What do we mean by ‘the political context’?
Clearly, there are two parts to it: the international, and the national.
Political economists would say that both are aspects of a security structure.
Just as the production structure consists of arrangements governing what is produced where and by whom, so the security structure consists of the arrangements governing the provision of security, for persons and property, for states and for enterprises.
On the international level, such security as there is derives from some sort  of balance of power between states.
When it breaks down, war may result.
At the national level, the degree of security provided for firms and individuals usually derives from the government's maintenance of law, order and increasingly regulatory behaviour.
Yet at the same time, governments may threaten to take away or violate the security of firms or individuals, in their person or in their property.
Thus, in political economy terms, change in the global security structure — the context of bargaining — may take place both at the international level (as relations among states change) and at the national level as a result of the changing relations between the state and what sociologists call civil society (Cox and Jacobson, 1973).
For example, if the firm's home state and the host state go to war, bargaining with the latter is bound to be gravely affected, as British firms experienced recently in Argentina.
The company's property may even be forfeit, as happened to German corporate property in America or Britain in 1946.
Equally, bargaining may be affected by internal political change.
If the host government appears to lose authority, or the legitimacy of its authority, over its civil society, the firm's security will be at risk.
An example was the effect of the Soweto riots in 1976 in South Africa.
Foreign companies immediately became less ready to invest in the country.
A less extreme example was the waning legitimacy and sense of control of the Sarney government in Brazil in the late 1980s, which undoubtedly stimulated some of the capital flight.
This in turn reinforced the vicious circle of foreign debt, exchange controls, administrative impediments to corporate planning and the reluctance of foreigners to increase investment in the country.
International politics
The main changes in the international political system are well known and understood.
The first is often described as the change from a bipolar to a multipolar world, though it is debatable whether there really are multiple, more or less equal power centres as the phrase implies.
What is actually meant is that the world is no longer so clearly divided as it was in the 1950s and 1960s into two armed camps of allies, with China, after 1960, causing something of a schism in the Russian camp.
Each superpower's dominance over its associated allies rested on its ability to provide a nuclear umbrella.
That dominance began significantly to diminish once the superpowers started to negotiate arms controls.
If the superpowers are still perceived as dominant, it is for other reasons.
For instance, US domination over South Korea is now less  exclusively based on the military protection it offers against invasion from the North: it is increasingly based on the threat of closure of the US domestic market to Korean exports.
More subtly, the United States has created an alternative form of economic hegemony through the market position of its multinationals.
As the US share of world exports has declined, the US multinationals' share of world trade of manufactured goods actually increased between 1966 and 1984 (Lipsey and Kravis, 1987).
Nye (1984) made the same point when he observed that the agenda for examining the power of US firms in the 1980s was little different from that of the early 1970s, despite the relative loss of US power.
He argued that the success of US multinationals had become much less dependent upon US hegemony and challenged Gilpin's earlier claims (1971: p. 54) that ‘a diminution of the pax Americana and the rise of powers hostile to the global activities of multinational corporations would bring their reign over international economic relations to an end’.
The workings of these changes have had quite different effects on our three countries.
Kenya has been the least affected, because it had never occupied a strategically important corner of a continent that had largely been ignored in the bipolar world of the superpowers.
They have had most effect on Malaysia.
The political context for investors there has shifted from that of a favoured frontline position on the Western side of the Bamboo Curtain in the 1950s to that of an emergent player in a dynamic, economically important region in the 1980s.
In the 1950s, the civil war with the Communists had made the newly independent government nervous about its future defence and security.
Britain was a member of SEATO, the US alliance organisation in the region, and shared the US interest in containing the Asian spread of communism.
It also had a more direct interest in keeping Malaysia in the sterling area.
The result, in 1957, was ‘a bargain unique in the history of the unscrambling of the British empire’ under which Malaya (as it then still was) agreed to bank her foreign exchange surpluses from exporting rubber and tin in sterling in London, while Britain undertook responsibility for Malaysian security.
Thus, colonial dependence was prolonged beyond independence, with marked effects on British investment in Malaysia.
Only after the dissolution of the Malaysian Federation, did the Malaysian government take over control of monetary policy and reserve management from the old colonial currency board (Strange, 1971).
The lingering effects of Malaysia's earlier position in the security structure go far to explain some of the subsequent changes both in the investment strategies of corporations and in the policies of the government.
For Brazil, which had been the US's chief Latin American ally among surrounding neutrals in World War II, the decline of the bipolar alliance system has been part of a long, slow process of growing mutual disenchantment.
The signing of the Rio Treaty in 1947 guaranteed US defence of the Western Hemisphere in peace as in war.
In the subsequent decade, a boom in US FDI in Brazil placed US corporations far ahead of others.
Subsequently, the American share of both influence and investment has shrunk.
Though there were other important factors at work some part of this decline can reasonably be attributed to Brazil's diminished sense of dependence on US military aid and protection (Lowenthal, 1987).
The impact of the international politics of the cold war upon most developing countries was rather distant.
The exceptions were those few developing countries where America feared most the possibilities of Soviet or Chinese expansion.
In particular, South Korea and Taiwan both got a kick-start to economic growth from lavish American aid and easy access to the US market.
Both made the most of their chance.
Others, like Iran or Pakistan, were unable or unwilling to do so.
In the development game, only a few countries benefited substantially from the conflict between the superpowers.
Of much more direct relevance to all developing countries has been the burial of third world hopes for an effective political alliance of the poor against the rich.
Born in the 1960s, the UN's decade of development, these hopes had been reinforced by the success of OPEC in the 1970s, only to be buried in the course of the 1980s.
By the time the debt crisis hit in 1982, it was already clear that solidarity among the delegations of developing countries at the United Nations and in other international forums was not enough.
The Group of 77, as the developing countries called themselves, had already discovered the capacity of the opposing phalanx of rich, aid-giving industrialised countries either to stonewall their demands for more aid or for preferential trading arrangements, or to fob them off with empty, symbolic gestures.
Recall that in 1964 the developing countries used their voting power in the UN to call the first United Nations Conference of Trade and Development (UNCTAD), because they had been frustrated by the rules operating in the GATT.
These rules stipulated that negotiations on trade matters could only be initiated by principal suppliers.
When developing countries wanted better terms of access for their exports of manufactures, they found that the principal supplier was invariably an industrialised country.
Moreover, even when negotiations were opened, the principle of reciprocal bargaining introduced by the  United States as a result of its own domestic legislation from the 1930s, meant that the LDC's had little to bargain with.
Their markets were small and concessions were rated by combining the size of the proposed tariff cut with the size of the market.
The equality of treatment boasted by GATT worked only among equals and to the detriment of the small.
Superficially, the rich countries appeared to make two concessions to the UNCTAD complaint of inequality in international trade.
One was to acknowledge that GATT's rules should take account of levels of economic development, and that developing countries henceforward would not invariably be expected to make reciprocal concessions to the rich, developed countries.
When it came to practice, however, the concession meant little.
In the 1960s Kennedy Round of multilateral trade negotiations, the much-acclaimed reductions in barriers to manufactures, trade did little for those LDC's that were poorly placed to produce, let alone export them.
A trend had already been set in textiles, where the comparative advantage of cheap labour was becoming important.
The Long Term Cotton Textile Agreement of 1962 (LTA) permitted the developed countries to check imports from developing countries.
By the 1970s, when the more comprehensive MultiFibre Arrangement (MFA) of 1974 took the place of the LTA, these quotas put a virtual stop to further export growth of the most successful textile producers.
The second concession was to exempt from most GATT rules those developing countries who could benefit from preferential trade arrangements offered by some rich countries, such as the European Community's Lomé Conventions, or by regional agreements like the Latin American Free Trade Area (LAFTA) or the Central American Common Market (CACM), both established in 1960.
But because most of the LDC's exports were primary products sold in open, competitive markets, and because when it came to their nascent manufacturing industries they were in hot competition with each other, these concessions brought little benefit.
High as their hopes had been after the OpEC price rise of 1973, the Group of 77 failed to get substantial support for its proposed Integrated programme for Commodities.
Under pressure from France and other Europeans, the US reluctantly agreed to a North-South dialogue to consider this and other matters.
At the ensuing Conference on International Economic Cooperation (CIEC) in Paris in 1976, the only small concession made to the demand for a New International Economic Order (NIEO) was a grudging and procrastinating acceptance of the idea of a Common Fund to support price stabilisation  arrangements for eighteen of the most important commodities exported from developing countries.
Setting up such a Common Fund proved even more difficult and it was not until 1986 that the required number of states ratified the agreement.
Even then, major subscribers like the US and the USSR had not come up with the necessary money.
By that time, the writing on the wall for the G-77 was clear for all to see.
Little was to be expected from combining forces and votes in international organisations.
It was each for himself in a hard, competitive world.
One significant casualty of the collective defeat of the G-77 was the attempt to use international organisations, specifically the United Nations, to put shackles on the multinational enterprise by means of an agreed Code of Conduct.
But by the mid-1980s, after more than a decade of discussion the G-77 had been unable to get the industrialised countries to agree to substitute the mandatory ‘shall’ for the advisory ‘should’in the draft Code (Zacher and Finlayson, 1988: ch. 2).
The liberal, non-mandatory OECD Code of 1976, together with the ILO's Tripartite Declaration dealing with social issues were left as the only general guideline for foreign investors in developing countries.
Neither have much influence over those countries most concerned with getting what they can from the colder world of sauve qui peut .
Domestic politics
In this new world of each for himself, the influence of domestic politics on state-firm bargaining has correspondingly grown.
The gap between stable, competent states (whether large or small) and unstable, incompetent and often corrupt states incapable of inspiring confidence whether as political or economic partners has widened.
Far from lessening the role of domestic politics, the growing interdependence of the world economy has put new pressure on the national political authority.
The essence of the change is that the intermediating function between social and economic forces is no longer one that a government can renounce or let go by default.
One might consider the primary choices for domestic policy to be those affecting autonomy, security, efficiency and the distribution of wealth.
In the early postwar decades it seemed that governments had some clear options.
States could choose to join the Soviet Union or the people's Republic of China in the non-market part of the world economy.
They could also choose to maintain barriers to trade, to investment and to other financial transactions with the outside world.
They could also match political neutrality with economic autarky as a means to maintaining the autonomy of the state and its immunity to external pressures.
Most of these options have been closed out in the last two decades.
Economic growth in the open world market economy has been so great that few governments are now in strong enough control over their civil societies to be able to deny them the chance to participate in this wealth-creating system.
Khrushchev's boast in the 1960s that socialism would bury capitalism sounds laughable now, as Poland and Hungary scramble ahead of the Soviet Union in economic reforms.
Even Gorbachev proclaimed the Soviet Unions' interest in participating in the management of the world market economy.
The radical change in Soviet policy was epitomised when Western investors were warmly invited to buy into state-owned enterprises (SOEs) or to set up new ventures, all with the ability freely to repatriate their profits.
Here, we see the state as an ardent suitor, suddenly aware of the rich dowry the multinational can bring to the national economy.
Opinions may differ on the relative contributions of different factors to the changes, but of the pressures pushing governments further and faster into the arms of the multinationals there can be little doubt.
These pressures complicate the choices for domestic policy and add new dilemmas.
Should political authority be managed for national independence or for collaboration?
Should considerations of efficiency dominate those of welfare?
Should regulation, based on international principles, supersede political intervention in the name of the national interest?
Whose interests within the state are of paramount importance?
These and other similarly familiar issues are examined in chapter 4 in the light of changing international circumstance.
It seems clear that the USSR, like many developing countries, has been revising its opinion about the nature of what bargaining with firms entails.
Instead of thinking of it as a zero-sum game in which one side gains what the other loses, they are beginning to regard it as a positive-sum game from which both sides may gain, provided both play with skill and finesse.
They have no illusions about the difficult choices that lie ahead, especially in terms of the distribution of the gains throughout the civil society.
The rewards, however, are seen to be worth the effort to master the new game.
What now defines the state?
The reader might conclude from this that we are arguing that Hayek (1979) and Friedman (1962) have won the ideological battle for a  diminished role for the state.
Their view that the less the state interferes with the market, the better for everyone is a totally different argument, especially as it applies to the developing countries.
In any particular society, real life suggests to us that the answers are neither black nor white but rather shades of grey.
How much welfare, and in what form, are questions that different societies with different resources and different ambitions will always answer differently.
The importance of the shift for the purposes of this book is that the growing competition among states-as-suitors means that government has shed some powers, but taken on others.
Their role in fostering education and R & D assumes far greater proportion than hitherto in conditioning their success in attracting those foreign firms who might assist in achieving national aims.
This is the basis of our earlier argument that states are being drawn, willy-nilly, into a new game with more complex rules and far greater demands on the skills of public servants.
The new game of competing for world market shares alters the order of importance of the functions of the state.
In the long run, the defensive function wanes as the welfare function waxes in importance.
Armed forces increasingly take on the role of internal policemen — as they often have in several countries.
Where states need armed forces to maintain internal order, as in China or South Africa or Northern Ireland, the military will continue to play a political role.
Neighbouring states, observing these forces as a potential threat to themselves as well as to the internal dissidents, will hesitate before dismantling their own forces.
But the trends in the global security structure must be toward a demotion of the military functions of the state.
Conversely, in most states the economic functions of the state become more important and more powerful.
The capacity to produce internal wealth and to create exports to finance purchases of needed goods and services eases the pressures for social and political change.
The dilemma in many countries, though, is that the civil society is itself becoming more fragmented.
Whose interests are best being served?
Can one think of the state as a giant labour union with an uncommitted workforce?
Social divisions, described in chapter 6, complicate the job of those who discharge the functions of the state.
They are more interested in tending the cow rather than milking it — the cow being the national economy.
finance ministers and central bankers will be more concerned than generals and defence ministers to keep the cow healthy, well fed and growing than to extract more milk in the form of taxation from the wretched animal.
The problem for analysts here is to define precisely what is the ‘cow’.
If the aim of states hence forward is to maximise the share of world demand being satisfied from their national territory, industrial policy grows in importance.
The European propensity to discriminate in favour of‘national champions’ has been strong, as it has been in Japan and to a lesser extent in North America.
The power and effectiveness of such discrimination, however, is eroding as the ‘national champions’ increasingly go offshore either to produce or to procure technologies.
The result, both in some sectors where there are producers who are purely home-based and others who are foreign-based, and in whole states, is a political tug-of-war to define the ‘cow’ according to either the stay-at-home or to the go-abroad interests.
The more there are of the latter, the less powerful the pleas of the former for protection against imports or foreign ownership.
The more there are of the stay-at-homes, the less warm the welcome for foreign rivals on the home ground.
We see already this battle joined within and between the United States and the European Community.
The weapons are competition policy and regulation of trade and services.
In both, there are contending forces in each direction and the final outcome for economies as a whole and for particular sectors is still in doubt.
In both, too, there are problems of defining the state.
In the EEC, there are the member states and increasingly regions, such as the Mezzogiorno or Scotland, whose interests diverge.
Within the USA, the states are increasingly flexing their muscles in the form of rushing through anti-takeover laws when a favoured local firm is threatened.
The ‘state’ thus becomes literally a bone of contention between opposed interests, both of whom want control over it in order to decide what precisely its role shall be and in whose interest the market shall be managed.
Precisely the same sorts of divisions of opinion plague policy making in less developed countries, though in many the lines of demarcation may lie along racial lines or involve the role of the traditional elites.
In short, a sufficient explanation of the differences in bargaining relations between states and enterprises must include consideration of changes in the security structure as well as to changes in the financial and production structures.
It is not enough to say, as successive reports from the IMF or the World Bank have tended to do, that it all depends on governments and that it is up to them how the economy prospers.
That is to beg the question of why any particular government was able to act or was constrained from acting in an economically optimal way.
The political economist has to look behind policy choices to the structural context of international relations and to the context of  the security structure influencing the definition of the role of the state in relation to markets, domestic and global.
Managers would be well advised to do the same, for otherwise they will be blind to many of the causal forces at work.
THE REALM OF IDEAS
‘A bonfire of the certainties’— the phrase was coined by a British politician in 1989.
It aptly describes the structural change that took place in the realm of ideas in the course of the 1980s, and which, no less than the more tangible structural changes in production, finance and politics, made up the context within which foreign firms and host governments bargained over the terms of their association.
In the 1970s, most Keynesians, monetarists and marxists still believed firmly in the validity of their diagnoses and the efficacy of their remedies.
But by the end of the 1980s none of them — not even the marxists and dependistas — were quite so sure.
The evidence before them — literally, thanks to television, before their eyes — was equivocal and contradictory.
A comparable uncertainty about the conventional wisdom of past decades can be found among political scientists concerning the forces shaping the state and influencing its responses both to the market and to civil society.
There were no more clear guidelines, no simple models, no surefire prescriptions for success.
The same is equally true for managers as they wrestle with the new demands of innovations in global competition that we describe in the next chapter.
A brief reminder to the reader of the nature of these uncertainties, without going into a lengthy digression on them, may serve to emphasise the point that this structural change, as much as the other kinds, added to the dilemmas of decision makers both in business and in government.
For while the other structural changes altered the range of options open to states and to firms, this one cast a shadow of doubt over which of the available options to choose within the range.
The uncertainties concerned not only the ends to be sought but also the means chosen to achieve them.
We see three really major issues on which ideas have undergone change, but without, as yet, reaching a firm verdict either way.
whether democracy is a help or a hindrance in the pursuit of economic growth.
Does a free, politically liberal regime provide a more stable environment for foreign firms than an authoritarian one?
whether in its style of economic management a weak state or a strong one is best for the economy.
Do governments throw sand in the works, so that the less they interfere the better?
Or, does the economy do better if they act as gardeners, nourishing the soil, pulling out the weeds, selecting the plants?
whether free trade is superior to protectionism.
Given that a totally closed economy is no longer a feasible option, questions remain about the optimal timing, the sectoral priorities and the best forms of liberalisation.
On all three issues, the accumulation of conflicting evidence is the main reason for the discomfiture of the dogmatists, the discrediting of easy, universal theories about economic growth or political progress.
On the first issue of political liberalism vs bureaucratic-authoritarianism, the popular dogma of the 1960s and 1970s — in Latin America especially — held that in poor countries, the ruling elites were mainly concerned to hang on to power and also to increase their own wealth, if necessary at the expense of the peasants and the urban proletariat.
The elite — bureaucrats as well as politicians — needed, it was asserted, alliances with local business and foreign multinationals.
The alliance would sustain the authoritarian political regime.
Economically, there would be growth, but also continuing poverty.
But by the 1980s, it was clear that there were contradictory permutations to this simple model of third world backwardness.
There had been some authoritarian regimes that were also populist and had been sustained by votes not repressive force.
And some of the authoritarian oligarchies had been good for economic growth — as in Brazil in the 1970s, or Singapore under Lee Kuan Yew — while others, like the Greek colonels, had not.
Some dictators had been keen to forge triple alliances including foreign firms; other had kept them at arms' length.
The diversity of political systems and of economic records in developing countries suggested that international capitalism was not the sole deciding factor.
General theories were suspect.
In an influential book,Bringing the State Back In , one of the editors, Theda Skocpol (Evans, Rueschmeyer and Skocpol, 1987: p. 28) concluded, ‘we do not need a new or refurbished grand theory of The State.
Rather, we need solidly grounded and analytically sharp understanding of the causal regularities that underlie the histories of states, societies and structures and transnational relations in the modern world’.
This book reflected a growing disenchantment with sociologists' abstract generalities of earlier years.
The editors' work had  emphasised the divergent consequences on political development of historical experience, of culture and social structures and of external threat.
Policy choices reflected what governments perceived as the major threats to the cohesion and survival of the state.
This might be foreign invasion, as in Israel or South Korea, or internal strife and divisive conflict as in Sri Lanka.
Evans concluded that in some developing countries, the foreign multinationals might be a help and not a hindrance to the state.
Their transnational linkages created new problems but also a new role and function for government (1987: p. 193).
These linkages moreover could even strengthen the hand of the state against humiliating interference by the US-dominated international financial organisations like the IMF or the World Bank.
The second disputed issue — really Keynesian interventionism vs Hayek-Friedman minimalism — was perhaps the dominant ideological issue of the 1980s.
Until well into the 1970s, the almost universal conventional wisdom — except perhaps in the United States — was that the government should stand ready to act as a deus ex machina , stepping in to save the capitalist system from its inherent defects of inequality in the distribution of the wealth it created, of unbalanced investment that created private affluence and public squalor, and or vulnerability to cyclical downturn, slump and unemployment (for example, Shonfield, 1965; Galbraith, 1956).
By the 1980s, in the wake of the stagflation and slow growth in even the rich economies of the Western Europe, came an equally almost universal loss of faith in the capacity of any individual state to intervene decisively and effectively.
More than that, state intervention, and especially public ownership of the means of production, had sadly disappointed socialist hopes.
Instead of balancing and sustaining the economy, it was stunting growth and obstructing innovative flexibility and creativeness to respond to market signals.
The most dramatic demonstration of the disillusion came from Eastern Europe at the close of the 1980s.
Though some reformers wanted to keep the social democratic welfare-oriented interventions of the state, all were united in wanting to free the production and distribution system from administrative meddling, incompetence and inefficiency.
There was wide disagreement about where and how to start dismantling the command economy, but none about the direction for progress.
Such disillusion is not confined to what UN statisticians call the centrally planned economies (CPEs).
From Latin America came a devastating critique of the consequences of excessive state intervention through the administration of licences and permits.
Hernando de Soto's (1989) study of Peru concluded that government had created a  large and costly informal economy by insisting on licenses for everything from building a house or driving a taxi, to starting a shop or business.
Rather than pay the bribes and suffer the losses resulting from delays, people took the risk of fines for disobeying the law.
In Peru, there were half a million laws, some conflicting, but all administrative.
Nearly two-thirds the work force opted to work outside the law, producing a hidden uncounted 29 per cent of the country's GNP.
The evidence we have from foreign firms' experiences in Kenya bear out de Soto's thesis: state intervention can be costly and corrupting.
Moreover, the excessive resort to public ownership is a drag on economic development.
One World Bank study estimated that in sub-Saharan Africa the public sector accounted for an average 30 per cent of GDP — but appropriated 60 per cent of capital available for investment.
Yet not all the evidence supports the minimalist, Friedmanite conclusion.
In Japan and South Korea, and in some sectors in Taiwan, government played an important part in accelerating industrialisation and developing exports.
In Taiwan, steel and shipbuilding had both been state-owned.
In Korea, industrial policy had clear priorities and had used political power to make sure that firms complied with what the planners wanted.
In Japan, the industrial policy of the ruling Liberal Democratic party worked through industry-wide business associations, and disputes were arbitrated by a strong, meritocratic central bureaucracy.
The central bureaucracy performed this arbitrating function mainly by developing long-term, multi-issued inter-relationship between each industry and the ministry of jurisdiction with minimal dependence on parliamentary legislation…
The system appeared elitist but it was mass-inclusionary because bureaucratic rationality was, through the LDP, subject to constituency demands at the constituency level.
(Murakami, 1987: pp. 68–9)
These varying forms of state intervention, rather clumsily described as ‘bureaucracy-led, mass-inclusionary pluralism’ worked well from the 1950s into the 1980s.
How they might continue to function is, however, a different matter.
Some analysts like Murakami are unsure of the effects as the new, wealthier mass middle class begins to use its political power.
And in Korea, the repression of opposition parties and of student and workers' protest suggested that policies suitable to early phases of industrialisation might not continue to be so acceptable.
All in all, state ownership and state intervention with prices has come out with a generally, but not totally, bad record.
Some state  enterprises have been efficient state enterprises, and some price controls (usually highly selective) effective.
for the rest, the Keynesian/monetarist debate is unfinished and inconclusive so far as any particular policy by any individual state is concerned.
Much the same can be said of the third issue, of free trade vs protectionism.
It was certainly not so simple an issue as supposed by the old ideologues on either side — the neo-mercantilists in favour of protection and the neo-classical liberals in favour of open, free trade.
By comparison with some of their Asian neighbours, the four ‘Little Tigers’ seemed comparatively liberal in trade matters.
Moreover, the record was mixed.
South Korea maintained barriers to imports of consumer goods well into the 1980s.
Taiwan kept some tariffs high, and until coerced by the United States had used the still more effective trade weapon of an undervalued currency.
Even Japan had such a low ratio of imports to GNP that it was repeatedly accused by Washington of covert protectionism, worked through its opaque distribution system.
Protectionism it seemed, was not necessarily a hindrance and could even be a help in the transformation of an economy.
That conclusion leaves open the question of what sort of transformation is best for the society.
By the mid-1980s, some development economists were beginning to question what was meant by successful economic growth.
There could be a rise in GNP per head without the poor being any better off than before (Streeten, 1981).
Sen, for instance, considered national economic development to be only a means to the end of better living standards.
He pointed out that some countries — mainland China, Sri Lanka, Mexico, India, for instance— had failed to achieve as dramatic increases in terms of GNP per head as, say, Korea, but had nevertheless progressed in terms of individual entitlements to food, housing, literacy, health and life expectancy (Sen, 1984, p. 485).
Their exports were not always spectacular but their industries produced enough for a growing domestic market.
In the case of India, in fact, a highly protected market had been highly competitive in some key sectors of the economy.
Local private firms had built up a skilled work force that eventually drew in foreign multinationals on terms acceptable to the government.
Hirschman, too, stressed that Latin American countries who by and large had disregarded the wisdom of the liberals had nevertheless managed to improve material standards for most if not all their people (Hirschman, 1986).
Perhaps the question is not that of choosing the right theory, but of getting the timing right.
Some development economists, hitting at the liberal dogmatism of the Bank and the Fund, were arguing in the late  1980s that the choice was not a simple either- or choice between Import Substitution or Export promotion.
Rather, protecting some selected local markets was a necessary stage in the progress to successful exporting.
The difficult decisions for policy makers were when to make the switch of emphasis; and what policy measure to choose to make it effective.
The problem of specifying the timing and the form of effective state action is essentially political, not economic.
A government's ability to act coherently and consistently with a predetermined economic strategy, is circumscribed by its dual political role: as both judge and advocate.
It is the arbiter of market forces, gatekeeper to the domestic market, and umpire, in the last resort, between conflicting vested interests.
And at the same time, it owes its very existence to an alliance of social forces that sees government as the instrument of social domination — whether by a ruling class, a small party or tribal elite or a coalition of either with the bureaucracy of the state.
Consequently, choices judged politically feasible are not always economically optimal.
One can see the effects of such political calculation in the choices made by each of our three countries, whether it is Malaysian domination of the Chinese, Brazilian bureaucratic domination of unorganised workers, or Kenyan domination of those outside the inner ring of presidential favourites.
As always, the range of politically practicable options open to policy makers at any time is circumscribed by local circumstances, the power base on which they depend and by external forces beyond their control.
To that extent, it could be argued that the current disarray of the theorists is a minor factor.
Yet because the function of theory in social science is not just to explain, clarify and add to understanding, but also to legitimate some courses of action over others, the contemporary ‘bonfire of the certainties’ adds one more difficulty to the normal dilemmas of policy making in developing countries.
Theory needs to deal more adequately with how general structural change has been a vital ingredient in the transformation of the role multinationals play in their dealings with states.
Global competition is much more than rivalry among firms, for it involves the ‘structural competitiveness’ of states within the world system.
The continuous confrontation is, as Fajnzylber (1988: p. 2) put it
between different production systems, institutions, schemes and social organisations in which business enterprises figure prominently but are nonetheless only one component of a network that links them with the educational system, the technological  infrastructure, management/labour relations, the relations between the public and private sectors, and the financial system.
The structural shifts we have described are pushing business enterprises to the centre of the stage in the evolution of the international political economy.
So it is to the consequences of structural change for the economics of global competition and the adjustments of firms' strategies that we now turn.
GLOBAL COMPETITION
The accelerating pace of structural change thrusting multinationals more squarely centre-stage in world affairs means that the economics of competition in many industries have been altered fundamentally, and probably irreversibly.
What is loosely termed ‘global competition’ is the outcome of how individual firms have reacted over time to the changing balance of opportunity and threat.
The opportunities have been pervasive, given the declining regulatory and technical obstacles to the internationalisation of firms' activities.
But so too have been the threats, for not all were able to respond adequately to the new standards set by the leaders.
The actions taken by both leaders and followers have, at each turn of the wheel of fortune, helped to create the next round of change.
Though most enterprises in developing countries have been by-standers in many rounds, more are now coming forward to play their part for the future.
That a Taiwanese enterprise, the Evergreen Marine Corporation, has emerged as the world's largest container shipper reflects the new opportunities, even for latecomers in established industries.
This chapter explores why external change in the international political economy has had the uneven impact on industries we showed in the previous chapter.
Some reasons are not hard to find.
For example, electronics has transformed many industries, but left others like agriculture relatively unmarked.
If during the last twenty years, the costs of automobiles had declined as fast as those for memory capacity in computers, today a Rolls-Royce would cost 50 cents (van Tulder and Junne, 1988).
Equally, regulatory change transformed financial services, but had lesser impact on chemicals.
Such changes radically alter firms' options for choosing how to serve their foreign markets and create alternative structures of increasingly global competition.
Other reasons are less obvious, for firms have not merely reacted to change in their external environments; many have actively sought to create new, internal sources of advantage.
As they jockey for position, firms often adopt quite different strategies within the same industry.
Their investments in competitive innovation have proved decisive in determining who gains leadership on the world stage and who loses.
For example, the US firm, RCA, one of the pioneers of TV technology and the first to produce a commercial monochrome TV set in 1946, could not keep up with later developments, was bought by GE during the 1980s and is now owned by the French firm, Thomson.
The dynamics of competition are such that firms' capacities to invest in next-generation skills and capabilities can be regarded as more important than industry-level economics in determining the international division of labour for specific projects.
The new competition created by all these external and internal forces has increased the barriers to entry and thus the degree of global concentration in many industries.
In many cases, as illustrated by examples from a few industries, the issue of the advantages of scale has shifted from the level of the factory to the firm as a whole.
The New Forms of production (NFP) can be seen to be of increasing power in certain circumstances.
Where they have been most developed, they act to divorce the firm from the factor costs of a national location, and thus provide a further challenge to older notions of comparative advantage determining the outcomes for countries.
This plurality of possibility and change among industries, and most particularly for firms within an industry, creates added complexity that government officials need to understand.
Anticipating future sources of competitiveness is at the heart of successful negotiations between firms and states.
ALTERNATIVE STRUCTURES OF COMPETITION
Competitive structures are shaped by the sum of the actions taken by the firms contesting the market.
They reflect managers' choices about how best to serve markets.
Essentially, they have three options: exporting, local supply or licensing.
Exporting is common when the costs of transport are low and the benefits of creating scale in a single location are high, as, for example, for Boeing and Airbus.
Alternatively, the firm can choose to set up a local operation and simply ‘clone’ the domestic business in the foreign country.
This investment option is favoured when the costs of transport and tariffs are very high in relation to the product, as in detergents and many simple household products, or when the need for local service is high, as in accountancy services and retail banking.
The third option is to offer a licence or franchise to independent local firms, as is common in  fast food services, hotels and parts of branded businesses like Coca Cola.
For the same business, firms vary their choices across countries, depending upon local regulations, the size of the local market and the existence of both local competitors and suppliers.
Thus, for example, McDonalds has some franchises, owns some of its foreign outlets and, for its new outlet in Moscow, has been obliged to set up its own supply chain for beef and other items not readily available locally in the needed quantities and qualities.
In Malaysia, ICI's industrial chemicals business combines all three: it imports scale-dependent products such as chlorine; manufactures simple pesticides; and has licensed locals to manufacture other products.
Brazil's informatics policy has obliged industry leaders like IBM and DEC to adopt policies in Brazil that they tend to avoid elsewhere.
Decisions about suppliers also affect the overall structure of competition.
Boeing's US exports are based in part on the supply of components from Canada, Britain, Japan and elsewhere.
Some of these are the result of political negotiation on offset agreements — as in the cases of their sale of AWACS planes to the UK — and some reflect the economics of scale and specialisation among independent suppliers.
Where firms use ‘workshop’ affiliates in developing countries, they may lower their total costs below those of stay-at-home rivals.
In other words, a complete picture of the structure of competition must be built up from consideration of the location and form of the whole chain of activities that go together to make up a business.
Merely looking at the final stage of supply can obscure the full range of options open to a particular firm in its choice of serving foreign markets.
Taken together all these effects have produced a widely varying balance of choice between exports and local production across industries, as figure 3.1 illustrates.
Only the general tendency for an industry is shown; there are always exceptions, as for example the development (though usually only temporarily) of some international chains of hairdressing salons in an otherwise ‘domestic’ industry.
Omitted are a whole host of major industries where the dominant pattern is less readily discernible.
Automobiles, machinery, electronics, chemicals and many others are somewhere in the middle: the choices made by individual firms are scattered all across the map.
‘Global’ is included in two guises in figure 3.1, for there are many possible variants of the phenomenon.
They all share the characteristic that decisions taken in one country directly affect decisions elsewhere.
When, for example, Matsushita decided to build an export-oriented   air-conditioner plant in Malaysia, it also had to adjust its plans for investment in Mexico and its export policies from Japan.
Matsushita's competitors were also affected for they had to make compensating decisions to protect their own market positions.
The American competitor, Carrier, had to adjust its investments in South Korea and Singapore as well as its trading policies in the USA.
Great care is needed in interpreting such diagrams, for what one sees depends critically on how the ‘industry’ is defined.
Automobiles are made of thousands of components, many of which are produced by small firms and sold to the assemblers like Toyota.
Should one talk about the auto assembly business or the carburettor business?
The former is global and one where Brazil's industry is exclusive to the multinationals: the latter is much more local and dominated in Brazil by indigenous entrepreneurs.
Another problem lies in the definition of ‘product segments’ within an industry.
What it takes to succeed in the PC market differs sharply from that for mainframe computers.
Moreover, the ‘boundaries’ that separate industries are shifting  continuously.
For example, the computer industry and telecommunications are now converging as technology advances.
NEC in Japan has adopted the corporate slogan ‘C & C’— computers and communications — to indicate the basis on which it is setting out to compete across the world with IBM and many others.
Global structures of competition are not god-given.
They are created as firms seek new advantages by linking together markets and activities that previously were kept separate.
In newspapers, for example,The Financial Times is now printed simultaneously in London, Frankfurt, the USA, and recently Tokyo, thus greatly extending the scope of the market it can serve.
Its development of a form of NFP harnesses the twin developments of declining scale in printing and growing scale advantages in a global network of information.
Often the changes come from managers' innovations in thinking.
Commenting on the fact that the industrial gas separation business had conventionally been regarded as ‘local-for-local’, because of the economic supply radius of 200 miles for the distribution of gas, the Chairman of BOC said,
we learned that the conventional wisdom was wrong.
Overlaid on local costs are substantial costs for the maintenance of technology.
We recognised that we could export technology and managerial skills internationally…
These one-time costs once met could be leveraged over much more business activity around the globe than we then enjoyed.
(Giordano, 1990).
Figure 3.1 provides a simple snap-shot of only two dimensions that distinguish one industry from another.
In reality, the picture is more akin to a movie full of life and detail.
Leaders emerge from a bruising contest.
Like others, BOC was seeking to create advantages from an international presence and make it possible to do things a purely local operator could not afford.
Why do firms expand abroad?
The basic driving forces propelling firms abroad come from managers' desires for growth, for cost reduction and for control.
These are the same as in domestic competition, but assume greater complexity and risk once the firm strays from its known market.
Why then do managers take on these extra burdens?
They must set up costly systems of command and control that can work effectively over large distances and deal with the hazards of markets that differ from their own, Managers must feel that the gains will outweigh the costs.
The balance of effect depends largely on what the firm is trying to  do.
The firm may be market-seeking , in the sense that it wishes to gain access to more customers and consumers.
Alternatively, it may be resource-seeking , in the sense that it wishes to gain access to raw materials that are not readily available without investment.
For firms that have already invested abroad, there is a third motivation:efficiency-seeking from investments that transform the workings of their international network.
This last motivation is explored later on in the section on ‘scope’ advantages.
For now, attention is focused on the first two reasons why firms invest, rather than rely purely on third-party trade.
In the hunt for both markets and resources, managers invest to create three basic kinds of new advantage that make it more difficult for others to compete.
First, they may create an ‘internal’ market that allows them to control all the activities involved in cross-border transactions.
They do this when they believe they can operate more profitably and with greater stability than could be achieved by reliance on the workings of imperfect international markets (Buckley and Casson, 1985).
Second, they may wish to exploit advantages of scale.
A third reason is the desire to spread risks by diversifying sources of supply or markets.
Exploiting a technical lead or a brand name are common spurs to creating an internal market.
Typically, technology innovators emphasise exports as the initial route for expansion and set up local sales subsidiaries to ensure proper control.
Few use licenses, for fear of creating future competitors by giving them a ‘free ride’ on ideas that cannot adequately be recovered by the fee (Magee, 1977).
Similar reasons apply to brands.
The perceived need to create an internal market and eschew licensing is also strong when there are concerns about ensuring the reliability and quality of the product.
Over time, however, the balance of effect may change as the technology matures, competitors develop rival products or regulations shift.
Trade can be replaced by import-substituting investments.
Exploiting the advantages of large scale, where they exist, is a second major force propelling firms abroad.
For example, in capital-intensive industries like oil refining and industrial chemicals, the largest plants can provide substantial unit-cost saving over smaller plants.
These plants can exceed the size of some national markets, leading producers to concentrate their production on a few sites and export to small markets: some chemical plants in Brazil or Mexico serve other parts of the Latin American market.
Alternatively, when the costs of transport are high and local production can be justified only by the creation of a single plant, competitors may choose to collaborate, as in the case of consortium oil refineries.
Scale  advantages are also created by the rising costs of development of the product or the process.
Both types of scale can provide advantages to only the largest players and lead to a concentration in the industry.
They are, however, offset in many cases where customers and consumers around the world want variety.
As we show later, the question of scale is complex and subject to rapid alteration in contemporary markets.
The third motivation — lowering risks — has several components.
Market-seeking investors often wish to smooth out the risks of fluctuating demand by serving multiple markets: decline in one market can be offset by growth in another.
The same considerations apply to the diversification of sources of supply for resource-seeking investors (see, for example, Rugman, 1979; Vernon, 1983).
Many investors also try to reduce risk by vertical integration.
Where scale has created high fixed costs, producers of standardised products have a strong incentive to stabilise demand: small variations in volume have a large impact on profits.
Owners of facilities such as a mine or oil well can reduce uncertainty by acquiring customers, or integrating ‘forwards’.
Although this does not eliminate the uncertainty, it reduces customers' abilities to switch among suppliers.
To protect their captive customers, they may also offer advantageous terms not available to others in the market.
These benefits can, however, be limited by producer countries' actions, as OPEC's countervailing power showed for the oil industry.
Attempts to create producer cartels for copper, aluminium and other commodities have, however, been less successful for lack of diplomatic solidarity.
The benefits are further reduced when competitors respond by integrating backwards'.
As the oil majors integrated forwards into petrochemicals, some chemical companies such as Du Pont bought oil companies to give them access to captive sources of petrochemical feedstock.
Such action and reaction creates turbulence in many markets.
Technology drives changes
Technological change is one of the most potent forces for upsetting existing industry structures.
It is driven by competition, for necessity has always been the mother of invention.
Though much attention has been focused on critical ‘breakthroughs’ in such areas as micro-electronics, biotechnology and new materials where the potential for creating dramatic changes is obvious, change can also be created in small steps as firms find new ways of upgrading efficiencies.
Over time, less glamorous ‘tortoises’ can change the rules of  competition and the structures of industry just as much as the ‘hares’of rapid change.
For the purposes of this book, it is important to define what we mean by technology and why time scale and the extent of change in any one step is important.
Our concern is not with the creation of technology, but with its diffusion to developing countries.
We share the view of Ernst and O'Connor (1989: p. 20) that
technology cannot be reduced to machines.
It has to do with certain kinds of knowledge, which allows the adaptation of means to ends.
Part of this knowledge is embodied in machines, but most of it is not.
it is embodied elsewhere — in the brains of people, in organisational structures and in behavioural patterns, which in turn are conditioned by the strategies of different social factors and their patterns in conflict and co-operation.
Understood in this broader sense, technological change cannot be separated from market structures, patterns of competition and social regulation, and from the quality of the educational system and of the labour force.
Technology is a double-edged sword.
It can create new advantages for innovators; it can also erode the position of incumbents by altering the rules' of supply and encouraging new entrants.
Sometimes, new entrants can come from ‘latecomer’ countries that previously had been excluded from the industry.
Whether developing countries can become competitive latecomers is a pressing issue that we discuss in later chapters when we look more deeply into the issues of social structures and human skills.
Our concern here is to sketch the broad trends.
With some notable exceptions, the costs of innovation have been rising to reinforce the barriers to entry and further concentrate already strongly oligopolistic industries.
Hi-tech leaders like IBM and Fujitsu spend close to 10 percent of turnover on R & D, and in the pharmaceutical industry spending is closer to 20 per cent.
Some large firms have found it impossible to match competitors' spending: Jaguar found it could not afford the costs of developing the next generation of engines and models and was forced to sell out to Ford in 1989 for £1.6 billion.
Sometimes the development costs exceed the resources of even the largest firms.
For example, a new large passenger aircraft can cost over $3 billion, requiring government assistance, either directly or indirectly.
Goldstar's new wafer fabrication facility being developed in South Korea will probably cost more than $2 billion before it is opened in 1996 and is dependent on generous government support (Hayashi, 1989).
Offsetting this barrier is the possibility that the costs of imitating the  leaders' original innovations can be much cheaper.
For example, EMI spent millions of pounds developing its Nobel prize-winning medical scanner in the early 1970s, only to find that competitors found ways around the complex wall of protecting patents for several hundred thousand pounds.
Similarly, the entry cost for new mini-computers used to be $25 million and five years' work, but has now fallen to below $5 million and one year.
Latecomers can take advantage of the effects of the broad diffusion of the ideas behind the original concept.
The same has been happening in the steel industry with the advent of the mini-mills.
Whereas Nigeria followed the classic pattern of building large plants with the latest equipment, and then suffering from overcapacity, Togo has been operating a mini-mill profitably for some years and has begun to export to neighbouring countries, even those with large, underused plants of their own.
Similarly, small plants were built in the late 1980s in the Ivory Coast and Benin.
These African developments owe much to an American entrepreneur who has personally provided the necessary technology transfer and opened up new possibilities for breaking old structures of trade that were dominated by the large producers in developed countries.
The application of technology to managerial systems provides the basis for creating the many possible NFP structures.
Even though the advent of computer-controlled equipment has lowered the minimum efficient scale in many factories, it has usually increased the need for greater scale elsewhere in the system.
Shortening lead times and the possibilities of widening the product range made on a single set of machines adds considerable complexity to the operation.
Some models of hand calculators, for example, are on the market today for six months or less, whereas a life of several years or more was common during the 1970s.
Further complexity is added because the factories have to be linked more closely to the markets, otherwise the advantages of better factory management would be eroded by inefficiencies in the supply system.
Managing such complexity usually requires efficiency-seeking investments that permeate the whole enterprise.
In both manufacturing and service industries alike, firms are becoming more critically dependent on advances in communications and office automation to make these systems work effectively.
For example, international insurers compete in part by deploying the abilities to manage large-scale systems they have built up by investment in equipment and human skills over many years.
Such investments, though less obvious than product development costs, provide equally stiff barriers to entry.
With smaller scale in the producing unit, the entry costs to many  component businesses have declined and allowed a proliferation of new entrants scattered across the globe.
Moreover, greater efficiencies in communication can make it relatively easier to control subcontractors and to separate parts of the vertical chain of supply into more bite-sized pieces.
Whether these entry positions can, in turn, be levered into positions of more than a new dependency on the technological leaders is an open question and one that cannot be answered in the general case.
Much depends on the specific conditions of both the technology and the state of competition.
Yet some new options have been created for developing countries.
Economic explanations
During the last three decades, many economists have built models that link together many of the factors affecting both trade and investment flows.
Their models have been evolving as circumstances have changed and explain much of what has been happening at the level of the industry, but say little about the behaviour of individual firms.
Economists are more concerned to find similarities among firms than to explain the differences.
As we argue many times in this book, it is the differences that concern government officials in negotiating lasting deals.
None the less, the concepts are powerful and provide a way into understanding the more detailed managerial explanations that follow later.
Economists consider the advantages described above to be created by inherent market imperfections; in a perfect market, all firm-specific advantages would be traded away by competition and the world would have remained in the state of Adam Smith's atomistic market.
Consequently, multinationals are concentrated in oligopolistic industries and have been larger than firms that stay at home (Bergsten et al., 1978).
Without the development of oligopoly at home first, multi-nationals would not exist.
There are, to be sure, a growing list of exceptions, but seldom are oligopoly considerations far removed from the picture.
After all, multinationals are essentially ‘monopolists’ in their use of their specific advantages, otherwise they would need neither internal markets nor contractual arrangements.
One school of thought concentrates on defining the conditions for creating power by building the internal market and thus overcoming the ‘market failure’ in many cross-border transactions.
Economists such as Buckley and Casson (1985), Caves (1982), Casson (1987), Rugman (1986), and Teece (1985) have explored how international production is affected by the relative costs of transactions inside and  outside the firm.
They place much stress on the distinction between ‘intangible’ advantages and those from large scale in production.
Intangible advantages are created by investments in technology, marketing and skills of organisation.
These provide firms with product and service differentiation that allow them to compete on other bases than merely those of costs and prices.
These ‘intangibles’ are growing in importance in NFP structures to provide alternative forms of scale benefit to leading firms and erect further barriers to entry.
The converse of barriers to entry are barriers to exit: it may cost firms more to quit than to stay in the market.
As we show in chapter 5, exit barriers make multinationals less mobile in practice than they are theoretically capable of being.
A related school of thought asks questions about how the competitive advantages of firms interact with those of countries to help explain the level and pattern of cross-border activities of firms.
Dunning's (1988a)‘eclectic paradigm’ contrasts a country's resource endowment and geographical position (providing ‘locational’advantages) with firms, resources (‘ownership’advantages).
In his model, countries can be shown to face one of the four outcomes shown in figure 3.2.
In the top, right hand box of figure 3.2, local firms possess competitive strengths, but the home domicile has higher factor and transport costs than foreign locations.
The firms, therefore, invest abroad to capture the rents from their advantages.
But if the country has locational advantages, strong local firms are more likely to emphasise exporting.
The possibilities when the nation has only weak firms, as in most developing countries, leads to the opposite outcomes.
These conditions are similar to those suggested by Porter's (1990)‘diamond’ of national competitiveness, discussed in chapter 1.
Dunning and porter help one to understand average national competitiveness, but fail to explain why competitors in the same country often adopt quite different strategies.
Moreover, national conditions have quite different effects on firms, depending on whether they are seeking markets, resources or efficiency.
Further, as we show below, the general theory needs modification to allow for the ability of some firms to escape from the average of national industry economics by internationalising their systems of management.
More generally, this effect means that multinationals are cushioned to a degree from the effects of exchange rate shifts and other determinants of national competitiveness (Lipsey and Kravis, 1987).
A major problem with such economists' models is that they are essentially static.
One exception is Vernon's (1966) international product life-cycle model.
Based on US data, this model treated   investment motivations as primarily defensive ; to protect export markets threatened by either tariff barriers or competitive moves.
For income-elastic products and services, demand first arises in high-income countries.
Firms in those countries become the world leaders and begin to export as rising incomes spur demand elsewhere.
At some stage, demand in a particular country grows to the point where it can more profitably be exploited by trade-replacing investments.
Later on, products mature and become more price-elastic, allowing production advantage to shift to lower-income countries that may later begin exporting on their own account.
The timing of the shifts depends on the growth of the local market, the extent of tariffs imposed and the fear on the part of one player that if he does not invest, others will and thereby capture the market.
This leads to a ‘bandwagon’ or ‘follow-the-leader’effect in which many firms invest in the same markets at roughly the same time (Knickerbocker, 1973; Graham, 1990).
These lines of reasoning emphasise the innovative capacity of firms and challenges static neo-classical economic explanations of national competitiveness.
This is the force that Schumpeter (1942: p. 84) describes as
competition from the new commodity, the new technology, the new source of supply, the new type of organization…competition which commands a decisive cost or quality advantage and which strikes not at the margins of the profits and the outputs of the existing firms (and possibly even entire national economies) but it their foundations and their very lives.
Johnson (1975b) picked up this theme: ‘Innovative capacity should be viewed as a basic source of difference in comparative advantage, and technological change as a chronic disturber of existing patterns of comparative advantage’.
Even Vernon's model has fallen foul of the continuing disturbance to existing patterns, as he himself acknowledged (1979).
Though it captured much of the dynamic of British and American FDI in the pre-oil shock world, it failed to anticipate subsequent developments in corporate strategy or indeed what had motivated investors from other countries.
A critical reason has been the exploitation of new advantages of ‘scope’, permitted by the declining costs of information.
New ‘scope’ advantages
Technology has permitted firms to link together more closely the three basic means of serving foreign markets — exporting, local production and licensing — within more complex ‘internal’ markets.
A global perspective allows firms both to spot opportunities faster than others and to build networks of supply that combine the strengths of various locations and so further reduce total supply costs.
This combination is sometimes called the economy of ‘scope’ and should not be confused with scale.
Because some firms are better equipped than others to create new advantages of this kind, the differences in corporate strategy have widened.
So too has the gap separating winners and losers.
Early analysis concentrated on the multinationals' invested position abroad.
For example, Vernon (1971) defined a multinational to be a firm with wholly or partly owned production facilities in a minimum of six foreign countries.
More recently, attention has shifted to considering the combination of FDI and world market share.
The idea is that, just as brands provide suppliers with enduring benefits, so command of significant shares of world markets can confer lasting advantage even if the supply choices change over time.
The success of many Japanese and German firms in gaining global market leadership has helped shape this re-appraisal.
Initially, they emphasised export strategies as an alternative to the leaders' investment-based approach.
They were helped by their post-war cost advantages — rapid reconstruction at home meant they had newer facilities than many of their competitors — but they were also pre-disposed towards exporting by the Allies' confiscation of their pre-war overseas assets.
When the Japanese returned to investing in the 1960s, they first concentrated on Asian markets that had largely been ignored   by earlier investors.
They tended to locate component supplies in lower-income countries to create two-way trade with Japan; they did not replace the trade in finished products (Kojima, 1978) .6 The Japanese moves cannot be explained in the defensive product-cycle terms; they were offensive in the sense that they were designed to establish positions that permitted new world-scale advantages to be created by subsequent expansion.
Japan's success, shown in table 3.1, has provided the inspiration for other newcomers, described in chapter 5, to follow suit.
Japanese market domination in such products does not indicate exports from Japan; the shares are held by firms that use both exports from home and, increasingly, overseas production.
High shares are increasingly important in industries where the economies of ‘scope’ are most apparent.
They allow leading firms continuously to adjust to the collapse of the timescales for the diffusion of products around the world; people all over the world are increasingly aware of what others are buying.
In addition, the precipitous decline in the real price of many products has made them accessible to many more people in the developing world.
Such adjustments, however, can only be made if firms invest in their internal capabilities.
They have to build systems capable of integrating the knowledge of diverse trends in national markets with the management of flexible supply.
Firms such as Kodak and Fuji in consumer film are able to launch new products simultaneously in  multiple markets.
Only the largest and most experienced firms can make such moves; others with lesser resources have to phase their market entry moves sequentially (Kogut, 1983).
But a sequential approach runs the risk of entering some markets too late to catch the wave of fashion or of meeting already entrenched opposition from the more fleet of foot.
As firms learn how to capture the full potential of such ‘scope’ advantages, they change, once again, the structure of many international industries.
The emerging New Forms of production demand ever higher levels of skill in the workforce at all levels in the hierarchy.
They do not however, apply to all industries, for there are many obstacles that firms have to overcome.
As with all the economic forces affecting firms' behaviour, the impact of change is uneven and defies generalisation.
Thus, it is to sectoral differences that we now turn, to illustrate how change has been occurring at different rates and with different implications for governments.
INDUSTRY EFFECTS
The range of possibilities for the pace and form of change can be seen in a few specific industries in each of the three sectors: national resource processing, manufacturing and services.
The experience in each suggests that there are many common features, but also many differences.
Each has its own momentum that critically affects how much developing country governments can influence the outcomes.
Natural resource processing
Adding more value to commodities is one of the most common means developing countries employ to increase the value of their exports.
Yet they are often inhibited from doing so by the structure of vertical integration imposed by resource-seeking investors from the consuming markets.
The combination of high fixed costs, limited numbers of actors and thin trading markets usually creates verticality (Williamson, 1975, 1985).
These barriers are amplified by the intangibles of market knowledge and the specific skills needed to operate effectively both at each stage of production and across the entire value-adding chain of production.
The aluminium industry illustrates an extreme form of multinational verticality.
It has three distinct stages of processing — bauxite mining, alumina refining and ingot smelting.
In 1976, 91 per cent of all bauxite trade was managed by multinationals (Hashimoto, 1983).
High capital  costs — an alumina plant can cost up to $1 billion — limit the number of buyers and sellers in the chain.
Moreover, overcapacity reduced margins during the 1980s when the real costs of construction rose, thus creating higher barriers to entry.
Further barriers come from the fact that alumina plants are highly specialised; switching among alternative sources of bauxite of varying chemical composition can add anywhere between 20–100 per cent to the operating costs (Stuckey, 1983: pp. 53–55).
Consequently, the trading between the mine and the refinery resembles a bilateral monopoly.
The operating conditions make short-term or spot contracts highly risky; stockpiling is uneconomic, because bauxite has few alternative uses.
Occasionally long-term contracts have been used, but recent experience has shown them to be uncertain, given the volatility of currencies.
Consequently, industry practice has been to reinforce policies of vertical ownership — the creation of an ‘internal’ market — as a more effective method of managing the uncertainties (UNCTC, 1981; Hennart, 1988).
The power of the international oligopoly has limited producer countries, abilities to capture a greater share of the total value of the sector.
For example, one study showed that if all the bauxite and alumina currently exported were converted into aluminium, Australia's export value could be tripled (Australian Manufacturing Council, 1989).
Yet Australian producers have not yet felt capable or willing to confront the historical legacy of capacity installed in the consuming markets.
In other countries, where a smelter has been installed near the mine, as in Indonesia, it has typically been built in partnership with the buyers of the output.
Even then there have been difficulties, in part from the problems of developing the skills required to operate the equipment efficiently, and in part from other national dilemmas of choice in allocating local resources against competing demands.
When these barriers are less pronounced, as in the tin industry , the degree of verticality is reduced.
Local producers can, depending on transportation costs, more readily locate refining and smelting units near small mines.
Indonesia, for example, has successfully operated its own producer, PT Timah, created by the nationalisation of the local operations of Billiton, a major Dutch operator later bought by Royal Dutch/Shell.
Even so, PT Timah took many years to develop its own technical expertise and still depends to an important degree on technical assistance from multinationals, including Billiton.
Malaysia went further by buying the parent company of many local mines, The London Tin Company, and later bought more mines from Charter Consolidated to emerge as a major producer in its own right, selling to world markets through the London Metal Exchange.
Such success for  developing countries is not always the case, even in the same industry; Bolivia has had a sorry experience in trying to do the same as its Eastern rivals, but has suffered from a critical lack of expertise.
Verticality and high barriers to the entry of local producers co-exist in many other industries, even where the structural balance is quite different.
Sometimes these conditions have been only temporary, as can be seen from the history of many agricultural industries.
For example, the advent of marine refrigeration allowed such firms as the American firm, United Fruit, in bananas from Central America, and the British meat firm, Union International, in Argentina, to build powerful integrated systems.
They owned extensive producing acreage and developed strong brand names in consuming markets, all linked together by processing units and captive fleets of ships.
Their power was eroded as producer governments applied tougher regulations or nationalised the plantations and ranches.
A contrasting example, where technology is acting to concentrate a previously fragmented industry, is the Kenyan Power industry .
Here, the chain of adding value in this industry can be considered as:
The integration of research and breeding allows faster development of new disease-resistant strains; information is more efficiently and creatively managed within an ‘internal’ market, especially given the advent of bio-technology.
In this case, however, unlike the aluminium industry, there are serious barriers that limit the extent of profitable integration through the rest of the chain, even for the multinationals.
One obstacle is the fragmentation of export markets.
National horticultural markets have wide variations in price, seasonal effects, methods of selling and quality gradations.
Buyers place great emphasis on the reliability of supply and the ability of the supplier to maintain quality during transit: quality is judged in the market, not at the time of despatch.
Sellers, therefore, have to know in detail where and when to sell and how to match their market intelligence with the planting cycle.
Because quality is hard to define with precision, reputation has a great bearing on suppliers, ability to deal with agents and to command premium prices in a volatile market with a considerable fashion element (for example, colours for festivals).
Although these conditions place a premium on the ‘intangibles’ of technical and market knowledge, they have not led to full verticality in the firms' fixed assets.
Instead, some multinationals have invested in knowledge systems that provide access to state-of-the-art breeding, disease control and cultivation techniques in a form that allows them to control much of the total chain without investing directly in all stages.
They can thus avoid the costs of variety and added risk in a volatile market.
They have also invested in superior packaging materials, storage and transport systems and market knowledge.
In short, they have used the advantages of ‘scope’ economies to limit their asset exposure while retaining control of the critical factors.
For example, Sulmac, the Kenyan subsidiary of Unilever, controls about one third of Kenya's exports of carnations to Europe and has limited its integration to combining cultivation with warehousing and agency operations in the buying markets.
Kenya faces a dilemma in its search for further growth, for a favourable climate is clearly not enough for success.
Kenya could encourage further ‘dependent’ exports, or it could provide assistance for local producers to gain the necessary skills.
But more ‘dependent’ exports would raise the import bill: the multinationals are reckoned to import proportionately more than local producers.
But local producers have lesser reputations and command lower export prices.
Besides, many of the locals will have to improve the management of their complex supply arrangements before they can develop the reputation for reliability needed for export growth.
The dilemma is that Kenyan companies cannot export effectively until they command the volumes needed to justify investments in both knowledge and quality, but they cannot obtain those volumes without investment.
Government assistance can overcome the financial barrier, but cannot deal with the managerial obstacles.
For example, the government-owned warehouse that was built to provide another means of reducing the entry barriers seldom operates efficiently because of uneven supply from the farms.
For Kenya, the issue therefore becomes one of judging how long it will take to build the necessary skills and whether the costs of delaying export growth outweigh the perceived longer-term gains from ‘independent’ exporting.
Manufacturing industries
For the manufacturing industries, skills and technology assume even greater importance than in the natural resource industries.
In the petrochemicals industry, the advent of non-traditional exporters — Saudi Arabia, Brazil, Canada — has done little to disturb existing structures.
Despite the power many potentially exercise by virtue of their oil resources, developing countries as a whole could only increase their share of exports from 4.6 per cent in 1970 to 7.1  per cent in 1983, leaving many as dumping grounds for the surplus capacity in OECD countries (UNIDO, 1985).
Growth has been inhibited by lack of access to many of the critical technologies, despite the use of plant construction firms as intermediaries.
Moreover, producer countries are having to resort to countertrade, with all its accompanying inefficiencies, to circumvent the shortage of foreign exchange for imports, which are allocated to develop other sectors (Vergara and Brown, 1988).
Two other manufacturing industries illustrate how market-seeking investors have been shifting attention to efficiency-seeking investments as competition has intensified.
Automobiles point to the importance of investment in novel NFP structures to enhance design and production capability, product quality and the linkage between the factory and the market.
The semi-conductor industry illustrates how quickly technology can both create and destroy competitive advantages and profits.
Global competition in the automobile industry has been driving out many of the smaller firms.
As the minimum economic scale of production in the assembly plant has been decreasing, it has been increasing at the level of the firm for engineering, design and marketing.
Success is increasingly determined by quality, the breadth of the model range and low total system costs.
Global-scale investments in new skills and production approaches that can readily be transferred across borders have replaced much of the trade; few can keep up with the pace of change.
The British firms were forced into defensive mergers and have now almost disappeared.
Many other European firms are in trouble and some, like Volvo and Renault in 1990, began to consider merging as the prospects for protection continuing beyond 1992 seem dim.
These unfolding events are best explained by a close look at factory economics.
The International Motor Vehicle program of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, which has studied eighty assembly plants around the world, provides hard evidence of what has been happening (Krafcik, 1988; Krafcik and MacDuffie, 1989).
The central finding is that the rising superiority of the Japanese is based, not on scale or factor costs, but on the creation of what has been dubbed a ‘lean’ system of production.
This allows them to proliferate their model ranges faster to cater for the growing demand for variety in each sector of the market.
Critical in the workings of the system is the management of time.
New models can be developed and introduced much faster and with fewer disturbances to the production flow than in the more conventional systems used by the Americans and the  Europeans.
Table 3.2 shows some of the telling performance indices of these systems.
The advantages of the ‘lean’ Japanese system go further to affect both productivity and quality.
Even more telling for the issues discussed in this book, is the fact that the system is capable of transfer across borders to provide new local advantages.
Figure 3.3 shows that the Japanese ‘transplants’ in the USA have significantly better productivity and quality than their local rivals, despite using roughly the same wage rates for US labour.
They have also been able to drive down costs faster than the locals and so create new export possibilities, even back to Japan; a feat that has eluded Detroit for decades.
Figure 3.3 shows the same effects in Europe, though to a lesser degree.
The MIT authors concluded that the Japanese had established world best practice, not simply in terms of more automation, but more critically in terms of combining design and production approaches in an integrated system that is highly dependent on the contributions from a skilled, flexible and motivated workforce.
Only in those countries where they are able to adopt uniform work practice can the Japanese deploy these advantages.
They are thus to some extent limited in where they can invest, as we discuss further in chapter 6.
As the gap widens between the Japanese and the locals in their own backyard, so the assumptions in many of the economic models discussed earlier are being challenged.
For instance, porter's model implies that national infrastructure and other factors determine national performance.
For automobiles, this is clearly no longer the case.
The power of a NFP structure that can successfully be transferred   across borders is that it can begin to divorce the firm's performance from national factors and thus reinforce the advantages of global scope.
There are, however, few other examples of this effect so far, so the implications are necessarily tentative.
They are none the less important, for other industries are moving in the same direction.
Kodak, for example, is beginning to reap the same sorts of advantage as it carefully allocates supply among all its producing units.
But even Kodak is finding that differences in local union structures and local  demand needs impede the full implementation of a uniform system (Harris et al., 1990).
The implications for developing countries are obvious.
Even though scale requirements have come down and thus open up new possibilities in small markets, the gains will not be great until the assembly plants are backed by world-class support structures.
The thirteen plants in ‘new entrant’ countries in figure 3.3 are mainly owned by the multinationals, but even so there are severe productivity and quality penalties to be overcome.
The alternatives are to find protection, either from government (as in Malaysia) or from alliances, as in Latin America, where Ford combined with VW in 1986 to form Autolatina, the world's tenth largest producer.
Both have their disadvantages, unless they can be combined with a dynamic of continuous improvement: the present state of development of the global systems is capable of much future improvement and further competitive challenge.
More promising for developing countries, perhaps, are the possibilities of expanding the supply of components.
They supplied $3.4 billion of exports in a total trade of about $60 billion in 1987, notably from Brazil, Mexico and Taiwan, and have been increasing their share as better systems of production and reliable supply have been introduced.
The difficulty, however, is that competition for components has made them increasingly price-elastic and thus sensitive to exchange rate movements.
Brazil's component exports increased rapidly in the late 1980s, only to fall sharply as buyers shifted their purchases to other developing countries in 1990 when the Cruzado became overvalued (Karmokolias, 1990).
As we show for the export of electronic components in chapter 4, such seemingly independent exporting has its hazards.
The winners are those who can keep up with best standards of quality and reliable supply and still maintain low international prices in a cut-throat business.
A wholly different dynamic of change can be seen in the semi-conductor industry .
This is a classic example of how competition can erode profits: rising barriers to entry and high growth do not necessarily make an industry profitable, even for the leaders.
Over the forty years of its existence, the entire industry has produced returns close to zero.
In part this is because of the cyclical nature of demand — high profits in boom years are offset by high losses during recessions (about $6 billion of losses worldwide during the mid-1980s)— and in part because of plummeting prices.
Faced with these forces, governments have found they can support their national producers for only limited periods.
The US government originally supported its infant local industry by buying integrated circuits (ICs) for defence purposes before the commercial market emerged.
The early US lead was eroded by countervailing Japanese and later the South Korean moves.
They supported their local firms by providing direct research subsidies and trade barriers, forcing many US producers to go offshore to regain cost competitiveness.
More importantly for long-run, strategic competitiveness, US firms have emphasised technologies best suited to their home markets, not necessarily the global ones.
They have excelled in leading-edge technologies for military and computer applications.
By contrast, the Japanese focused on components needed in consumer applications.
As consumer products have become more sophisticated, so too have their semi-conductors.
The chip that goes into a state-of-the art VCR begins to approach the requirements for a computer.
Now that Japan has the world's largest market for chips, it will be increasingly difficult for the US industry to regain its former leadership.
Global competition has pushed out many of the weaker firms, has excluded most Europeans from profitable operations, and has transformed the part developing countries can play in its evolution.
It has also provoked extensive networks of defensive alliances, as we indicate later on.
Many of the component technologies matured rapidly and could be transferred abroad without making undue demands on the technical capacity of the local workforce.
Developing countries have taken advantage of their low labour costs and plentiful supply of ‘busy fingers’(Lecraw, 1989) to provide high-productivity sources of supply, attractive especially to the Americans in their contest with the Japanese.
The resultant exports are, however, dependent upon the multinationals; relatively few local suppliers have yet broken out to provide an independent, though necessarily volatile, supply capability.
The price of such dependency is that local suppliers are vulnerable when each new generation of technology arrives to upset existing patterns of supply.
The service industries
Services are now being internationalised faster than other sectors.
In large part, this has been caused by demand derived from earlier investors.
Just as many component suppliers to the automobile industry have expanded abroad in order to provide worldwide supply to their large customers, so many service firms have followed suit.
Banks, accountants, advertising agencies and many other providers of professional services are the camp followers of the multinational  army.
The growth of tourism has spurred equivalent developments in the hotel and leisure-related sectors.
Other sectors such as construction and trading houses have had different spurs to go abroad, but they too have been influenced by the earlier investors.
Accurate data on the growth are elusive, for services are often omitted from official statistics.
Even so, GATT estimates that services have accounted for 17–20 per cent of world trade every year since the mid-1960s: other estimates are that FDI in services has risen even faster.
The problem for measurement is that much depends on what type of service is involved.
Some, like construction, require physical proximity for the service is consumed (literally so in restaurants) as it is produced.
Others like reinsurance and the design portion of a construction contract, can be produced at a distance.
The former type is the most common, though even here there are further distinctions to be made.
The consumer of the service can be immobile, as in the case of the construction site, but others are mobile, as for heart surgery patients.
Improved communications have increased the ability of firms in some sectors to provide a service at a distance, as for mail-order shopping and database management.
The more this develops, the more the service is ‘disembodied’ and difficult both to measure and to regulate.
A further difficulty with both definition and measurement has been created as manufacturers have extended their reach into services, such as warehousing and financial operations.
They have done so as technology has altered the source of profits in the total system of supply.
For example, to run a computer system in the 1960s, hardware accounted for 80 per cent of total costs.
By 1990, many systems had changed to the extent that 80 per cent of the costs came from services — software, engineering support and applications consultancy — many of which were being provided by the hardware suppliers.
The ‘boundaries’ separating manufacturing from service have thus been blurred, even though each has its dynamic affecting cross-border transactions (Hirsch, 1989).
Unlike most manufactured goods, however, the real price of most services has increased over the last few decades.
Reflecting the substantial barriers to international integration, prices have not come to an equilibrium across countries.
Even where labour is cheap, services can be more expensive than in advanced countries.
As Bhagwati put it, ‘in underdeveloped countries, you go crazy making phone calls; in developed countries, receiving them’(Bhagwati, 1986: p. 13).
But, the application of new technology is now acting to change that, even though services, unlike products, cannot be stored.
The real cost of  servicing insurance claims, for example, has been reduced by computerisation.
Moreover, system investments have created economies of scale where few existed before and have begun to make it more possible to derive benefit from global ‘scope’.
Declining costs of information have been of critical importance in spurring the international growth of service firms and the service functions within manufacturing firms.
Mitsui & Co. and other Japanese Sogo Shosha are notable examples.
These trading houses have invested heavily in global networks of information-gathering affiliates and extensive communications systems.
Their superior intelligence capabilities have allowed them to exert considerable leverage in setting the terms of trade and the manner in which the separate stages of production in their customers' factories are linked together.
Similarly, many banks and airlines are investing heavily in information management.
For example, Air France is reported to have spent as much on its communication system as on aircraft during the late 1980s.
CitiBank spent $1.5 billion in 1989 on information management, equivalent to $19,000 per staff member or 20 per cent of non-interest operating costs.
Such expenditures create new barriers to competition and serve to concentrate service industries, just as many manufacturing sectors have experienced.
The ‘intangible’ advantages of large-scale information capability seem best exploited within ‘internal markets’if they are to assume their full efficiency.
With few exceptions, such as franchising in hotels and fast foods, where the service can be ‘packaged’ and transferred to a third party under stringent conditions of control, most service firms find that they require equity control to ‘internalise’the gains and recoup the high costs of developing the network in the first place.
Besides, there have been so many opportunities for growth in countries that do not require local equity sharing that they have had little incentive to try to build businesses in those countries that do.
Such reasons provide just one set of limitations against the wider adoption of forms of NFI, an issue we discuss in chapter 5.
Regulatory barriers have been an especially important obstacle to the full development of internationally traded services.
One reason, of particular salience in developing countries, is that services are regarded with considerable suspicion.
In part, as the UNCTC considers, this is due to a ‘widespread impression that service industries consist largely of technologically stagnant, small-scale personal services based on unskilled labour working with little capital in ways that have not changed for many years’.
As the UN concludes, this is outdated, for the service multinationals bring in the ‘soft technology’ and skills required to run an efficient business.
They train the labour they need rather than import it (but note the exceptions like the Korean expatriate workers) and often give these workers the sorts of skills that can usefully be hired by indigenous rivals (UNCTC, 1988a).
Even so, many officials remain opposed to liberalisation of the regulations: they regard services as culturally corrosive (as in media) or politically important for national control (as in financial services and trans-border data flows).
There are now signs that the generally negative attitudes may be changing.
Evidence is accumulating that an efficient service infrastructure increases the attractiveness of a location for potential investors (Marshall, 1985; Browne, 1983).
Just as regional ‘externalities’ created dynamic growth points for electronics in Silicon Valley and for textiles in the Po Valley, so national advantages can be created.
Recognising these benefits for its infrastructure, Singapore has set out actively to woo foreign service firms.
A government report concluded in 1986 that
we must move beyond being a production base, to being an international business centre.
We cannot depend only on companies coming to Singapore solely to make or assemble products designed elsewhere.
We need to attract companies…to establish operational headquarters…(to)…do product development work, manage their treasury activities, and provide administrative, technical and management services to their subsidiaries.
Then it becomes worthwhile for them to establish a plant in Singapore, to produce goods or services for export.
(Singapore, 1986: p. 12)
Where Singapore leads others may soon follow.
ALTERATIVE GLOBAL STRATEGIES
Just as the economic trends have affected industries differently, so they have affected the players within an industry in various, often quite contradictory ways.
Managers have had to make difficult choices about where and how to compete with their limited resources.
Some of the earlier investors have found they could not adjust quickly enough; others have been severely battered by innovative competitors but managed to fight back.
Ford lost $3 billion during 1980–2 in its fight with the Japanese, but recovered.
Others proved less resilient.
Some major shippers of the 1970s, like Ocean Steam in the UK, could not hold their position against the onslaught of newcomers like Evergreen and left the business altogether.
For everyone, the structural shifts have placed new demands on managers' abilities to be strategically  innovative.
Merely repeating policies that worked in the past was not enough.
The new competition is not so much a contest among the strong and the weak all obeying Queensberry rules; it is now just as much a contest among competing strategies.
There are over 600 multinationals in a ‘billion-dollar-club’ and a host of smaller fry all competing for a share of the market.
Twenty years ago, about sixty of them accounted for roughly half of all FDI, reflecting the oligopolistic forces discussed earlier.
The same proportion still holds true, but the composition of the top sixty has changed.
US firms have lost many of their leadership positions in major industries, producing a dispersion of economic power among the firms akin to the alleged dispersion of hegemonic power referred to in chapter 2.
To explore why there has been so much flux in the structures of competition, some basic distinctions are needed.
A ‘global’ product is not the same thing as a ‘global’firm or a ‘global’industry.
A global product is conventionally regarded as being the same in all markets.
An industrial gas like oxygen is chemically identical in all markets, but the means of its delivery may vary among markets.
Moreover, though the majors may all be global in reach, only some, like BOC, has been investing to create global interdependence for some of the key functions of the business.
The others have preferred to compete on a local-for-local basis with many others whose limits are purely national.
All global firms are balancing two competing forces: those gaining advantage from integration of their systems; and those for becoming more responsive to differences in local demand.
How they strike a balance between the two is at the heart of corporate strategy.
The answer is shown in their choices of product policy, location of assets, and investments in building skills.
Because there is always uncertainty about the direction of future change, it is not surprising that competitors with different resources and different perspectives take different gambles about what the best position will be in the next round of competition.
For example, the Belgian firm, Bekaert, which has emerged as the world leader in steel cord for automobile tires, has deliberately eschewed the benefits of building large scale in its factories.
Bekaert concluded that the potential gains in unit costs would be more than offset by losses in terms of lack of focus on customer service needs.
Conventional economic analysis would have pointed to the opposite policy, but would have ignored the human factor in making a complete system work.
This does not mean that the competitive arena has become less global.
On the contrary, the requirements for massive investments in systems have reinforced the  power of Bekaert's global perspective and global scale of total resources.
Firms can choose to concentrate their resources in a few countries and emphasise exports to other markets, or they can disperse their resources and emphasise FDI.
This is the company version of the industry ‘map’ shown earlier in figure 3.1.
Laid on top of this choice is that of determining the extent of the investment in co-ordination of the various operations.
When the assets are dispersed, firms can rely on relatively little co-ordination, as in the ‘local-for-local’ strategies, or they can emphasise co-ordination, as in BOC's global strategy.
The difference is akin to that between a bag of marbles and a pillar of marble.
Many early investors built a bag of marbles, each well polished and each managed by a local team jealous of its independence.
But the very strength of local independence has often impeded the transition to a more globally integrated structure: past strength can prove to be a handicap when the competitive battle changes.
Two features of the new contest are providing further pressures for future change.
One is the move towards creating alliances, as means of dealing with the problems of rising resource costs just to stay in the game.
The other is the emergence of new, third world competitors that deploy their resources in innovative ways that sometimes can minimise the handicaps of being a late entrant into established markets.
Alliances
The spurs to create alliances are the rising costs of research, the quickening pace of technological change and the costs of entry to heavily regulated markets.
All these mean that even large multi-nationals may not have sufficient resources to succeed on their own.
Alliances provide the mix of scale and flexibility needed to generate sufficient revenues for next-generation product development.
As one senior official in Olivetti put it recently,
In thy 1990s, competition will no longer be between individual companies but between new, complex corporate groupings.
A company's competitive position no longer(solely) depends on its internal capabilities; it also depends on the type of relationships it has been able to establish with other firms and the scope of those relationships.
Alliances include many forms of joint venture, outsourcing agreements, product licences and co-operative research.
They differ from older forms of association in that they are two-way trades of complementary strengths among competitors.
A one-way outsourcing  arrangement, such as General Motors' purchases of cars and components from Daewoo in South Korea, is little more than a sophisticated version of familiar NFI agreements: they offer the supplier the opportunity to gain value-creating activities and obviate the buyer's need to invest.
A two-way trade is illustrated by ICL's alliance with Fujitsu, without which ICL could not have developed its current range of mainframe computers and Fujitsu could not have expanded so quickly into European markets.
The problem for many that have entered alliances is that, though the alliance can strengthen both firms against outsiders, it can also weaken one partner relative to the other.
A recent study of alliances defined them as
a constantly evolving bargain whose real terms go beyond the legal agreement or the aims of top management.
What information gets traded is determined day-to-day, often by engineers and operating managers.
Successful companies inform employees at all levels about what skills and technologies are off-limits to the partner and monitor what the partner requests and receives.
(Hamel et al., 1989: p. 134)
The essence of the successful alliance is the extent of the mutual learning about the partner's skills and the extent to which that learning can be diffused throughout the organisation to provide future strengths.
‘Companies that are confident about their ability to learn may even prefer some ambiguity in the alliance's legal structure.
Ambiguity creates more potential to acquire skills and technologies’(p. 139).
The impact of these alliances can be seen clearly in the semi-conductor industry.
It seems unlikely that the earlier experience of one country having an autonomous capability in the industry will be repeated, now that the web of alliances has permeated almost all sectors of the industry.
In 1990 alone, IBM joined forces with Siemens for some segments, Siemens was negotiating with SGS-Thomson (the Italian-French group) to develop semi-conductors and four other US producers allied with Japanese competitors.
Similar developments were taking place in pharmaceuticals, aerospace, construction and automobiles, where it was becoming increasingly difficult for firms to maintain capability in all the technology options for the future.
Producers in smaller countries now face even higher barriers to entry in such industries, if they want to develop beyond ‘dependent’ exporting; they have little to offer by way of an entry ticket to the two-way partnership.
These developments are, quite naturally, producing fears in government circles that alliances are no more than  cartels designed to restrain competition, albeit dressed up in new and more attractive clothes.
Third world multinationals
Increasingly firms from developing countries are extending abroad, for many of the same reasons that earlier prompted the moves of developed country multinationals.
No longer dependent on cheap labour for competitiveness, many are pushing abroad in even high-technology fields and are doing so, perhaps ironically, to exploit other countries' cheap labour (Cantwell and Tolentino, 1990).
As they expand and gain in political significance, they may act to constrain the actions of their own host governments: reciprocity will be needed.
Wells (1983) estimated that there were as many as 8000 subsidiaries of firms from developing countries operating in other developing countries.
Expansion has continued, though there are no comprehensive estimates of the extent of the growth to the end of the 1980s.
Brazilian firms provide engineering and construction services in Africa.
The Regent, peninsular and park Hotel groups operate throughout Asia.
Taiwanese firms build steel mills in Nigeria and make furniture in Malaysia.
Indeed, Taiwan became the largest foreign investor in Malaysia during 1988, in terms of the annual flows of investment.
This was during a time when Taiwan's exports to Malaysia were increasing rapidly.
Already it seems clear that the same forces that have acted to bind together trade and investment flows within the OECD are affecting South-South economic relations.
Some third world firms have extended further into the developed world.
For example, the Brazilian firm Gradiente Electronica bought the (near bankrupt) British firm Garrard from Plessey for $2 million in 1979.
The purpose was to use the brand name and, more importantly, the distribution network to increase exports from the Manaus EPZ (Lall, 1983).
More recently, and for much the same reasons, Stelux, from Hong Kong, bought the Bulova Watch Company in the USA.
The Malaysian government has gone further and purchased the parent companies of many British-owned Malaysian subsidiaries: Sime Darby, Guthrie and other trading companies.
Sime Darby has foreign manufacturing, plantation, trading, transportation and financial interests in many developing and developed countries.
With 1989 sales of $1.6 billion, it is already an established and important multinational in its own right.
Though similar in many respects to developed-country multi-nationals, these firms have important differences, both positive and  negative for their home and host economies.
Recent analyses have shown positive host-economy effects in terms of their greater adaptability to local conditions, greater use of labour-intensive technology, and greater skills to work profitably at small scale.
Their overseas affiliates tend to be highly autonomous and to remit small proportions of their profits to the parent.
As new entrants, most are open to accepting NFI requirements.
Most prefer market-seeking investments and few have created new exports.
For some, the spur to going abroad seems more of a push from frustration at bureaucratic regulations at home than a pull from market opportunity.
There are, however, troubling reports that many are prone to bribe local officials and to use more home country nationals than their advanced rivals.
Further, the very fact that they use more ‘appropriate’ technology means that they compete intensively with local firms and thus exacerbate rivalries among local ethnic groups.
These characteristics pose difficult additional choices for host governments.
IMPLICATIONS FOR GOVERNMENT
Global competition is undoubtedly here to stay.
As industries continue to concentrate at the world level, the forces described in this chapter raise two possibilities.
One is that future change may be driven primarily by the firms, not by government.
If more firms can overcome the internal obstacles to resemble the Japanese automobile producers, the world economy will become increasingly dominated by oligopolies with growing abilities to divorce themselves from local conditions and to create new types of enclaves within host states.
The other, perhaps more likely, possibility is that, far from becoming the ‘borderless world’ that Ohmae (1990) foresees, these major industries may become more susceptible to government influence.
The reason why the latter seem more likely is that it is on these major industries that much of the future competition among states for wealth-creating resources will be focused.
A key question is how the management of the market imperfections that have so strongly influenced investment behaviour in the past will be conducted in the future.
Can the combination of both inward and outward investment be made complementary to rather than a substitute for domestic investment?
Rather than regarding the relationship as essentially adversarial, as did many observers twenty years ago, the issue is now one of searching for ways to allow the two parties to co-operate to promote their mutual interests.
In the search for collaboration, states need to watch carefully both  the dynamics of industry-level competition and the position of individual firms.
Competitive innovation has proved decisive in many industries over the last two decades in determining which firms assume leadership positions and which disappear.
Governments choosing weaker competitors, precisely because they were more accommodating of local demands for, say, ceding some of the ownership of the venture, have later regretted the choice when the firm failed in the global contest.
The British experience of a quasi-partnership with Chrysler, and Chrysler's failure and eventual withdrawal from Brazil in 1979 provide testimony that both developed as well as developing countries can be disappointed by failing to judge the strength of the partner by international criteria (Stopford and Turner, 1985: p. 230).
National policy must therefore be crafted and implemented in the clear knowledge of the international structures of particular industries and the strength of individual firms seeking market access.
The growing use of alliances in strategic industries heightens this need to understand the world scene.
No longer can the worth of an investment proposal be evaluated by looking at the immediate terms of the deal: the longer lasting impact of the structure of alliances must also be taken into account.
The resilience of the investor is critical to ensure that the deal will not disappoint people on both sides of the bargain.
The scenario of growing state-firm collaboration seems possible, given the ways that so many states are moving towards liberalising their regulations.
They are removing many of the distortions that have made investors look elsewhere in the past.
But the liberalising trends are not blind moves towards laissez-faire, but the product of many countervailing forces in the local society.
How policies are emerging in developing countries to deal with both the general issues of the international political economy discussed in the previous chapter and the more particular ones created by global competition is explored in the next chapter.
DILEMMAS FOR GOVERNMENTS
Export-led growth and increased autonomy have proved elusive goals for most developing countries.
Most are constrained by limited resources and by intractable domestic agendas that impede their capability to implement policy.
The grinding together of internationally mobile capital and intellectual resources against immobile labour has produced acute dilemmas for choosing policy and reconciling conflicting objectives.
Where some have attempted to ignore international structural changes, others, perhaps grudgingly, have accepted the need for change and grasped the nettle of internal adjustment.
Few have rivalled Singapore's enthusiasm for harnessing the multinationals as agents of growth and economic transformation.
In chapters 1 and 2, we laid out some of the broad lines of argument about how national choices are conditioned by the international political economy.
Chapter 3 described how multinationals' strategies are similarly being shaped by the combination of external and internal forces.
In this chapter we begin to assess how the changes can both bring together states and firms in partnership and also pull them apart.
Figure 4.1 suggests one way of looking at the emerging relationships.
National resources, combined with policy choice, affect both the appropriateness of various forms of firm strategy and the nation's attractiveness to existing and potential investors.
Multi-nationals' resources and ambitions shape both their global strategies and choices of location.
The lines of causality and interaction go both ways, affecting the performance of both players.
The focus of this chapter is on the government side of the equations.
We aim to illuminate the nature of their dilemmas and to show how they affect the bargaining relationships with foreign investors.
Our main concern is with those policies and issues we regard as being the most important in determining the achievement of national goals through partnership with the multinationals.
How firms actually reacted to these policies and practices will be best seen when, in the next chapter, we review how corporate strategies made at the world   headquarters have been adjusted at local levels to reflect national possibilities.
For governments, logic would suggest a simple sequence of thought and action.
Starting from a recognition of the constraints and opportunities set by human and natural resource endowments, one might assume that they then define a broad set of goals for the future.
These set the sights of ambition, often embodied in a series of national plans, what we called national intent in chapter 1.
These goals form the basis of both macro-level policies for industry.
National institutions and agencies, each responsible for one agenda, are charged with administering specific policies for each sector and each group of multi-nationals.
Trouble arises at this point, for no country can ensure that all its ministries and agencies manage everything in a wholly co-ordinated way.
There are dilemmas at every level of concern; different interest groups hold different priorities.
Thus it is common for policies to be announced but not implemented fully or consistently.
Where a country espouses outward-looking policies, it may continue to behave in many important respects as though it were still domestically focused.
Dilemma is bred both by the interconnectedness of the various agendas and by dynamic environmental changes.
The knock-on consequences of choice for one agenda are not always discernible in advance, nor are yesterday's choices necessarily appropriate for to-morrow.
All too often, policies are introduced to solve particular problems of the day.
Only later are unanticipated costs and benefits visible; hindsight can make them appear deliberate all along.
Disentangling all the connective strands and lines of causality is a task beyond our scope.
Instead, we summarise the issues for the major policy agendas and illustrate the dilemmas with examples of particular  choices of policy and administrative action.
The data demonstrate how economic policy and political bargain interact and sometimes lead to unexpected outcomes.
The reader can decide which of the possible explanations is the most plausible.
For example, why did Malaysia initiate the proton project to develop its own car in 1982?
Some claim that the spur came from a desire to raise the local content above the 20 per cent achieved by the multinationals' assembly plants.
But, why in 1982?
The situation had existed for many years.
And why was the particular form of the deal chosen, with Mitsubishi as the minority partner granted a (seemingly lucrative) import licence for its own components?
An alternative explanation lies in Dr Mahatir's ‘look East’ policy, designed to break away — finally and for ever— from the colonial past and to speed up the pace of change by harnessing the vitality of Japanese firms.
The auto industry just happened to be a convenient sector in which to show his determination to change (Doner, 1987; Oman, 1989: pp. 164–166).
Before getting to such details, we first review the general considerations of policy regimes.
The data in the appendix add details of the chronology of policy development in each of our three countries and the changes over recent years in trade and investment flows, sectoral composition of the economy and demographic indicators.
These provide the backdrop for assessing more specific policy choices.
The chapter ends with a discussion of how the growing problem of managing the additive agendas created by international developments affects governments' bargaining power and their behaviour towards the multinationals.
NATIONAL ECONOMIC POLICY
All countries possess an armoury of policy weapons that together add up to a policy regime.
Drawing from his experience of Japan, Johnson (1984: p. 8) considered that this ‘means the initiation and co-ordination of governmental activities to leverage upward the productivity and competitiveness of the whole economy and of particular industries in it…
Positive industrial policy means the infusion of goal-oriented, strategic thinking into public economic policy’.
That may well be the experience in Japan, but it is a far cry from practice in most developed and developing countries.
None the less, this description serves as a useful goal to which countries can aspire.
Among developing countries, the difficulties of reconciling economic and social policies, and of ensuring adequate co-ordination   among departments, is immense.
Moreover, it is only recently that some have engaged in such strategic thinking at all.
Brazil made a start when it set up its Grupo Interministerial in 1986, with representatives from planning, Industry and Commerce, Finance, Science and Technology.
Malaysia's Industrial Master plan also represents such thinking, though many question whether the goals set for the twelve priority sectors of development strategy can be achieved.
By comparison, Kenya's five-year plans are far behind in specifying a strategy.
None the less, all countries have some form, whether or not it is spelled out and consistent.
Just as a US Supreme Court Justice concluded for pornography, ‘you know it when you see it, but you can't define it’, so too with a development strategy.
These broad policy approaches take meaning for firms through a range of specific instruments.
Together, they indicate the direction of intended progress.
A recent study provided a careful compilation of 206 policy changes in 26 developing countries between 1977 and 1987.
Overwhelmingly, the data show how the general moves towards liberalisation, described in earlier chapters, can be seen in individual policies (Contractor, 1990b).
This study classified policy into seven general categories: ownership policies, taxes (including subsidies, tariffs and transfer payments), currency (including exchange rate  management, convertibility, and restrictions on remittances), price controls, performance requirements (such as local content regulations and exporting), sector-specific incentives and limitations, and administrative procedures for approvals.
Table 4.1 shows the incidence of change in these seven categories.
Though liberalisation is the dominant trend, there are important exceptions in every category.
Performance requirements have commonly increased, indicating countries' determination to retain a degree of control over firms; liberalisation does not mean laissez-faire.
Moreover, many poorer countries have increased restrictions, though some have felt forced by external shocks to begin to look outwards.
Tanzania's 1990 investment promotion decree, promulgated after lengthy internal political debate, illustrates just how troublesome are the dilemmas for the poorest countries; a question to which we return in chapter 7.
Subsidies or regulate?
Part of the reason why cross-currents muddy the stream of liberalisation is the changing political approach to a general choice: to intervene in the affairs of enterprises directly or to provide general regulatory conditions?
Intervention can be either negative for certain classes of asset holder or supportive by providing subsidies of varying magnitude.
Regulation can vary from laissez-faire to the oppressive and capricious.
The dual role of the state both to support business and provide finance on the one hand, and to be the guardian of social welfare and redistributor of resources on the other is exceedingly difficult to manage coherently (Steiner, 1975).
The choice indicates how much the state is willing to take on an active role of managing national resources for greater international competitiveness, and in what form.
The choice is not solely a question of relative bargaining power, but also one of assumptions about the role of the state.
Must states, as Evans (1979) argued, ‘continually coerce or cajole the multinationals into undertaking roles they would otherwise abdicate’ even as the pendulum swings towards liberalisation?
How, in Schelling's terms (1979), a state manages the balance between voluntarism and coercion is a central key to understanding what its future investment climate might be like, and thus its attractiveness to potential investors.
The post-war history of South Korea shows how the balance of effect can change over time, driven by a coherently evolving logic for economic development, despite major changes of government and  military rule.
Starting from near laissez-faire during the 1950s, when the main action of government was allocation of scarce dollars among importers, policy shifted during the 1960s to heavy subsidisation and limited regulation of key local enterprises (the chaebol ), plus policies of excluding most foreigners.
The determination to use private enterprises as key actors was later complemented by stronger regulation.
As the chaebol gained in stature at home and abroad during the 1970s, the levels of subsidy for them were reduced and increased for smaller, export-oriented local firms (Jones and Sakong, 1981; Cho, 1984).
Only during the 1980s did Korea begin to reduce its restrictions against foreign investment as an added means of linking more directly with the international system.
Similar changes can be discerned in the data in the appendix for our three countries.
Though they have all faced more complex choices by virtue of having mixed policies towards foreign investors and internal interest groups, there has been some perceptible consistency in approach over time, even though that is at times obscured by administrative and political compromise.
MONETARY POLICIES
To illuminate the interlocking bargains that produce such compromises and contradictions, we focus first on monetary, then on trade policies, for these are the prime determinants of demand conditions.
The choices governments face are conditioned by social constraints, as we discuss in chapter 6.
Though these constraints can be decisive in some ways, we concentrate here on the economic policies and some of the more specific policies like price controls that affect the investment climate for multinationals.
Debt management
For many of the categories of indebted countries, identified in chapter 2, the continuing debt crisis is probably the greatest single influence on choices of monetary and financial policy and thus the ability to grow.
Rescheduling the debt has merely deferred rather than solved the problems of increasing internal efficiencies and domestic savings rates.
How states manage their debt thus becomes the point of departure for examining economic management.
Indebted countries' options depend on the magnitude of the debt, who lent the money in the first place, and on what terms.
As the tables in the appendix show, all three countries have high debt (relative to GNP), but of quite different composition.
Their policies and performance can thus illustrate a range of problems that many developing countries face.
Kenya, never able to borrow heavily from commercial banks, has relied on ‘official’ loans from aid ‘donor’governments like Britain and from international organisations like the World Bank or the IMF.
Consequently, the repayment terms are long, thus reducing the servicing costs below those required by commercial borrowing.
Kenya's development has probably not been overly constrained by debt per se , though the strings tied to the loans have limited policy choice.
One must look to their domestic policy dilemmas for more serious impediments to growth.
Malaysia's $20 billion debt, at 66 per cent of GNP, is proportionately almost as high as Kenya's.
Though commercial banks have lent the majority of the capital, the debt-servicing burden is lower.
The reason is that Malaysia's exports have been much stronger.
Only for a short period in the mid-1980s, when commodity prices and demand for semi-conductors slumped, did Malaysia risk hitting its borrowing ceiling.
In other words, borrowing can be a positive weapon for development when the borrower can provide the liquidity to service the debt.
Brazil provides the example par excellence of a country where borrowing during the 1970s seemed a sensible means of providing liquidity to finance industrialisation (Sachs, 1981: p. 39).
Brazil also typifies the category of unsafe borrower, discussed in Chapter 2.
Rising debt levels later provoked fears of a solvency crisis.
The distinction between liquidity and solvency is important, for the lender must be confident that the borrower will invest wisely and eventually become able to repay both interest and capital.
Though Brazil's massive debt of about $115 billion is only 30 per cent of GNP, its debt service ratio is over 50 per cent.
Twice during the 1980s, Brazil effectively defaulted on its foreign debt and on many occasions has declared itself unable to carry out the promises made in its successive Letters of Intent to the IMF.
Only its large size and large stock of FDI inhibited creditors from over-reacting to the crises.
Failing to do all the IMF wanted was one thing: escaping the exigencies of dependence on foreign credit, if only to continue financing of trade, was quite another.
Rescheduling was deemed better than default.
Once rescheduling had been agreed in 1987, Brazil could do more to capitalise its debt; that is to get creditors to exchange claims for interest and repayment on past loans for direct investments of some kind in the country.
Mechanisms to make this possible were first introduced in 1982, but only in 1988 was a debt/equity swap programme introduced.
Brazil's faith in debt/equity swaps as a means of easing the burden has been shared by many.
Indeed, the whole market for secondary debt has boomed, reaching about $70 billion in 1989.
Though officially endorsed in the ‘Brady plan’, there is considerable doubt about the wisdom of the approach, compared to the alternative of lending more.
Recent evidence suggests that buy-backs merely create banking commissions and do not stimulate growth.
For example, in 1988 Bolivia bought back roughly half of its heavily discounted $670 million debt.
Immediately afterwards, the market price of the remaining debt nearly doubled, leaving the total value virtually unchanged.
General economic arguments, however, omit the spin-off benefits from the inventiveness of financial operators in search of bargains and easy profits.
Moreover, some multinationals, such as the textile group Coats-Viyella, which had virtually stopped investing in Brazil, were lured by debt/equity swaps into putting new money into their subsidiaries at a very substantial discount — in that case, 41 per cent.
With the discount moving down to about 20 per cent by mid-1990, others may be similarly tempted even though the discount rate reflects some measure of the depreciated economic value of the assets.
Responses to extreme forms of the debt crisis are also conditioned by who holds the debt, how much they are hurt and their power to take avoiding action.
Frieden (1987) makes the crucial distinction between liquid and fixed asset holders — industrial firms being prominent in the latter category.
In Mexico, liquid asset holders predominated.
They could take their money to the USA: about $27 billion left the country between 1976 and 1984.
The fixed asset holders, meanwhile, managed to get preferential help from the government to ease the pain.
In Brazil, where fixed asset holders predominated, capital flight was much less serious.
When industrial interest groups failed to get help, they took political action against the military.
Postponing the necessary adjustment had, however, only made the ultimate adjustment harder, and the policy dilemmas sharper.
It is not, to be sure, only domestic social-political power structures that affect responses; it is also banks and creditor nations.
As we illustrated in chapter 2, they had to choose between permitting default (and risk a banking panic) or insisting on repayment (risking cutbacks on trade with the debtor countries).
They chose the second option, because their prime concern was for the safety of the international financial system.
Consequently, none of the proposed remedies for the debt crisis has been fully implemented, allowing the creditors to continue muddling through.
Controls on capital and profit remittances
Debt problems, at the extreme, cause capital flight.
Less obvious are their effects on the more ‘normal’ policies for controlling legitimate capital transfers and the remission of dividends and investors' other financial transactions.
In some cases, the two become connected in ways that defy control, as Brazil has discovered.
Capital flight has as much to do with political structures as with a loss of confidence.
Indeed, some of the worst cases have been associated with autocratic and corrupt governments like the Shah's Iran or Marcos' Philippines, where capital flight helped precipitate a debt crisis.
Naylor (1987) tells some hair-raising tales of how politicians have often been the chief culprits, stashing away government revenues and foreign aid funds in numbered accounts.
Brazil had no such push factors at work: when capital fled it was more because of the debt crisis than its cause.
Brazil's controls on transfers date back to 1962, when the profit Remittance Law was introduced to limit dividend remittances to 10 per cent of the value of the capital invested, excluding reinvestments.
Later amendments made remittances over 12 per cent of registered capital subject to heavy taxes.
By the late 1980s, Brazilian inflation had created such a thriving (and openly tolerated) black market in foreign currency that some multinationals found it worthwhile to exceed the 12 per cent limit.
They could repatriate profits at the official exchange rate and then reinvest them at favourable black-market rates that more than offset their tax liabilities.
The ultimate paradox of profit remittance policies came in mid-1989, when the debt crisis caused the government to freeze all profit transfers.
The result, as shown in figure 4.2, was a catastrophic fall in capital inflow and an inability to control all outflows.
A year later, the new government, having learnt the lesson the hard way, lifted the freeze on profit remittances.
By contrast, Malaysia has been able to be much more liberal; there have been no restrictions on the remittance of profits abroad or on the withdrawal of capital through divestment.
The government has only insisted that fees and royalties charged to Malaysian affiliates should be ‘reasonable’.
We found, however, some cases where the definition of reasonableness had become a bone of contention and subject to tense renegotiation, especially by Japanese investors.
So much so, that attempts were made — unsuccessfully — to make the 1988 package of expanded capital availability offered by the Bank of Japan conditional on an easing of the perceived unreasonableness of the Malaysian authorities.
In other words, controls can be exercised indirectly by   negotiation over what amounts to a question of how much can be charged against local tax.
Kenya, despite the fact that it has twice suffered massive haemorrhages of foreign capital, has been equally moderate.
It has, however, sought other ways to stop earnings from leaving the country.
For example, the government ‘Africanised’ the insurance business.
The problem was inherited from colonial days when insurance, like banking, was British controlled.
Premiums collected in Kenya were transferred to London for reinvestment.
But, as other African countries have discovered, African insurance companies were too small to carry major risks and had to lay them off with foreign re-insurers.
The government, therefore, established the Kenya Reinsurance Corporation in 1971 and decreed that all underwriters reinsure part of their business with Kenya Re.
Kenya's success in increasing the proportion of the income retained at home has, however, been only modest.
Market forces there, as in other developing countries that have similar local rules, cannot be wholly restrained (UNCTAD, 1987).
Exchange rates
Many developing countries attempt to manage their exchange rates.
Past policies favouring over-valued currencies have proved  unsustainable.
They had the effect of encouraging imports of capital-intensive producer goods for import-substitution and industrialisation and imports of luxury items for the elites.
Prodded by the IMF and the drive for exports, combined with market forces, devaluations have been steep during the 1980s.
The average real exchange rate (trade-weighted and adjusted for inflation) fell by 40 per cent between 1980 and 1988 in the 80-odd developing countries monitored by the World Bank.
Excepting internationally priced commodities, this meant that all developing countries had to export more in order to import the same amount of goods and services.
A recent evaluation concluded, depressingly, that the devaluations by themselves did little to improve trade balances and tended to reduce investments (Faini and de Mello, 1990).
The link between exchange rates and debt is impossible to establish with clarity.
None the less, Brazil's debt had an important role to play in creating downward pressure on the currency.
Similarly, Kenya was obliged by the IMF to devalue its Shilling as part of the price of gaining stand-by credits (Delamaide, 1984: p. 61).
Many other developing countries fared similarly.
Between 1980 and 1987, the IMF and the World Bank provided $43 billion of ‘adjustment loans’.
The recipients had to agree to devaluation among other provisions.
The links between foreign debt and domestic monetary and fiscal policies are equally obscure.
None the less, the central importance of interest rates is widely recognised.
Thus, many highly-indebted countries are now experimenting with novel mechanisms, such as currency options, interest swaps and caps and commodity-linked facilities, to reduce their exposure to adverse movements in international interest rates.
The market for raising new finance by this form of risk management has grown to about $4 billion in 1989.
Further growth, however, seems limited: it is expensive, very complicated and designing appropriate control mechanisms that limit the potential for losses in hedged positions has proved difficult (Mathieson, 1989),
Rather than attempt to review all the conflicting theories about such issues and about how exchange rates affect adjustment and growth, we focus on two factors that have a direct impact on the relationships with foreign investors.
The first concerns how investors assess the various measures and the second concerns how governments manage the administrative mechanisms they use to influence exchange rates.
Investors watch exchange rates closely, because they calculate their profits in their home currency, and because they must assess how changes might affect the future international competitiveness of local output.
If firms believe devaluation is likely in the near future, they  typically defer investment until after the event, to avoid writing down the asset value.
A prime indicator of future trends in many countries that attempt to manage the rates is the black market rate.
For example, unlike Brazil, Myanmar insists that all multinationals' currency dealings are at the official rate.
With the black market standing at roughly one-tenth of the official rate in mid-1990, many investors who might otherwise have wanted to invest were holding back, betting that the official rate could not indefinitely be propped up.
The second factor is how the government intervenes to affect the exchange rate.
Kenya's practices illustrate the problem.
By mid-1982, when Kenya's reserves were barely sufficient to cover a month's imports, plans to get rid of complex and arbitrary quantitative import controls came to a halt, ‘because the Central Bank was unable to authorise release of foreign exchange [needed]for licences issued’(Commonwealth Secretariat, 1985).
The administration was desperately overloaded with applications for import licences.
The Foreign Exchange Allocation Committee operated on a case-by-case basis.
The consequential uncertainties about both the outcome and the timing of its decisions were just as important to investors as the actual rate.
Where efficiency and speed are of the essence, investors will look elsewhere.
Small wonder that Kenya's plans to establish an Export processing Zone (see later section) have yet to come to fruition, despite recent improvements in the exchange-management procedures.
Credit allocation
The three financial ingredients necessary for successful economic development — to judge from the experience of some Asian NICs — are an undervalued exchange rate, a high domestic savings rate, and a system of allocating cheap credit to industrial enterprises, either generally or on a discriminatory but competition-inducing basis.
Both South Korea and Taiwan have enjoyed all three, sometimes assisted by social policies that raise liberal eyebrows, such as the absence of public welfare spending.
To compensate, Asian families were prepared to cut current consumption drastically, thus raising the ratio of savings to GDP to heights (such as 39 per cent) unheard of in developed countries.
To that extent, the early economists' stress on the importance of local capital accumulation for development was not mistaken (Clark, 1984; Singer, 1989).
What they mostly overlooked was the possibility of using state power to allocate credit to specific sectors — shipbuilding in Korea, for example, or steel in Taiwan — or for  special groups of borrowers — the chaebol and more recently the smaller, export-oriented Korean firms.
Of these three ingredients, the first is seldom possible for open-market economies, given market forces.
The second has more to do with society and cannot be changed readily.
Only the third is open to specific administration.
Among our three countries, only Malaysia has enjoyed the effects of the first: during the latter half of the 1980s, its real effective exchange rate dropped by 36 per cent.
They have not enjoyed the second, nor have they set out to use credit allocation mechanisms as a means of promoting sectoral competition.
Even when, as we show later, Brazil had an opportunity to do so when it invited the multinationals to establish its automobile industry, it chose not to exercise its power for fear of discouraging potential entrants.
None the less, some attempts were made to provide local, preferential credit.
Malaysia set up its New Investment Fund in 1985.
It was designed to use preferential interest rates to encourage investment in manufacturing, tourism, mining and agriculture.
But it seems doubtful if it was big enough to have much impact.
Brazil set up the National Bank for Economic and Social Development (BNDES) in the 1950s.
Though its original statute forbad lending to foreign-controlled firms, a 1986 policy statement softened this policy by implying inclusion of local firms with minority shares held by multinationals (Brazilian Government, 1986).
A new industrial policy decree went further in 1988, reflecting the growing opinion among Brazilian industrialists that some form of partnership with a foreign company was often the essential condition of attaining competitiveness abroad and even at home (Fritsch and Franco, 1988: pp. 82–4).
Consequently, some Brazilians now regard BNDES as a relic of the 1950s, useful in its day but no longer a major instrument of development policy.
Lacking a high domestic savings rate, Kenya went further than most.
Since the mid-1970s, Kenya has restricted the multinationals' access to the local capital market.
Kenya feared they would ‘crowd out’ local borrowers and that scarce domestic savings would leak abroad through dividends.
Kenya's dilemma then became that of finding how to make foreigners welcome whilst forcing them to bring their own capital.
Thanks to what the Chinese call ‘connectology’, however, some have found ways round this and other restrictions.
A favourite and well-tried one is to appoint a Kenyan director with good political connections and capable of finding ways to smooth the flow of import licenses and local credit.
If successful, he will add another dimension to the problem.
Discriminatory policies merely encourage established foreigners to employ marginally corrupt locals, thus adding a further  disincentive to new entrants by conspiring to maintain the unsatisfactory status quo.
Domestic price and wage controls
Finally, there is the fraught issue of fighting inflation.
There are significant negative relationships between inflation and growth, between inflation and investment ratios (Gylfason, 1989; Dornbusch and Reynoso, 1989), and among inflation, devaluation and export potential.
In addition to fiscal measures, price controls have sometimes been used as a weapon.
These have sometimes been effective in wartime: almost never in peacetime.
They have been tried and abandoned in Eastern Europe, Britain and other developed countries.
All found it one of the hardest forms of market intervention.
Of our three countries, Kenya stands out as the only one which has tried to manage economic development and contain inflation by selective price controls on individual items.
The result, predictably, was shortages of goods, the emergence of black markets (an additional incentive for corruption), as well as general aggravation and frustration for business, whether local or foreign.
Meanwhile, real wages declined, despite attempts to fix minimum real wages, at least around Nairobi.
Bowing to the inevitable, Kenya started to remove the controls in 1988 and had eliminated them all by 1990, except for a few agricultural products like maize.
Brazil tried draconian, general intervention at the height of its debt crisis.
The 1986 Cruzado plan introduced a mandatory anti-inflationary wage and price freeze.
Unaccompanied by cuts in government spending or the money supply, the result was a predictable failure.
Growth continued to create shortages that expanded the black market.
The OECD (1988: p. 61) concluded that, because these conditions also hindered exports and cut the trade surplus, the policy proved self-defeating.
By 1989, in the so-called Summer plan, the Sarney government was still trying to control prices with a promise that inflation would be kept to 28 per cent/month.
But the resignation in August 1989 of the Justice Minister on the grounds that a failed promise would bring social unrest showed how ineffective the controls still were.
In June 1990, the controls were ruled unconstitutional.
The new government, perhaps not knowing what else to do, took the drastic step of freezing all savings, while abandoning wage indexing even though inflation was still running at about 8 per cent a month.
A consequent strike by outraged Ford workers ended in the entire plant being wrecked.
Not only was administration of controls difficult; their abolition was politically risky.
TRADE POLICES
Many developing countries try to liberalise their trade regimes by revising their policies of intervention and by reducing or eliminating tariff and non-tariff barriers.
Free trade, however, is not a panacea.
Drastic, unprepared liberalisation can lead to economic chaos, as in the Ivory Coast in 1988.
The problems are most evident when tariffs have been cut without adjusting other macro-economic policies.
If the budget worsens after revenue-yielding tariffs have been reduced, governments may not be able to wait for the longer term trade gains to emerge to replace the lost revenue.
They may then feel obliged to reimpose taxes.
By doing so, they signal to the private sector that outward-looking policies do not ‘work’.
Such difficulties of determining the impact and the timing of adjustment make generalisations about trade policies elusive.
These difficulties are compounded by the fact that industrialisation policies have their own dynamic in each sector and by foreign lenders' intervention in domestic policy.
Trade theory seems of little help, for the advances in recent years of understanding how trade might affect national welfare are offset by limits to the theories in their capacity to yield policy advice that can work in practice (see, for example, Baldwin, 1988; Helpman and Krugman, 1989).
The issues for trade policy are none the less clear.
In the sections below we divide them into policies affecting imports, exports and countertrade.
We also consider the use of export processing zones (EPZ) and commercial diplomacy in regional trading blocs.
Import controls
The problem with ‘infant industry’ and other import controls is that they protect the domestic producer, whether foreign or local.
By removing the incentive to become or to stay competitive, countries risk losing in the longer term the benefits they sought in the first place.
Perhaps recognising the risk, Malaysia has used tariffs only as a temporary form of protection for the first-comer investor in certain sectors, like television sets.
Before World War II, Brazil introduced high rates of effective protection for local manufacturers against imports (up to nearly 70 per cent during the 1960s) and thus created a strong and enduring anti-export bias (Balassa, 1985: p. 27).
This policy, known as the ‘Law of Similars’, was, until recently, administered by CACEX, sometimes on the advice of business associations like ABINEE (electronics) or ABIMAQ (machinery).
Where many import requests were combined  in one project, CACEX negotiated a ‘national content’ proportion for the project as a whole, leaving the enterprise to decide which imports were vital and which replaceable, CACEX licences have been much more effective in controlling imports than the high tariffs, which in practice affected only about 6 per cent by value of total imports.
By the late 1980s, however, the system came under increasing criticism from domestic and foreign-owned exporters.
They complained that the Law of Similars often obliged them to use overpriced components, handicapping their products in world markets.
In May 1988, the government responded to these complaints (prodded no doubt by criticism from the IMF as the debtors' watchdog) with a series of new decrees, labelled the New Industrial policy.
This promised to replace the opaque and often arbitrary protection offered by the licensing system with a transparent set of tariffs.
Implementation, however, was slow — not so much from a lack of conviction as from the constraints of the chronic debt and adverse balance of payments situation.
There was also resistance in the National Assembly and from protected vested interests.
The new trade policy might act to reduce the power and corporatist influence of the powerful business associations (Fritsch and Franco, 1988).
Eventually, however, trade reform came as part of an apparent deal with Brazil's major creditor, the United States.
On taking office, Collor replaced the CACEX list of banned imports with high but declining tariffs.
But by June 1990, the country's economic situation had become so desperate that it had really run out of options.
Collor announced that both import licences and tariffs would be abolished in exchange for the USA abandoning its threatened action under the notorious Section 301 of the US Trade Act.
Brazil would also stop subsidising its coffee producers and would accept foreign property rights on pharmaceuticals, as demanded by Washington from the start of the Uruguay Round of trade negotiations.
The impact on Brazil's informatics policies was equally drastic, as we show later on.
Whether Washington was wise to use such coercive tactics is uncertain, because of the difficulties Brazil faces in adjusting other policies.
Besides, whoever suffers the pain of adjustment will blame the United States, whether justly or not.
Kenya has made most use of import licensing, causing, some would say, most of the investors' problems there.
But Kenya, being far more dependent on world commodity markets for its earnings of foreign exchange, always had fewer options.
Just occasionally, however, the commodity price movements provided a window of opportunity to  relax the highly protectionist policies.
One such chance came in 1986 when coffee prices (exports) went up and oil prices (imports) went down.
The government's dilemma was whether to risk liberalisation, hoping prices would stabilise, or to play safe and keep the controls.
Delays within the bureaucratic maze eventually allowed the opportunity to slip by.
Kenya's dilemmas were worsened by the very complexity of its protectionist policies.
These included high tariffs — up to 100 per cent ad valorem , import duty drawbacks and rebates, combined with duty-free entry for some specific capital goods.
The effective rate of protection for steel, vehicles and electrical goods, however, went much higher, up to 300 per cent.
The latitude for administrative discretion in individual cases surely encouraged rather than checked official corruption.
In principle, therefore, the World Bank's demand that all imports (except for some excluded on grounds of health or safety) should be free of controls by June 1991 seemed a step in the right direction.
In May 1988, the Kenyan government, dependent on the World Bank for a structural adjustment loan, agreed to this as part of the approved Industrial Sector Adjustment programme.
But whether the balance of payments will allow the agreement to be carried out remains uncertain.
In the meanwhile, it appears that the over-elaborate Kenyan system of import licensing has had a more dampening effect on the animal spirits of entrepreneurs than the more selective Brazilian CACEX system.
And the longer reform remains on the sidelines, the harder it becomes to change: bad habits, like barnacles, encrust the ship of state.
Export promotion
Ever since the early 1970s, Kenya has used subsidies to encourage exports.
These offset the extra cost of using either uncompetitive domestically produced inputs, or imported inputs on which high tariffs had been paid (Bradford and Branson, 1987).
But deteriorating internal conditions forced them to increase the subsidy in 1985 to 20 per cent, and to promise prompt payment (Kenya, 1986, p. 96).
In other words, the costs of the ‘shadow price’ can be considerable and the results indifferent.
Consequently, many countries prefer alternative policies.
For manufactured goods, Malaysia has relied heavily on attracting foreigners to its Export processing Zones (see below) and letting them fight it out in the exports markets with the minimum of intervention.
There are considerable risks inherent in this policy, for export   competitiveness can shift rapidly among countries, almost irrespective of relative changes in domestic costs.
An extreme form of export volatility is shown in table 4.2 for semi-conductors made by US firms.
The workings of the US tariff code have particular importance.
Under Items 806.30 and 807 in the code, US firms can gain tariff exemptions for products exported from the USA, processed abroad and re-imported to the USA.
Brazil, on the other hand, has combined export subsidies with other regulations to force firms to develop exports and add a greater net contribution to the balance-of-payments as the price for being able to sell in the huge internal market.
Brazil's size gave it bargaining power not equally enjoyed by either Kenya or Malaysia.
Under the BEFIEX system, set up in 1972 to consolidate earlier policies, firms promising to export a set portion of their production were allowed to bypass the ‘Law of Similars’ and also get soft loans for financing exports.
Surprisingly perhaps, this programme was initiated at the suggestion of the local Ford affiliate (Baumann and Moreira, 1987: p. 2).
The success of BEFIEX can be judged by the fact that by 1985 it covered 40 per cent of all manufactures, with a significant increase of the net trade generated (Fritsch and Franco, 1988: p. 116).
Much of the success was fuelled by the multinationals responding to the combination of carrot and stick.
By 1986, they accounted for one-third of total exports of manufactured goods, mainly in transport equipment, machinery and chemicals.
Even though local firms were also permitted to use the BEFIEX rules, the multinationals increased their export propensities four times faster.
But here, too, there was a dilemma.
The BEFIEX programme affected both export prices and margins.
For  much of the 1980s, internal price controls and market reserve policies combined to make margins on the domestic market much more attractive than for exports.
Many multinationals told us they had switched supply accordingly, thus reducing the full extent of the export growth.
In other words, Brazil found it hard to balance domestic and export intervention policies simultaneously.
For most developing countries the gains in trade from all such policies have been made primarily in price-sensitive goods.
Especially in South-South trade, the evidence is that older notions of comparative advantage based on price elasticities still hold sway (Thomas, 1988).
The implication is that a new ‘sub-economy’ is emerging alongside the world of global competition.
This appears to be a zero-sum game, because what one developing country gains is at the expense of another.
Only where the multinationals' power has been harnessed have substantial gains in income-elastic goods been achieved.
Export processing zones
Creating new export possibilities by establishing an EPZ in which exporting-only enterprises can be set up free of most local laws has appealed to many developing countries from the 1970s onwards.
Kenya's problems of being unable to adjust policies elsewhere to ensure efficiency, an essential requirement, have already been discussed.
Brazil's only special economic zone is a rather different case, as we show below.
Thus, our attention is focused on Malaysia, one of the pioneers of the idea in 1971.
For Malaysia, the New Economic policy aimed, among other things, at employment-creating industrialisation, in which foreign capital, already prominent in the economy, would play a part in enhancing exports.
But to make the location sufficiently attractive, the government decided to follow Singapore's lead and create an EPZ.
A promotional drive in California was directed at specific industrial sectors — like electronics — where officials thought their best chance of success would lie.
National Semiconductor became the first of a stream of US and later Japanese electronics investors to take the bait.
Other EPZs were later established in many parts of the country.
The range of investors widened, but mainly within electronics and some textiles.
Together these two industries account for over 90 per cent of the exports generated.
Though the net gains to Malaysia's balance of payments and employment have been valuable, the hoped-for transfers of  technology to local suppliers have been disappointing.
Some technological capabilities have been enhanced, but the main benefits have been restricted to the simpler parts of the industry.
Even so, Malaysia has become one of the world's largest exporters of semi-conductors.
Excluding the minimal spillover benefits, one cost-benefit study concluded that the net benefits of the EPZs, in terms of jobs, trade and local purchases, had grown to the point where by 1982 they exceeded the costs of providing infrastructure and of foregone tax revenue (Warr, 1987: pp. 52–3).
Such a conclusion has not, as we describe in Chapter 5, stopped Malaysia from continuing to press for even greater benefits in the form of enhanced linkages with local producers.
More generally, the competition created as more countries have established EPZs has eroded their effectiveness (Basile and Germidis, 1984).
Instead of considering them in purely ‘enclave’ terms (UNIDO, 1980a: p. 39), they must now be considered as a kind of magnetic field, reinforcing a country's existing attractiveness as a site for more foreign investment (Lütkenhorst, 1988).
This changing role affects ability to stimulate local ‘linkages’, for other obstacles come into play and lead to mixed outcomes.
EPZ regulations must become much more flexible if countries are to retain the vitality of the original investors.
Typically, firms have been required to export all their output to attract the full set of incentives.
In Malaysian electronics, this ‘has sometimes led to the ridiculous situation whereby a company based near a factory producing ICs places an order with the manufacturer's parent company or regional marketing office.
Components that were made in and shipped from Malaysia a few days earlier are then shipped back’.
Malaysia has subsequently become more flexible in the application of its procedures.
So too has Mexico, where maquiladora enterprises are now permitted to sell up to 20 per cent locally under some conditions.
Other adjustments include those in Sri Lanka, where enterprises can, where costs suggest location close to a supply of raw materials, get the benefits without being physically in the zone.
Some countries have lifted restrictions on nationality and now allow local nationals to set up in the zones.
Further, South Korea is experimenting with the conversion of EPZs into science parks.
All these developments suggest that the phenomenon of EPZs has its own life cycle and that policy must adjust accordingly, however difficult that may prove in practice.
Brazil's Free Zone of Manaus (ZFM) provides a good illustration of the difficulties of adjustment, even though it was set up for quite different purposes.
Because ZFM was set up in 1967 at the insistence of the military, who argued that economic development in the Amazon  basin was necessary for national security, its managing authority, SUFRAMA (Superintendencia da Zona Franca de Manaus) is responsible to Defence rather than Trade.
Consequently, the original policy of allowing tariff-free imports into the zone had little coherence with other national policies.
Foreign firms found ZFM to be an excellent way of avoiding the import bans from the Law of Similars, especially in electronics.
Only in 1987 did SUFRAMA begin to promote exports.
The relative lack of success was due in large part to the lack of consistency with other policies — a fact that became apparent in 1990, when Collor abolished national import quotas, and threatened to cut tariffs too.
Countertrade
Countertrade is a means of escaping from the straitjacket of the world system when it pinches too tightly.
Such evasion is, naturally, the subject of considerable controversy.
Gilpin (1987), like many liberal economists, regards it as contrary to consumer interests, whereas others describe it as ‘a ray of hope in a dismal world ‘.
Whatever the merits of either argument, it is an option used widely throughout the world as the earlier example from petrochemicals showed.
One recent study listed over 1,300 such deals concluded by developing countries between 1980 and 1987 (Jones and Jagoe, 1988) and concluded that most had been due to the instability of the financial system.
Others echo this view, regarding countertrade as ‘the symptom, not the disease’(Hammond, 1989: p. 252; Welt, 1985).
Brazil has been one of its greatest exponents.
Many estimate that countertrade accounts for as much as 10 per cent of Brazil's exports of both raw materials and manufactured goods.
Just as many third-world deals have involved oil so as to escape the OPEC output quotas, so Brazil exchanged $630 million worth of locally-made Volkswagens for Iraqi oil in 1984.
With Nigeria, Brazil exchanged promises to trade $4 billion of sugar and some sugar-processing equipment in return for oil.
Malaysia, too, has been active since 1983.
Government-negotiated deals have included the exchange of tin and rubber for Yugoslav manufactures, textiles and electric goods for Korean patrol boats, oil for Brazilian iron ore.
Where Brazil and Malaysia have felt free to manoeuvre, Kenya has been constrained.
The difference lies not in ideology, nor in what they have to offer for exchange, but in their unequal vulnerability to the disapproval of the United States, the IMF and the World Bank.
Kenya has been so dependent on official aid and structural adjustment loans  that its government dared not go in for countertrading — despite the fact that, like Brazil, it was surrounded by poor, debt-ridden neighbours.
Some major companies now seem, however, capable of finding ways around the obstacles.
Recognising that Uganda permits barter deals, General Motors Trading Corporation in Kenya, for example, negotiated the export of Isuzu buses (assembled in bond in Kenya) in exchange for hides and skins which it then sold on to third parties.
Though most developed countries deplore such practices, most either practice them from time to time— as Britain did in its arms dealing with Saudi Arabia — or else turn a blind eye when it suits them.
For example, Israel has since 1967 followed the general rule that all government purchases — including, of course , arms — should be paid for by offsets.
The US Congress has never uttered a word of criticism against the Israelis.
With such examples in mind, it is small wonder that developing countries feel equally free to use countertrade when short-term necessity over-rides any sense of the longer term and less certain consequences.
Regional trade blocs
Rather than act independently, many developing countries have tried to increase their competitiveness by forming regional trade blocs.
They have typically had two motivations.
One is to increase inter-regional trade and gain scale advantages by specialisation.
All too often, however, the gains have proved illusory, for member states have had either competing, not complementary, products or have failed to agree on ‘rules’ for determining who gets what share of the newly specialised output.
The other and perhaps stronger motive for regional bloc-building is the hope of increasing collective bargaining power.
In the case of ASEAN, there is some evidence of success.
For instance, in 1977, Australia backed down on proposed cuts on Asian footwear imports after ASEAN threatened to buy food elsewhere (Gill and Law, 1988).
The severity of the obstacles against realising regional gains are shown in the dismal history of such policies.
From the Central American Common Market in the 1960s onwards, almost everywhere hope has been followed by disillusionment.
The collapse of the East African Economic Community in 1976 had damaging effects on foreign investors by cutting off important local markets.
The 1983 agreement by eighteen countries to set up a regional preferential trading area (PTA) in East and Southern Africa has been little more successful in overcoming three familiar problems.
One was imbalance  in trade advantage.
As the more industrially developed countries in the region, Kenya and Zimbabwe stood to benefit most from the association.
Kenya gained a (largely unpaid) surplus and was therefore reluctant to increase unrequited exports.
The second was the rules-of-origin clause which excluded exports by firms not majority-owned by Africans.
The third was the dependence of poor governments on trade tax revenues — 70 per cent of total revenues for Uganda, 25 to 30 per cent for Kenya — and their consequent unwillingness to cut tariffs even to other African states.
GATT's general disapproval of such trade-distorting initiatives is, by comparison, a gnat bite.
Latin American efforts to exercise collective bargaining power against multinationals have equally flopped.
The Andean pact's much publicised Decision 24 of 1970 progressively to exclude multinationals was reversed — the official euphemism was ‘replaced’— by Decision 220 of May 1987, effectively leaving the bargaining up to the individual states (Bolivia, Peru, Ecuador and Venezuela).
The original fade-out provisions that called for progressive expropriation of foreign firms have gone; and the attempt to create cooperative ‘regional multi-nationals’ on the basis of a division of labour and specialisation was abandoned in 1982.
The broader-based Latin American Free Trade Area appeared to increase intra-industry trade but had few other perceptible consequences.
One reason was that it incorporated a most-favoured-nation rule that precluded bilateral deals and thus limited collective agreements to the willingness of the least cooperative member.
It was effectively superseded in 1980 by the Latin American Integration Association (LAIA), which allowed bilateral deals and has since been an umbrella under which they have proliferated (Tussie 1987: p. 129).
Equally questionable has been ASEAN's development.
Though inter-industry trade is higher within the region than among developed countries (Erzan, 1984), this could be merely the result of good communications and cheap transport (Grimwade, 1989).
The record of negotiating — and sticking to — regional specialisation in basic industries has not been impressive.
A recent example of how plans have come unstuck is the fate of the Japan-backed ASEAN plan for automobile components, where Indonesia's intransigency has put plans for regional specialisation back on the drawing board.
Bilateral agreements may hold out more promise, if only because they are easier to administer.
For example, Brazil and Argentina are developing a free trade agreement, due to be completed by 1994.
The initial agreement covers many capital goods (excluding informatics) and has led to an increase in trade and specialisation.
Argentina's  exports emphasise goods where batch production is effective, whereas Brazil's emphasise products for which long runs and economies of scale are important.
Future agreements are intended to cover a wider range of industries.
Already complementary technology agreements have been made among local firms to support these ambitions.
Meanwhile, among economists, the jury is still out on whether regional trade blocs and bilateral trade agreements are any more than a second-best strategy.
Yet the Canadian decision to join the USA in a free-trade area means that weaker partners think the risks of not joining are greater and the benefits, however marginal, worthwhile.
The point is not lost on developing countries: if the rich countries think the strategy beneficial, there must be something in it for them too.
OWNERSHIP CONTROLS
States' policies towards the ownership of assets can be considered in four categories, depending on their priorities for state ownership and their attitudes to foreign firms.
They can choose to insist on state ownership, as is common for public utilities, post and telecoms.
Where state ownership is not at issue, they can be neutral, leaving the sector free to respond to market forces and to the general, national policies.
For the rest, they can choose either to give preferential treatment to foreign firms (by means of incentives not available to local firms), or to discriminate against them by such means as Brazil's market reserve policies.
State-owned enterprises
Though they have existed in some countries for centuries, only after the 1940s did state-owned enterprises (SOEs) come to prominence in most developing countries.
Either by nationalisation or by the creation of new industries, SOEs were widely regarded as an essential feature of managing the ‘commanding heights’ of the economy.
In Brazil, president Vargas started creating SOEs during the 1930s.
By 1960, their number had grown to 150 in 1960 and to over 600 by 1980.
Some of these were mixed, in the sense that investment in some sectors like chemicals was created under the ‘tri-pé’ policy whereby ownership was shared among state enterprises, local firms and multinationals.
SOEs multiplied in Malaysia with the desired roles, as explained by one official as ‘patron, trustee, joint venture partner, complementer and inducer of expanded bumiputra participation in the commercial and industrial sectors’(Leeds, 1989: p. 743).
Over 100 industrial SOEs were formed in Kenya in most sectors, often in partnership with foreigners.
Because SOEs were created for multiple reasons, most faced conflicting pressures from various constituencies and could not reconcile multiple, and conflicting, objectives.
The problems were worsened by corruption, as in the notorious Malaysian case when a major highway contract was awarded to a construction company of limited experience, but owned by the ruling political party.
The inherent conflicts embodied in their creation has subsequently led to their demise in many countries.
Targets for output and employment often conflict with targets for profitability.
Measures of contribution to government revenue could not be matched, as in Sierra Leone's petroleum SOE, with price controls designed to keep energy prices low (World Bank Staff, 1989: p. 225).
With notable exceptions, SOEs have proved disappointing.
Far from delivering priority goods and services efficiently, most have been shambling giants draining funds out of national coffers.
In countries like Brazil, the original financing had come so heavily from foreign loans that by the mid-1980s, SOE debt was over half of the total foreign commercial debt.
The position was even worse in countries like Tanzania, where SOEs were set up primarily to replace imports but worsened the trade balance.
Moreover, Tanzanian SOEs became massive net consumers of state revenues with consequently negative impact on development (World Bank, 1989: pp. 11–13).
Expropriation of multinationals has created a good many SOEs.
The history goes back to 1938, when Mexico took over US and British oil interests and reached a peak in 1975; eighty-three acts of expropriation of foreign firms in twenty-eight countries (UNCTC, 1988a: table XIX-I).
Since then the tide has turned.
In the first half of the 1980s, there were only fifteen expropriations compared with 336 in the first half of the 1970s.
As the UNCTC commented, ‘The mood today is very different…
Not many developing countries would now see the activities of TNCs as impinging on their sovereignty…there are clear indications of a new pragmatic approach which comes from the growing belief that developing countries can negotiate agreements with TNCs in which the benefits of foreign investments are not necessarily outweighed by the cost’(UNCTC, 1988a: p. 314).
Privatisation
Failure, whether because of internal inefficiencies or because of the need to create new international partnerships, has led many  governments to consider privatisation as part of the cure.
Broadly defined, privatisation ranges from sale of all or part of the equity to their transformation to management contracts or leasing agreements with private firms.
It may also involve, as in banking, a degree of deregulation of markets.
Whatever the mechanism of the sale and to whom, the intention of privatisation is to increase economic efficiency (Commander and Killick, 1988) and to increase the degree to which the country can become part of the global economy (Vernon, 1988).
That intention has, so far, seldom been realised.
By the mid-1980s, relatively few of the SOEs targeted for sale had actually been privatised.
Moreover, the privatised firms had seldom showed the expected gains.
The numbers show that in Africa and in Latin America, excluding Chile, only about 17 per cent of targets for privatisation had actually been sold and in Asia only about 30 per cent.
In Brazil, where the total net assets of state enterprises amount to about $40 billion, the assets of those privatised amounted to only $27 million (Pfeffermann, 1988: p. 15).
That is at least better than Nigeria or Turkey where despite much fanfare and expensive feasibility studies, nothing at all has happened.
Severe administrative obstacles and problems over valuation of the assets are prime obstacles to action.
Chile has been far more successful than most, precisely because of the simplicity of its administrative procedures and considerable pragmatism in assessing values: features largely absent elsewhere.
Valuation problems are exacerbated when privatisation has been undertaken as part of a wider adjustment to outward-looking policies.
Often the World Bank and the IMF have required the hardest pressed countries to adopt both ‘structural adjustment’ and ‘policy reform’(a euphemism for privatisation) before new financing is made available.
Structural adjustment can make the internal market less profitable and thus less attractive to those prospective buyers seeking to exploit the local market.
Perversely, this reduces the value of the assets for sale and thus the fiscal benefit to the treasury.
Further obstacles come from the short-term costs of re-construction and from a lack of local buyers.
A Brazilian estimate was $1 billion for the physical rehabilitation of rundown, inefficient state enterprises.
Thus, the 1985 proclamation of privatisation had largely stalled by 1989 for lack of buyers.
A growing backlash of nationalist sentiment further impeded Brazil's programme.
When debating their new Constitution in 1988, Congress passed a provision to force foreign companies to divest their controlling interests in mineral extraction  over a four-year period.
Though, as we discuss below, this provision has been modified, the nationalistic sentiment was clearly registered by prospective buyers.
Brazil's pro-privatisation rhetoric needs to be supported by much further change in policy and practice to turn it into more than a minor curiosity in its history.
Progress has been less hindered in Malaysia since 1983, when the government began a new policy, led by the prime Minister, of co-operation between government and the private sector in which multinationals could participate as minority partners or with management contracts.
Yet Malaysia has not always gained greatly from the sales of assets, such as shares in its airline and the container terminal at port Klang.
Political control could still override commercial consideration (Nankani, 1988).
In Kenya, the sparse results of the 1983 Task Force on Divestiture of Government Investment reflect less the unwillingness of the government to press on with privatisation — as demanded by the IMF and World Bank — than the absence of willing African — not Asian — buyers; most foreign private enterprise have been uninterested.
All that happened was a marked decline in the preferential finance made available by parastatal Kenyan banks (Commonwealth Secretariat, 1985: p. 26).
Government has also been reluctant to act, as we illustrate later on for textiles, for fear of loss of jobs.
As in Eastern Europe, where privatisation has been accomplished, the full longer term benefits will not be achieved until the enterprises gain greater competitiveness.
The obstacles are considerable when one considers how much has to change in managerial attitudes, skills and in the internal control systems.
Managers long cushioned by state intervention become driven by production targets, not by the test of the market.
Their failures can all too readily be excused and even hidden by further infusions of state funds.
Few are likely to be enthusiastic about taking up the burdens of having to compete.
This problem is especially acute in smaller countries like Kenya and Tanzania, where there are now fears that state capitalism will merely be replaced by ‘crony capitalism’.
All too often, newly privatised enterprises remain dependent on political connections for a wide range of monopolistic privileges to cushion the full force of competition.
Unless adequate attention is paid to building robust institutions that promote internal competition and offset the lack of commercial experience or knowledge in the political system, privatisation will merely transfer privilege and feather-bedding from one group to another.
Controls over private ownership
Controls over private ownership go beyond state ownership or policies towards foreign investors; they can also affect racial or tribal groups in the local society.
In Kenya, it sometimes seems as though the main issues regarding ownership have not really been foreign vs.
African so much as African vs.
Asian and state vs.
Private.
The low savings rate and the low literacy rate among Africans left the economy heavily dependent for growth on either Asian enterprise or foreign investment and expertise.
Given the policy of explicit discrimination against Asians and constraints on foreign ownership, SOEs had to fill the gap.
Even recent liberalisation has failed to dispel deep-seated suspicions that discrimination still lurks beneath the surface.
Malaysia has been primarily concerned to secure the economy against too much Chinese ownership.
Spurred by severe racial riots in 1969, the New Economic policy (NEP) was introduced in 1970 with the primary objective of forcing a change of ownership to reflect the ethnic composition of the country.
Thus Malaysian, or bumiputra, shares of corporate ownership were targeted to rise from about 2 per cent to 30 per cent.
The foreign investors' share was to reduce from 60 to 30 per cent by 1990 (Malaysia, 1973: table 4.9).
Chinese interests were also forced to restructure their equity holdings as the government became more directly involved in the redistribution of national resources and enacted restrictive legislation such as the 1975 Industrial Co-ordination Act.
Moreover, anti-Chinese discrimination extended into the educational field and employment in public service, with a high percentage of places reserved for bumiputras.
One response was to create both an exodus of talent from the country and capital flight.
Ironically, this capital flight has been rumoured to have fuelled some of the growth of inward investment from ASEAN countries.
Capital fleeing the country has been recycled through family connections abroad to reappear as fresh capital imports capable of attracting the more recently relaxed rules for foreign investors, regardless of national or ethnic origin.
Though such rumours cannot be proved, they are so endemic that they suggest something of the sort has been occurring.
The general climate of gradual relaxation of constraints against foreign ownership that prevailed at the end of the decade has probably extended to the Chinese and the smaller Indian local population.
The fact that bumiputra ownership had increased dramatically, no doubt helped smooth the way.
By 1986, thy bumiputra share of equity among the 173 members of the Malaysian Chamber of Commerce and Industry, which broadly represented the international business  community, had grown to 21 per cent.
Yet it must be noted that much of the growing Bumiputra ownership was held in a series of trusts and pension funds.
By attenuating the link between ownership and control, the benefits have not been widely distributed among local entrepreneurs and individuals (Sieh and Chew, 1985).
Controls on foreign firms
Just as firms have to modify what they want in strategic terms with what they can get, so too for government.
Attempts at privatisation, designed to push SOEs on to the global bandwagon, have often been accompanied by an easing of equity limitations in other sectors.
For example, the first constitution of independent India in 1947 laid down that foreign ownership should be limited to less than half in oil, and in certain other restricted sectors.
Only where the foreigner brought in technology that could not otherwise be obtained or where the firm exported the great bulk of its output were these constraints relaxed.
Today, such exemptions have been extended as governments understand more fully just how much of a deterrent ownership restriction is to certain types of investor, especially those pursuing some form of global strategy.
Liberalisation of ownership is seldom a matter of states retreating to a policy of indifference.
Most wish to retain or promote some form of local participation.
This preference is shown up in growing governmental preference for the many variants of NFI, in which a local enterprise associates with a foreign partner (or sometimes with two as in Brazil where Tintas Renas teamed up with both ICI and Dupont to produce paint for the local market).
Just how sensitive is the issue can be seen in US firms' responses when ownership controls have been relaxed.
Where they could, they increased the proportion of their wholly or majority owned foreign affiliates between 1977 and 1982 (Contractor, 1990a).
American preference for equity control remains, it would seem, undiminished.
Others can be more flexible, depending on their competitive strength and strategy of expansion.
A full discussion of the issues is therefore deferred to the next chapter, when local strategy is matched against local regulation.
Incentives
The question naturally arises as to whether liberalisation of policy leads to greater inflows of direct investment.
With so many weapons to hand, some cancel out others in a tangled web of  incentives and disincentives.
Thus, while Korea found that inflows rapidly increased after their liberalisations in 1981–2, Pakistan found a decline in investor interest after introducing a new policy of welcome in 1984.
Part of the reason for such seemingly irrational behaviour is the suspicion among many managers that incentives rise as governments try to offset inherent economic disadvantages or protect restrictive domestic policies.
Besides, the forms of the incentives themselves come in a bewildering array.
Guisinger (1985) lists 59 varieties of incentive and obstacle that governments use.
The effectiveness of each depends on many other factors.
For instance, US investors are not swayed by tax holidays as tax policy in the USA offsets much of the benefit.
Most importantly, effectiveness cannot be measured in the generality; it has to be seen in the context of what each firm is trying to achieve.
As we have repeatedly observed, the critical distinction is create exports.
Internal price controls may be important for the former (IFC, 1986), but not for the latter.
As Wells (1986) pointed out, failure to recognise this distinction leads to confusion.
Effectiveness is also a function of the efficiency of the agency or agencies responsible.
In many countries, a single agency deals with assessing investors' proposals; in others the investor has to negotiate with several ministries, with all the attendant delays and possible inconsistency of messages received.
Given the sensitivity of time, it is not surprising that there has been a trend towards countries adopting ‘one-stop-shopping’ approaches.
Many, like the BKPM in Indonesia, are also simplifying the procedures so that smaller projects can go through without screening, or adopting procedures that allow automatic approval (unless subject to official objection) within thirty days.
The record for ambition to be speedy seems to be held by the Selangor State government in Malaysia, which announced in 1988 that it was now ‘possible for applications to be approved in one day’.
Admirable though they are, the benefit of these moves are eroded by administrative inefficiencies and distrust.
For example, when Kodak wished to set up a regional distribution centre in Nairobi, it failed to gain permission for ‘green channel’ facilities for the re-exports.
The Kenyan government could not believe the duty-free photographic chain would not somehow leak out into the economy.
In addition, Kodak found so much administrative hassle was to be involved in serving the regional market via Kenya that it was more cost-effective to fly in the chemicals direct to each country.
When Malaysia turned attention to export promotion, local manufacturers  eligible for export incentives ‘did not avail themselves of the facility either because of ignorance or owing to the cumbersome procedures’(Ariff and Hill, 1985).
Besides, the subsidies implicit in the incentives were insufficient to offset the anti-export bias created by the NEP ‘padding’ and protectionism and were aimed at only the largest enterprises.
Such obstacles apart, all these facets of ownership policy and incentives to change behaviour, taken together, have led to a ‘new pragmatism’.
Flexible arrangements for decision making on projects in which having a bare majority in equity ownership is not the deciding factor are now becoming more common (UNCTC, 1988a: p. 326).
Because the needs of governments — for technology, for foreign exchange earned through exports, for managerial experience — differ from sector to sector, as does the prospect for profits for the investor, the sectoral differences among bargains are likely to be even greater than national differences.
SECTORAL POLICES
So far, the discussion has concerned general policies that affect all industries, but in varying ways.
Firms in global industries tend to be much more concerned with exchange rate questions, for example, than those in domestically oriented ones.
To deal with such problems, governments can choose to adopt a specific sectoral policy.
They have the same four basic options we described for general ownership policy: state ownership; specific support for or discrimination against locals or foreigners; or neutrality.
At the sectoral level, however, these choices can be more difficult, especially when powerful interest groups are directly affected, or when specific sub-sectors of industries have been designated as flagships of industrialisation.
Political deals can add confusion about the implementation of a particular policy.
The balance of effect varies widely among the three parties shown in figure 4.3.
Brazil's military government, according to Evans (1979), envisaged a ‘triple alliance’.
Local firms were to provide the skills in political manoeuvring, multinationals the technology and the state to supply the institutions and the arena in which to forge a common set of goals to unite the alliance and manage the national economy.
In practice, in Brazil and elsewhere, the alliance within sectors is always unstable, because coalitions form to oppose the status quo.
Privatisation moves may initially favour a strengthening of links with foreigners, but later give way to greater support for local firms when   their objections to being excluded are heard.
Inherent competitive weakness in a state/local sector coalition may break down as some local firms seek advantage by alliance with foreigners.
Sectoral policy that favours foreigners may, as in Malaysia's electronics, provoke calls for greater linkage with and support for local firms.
These shifting balances and the accompanying administrative muddle and dilemma are illustrated by experience in five national industries.
These indicate the pressure for change, the dilemmas of choice and the difficulties of implementation when different parts of government take opposing views.
More detailed consideration of the human and political aspects of these issues is given in chapter 6.
Informatics is a prime example.
Spurred originally by demands from the Navy (for special performance requirements, not well catered for by the US suppliers) and by internal security needs for faster information, Brazil had determined to go for a policy of self-sufficiency in the underlying technologies.
In the terms of our matrix in chapter 1, this was a move in intent from left to right for a global industry, with all the attendant risks of such high ambition.
Most imports were banned and foreign investors forced to renegotiate their position.
Some, like Honeywell, chose to leave, while others chose to commute equity into licence agreements.
This policy approach was, however, overtaken by the events of 1990, when the new Collor government agreed the plan, described earlier, to reduce trade friction with the USA.
Rather than immediately repealing the existing Informatics Law of 1984, however, the government decided to abolish it when it expires in 1992.
The reasons for the delay were explained by the Minister for Science and Technology:
We had no choice.
The informatics Law must be changed by Congress, which is clearly opposed.
I'm caught in the cross-fire between on one side the US which wants to export computers, the motor and textile industries which complain they cannot modernise and thus compete without a change in the law, and on the other side the Brazilian computer industry which argues we are leading them into bankruptcy.
To add further confusion to an already muddled picture, the SEI (Secretaria Especial de Informatica) is reported to have maintained the similarity examination and placed bureaucratic obstacles in the path of importers.
They seem likely to continue to do so even after the reserve policy has been replaced by an interim policy of providing maintained protection for a list of specific products with the potential to compete with foreign products.
Under these circumstances, it is unlikely that foreign computer firms will scramble to take advantage of the new policy under which they can subscribe for 30 per cent of equity in a local producer.
The Brazilian arms industry provides a second example, but in this case change came more from the workings of market forces, not, as one might suppose, from the continuing strong influence of the military in Brazilian politics (C. Evans, 1990).
Here local firms have been pre-eminent, though some have used selective technical agreements with foreign enterprises, like that between Embraer and British Aerospace, to keep up technologically.
Their export success was, for a time, phenomenal.
They rose to fifth place among arms exporters, helped perhaps by the embargoes constraining some competitor nations.
According to Carol Evans' detailed analysis (1991), the land-based arms industry was not planned: it emerged after a slump in demand for machine tools and other capital goods.
Producers desperately needed to find new outlets for the capacity they had installed in the boom times.
As most of their expansion had been in transport sectors, it was a natural step for them to try switching production from trucks to tanks.
The timing seemed fortuitous, for they expanded just as demand was booming in the Middle East.
But the end of the Iran-Iraq war led to a precipitous decline in exports and to the bankruptcy of two major firms: Avibras and Engesa.
A narrow export base was inadequate to protect the sector from the boom-to-bust cycle.
The origins of Brazil's export success in military trainers and small civilian aircraft were quite different.
Here, government discrimination against foreign firms, combined with preferential protection for Embraer, broke the earlier US stranglehold on the industry.
During  the 1950s the US light aircraft company, Cessna, dominated the Brazilian market.
When the government initiated a preferred partner strategy to force import-substitution, it offered Cessna a deal.
Protection would be granted if Cessna produced aircraft in Brazil and modified its US designs to suit local conditions.
Cessna refused.
Its smaller rival, piper, agreed to a joint-venture, and for a while enjoyed Cessna's position, before being displaced when Embraer took over complete control.
By the end of the 1980s, the sector had developed, with the aid of foreign partners and technology, to the point where Embraer claimed nearly 40 per cent of the world regional airliner market.
Exports to the USA had, however, been impeded during the late 1980s by US obstacles, placed in retaliation against ‘unfair practices’.
Only after the market reserves for imported planes were dropped in 1990 did the export position improve.
In this instance, it is notable that the domestic monopoly did not create inefficiency.
Embraer had long adopted policies of aiming for international competitiveness; the domestic market was too small to support its ambition.
The Brazilian automobile assembly industry was created in the 1950s to replace imports by using investment allowances and protection as inducements to foreigners to invest.
Though the policy of according preference to foreigners has been retained, its application has changed dramatically.
Originally, under the Law of Similars, investors were offered a protected place, one foreign firm in each segment of the sector, just as in aircraft.
This created quasi-monopolies, marked by inefficiency and lack of export potential (Fritsch and Franco, 1988).
This strategy changed in 1972 when BEFIEX was introduced.
The large size of the internal market gave Brazil the power to insist on the transition, despite objections from the firms about the cost of the reinvestment needed.
Further fuel to the drive for competitiveness was added at about the same time by inter-provincial rivalry.
Minas Gerais, for example, wanted to gain some of the job-creating benefits of playing host to foreigners that had previously been concentrated around Sao Paolo, and did a deal with Fiat; Parana acted similarly with Volvo.
But the sector suffered like chemicals and shipping from cyclical downturns in world demand which thinned the ranks.
Two major producers — General Motors and Autolatina — came to dominate the sector while minimising their risks by building closer links with local component suppliers.
Though some, like Dahlman (1984), consider this industry to be a ‘success story of infant industry development’, the reality is much more complex.
It is a sector where the multinationals dominated, but had to be coerced into action that produced export gains but at the price of deepening the dependence  not just in the main products, but also in key component suppliers.
Besides, the Japanese presence in the industry is limited.
Some argue this is because of the decision to adopt sugar-derived alcohol, not solely to reduce oil imports, but also to add a further barrier against new foreigners.
Policies designed to increase the added-value content of natural resource exports have taken different forms, depending on the nature of the world market.
As discussed in chapter 3, open, competitive markets confer greater power on the government when the sophistication of the technology and the scale in advancing downstream are slight.
But when there are advantages from vertical integration, as in aluminium, the multinationals can defeat government policy.
For example, Brazil's 1988 resolution to prohibit foreign controlling interests in natural resource ventures was circumvented by the exemptions granted to those who ‘industrialised’ their operations by building refineries and the like.
Though many in Brazil feel that this softening in the law was due to lobby pressure from the multinationals, others take a different view.
One authority in the Brazilian Mineral Institute claimed that ‘Congress felt that foreign mining companies that had already made huge investments here should be differentiated from newly arrived companies’.
The new provisions hit hardest at the exploration stages of minerals projects, where there is the greatest risk.
Shell has stated that it ‘no longer wants to invest in exploratory mining in Brazil.
None the less, as 95 per cent of Shell's (minerals) investments in Brazil are in aluminium, we will still be a strong presence here’.
Policy shifts and administrative compromise are common experiences.
The Kenyan textile sector shows clearly how dilemmas and conflicts of policy can multiply over the years.
Textiles were one of the earliest modern manufacturing industries to be established in Kenya.
By independence, seven mills were in operation, all owned, wholly or partly, by local Asians.
In the decade following independence, a number of vertically integrated companies were founded as joint ventures with foreign partners, some with minority government participation.
Up to 1972, these ventures were modestly successful, due mainly to high rates of effective protection (Langdon, 1986: p. 186).
Such protection, however, bred inherent inefficiency by encouraging excessively wide product ranges, short production runs and costs at least 40 per cent above world prices.
In the early 1970s, government policy shifted towards promoting manufactured exports, Textile exports were targeted in the 1974–8 Development plan, and four new projects were negotiated by the  government with foreign partners.
In each, a complex consortium of development finance institutions held majority equity positions.
Promises of export earnings failed to materialise: most of the projects had bought overpriced and sometimes obsolete equipment from the shrinking European textile industry.
By 1983, all the ventures involving government development finance institutions were nationalised after defaulting on loans.
Even in public ownership, most were seriously undercapitalised.
Most were also inefficient: irregular supplies of raw materials encouraged over-stocking (UNCTC, 1988b).
The only remaining profitable joint venture textile company was the private venture between local Asians and the Japanese, Nomura.
In effect, the government became trapped by its original, but incomplete, logic.
The planners held the conventional view that textiles was an attractive industry, because it was labour-intensive and could compete on world markets by virtue of low local wages.
What the planners ignored was the effect of competition on profitability.
High effective rates of tariff protection (up to 93 per cent)(World Bank, 1987: p. 283), were no defence against competition from local Asian producers and from smuggled goods.
Even when the industry persuaded the authorities to introduce and enforce bans on imports, it did not change the operation of the highly concentrated domestic wholesale textile market.
This remained largely controlled by Asians who also owned most of the garment manufacturers.
Naturally, they exerted as much downward pressure on ex-mill prices as they could.
Low profitability meant the textile ventures could not finance their substantial foreign borrowings when Kenya began a series of devaluations in the 1980s.
At the same time, although the government did not have the resources to finance adequate re-capitalisation, it was unwilling to close mills for fear of creating unemployment.
The situation was so bad in one company — it had started life as a joint venture with Lonrho — that the losses from 1985 to 1988 were substantially greater than its aggregate wage costs.
The state-owned textile companies now operating with insufficient working capital are even more vulnerable to price gouging by Asian wholesalers (Coughlin, 1987).
Moreover, while upper management may be reliable political appointees, Asians (and a few Europeans) still dominate the ranks of senior textile engineers.
Sectoral policy can also lead to unexpected problems as protected national entities themselves attempt to compete in international markets.
These attempts represent a shift in ‘intent’ from left to right in the matrix of agendas shown earlier in figure 1.7.
Whereas a few, like Embraer in Brazil, have succeeded in creating the resources and  abilities to become global players, many others have stumbled.
Kenya Re, mentioned earlier, illustrates the problem.
Once established to control domestic reinsurance flows, Kenya Re attempted to grow further by taking on risks from such countries as their African neighbours and Bangladesh.
These risks had been previously rejected by the more experienced majors.
The perhaps inevitable consequences were accumulating losses and a withdrawal back to the protected home market.
What started with high hopes for mutual support among poor countries was confounded by market forces.
In other words, the limits to South-South collaboration at national levels, described in chapter 2, are also visible at the sectoral level.
All these examples show the wide range of forces — economic, competitive and political — that together shape both the balance of sectoral bargaining power and the basis of government choice about the form of desired control.
The chances of being treated preferentially or even of being treated on a left-alone basis also depend critically on the level and pace of change of the technology involved and on the degree of concentration and competition in the sector (Mytelka, 1979; Milner, 1988; Grosse, 1989).
Often, as in household products or industrial chemicals, hot competition among affiliates of big multinationals ensures both growth and cost-competitiveness.
But global competition, by itself, is not necessarily enough.
Multi-nationals can use their market power to fiddle transfer prices.
Though rare, such abuses do happen.
Kenya Canners (now renamed Delmonte Kenya) was subjected to an Interpol investigation in 1978, prompted by the fact that it persistently showed local losses while continuing to export 96 per cent of its output.
The investigation revealed wide discrepancies in the invoices shown to the Kenyan authorities and those submitted to foreign buyers.
Subsequently, the company agreed to independent auditing and has returned to profitability.
Given that the company received about 20 per cent of its profits from the government's ‘export compensation’, such acquiescence was not surprising.
In pharmaceuticals, firms can use the power of their technological oligopoly so blatantly that there has been a policy reaction by many governments.
Sri Lanka, for example, once adopted a national reserve policy to switch supply to generic drugs, mainly from Eastern Europe.
Though designed both to save foreign exchange and for social welfare reasons, this policy had later to be modified as problems of quality and unreliable supply multiplied.
WHERE THEORIES FAIL
This brief look at sectoral differences raises some much broader questions about the adequacy of academic theories to explain how the emerging state-firm relationships affect bargaining.
Bargaining theory is common to the study of both international relations and international business management.
Indeed, there is a growing consensus among writers on transnational corporations in developing countries that the relationship between the parties is the product of bargaining, whether explicit or implicit.
(Grosse, 1989; Kobrin, 1987; Dunning, 1989; Doz and Prahalad, 1987; Safarian, 1983; Wells, 1977, Encarnation and Wells, 1986; Austin, 1990).
There is also consensus that there are certain common factors, negative and positive, that affect a country's ability to bargain successfully with transnational corporations (Katzenstein, 1978).
Yet, even the theoretical models that underpin the relationships sketched in figure 4.1 do not constitute a general explanatory theory of why and when the balance of bargaining power shifts, nor why outcomes differ, nor yet why and how the bargaining process (involving more than narrowly defined one firm-one state conditions) gets started.
The much wider social sciences literature concerning bargaining offers little more help.
At best, it merely clarifies some aspects of the processes by which parties with different, even mutually conflicting, objectives manage to reach agreement both can live with.
In political science and international relations, from Schelling's seminal book (1960) onwards, much of the literature started from positivist, realist assumptions and focused almost exclusively on the behaviour of states (Rapoport, 1960; Iklé, 1964).
The further assumption of public choice theory, that states are rational actors and interact rationally with each other, has led many scholars in this field to follow the lead of the economists — who in turn were following the mathematicians — to use game theory and to make limiting assumptions about the nature and duration of the game.
Logical coherence has been gained at the expense of empirical relevance.
At the extreme are international lawyers like Falk and the conflict resolution school of writers like Galtung whose purpose is explicitly normative, seeking to use game and bargaining theory to change the behaviour of the protagonists.
Only a few writers in international relations (notably Jervis, 1976; Steinbruner, 1974) have seriously questioned the assumption of rationality in state policy making and some more recent works have distinguished bargaining in which the parties are not consciously conflictual but are searching for a point of convergence (Raiffa, 1982; Rangarajan, 1985).
Why bargaining theory helps so little should be clear enough from our evidence.
A state has objectives that are multiple, often conflicting, always shifting.
It cannot in reality be a rational actor in the game-theory sense of having a fixed order of priorities in its policy goals.
It always wants incompatible, conflicting values.
It wants to be efficient and competitive and to preserve social peace and the cohesion of the state with society.
It wants autonomy and the freedom to choose its own path to economic development and access to advanced technology and overseas markets.
It is playing a trade-off game in which the variables are never constant.
Policy-making dilemmas, we repeat, have been increased in number and difficulty by the necessity of partnership with multi-nationals in the hunt for world market shares.
States must choose, in industrial policy as in corporate strategy, between diversification and specialisation.
Specialisation may improve the chances of successful exporting as with Korean and Malaysian electronics, Taiwanese containerships, or banking in Hong Kong.
But the risks from new competitors and from changing technology or market demand will also be greater.
Korea's choice of shipbuilding shortly before the shipbuilding and especially the tanker market virtually collapsed in the mid-1970s could have been disastrous.
And in textiles, Kenya's experience shows that cheap and plentiful labour was insufficient to overcome increased import quotas and Voluntary Export Restrains, or to compete against new, still cheaper competitors.
States must also choose which policy approach should apply to which sectors, and when and how to move a sector from one category to another.
The politically optimal policy toward the foreigner may be precluded by the inequality of factors affecting the balance of bargaining.
There has never been a time in economic history when comparative advantage was less static.
Understandably, governments have difficulty reconciling their macro-policies towards foreigners with the need for discriminatory policies among sectors, and still more with the specific bargains they may be tempted to make with particular firms.
Foreign investors typically call loudly for clear, unambiguous rules by which to play the game.
They want continuity of policy, not capricious or arbitrary decisions.
But each enterprise also wants government to be flexible, to discriminate in its favour; and for itself wants to be free to take advantage of any shifts in the factors which improve its own bargaining power.
The dilemmas are often more acute for the government with a small economy like Kenya's than one with a large domestic market like Brazil or India.
Both, however, have difficulty in choosing among  firms in the same sector.
In the final analysis, much of the success or otherwise of a policy will depend on which firms carry out the operations.
But this introduces a further dilemma.
Should the state favour a leading multinational that will likely insist on tougher terms?
Or should it seek weaker competitors or new entrants who are often more accommodating to local policy, but may lack the resources to keep up with the pace of change?
These questions are addressed in the next chapter.
For now, it is important to remember that the bargaining relationship is never static.
Rational, economic analysis is far too static to capture this dynamic; governments are left to choose their policies on political grounds.
It is they, not international advisors, who have to suffer the consequences of wrong political decisions.
This is why they often consider advice from the IMF or the World Bank to be hopelessly abstract and unrealistic.
These organisations have to give — or at least be seen to give — the same advice to all their members, regardless of politics.
Backed by a combination of sticks and carrots, the advice often gains credibility only because it is taken.
But it is not always or necessarily the best advice.
Their experts are not infallible, as when the World Bank boosted tourism in the 1960s as a sure-fire multiplier of development.
Their advice, even today when it is more flexible and politically sensitive, consequently often falls on deaf ears, not because the economic logic is at fault but because the political factors in the equation are both unquantifiable and subjective for the decision takers.
A final weakness of bargaining theories in this context arises from the complexity of interlocking relationships in the real world.
Government policy must be seen as a whole, not in parts.
There are bargains between ministers within government; there are bargains between political parties supporting government; there are bargains with labour unions, with business associations, with religious groups and ethnic minorities.
There are also bargains which interlock all these with foreign corporations, foreign governments and the international organisations.
In all these, over-generosity with one partner can cost dearly in relations with another.
Conversely, being too hard in one set of negotiations — as the Chinese government was in the Bloody Summer of 1989 with its Peking students — proves enormously costly in terms of lost credibility and lost confidence in another set of negotiations — in that case, with the foreign banks, corporations and governments who were due to help with credit, technology and market access.