

Welcome to Nottinghamshire
So Easy to Get There
Whether planning a day trip, a weekend away from it all or a relaxing holiday, NOTTINGHAM and NOTTINGHAMSHIRE have something for everyone to enjoy.
With a host of visitor attractions, acres of beautiful countryside, excellent accommodation and leisure facilities and a rich and colourful history, this charming county is the perfect place to enjoy England at its best.
NOTTINGHAMSHIRE lies right in the heart of the rural leafy East Midlands of England.
The central location and excellent communications network means Nottinghamshire is readily accessible from any part of the country and is also the ideal base from which to visit other regional and national attractions.
BY ROAD BY ROAD BY ROAD
Two of  Britain's major motorways, the A1 and M1, pass through Nottinghamshire linking it directly with towns and cities throughout the country.
BY RAIL BY RAIL BY RAIL
The county's mainline stations are at Nottingham, Newark and Alfreton/Mansfield Parkway.
All of these have direct and regular services to and from destinations throughout Britain.
For further details of services to Nottinghamshire telephone British Rail on:— Derby Newark
BY AIR BY AIR BY AIR
East Midlands International Airport — the gateway to Nottinghamshire is just 20 minutes drive from the City.
For flight information contact East Midlands International Airport, Castle Donington, Derby DE7 2SA.
Tel:
TOURIST INFORMATION
For advice or information on Nottingham and Nottinghamshire contact the Tourist Information Centres listed below .
Please note: Nottinghamshire County Council has collected information to publish this brochure in good faith and every effort has been made to ensure its accuracy at the time of printing.
Nottinghamshire County Council cannot be held responsible for any error, omission or subsequent alteration to the information contained in this brochure.
Live the Legend in Robin Hood Country
The County of Nottinghamshire is an ever changing landscape of rolling fields and tangled woodland.
Within this rural backdrop bustling market towns, industrial communities, grand estates of former dukes and picturesque villages exist in harmonious contrast.
Through the centuries a host of famous people have been proud to call this charming county ‘home’.
Today, the result of their endeavours can be found throughout the modern world — in industry, religion and amongst the great literary works of our time.
So too, the world's greatest legendary hero, Robin Hood, once lived amongst the green glades of Sherwood Forest in Nottinghamshire.
MAJOR OAK, SHERWOOD FOREST
ST MARY'S CHURCH, EDWINSTOWE
THE LEGEND OF ROBIN HOOD
From the early ballads to the silver screen the exploits of the world's favourite outlaw have thrilled generations.
In Nottinghamshire, where his legend lives on, you can today follow in his footsteps and enjoy the real Robin Hood Country.
SHERWOOD FOREST COUNTRY PARK AND VISITOR CENTRE was once part of the Royal Hunting forest and scene of many of Robin's clashes with the forest wardens as well as much merry making when work was done!
Every Summer, the ROBIN HOOD FESTIVAL brings the legend to life with a magical week-long programme of medieval entertainment including jousting, storytelling, feasting and traditional crafts.
It's a great family event especially for the children, who will exploit being a legitimate ‘outlaw’ to the full!
ROBIN HOOD FESTIVAL
ROBIN'S COUNTY TRAIL
Many of the villages in close proximity to Sherwood Forest have also played a role in the legendary tales of our hero.
Robin is reputed to have wed fair Marian in St  Mary's Church in the village of EDWINSTOWE.
Close by, in peaceful PAPPLEWICK village, Robin Hood halted the marriage of one Ellen to an ageing knight so that she could instead marry the lovelorn Alan-a-Dale.
It was FOUNTAINDALE near Mansfield that was the sight of the colourful first meeting of Robin Hood and Friar Tuck and in the village of BLIDWORTH, the church yard of St Mary of the Purification is said to be the resting place of Will Scarlet.
A grand Royal hunting lodge in Robin's day stood in a clearing in the wilderness in Sherwood Forest.
Today, the remains a stone ruin at OLD CLIPSTONE, protected as a natural monument.
ROBIN HOOD STATUE OUTSIDE NOTTINGHAM CASTLE
THE CITY AND THE LEGEND
Nottingham City is also proud of its legendary connections.
NOTTINGHAM CASTLE, now a museum and art gallery, was once home to the evil Sheriff and even Little John spent some time in service here.
Beneath the Castle wall stands the ROBIN HOOD STATUE cast in bronze and behind this figure, four plaques depict famous scenes  from the legend.
A short walk from the castle brings you to the excitement of the TALES OF ROBIN HOOD — the world's greatest Medieval Adventure.
Here, visitors can ride through the magical green-woods of  Robin's time, try their hand at archery and feast under the ‘Greenwode Tree’.
The annual ROBIN HOOD PAGEANT takes place on the CASTLE GREEN providing a rich array of medieval pageantry, music and entertainment as Robin and his men once more face the challenge of the evil Sheriff.
TALES OF ROBIN HOOD, NOTTINGHAM
LACE
Nottinghamshire has always been an industrious county and the skills of local people have contributed over the centuries to the growth of a diversity of well known products.
During the 19th Century the textile industry flourished as the County became famous for its beautiful Nottingham Lace.
By 1865, over 130 lace making factories were producing this delicate fabric on machines powered by the abundance of local coal.
Nottingham Lace became, and remains today, re-known throughout the world.
THE LACE HALL stands on the edge of the lace market, once the hub of the industry.
It offers fascinating insight into the history of machine as well as hand made lace.
THE LACE CENTRE, housed in a beautiful timber framed building has a wonderful selection of lace products on sale.
Those wishing to further explore Nottingham's significant contribution to the growth of machine made lace should visit the MUSEUM OF COSTUMES AND TEXTILES on Castlegate and THE INDUSTRIAL MUSEUM of beautiful WOLLATON HALL.
LITERATURE
The literary world has been enriched by the works of two of Nottinghamshire's famous sons.
THE 6th LORD BYRON, born in 1788, is recognised throughout the world as being one of Britain's most remarkable and influential poets.
A glimpse of his flamboyant lifestyle can be seen at his former Nottinghamshire home, NEWSTEAD ABBEY, a beautifully preserved tribute to this great Romantic.
Author D H LAWRENCE was born and raised in a tiny Victorian terrace in the Nottinghamshire mining town of Eastwood.
This house, now the D H LAWRENCE BIRTHPLACE MUSEUM, provides fascinating insight into the working class origins that so influenced his writing.
FAMOUS FOUNDERS
To retrace the origins of a great and powerful nation, look no further than two peaceful north Nottinghamshire villages — BABWORTH and SCROOBY.
These were home to founders of the Pilgrim Father Movement, which many years later saw its followers making their epic voyage to America aboard the Mayflower.
THE PILGRIM FATHER STORY is told for visitors at the WORKSHOP MUSEUM.
Another influential local figure was William Booth, founder of the Salvation Army.
THE WILLIAM BOOTH MEMORIAL COMPLEX is the site of his birthplace.
There are many more places to visit in Nottinghamshire and a full list can be found on pages 10–11–12 of this guide.
D H LAWRENCE BIRTHPLACE, EASTWOOD
NEWSTEAD ABBEY
Entertaining Nottingham
The capital of the county is the vibrant, cosmopolitan city of Nottingham.
The busy city streets have, over the centuries been traversed by a colourful array of characters from Kings to outlaws and the history of the city is captured for visitors in a wealth of museums and splendid historic buildings.
Today, this friendly city also boasts a dynamic shopping entertainment and sporting scene.
A  SHOPPER'S PARADISE
When it comes to shopping, Nottingham City Centre caters for every need — and pocket!
Unusually there are two modern shopping complexes, the VICTORIA AND BROADMARSH CENTRES and these are linked by pedestrianised streets to traditional shops and fine arcades.
Tucked away on the fringes of Nottingham are areas such as Hockley and Bridlesmith Gate which have become thriving centres for high fashion, continental cafes, antiques and contemporary art and craft shops.
ENTERTAINMENT
People from miles around come to Nottingham to enjoy the very best in night-time entertainment.
As a gastronomic centre, Nottingham can offer a mouthwatering selection of venues for the hungry visitor.
You can also raise a glass or two at one of Nottingham's famous pubs.
The choice is endless, from the quaintly historic to the truly exotic.
In fact, Nottingham is the home of England's oldest pub, ‘Ye Olde Trip to Jerusalem’, set in the shadow of Nottingham Castle.
The hub of the City's cultural life is the Royal Centre.
THE THEATRE ROYAL, with its impressive auditorium lush with green and gilt of the Victorian era, offers anything from opera to pantomime or ballet to farce.
THE ROYAL CONCERT HALL provides a 20th Century contrast and here, audiences of up to 2,500 can enjoy their favourite groups, comedians and orchestras.
At the NOTTINGHAM PLAYHOUSE, stimulating repertoire enjoys international acclaim and the ALBERT HALL has for many years been a popular venue for classical concerts.
Big Screen entertainment can be found at several city centre cinemas and on the outskirts of the city, at the huge, multi-screen Showcase Complex.
SPORT
Throughout the year, Nottingham plays host to a variety of sporting events and meetings.
On the outskirts of the City internationally famous Nottingham Forest and England's oldest team Notts County take on their opponents at the City Ground and the Meadow Lane Stadium.
In the world of cricket, the name of TRENT BRIDGE is synonymous with international tournaments.
In 1991 THE NOTTINGHAM TENNIS CENTRE hosted the prestigious Federation Cup, the  world's premiere team tennis event for women.
The Centre offers both indoor and outdoor courts, coaching expertise and is suitable for all standards of players, and with such excellent facilities promises to be a major venue for international events in the forthcoming years.
NOTTINGHAM RACECOURSE is situated on the edge of the city.
Enthusiasts can enjoy a flutter at flat and jump meetings throughout the year as well as a variety of special themed events.
HOLME PIERREPONT NATIONAL WATER SPORTS CENTRE is set in a beautiful country park and the Olympic Standard water sports course makes it an important venue for international canoeing, slalom and rowing events.
All of these, plus a busy sporting calendar and excellent modern leisure centres and facilities ensure that Nottinghamshire really is a sporting county.
EXCHANGE ARCADE
NOTTINGHAM TENNIS CENTRE
ROYAL CENTRE
Nottingham City Centre  
Places to Visit
IN AND AROUND NOTTINGHAM
NOTTINGHAM CASTLE
This magnificent Ducal mansion built in 1674, houses the first municipal museum and art gallery outside London for fine and applied arts.
An intriguing exhibition and audio visual shows also explore the history of the original Castle which was destroyed during the Civil War.
A special collection of local memorabilia offer a fascinating insight into Nottingham's industrial heritage.
To complete your visit, a browse around the Castle's excellent museum shop specialising in British crafts and a chance to relax in the Castle Buttery are strongly recommended?
THE SHERIFFS LODGE
Be entertained by The Kings Troupe and enjoy medieval merriment at a Medieval Banquet at The Sheriffs Lodge.
Partake of traditional English Fayre and countless tankards of fine ale and cider.
Open: Banquets ever Friday and Saturday evening.
Admission: Charge payable.
Advance pre-paid bookings only.
THE TALES OF ROBIN HOOD
Explore the life and world of Robin Hood by travelling back in time and sampling the sights and sounds of medieval Nottingham.
After dodging the evil Sheriff's men and their deadly arrows, try your hand at archery before settling down to a feast under the ‘Greenwode Tree’.
A fine souvenir shop also offers a wide range of medieval crafts and clothing to suit all outlaws' tastes.
THE LACE HALL
A fine former Unitarian Chapel is the spectacular venue for this popular lace exhibition based in Nottingham's Lace Market area.
The combination of audio visual shows, extensive exhibitions and traditional lace machines in full operating order, make this an appealing attraction for all age groups.
Two superb lace shops also offer a wide range of goods from souvenirs to wedding dresses!
CANAL MUSEUM
Based in a restored warehouse on the banks of the Nottingham and Beeston canal, the Canal Museum presents a broad insight into the history of the River Trent.
The historical theme extends to cover local canals, bridges, floods, natural history and archaeology.
This includes an audio visual show which transports visitors on a 15 minute journey on the Trent to relive floods and battles.
COSTUME MUSEUM
This museum is rapidly becoming one of the most important study centres for costumes and textiles.
In addition to the display of Torvil and Dean's costumes worn during the famous ‘Bolero’ skating routine, costumes dated from 1790 to the mid 20th century are also beautifully presented in a series of atmospheric period rooms.
Other exhibits include the unique Eyre map tapestries of Nottinghamshire, 17th Century costume and embroideries from the Lord Middleton collection, Eastern and European needlework, knitted, woven and printed textiles and accessories from through the ages.
THE LACE CENTRE
The charming medieval building situated opposite the Robin Hood statue, provides a fine introduction into the history of lace.
With a superb selection of quality lace for sale and bobbin lace making demonstrations, this is a truly authentic place to visit.
BREWHOUSE YARD
This delightful museum, set in a group of 17th Century cottages, presents a realistic glimpse of every day domestic and commercial life in Nottingham over the last 300 years.
BREWHOUSE YARD AND CAVES
In addition to the thousands of locally made or used objects, recreated shops and streets, displays of the recreational, educational life and working conditions of local people, the Rock Cottage also houses a schoolroom and toy shop of the 1930's.
Caves behind the houses used in the past for storage, cooking and as air raid shelters are now part of the museum.
GREEN'S MILL
This impressive, fully operational 19th century windmill was once owned and operated by George Green, an outstanding mathematical physicist.
Not only can you witness the grain being ground, but you can test your scientific skills at the adjacent science centre which involves ‘hands on’ exhibits of experiments with light, magnetism and electricity.
NOTTINGHAM CAVES
A unique honeycomb of caves under the City make an ideal venue for the explorer.
Over 400 caves exist which have been used as food and wine/beer stores, tanning and malting rooms, dwellings and shelters in time of war.
Regular tours are conducted throughout the year, details of which can be obtained by calling the above number.
A small admission is made.
WOLLATON HALL
Set in over 500 acres of mature parkland, Wollaton Hall is one of the most spectacular and ornate Tudor buildings in England.
It is now the home of the City's  Natural History Museum a Fine Industrial Museum.
Extensive flower gardens, an adventure playground, and cafeteria, all help to make this a delightful place to visit.
WOLLATON HALL
NEWSTEAD ABBEY
Set in extensive gardens and parkland, this beautiful historic house is best known as the home of the poet, Lord Byron (1788–1824).
A host of splendid 19th century rooms throughout Lord Byron's apartments are open for the delight of the public.
Newstead is a rare example of a medieval priory converted in the 16th century for use as a family house.
The monastic cloisters enclose a medieval-style secret garden and an ancient stone fountain carved with fantastic beasts!
AROUND THE COUNTY
SHERWOOD FOREST COUNTRY PARK & VISITOR CENTRE
Magnificent woodland home of Robin Hood, the world's most famous outlaw.
Today, waymarked pathways guide visitors through the forest, and in its midst stands the mighty ‘Major Oak’ tree — Robin's favourite hideout.
In the Visitor Centre there is a colourful exhibition ‘Robyn Hode and Mery Sherwode’ as well as a gift shop, tourist information centre, and Robin Hood's Larder, which serves wholesome snacks.
A year round programme of events and activities including the Annual Robin Hood Festival brings the outlaw to life.
RUFFORD COUNTRY PARK & CRAFT CENTRE
Acres of woodland and parkland, at the heart of which stand the remains of a 12th Century Cistercian Abbey which inside has exhibitions depicting the history of the monastery and country house.
A beautiful lake is inhabited by many species of waterfowl and the delightful formal gardens include herb and sculpture gardens.
Rufford Craft Centre houses a gallery with major art and craft exhibitions, a craft shop selling a fine selection of British crafts plus a souvenir shop.
The Coach House and Buttery restaurants offer delicious meals and refreshments.
RUFFORD ABBEY
HOLME PIERREPONT NATIONAL WATER SPORTS CENTRE & COUNTRY PARK
Set in 270 acres of country park with nature reserve and fishing lagoons beside River Trent.
The focal point of the Centre is an Olympic standard 2000 metre water sports course which hosts events.
There is also an international canoe slalom course and water ski lagoon with cable ski tow.
HOLME PIERREPONT HALL
An early Tudor brick manor house in continuous family ownership, of medieval design with timber partitions and regional furniture and portraits from the 17th Century onwards.
D H LAWRENCE BIRTHPLACE MUSEUM
Tiny two-up, two-down house, restored and refurbished to recreate Lawrence's early childhood.
Gift Shop.
Eastwood Centre is adjacent
WHITE POST MODERN FARM CENTRE
Modern working farm with displays and exhibitions designed to make you listen, feel and smell at every opportunity!
Picnic areas, nine indoor areas including new reptile house, farm amusements and gift shop, tea rooms and tea gardens.
WHITE POST MODERN FARM CENTRE
NEWARK CASTLE
Historic ruins dating back to late 12th Century.
Newark Castle was of strategic importance during the Civil War when it withheld three sieges by Parliamentarians.
Fine Norman gatehouse and exhibitions on the history of the Castle.
NEWARK CASTLE
BESTWOOD COUNTRY PARK
Beautiful area of countryside, made up of 650 acres of grassland and secluded woodlands, situated on the northern edge of the city.
Ample opportunities for many activities plus a varied programme of guided walks and events.
SOUTHWELL MINSTER
The charming market town of Southwell is dominated by its splendid Norman Minster.
Chapter House contains one of the finest and most realistic leaf carvings in the world and the  choir screen is described as the loveliest in England.
SOUTHWELL MINSTER
PAPPLEWICK PUMPING STATION
Unique working example of late Victorian water works.
With its ornate architecture and elaborate internal decoration, the pumping station features two Boulton and Watt engines and six Lancashire boilers.
PAPPLEWICK PUMPING STATION
THE PILGRIM  FATHERS' STORY
Exhibition telling the history of the Pilgrim movement from its origins in North Nottinghamshire to settlement in the New World.
Workshop Museum also houses temporary art exhibitions.
Visit the villages of Scrooby and Babworth, home to the founders of New England and the Separatist Movement.
LAXTON VISITOR CENTRE AND VILLAGE
Laxton is the only village in Europe to maintain the medieval open field system of farming.
A visitor centre provides a fascinating insight into this traditional farming method.
PATCHINGS FARM ART CENTRE
Art gallery and licensed restaurant set in lovingly restored farm buildings of the early 1800s.
Working art and pottery studios, art shop, antique shop, exhibition of farming bygones and new Painters Paradise — unique gardens with lake and ‘Monet’ bridge.
LONGDALE CRAFT CENTRE
Recreated mid 1800s village street with authentic period workshops housing many  workshop artists and craftspeople.
SHERWOOD FOREST FARM PARK
Opportunity to view attractive and unusual animals preserved and bred in pleasant park and lakeland setting.
Large collection of wildfowl plus rare Black Swans, Fallow Deer and Water Buffalo.
Aviary, children's play area, gift shop and tea rooms.
CHURCH FARM CRAFT WORKSHOPS
Opportunity to observe skilled craftspeople at work in beautifully restored farmhouse out buildings.
CLUMBER PARK
Famed for its ‘Dukes Drive’, a magnificent double avenue of lime trees stretching over two miles, this 3800 acres National Trust park boasts an impressive lake, nature walks, lodges and gardens.
SUNDOWN KIDDIES ADVENTURELAND
Play park for little children, with attractions including fantasy castle, domestic animals, tea room and burger bar, and new Jungle Adventure Indoor Play Area.
VINA COOKE MUSEUM OF DOLLS AND BYGONE CHILDHOOD
Fascinating collection of dolls, toys, games and books in the setting of an imposing 17th Century Rectory.
Tea room.
CRESWELL CRAGS VISITOR CENTRE
Area of great historic, natural and archaeological interest.
Narrow limestone gorge contains series of prehistoric caves occupied by men and animals some 70,000 years ago.
Visitor Centre houses exhibition, audio-visual programme and bookshop.
RUDDINGTON FRAMEWORK KNITTERS
Unique complex of 19th Century framework knitters building containing a restored workshop with 26 hand frames.
Working machinery, samples and exhibition of local framework history plus video presentation.
OUR LITTLE FARM
Situated in the beautiful Vale of Belvoir, Our Little Farm has traditional and modern breeds of farm animals for you to stroke and feed.
There is also a Nature Trail, a tea room and plenty of picnic spots.
NORWOOD PARK
This glorious 18th Century family house is set amidst a medieval deer park and today is a working fruit farm.
The house and gardens are open to the public on Sundays from May to August.
These are a selection of the many attractions in Nottinghamshire.
For further information contact one of Nottinghamshire's Tourist Information Centres (see page 4 for details).
Festivals and Major Events '92
Nottinghamshire is proud to offer a wealth of family entertainment every year and 1992 promises an events diary that is bursting with dates to remember.
Entertainment of every kind is on offer.
The arts programme of music, films, drama and comedy will delight any audience and local tradition and character comes to the fore at craft fairs, festivals, shows and exhibitions around the country.
Nottinghamshire never forgets those who have played their part in its colourful past.
During 1992 two major festivals pay tribute to the life and times of hero Robin Hood whilst, throughout the summer, a host of events will celebrate the part played by local folk during the tumultuous years of the English Civil War.
1992 promises a glittering array of exciting events to delight locals and visitors alike — so be sure not to miss the fun!
CIVIL WAR
THE 8TH ANNUAL ROBIN HOOD FESTIVAL
Sherwood Forest Visitor Centre, Edwinstowe.
The greenwoods of Sherwood fill with music and outlaws during a week of jousting, jesting, fancy dress and feasting!
A full programme of family events includes theatre, wandering minstrels, storytelling, children's activities and a host of competitions.
Traditions craftsmen demonstrate skills learned generations ago and brave warriors demonstrate fighting techniques in their jousts and skirmishes.
JOUSTING TOURNAMENT
THE ROBIN HOOD PAGEANT
Come and make merry in the shadow of Nottingham Castle this autumn.
The former home of the evil Sheriff of Nottingham is the venue for a weekend of celebration in true medieval style and a colourful tribute to legendary hero Robin Hood.
THE BATTLE STANDARD RAISED
On Monday 22 August 1642, Charles I raised his Royal Standard outside Nottingham Castle thus marking the beginning of the English Civil War.
During the tumultuous years that followed, Nottinghamshire was to play a major role in the bitter conflict.
In the 17th Century the most important routes to the north of England took travellers via crossings over the River Trent at Nottingham and Newark.
It was these two towns therefore that became of the utmost importance and, as Royalist and Parliamentarian forces fought to gain supremacy, the surrounding villages and hamlets became the scene of many violent skirmishes.
350 years on, in 1992, Nottinghamshire plays host to a variety of events and exhibitions in recognition of this vital role played in a conflict that was to affect the destiny of a nation.
Accommodating Nottinghamshire
Why not stay awhile and spend some time exploring the delights of this fascinating county.
Nottinghamshire is proud to offer its thousands of guests the highest standards and widest choice of accommodation.
There are a full range of excellent hotels and guest houses throughout the county.
Choose from old world charm to contemporary elegance and from cosy family bed and breakfasts to the sheer luxury of international hotel chains.
For those who wish to escape the hustle and bustle and lose themselves in the peaceful Nottinghamshire countryside, the working farms of the Nottinghamshire Farm Tourism Group offer a taste of the rural tradition.
Members pride themselves on a choice of self catering and bed and breakfast accommodation that offers visitors excellent value, first class service and a unique insight into country life.
If caravanning and camping are your favourite way of getting away from it all them the selection of excellent sites around the county means you won't be disappointed in choosing Nottinghamshire as your holiday destination.
Whatever you choose, you are guaranteed quality of service, excellent value and, above all, the warmest of welcomes in Nottinghamshire.
CHARMING COACHING INN, SOUTHWELL
FARMHOUSE ACCOMMODATION
CITY CENTRE HOTEL
Short Breaks
The picturesque countryside, fantastic choice and family events, excellent shopping and the host of places to visit make Nottinghamshire the perfect short break destination.
So this year why not treat yourself to a weekend away from it all — you'd be surprised at how affordable it can be!
THE ROBIN HOOD RATE Throughout 1992, twenty of Nottinghamshire's top hotels are offering bargain rates during weekends at prices that really are a steal!
From around £49 for two people per night bed and breakfast (subject to availability) you can enjoy a luxurious break — at a price even Robin Hood would be happy to pay!
There are special rates for children too and so the whole family can enjoy this special offer.
Themed Weekend Breaks
For those searching for a short break that is just that little bit different, you are invited to make your selection for this year's choice of special themed weekend breaks.
From the tension of a Murder Mystery to the delicate art of Bobbin Lace making and from golf and cricket to a special Robin Hood Festival Break, there is a weekend for everyone, available at a top hotel for an all inclusive price.
One thing is certain all of these breaks are great fun and great value!
For details of special weekend offers available in Nottinghamshire send today for your free brochure by telephoning (0602) 824215 or simply return the order form on page 34 of this guide.
Accommodation Guide
Nottinghamshire Area
All accommodation listed within this guide consists of inspected properties and those who have undertaken to abide by the Tourist Board Code of Conduct.
For easy reference, the listing has been split into the following main areas:
NOTTINGHAM & AREA (Nottingham City, Broxtowe and Gedling Districts)
SOUTH NOTTINGHAMSHIRE (Rushcliffe District)
EAST NOTTINGHAMSHIRE (Newark and Sherwood District)
WEST NOTTINGHAMSHIRE (Mansfield and Ashfield Districts)
NORTH NOTTINGHAMSHIRE (Bassetlaw District)
Choice of Accommodation
Each area has been sub-divided into accommodation type.
HOTELS; GUEST HOUSES & BED AND BREAKFAST; FARMHOUSE ACCOMMODATION; SELF-CATERING; CARAVAN & CAMPING.
We hope this will help you to find easily the establishment that will best suit your needs.
Prices
All prices include VAT.
Please note that for serviced accommodation prices quoted are PER ROOM B&B, NOT PER PERSON.
These prices are a guideline only and it is strongly advised that prices are checked at the time of booking.
English Tourist Board Crown Ratings
Hotels, Guesthouses, Motels, Inns, B&Bs, Farmhouses.
Over 16,000 hotels, guesthouses, motels, inns, B&Bs and farmhouses throughout England, Scotland and Wales now offer the reassurance of a national CROWN classification — and the number grows daily.
Whatever the classification, ranging from ‘LISTED’ to FIVE CROWN, every classified establishment is inspected by the tourist boards each year to make sure that standards have been maintained.
More CROWNS simply mean a wider range of facilities and services.
A lower classification does not imply lower standards.
Although the range of facilities and services may be smaller, they may be provided to a high standard.
(See Quality Commendations below).
Listed
Clean and comfortable accommodation, although the range of facilities and services may be limited.
Accommodation with additional facilities, including washbasins in all bedrooms, a lounge area and use of a telephone.
Accommodation with a wider range of facilities and services (some with private bathrooms or en-suite facilities) including morning tea/coffee and calls, bedside lights in all bedrooms, colour TV in lounge or bedrooms, assistance with luggage.
Accommodation with  at least one-third of the bedrooms with en-suite WC and bath or shower, plus easy chair and full length mirror in all bedrooms, show cleaning facilities and hair dryers available, a separate quiet lounge.
Hot evening meals available.
Accommodation with at least three quarters of the bedrooms with en-suite WC and bath or shower plus colour TV, radio and telephones in all bedrooms, 24 hour access and lounge service until midnight.
Last orders for meals 20, 30 or later.
Accommodation with all bedrooms having WC, bath and shower ensuite, trouser press (or valet service), plus a wide range of facilities and services including room service, all-night lounge service, laundry service.
Restaurant open for breakfast, lunch and dinner.
KEY RATINGS
Self-catering Holiday Homes
The range of facilities and equipment provided by Holiday homes is indicated by ONE to FIVE symbols.
All such establishments in this guide have been inspected by the South East England Tourist Board and ‘KEY’ classified, or have applied and are awaiting inspection.
Clean and comfortable, adequate heating, lighting and seating, TV, cooker, fridge and full range of crockery and cutlery.
Colour TV, easy chairs or sofas for all occupants, fridge with icemaker, bedside units or shelves, heating in all rooms.
Dressing tables, bedside lights, linen and towels available, vacuum cleaner, iron and ironing board.
All sleeping in beds or bunks, supplementary lighting in living areas, more kitchen equipment, use of automatic washing machine and tumble dryer.
Automatically controlled heating, own washing machine and tumble dryer, bath and shower, telephone, dishwasher, microwave and fridge freezer.
QUALITY COMMENDATIONS
To identify accommodation offering even higher standards than those required for a simple CROWN or KEY classification, the tourist boards have introduced levels of quality commendations: APPROVED, COMMENDED and HIGHLY COMMENDED.
These take into account warmth of welcome, atmosphere and efficiency of service, as well as the quality of food, furnishings, fitments and services, although limited, are provided to a high quality standard.
The absence of a quality commendation does not imply low standards.
Some establishments may have applied for commendation but have yet to be assessed.
BRITISH GRADED HOLIDAY PARKS
Holiday Caravan Chalet and Camping Parks.
All graded parks within this scheme are inspected annually by the South East England Tourist Board.
There are five grades, indicated by 1–5 *s with a Q (for quality) symbol.
The more *s, the higher quality standard.
Even a small park with a few facilities can achieve ***** if what it offers is to an exceptionally high quality standard.
The accommodation lists here have been kindly supplied by the East Midlands Tourist Board.
Please note:
Classification and quality commendations are subject to change.
The classifications and quality commendations that appear in entries in this guide were correct at the time of going to press.
During 1990 additional minimum requirements were introduced for each of the CROWN classification bands.
As a consequence of the CROWN rating of some establishments has been reduced by one or more CROWNS.
This should not be taken to imply any reduction in the facilities or standards previously provided by the establishments affected.
Those mainly affected are B&Bs that do not provide an evening meal.