

Harmonization, Unification and Internationalization
Reflections on the Harmonization of Commercial Law
ROY GOODE
Introduction
Truly there is nothing new under the sun.
Nearly two thousand years have elapsed since Cicero proclaimed the virtues of legal harmonization: The urge towards internal harmonization of local laws and customs gave rise to the common law in England and to codification in Europe.
Harmonization spread geographically through colonization and internationally through adoption by one State (typically a developing State) of codes conveniently in place elsewhere.
But harmonization of this kind remains purely internal.
Colonization involves merely a geographical extension of domestic law; adoption of another State's code is a short-cut route to the creation of the developing State's law and does not have as its objective the facilitation of a common market or of inter-State commerce.
The particular characteristic of twentieth-century harmonization lies in its motivation, which is to reduce the impact of national boundaries.
But this overall objective encompasses two quite distinct purposes.
The first is to create a special regime for international transactions while preserving the identity of national laws for domestic transactions, and is effected primarily by international Conventions.
The second is to facilitate a common market or a political or economic grouping by harmonizing national laws governing domestic transactions, so that State boundaries within the geographical area covered by the members of the market lose much of their significance within the fields covered by the harmonizing measures.
There is thus a fundamental distinction, both in objectives and in the character of the content, between, say, the Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of Goods on the one hand and the EEC Directive on  Consumer Credit on the other.
The Convention is concerned to facilitate inter-State trade, the Directive to promote the social aims of the Single European Market and to avoid distortion of the market.
The provisions of the Convention are almost entirely dispositive, those of the Directive obligatory.
The Convention is confined to international transactions, the Directive prescribes minimum rights and duties for parties to domestic transactions.
The Convention excludes consumer sales contracts; the Directive is confined to consumer credit agreements.
The Convention predicates the separateness of States, the Directive their integration in a common market.
Despite these differences between Convention law and Community law they possess a certain symbiosis.
The influence of Community law is steadily expanding, so that each member State is increasingly having to adjust its thinking to accommodate principles and rules derived from other legal systems within the Community and thus to acclimatize itself to a less nationalistic approach to law.
The harmonization of laws affecting domestic transactions in member States has an effect on international transactions in that within the field covered by the harmonizing measures these obviate the need to resort to conflict of laws rules and thus achieve one of the objectives of a Convention regulating international transactions.
The drive towards economic and political union has the tendency to convert what were previously international transactions into internal transactions, and thus reduces the sphere of influence of Conventional law within the EEC.
This paper is devoted primarily to harmonization of legal rights and duties arising under international transactions.
It addresses certain key issues which continue to be troublesome: the selection of aspects of commercial law suitable for harmonization; the level and scope of the harmonizing measure and the extent to which it does or does not displace conflict-of-laws rules; the factors relevant to the method of harmonization and the likelihood of its success; the problem of language; the efficiency of the mechanism by which harmonizing measures are brought into existence and implemented by national legislation; and, most crucial of all, the indifference, or even hostility, with which harmonization proposals continue to be greeted.
The principal vehicles for this analysis are the United Nations Convention on Contracts for the International Sale of Goods, because of its major importance in private commercial law; the Unidroit  Conventions on International factoring and International financial Leasing, with which the writer has been involved from the early days of their conception; and the rules and trade terms promulgated by the International Chamber of Commerce, which demonstrate how much can be achieved by the contractual approach to the harmonization of commercial law and practice, and which will be given particular attention later.
Selecting the Field
GENESIS OF A PROPOSAL
By what process is the field of harmonization selected?
Typically, someone has a bright idea and decides to put it into play.
He or she may be a member of an organization involved with harmonization — the EC Commission, Unidroit, UNCITRAL, for example— or an academic or other outsider who sends a proposal in to such an organization for consideration.
The idea may have been worked out with some care or, at the other extreme, it may have been put up spontaneously at a meeting convened to discuss the content of a future programme of activity.
There is nothing wrong in this.
Ideas have to begin somewhere, a point which tends to be overlooked by those who seize on leaked internal government memoranda floating a proposal at a formative stage of the idea and criticize both the content of the proposal and the secrecy which surrounds it, without reflecting that ideas have to be shaped by discussion and given preliminary approval as worthy of examination before they can go out under the imprimatur of the organizing body.
IS THERE A PROBLEM?
Once an organization has decided that a particular proposal falls within its remit and appears sufficiently meritorious to warrant further examination, what should happen next, before it is approved, is a testing process to see whether the problem which the proposal is designed to solve actually exists, and if so, whether it is sufficiently significant to warrant the labour and expense of a harmonizing measure.
It is far from clear that this essential step is always taken.
for example, the earlier work of the E C Commission appeared to proceed on the untested assumption that any differences in national laws of member States within the field identified as potentially suitable for a Directive distorted the Common Market and justified the proposed Directive, without any fieldwork being undertaken to see whether there was in fact a problem.
The tendency persists to this day.
Thus the EC Commission and Council, not content with amending the Consumer Credit Directive to specify the equation which must be satisfied  for a correct statement of the annual percentage rate of charge and the items that are to be excluded from computation of the total charge for credit, threaten a further Directive prescribing a single mathematical formula for calculating the A P R. But why?
Consumers do not in practice shop for credit outside their own country, they simply use their home-based credit cards to make purchases abroad.
The notion that an English-man will cross the Channel to France to obtain credit in Calais because the formula under which French finance houses are allowed to quote the A p R enables them to advertise a cheaper rate than their English counterparts, and that the Common Market is thereby distorted, is too ludicrous to warrant a moment's consideration.
Yet it is just this kind of assumption, unsupported by any fieldwork, that is responsible for the proposal for the further Directive.
It is fair to say that international organizations are much more sensitive to this accusation than formerly.
Unidroit, for example, goes to considerable trouble, by means of consultations with representative international organizations and by questionnaires to specialists and to governments which in turn consult their national organizations, to establish that those practising in the field in question believe that differences in national laws create a problem and that harmonization would bring benefits.
UNCITRAL likewise engages in widespread consultation, drawing widely on the expertise of practising specialists.
Projects least vulnerable to the accusation that they are dealing with non-problems are those initiated by the International Chamber of Commerce, the membership of whose Com-missions is drawn preponderantly from the world of industry and commerce, banking, shipping, and arbitration.
The testing process is absolutely vital, not only to ensure that a significant problem exists which would be alleviated by a harmonizing measure but also to identify it accurately.
Case law, which is not infrequently relied on as an indication of problem areas, can be a very unreliable guide, since many cases are atypical and the real problems lie elsewhere.
The Instruments of Harmonization
THE RANGE OF AVAILABLE INSTRUMENTS
There are at least nine methods by which harmonization may be either effected or in some measure induced, namely:
(1)
a multilateral Convention without a Uniform Law as such;
(2)
a multilateral Convention embodying a Uniform Law;
(3)
a set of bilateral Treaties;
(4)
Community legislation — typically, a Directive;
(5)
a Model Law;
(6)
a codification of custom and usage promulgated by an international non-governmental organization;
(7)
international trade terms promulgated by such an organization;
(8)
model contracts and general contractual conditions;
(9)
restatements by scholars and other experts.
The characteristic of the first four is that they have the force of law, subject to such constitutional acts as may be necessary to give them force in the territory of a particular Contracting State.
The Model Law is, as its name implies, a model which can be adopted in its entirety, adapted, or simply used as the basis for ideas; it has no legal force as such.
The next four instruments depend for their efficacy upon incorporation into contracts, though a codification of custom and usage could perhaps be relied on as the best evidence of custom and usage and as such be imported by implication into a contract, whilst the adoption of general contractual conditions is not the exclusive prerogative of private parties but can also be achieved by embodiment in bilateral or multilateral Conventions implemented by dispositive legislation in the various participating States.
MAKING THE CHOICE
In an ideal world the choice of harmonizing instrument would depend on what was most suitable for the particular project envisaged and carried with it the greatest prospect of successful implementation.
In practice, the relative lack of co-ordination among the various harmonizing agencies means that the form of instrument is largely predetermined by the nature of the organization initiating the measure.
International intergovernmental organizations such as Unidroit and UNCITRAL and the specialist agencies could in theory select any of the available instruments but for practical reasons usually choose the route of a Convention (with or without Uniform Rules) or a Model Law.
By contrast the International Chamber of Commerce, which is an international non-governmental organization with national Chambers of Commerce as its members, promotes non-law instruments which depend for their effect upon contractual incorporation.
The advantages of the contract route are becoming increasingly  appreciated.
Since governments are not involved, the role of lawyers is reduced and the procedure is more flexible and informal, proposals can be implemented more rapidly, and rules found to cause difficulty can be changed more readily.
The utility of contract rules increases as their use expands.
The most striking example is provided by the Uniform Customs and practice of the International Chamber of Commerce, which has been adopted by banks throughout the world.
The beauty of the UCP is that since all relevant contracts involve a bank there is a ready mechanism for ensuring that all contracts are governed by the UCP.
This applies to the account party's application to his bank to open the credit, the credit itself, the relationship between the beneficiary and advising and confirming banks, and the relationships of the banks inter se .
Each of the relevant contract documents incorporates the provisions of the UCP by reference.
The result is to connect up a network of contracts by a uniform set of rules and thus give them multilateral force.
SUBSTANTIVE RULES AND TRADE TERMS
There is a close relationship between substantive rules embodied by contract and uniform trade terms so embodied.
The latter constitute both a small dictionary of commercial abbreviations and a set of dispositive rules.
Indeed, they differ from substantive rules only in that the latter have no dictionary function.
LIMITS TO CONTRACT METHOD
The International Chamber of Commerce has done valuable work in the formulation of uniform rules and trade terms effectuated by incorporation into contracts.
But there are limits to what such a institution can achieve.
First, since the ICC is not a lawmaking body it cannot formulate rules of a mandatory character; indeed, its rules are intended to encapsulate proper practice rather than to distribute legal liability.
So it would not have been the appropriate body to formulate rules of the kind embodied in the Vienna Sales Convention, though recommended contract terms might have been feasible.
Secondly, since the ICC rules depend upon adoption by contract their success depends in large measure on the existence of an institutional structure sufficiently homogeneous and of contract terms sufficiently stan-dardized to ensure the likelihood of such adoption.
In the case of docu-mentary credits and performance bonds and guarantees the banking mechanism provides the requisite homogeneity for the ICC Rules; the  failure of the Uniform Rules for Contract Guarantees resulted from a different factor, namely too great a separation from commercial practice.
The ICC's Incoterms are widely used by exporters and forwarders involved in the shipment of goods.
But it is unlikely that the ICC could have successfully mounted an exercise to codify contract rules governing commercial agency agreements, though a Working party of the ICC's Commission on International Commercial practice under the chair-manship of professor Fabio Bortolotti has successfully completed a model form of agency contract for international trade and is proceeding with work on a model distribution contract.
RESTATEMENTS
Insufficient attention has hitherto been given to the role that can be played by scholarly publication in influencing harmonization.
Of particular interest in this regard are the various UNCITRAL Legal Guides and two projects on principles of contract law undertaken by Unidroit and the Commission on European Contract Law respectively.
The latter are intended to offer a set of principles providing the best solutions to typical problems in contract law.
Inspiration from these is drawn from a variety of sources, including national laws, the American Restatement , and the fertile minds of those engaged in the projects.
It is hoped that these state-ments of principle will over time influence national courts by persuading them to look beyond their own, or indeed any one, legal system, particularly where the dispute is international and thus does not readily respond to national laws designed primarily for domestic transactions.
Which Organization?
There is a tendency to formulate proposals for uniform laws without adequate liaison among the various bodies involved in harmonization to ensure that each is kept informed as to the other's projected programme of activity and that duplication of effort is avoided.
In general, the organization that conceives the idea retains the project, unless it is one which clearly falls outside its remit, and carries it through to completion.
This is not to say that there is no collaboration between organizations.
It is common for members of each to attend meetings of the others, at least as  observers, and sometimes a project initiated by one body is subsequently brought to fruition under the aegis of another.
Thus for practical reasons it has sometimes been found expedient for projects initiated by Unidroit to reach fruition at a Diplomatic Conference held under the aegis of UNCITRAL.
But much energy is expended fruitlessly by parallel work by different bodies, who by pooling their resources and expertise could have expedited the work and improved its quality.
Thus while the EC Commission was working on its Draft Directive on products Liability the Council of Europe was preparing a Convention on the very same subject.
The Convention was the first to arrive, being opened for signature in January 1977, whilst the Directive did not appear until July 1985.
But having done so it rendered the Convention otiose except in relation to non-EEC members of the Council of Europe.
Not all duplication can be avoided, for EC Directives are limited to members of the European Community, whilst the catchment area for bodies such as UNCITRAL and Unidroit extends across the world.
But much more needs to be done to co-ordinate effort if limited resources are to be used to greatest effect.
The problem is less acute in specialist fields identified to one particular agency.
Thus Conventions on conflicts of laws fall within the prerogative of the Hague Conference, matters relating to shipping within the domain of the IMO and the CMI, proposals concerning air transport within that of the ICAO and IATA, and those affecting intellectual property within the remit of WIPO.
It is in the field of general international trade law — a field in which three international organizations, Unidroit, UNCITRAL, and the ICC are particularly active — that the overlap is most prominent; and problems may also arise where work in such field is considered by specialist organization to impact on their area of expertise.
The question which organization is best fitted to undertake a particular project should be determined not only by considerations of relative expertise and resources but also by reference to the type of instrument that is most likely to be effective.
Should it be a Convention or simply a set of rules incorporated into contracts?
If the former, it belongs to bodies such as UNCITRAL and Unidroit; if the latter, to the ICC.
But the question seems rarely to be asked.
In general, the approach is to leave a project to  the first in the field without adequate consideration whether the type of instrument which that body's work will produce is necessarily the most appropriate.
Scope of the Harmonizing Measure
Determining the nature of the field to be covered is only the beginning.
The next question is the scope of the proposed harmonizing measure.
How wide should its net be spread?
At one end is the minimalist approach, which postulates that the narrower the field the greater the likelihood that the project will be successfully completed within a reasonable time.
At the other is the maximalist approach, which predicates that the task is not worth undertaking unless all significant aspects of the field are covered.
The former approach is usually expanded by ambition, the latter con-tracted by realism.
What is achievable depends to some extent on whether the project is entirely new or is able to build on preceding work.
In the latter case there is obviously scope for a harmonizing measure of greater magnitude.
What is difficult to judge in the early stages is the extent to which the project can be broadened without jeopardizing the prospect of success.
just as the best is the enemy of the good, so also the largest is the enemy of the more modest.
After all, earth was not made in a day and there is always scope for a second project once the first has been completed and shown to be a success.
There are a number of aspects of the scope issue.
First, there is the range of substantive law issues to be covered.
Next comes the question whether the harmonizing measure should be confined to international transactions or should apply also to domestic transactions and, if the former, what tests of internationality should be applied.
Thirdly, should the measure be confined to business transactions or apply to consumer transactions as well?
Fourthly, what, if any, should be the connecting factor linking the subject-matter of the Convention to a Contracting State?
Finally, to what extent is the harmonizing measure to pre-empt national law and thus to exclude conflict of laws issues?
There is no special magic in the order in which these issues are taken.
They are so closely related that a provisional view on one may well be displaced as the result of conclusions reached on another.
Each will be taken in turn.
COVERAGE OF SUBSTANTIVE LAW
Let us take some concrete examples.
The Vienna Sales Convention has been criticized for not dealing with the passing of property or with priority conflicts between the seller/buyer and a third party.
Why were these  important topics omitted? first, it would have made the project too large (as it is, the Convention runs to 101 articles).
Secondly, it was felt that on issues of property law differences in legal policy and approach created a chasm too large to bridge.
A particular stumbling-block is the significance of possession as a determinant of property rights.
In a number of legal systems there is a presumption that the property in identified goods is intended to pass on the making of the contract, in others, only on delivery.
The effect of an unauthorized disposition by a party in possession who has not yet acquired ownership also raises acute differences in approach.
In particular, common-law systems start from the position nemo dat quod non habet , civil-law systems from the principle en fait de meubles la possession vaut titre .
Both sets of systems have moved towards each other but a gulf remains.
There is the additional problem that conflicting claims to tangible movables raise issues going well beyond sales law and that conflicts arising from sales transactions cannot sensibly be dealt with in isolation.
Much the same reasoning led to the steadfast refusal of the Unidroit Study Group to yield to pressures to extend the scope of the Convention on International Financial Leasing to cover general issues of priority of competing claims to leased equipment, though article 7 does contain provisions preserving the lessor's real rights against the claims of the  lessee's trustee in bankruptcy and execution and other creditors.
What is inter-esting is that the provisions of article 7 relating to mobile equipment have triggered a proposal to Unidroit by Canada for a separate Convention on security interests in mobile equipment.
Investigations into the extent of the problem raised by differences in national laws are being undertaken prior to the Governing Council deciding whether the project should proceed.
Questions of scope of subject-matter are not, of course, determined purely by feasibility; the scope of a project is also limited by its fundamental objectives.
Again, the Unidroit Leasing Convention provides a case in point.
The Convention is confined to international financial leasing, that is, to leasing which in economic terms is equivalent to a sale or purchase-money loan, the equipment being leased to a single lessee at whose request it was bought and the rentals being fixed not by reference to the use-value of the equipment as such but at a level which, taking into account cash-flows, tax-reliefs, and the like, will guarantee to the lessor the reim-bursement of his capital costs and desired return on capital.
There was much pressure to extend the scope of the Convention to cover operating leases, in which equipment is let at its market use-value to several lessees in succession.
Again, this pressure was resisted by the Study Group and the ensuing group of governmental experts, on the ground that whilst some provisions of the Convention would be appropriate to both types of  lease, the primary function of the Convention was to recognize the particular financial nature of a finance lease by giving a substantial degree of immunity from suit to the lessor and transferring liability to the supplier.
Such immunity would be entirely inappropriate in the case of an operating lease.
Similarly the International Chamber of Commerce has rightly refused to incorporate into the Uniform Customs and practice for Docu-mentary Credits (UCP) rules as to the effect of forgery or other fraud, taking the position that the essential function of the UCP is to codify best banking practice in the handling of credits, not to provide a comprehensive legal text.
In essence, then, the scope of a harmonizing measure is determined by the nature and extent of the problem to be tackled, the function of the particular body undertaking the measure, and the feasibility of the project in terms of ability to reach agreement within a reasonable time-frame.
As regards time those involved in unification projects have learned to be patient and to think in decades rather than years.
In general, a minimum of ten years is required to bring to fruition an initial proposal for an international Convention, though there are exceptions.
Very often the period is much longer and securing the requisite number of ratifications may take a decade more, if, indeed, this is achieved at all.
Projects of the International Chamber of Commerce can usually be completed much more quickly, since not only are they less formal but they are not legal instruments in themselves, simply rules or trade terms incorporated by contract, so that the legal issues are de-emphasized and, indeed, the product is primarily the work of non-lawyers.
The size of the project is obviously a relevant factor in the time taken to complete it but length alone is not a reliable indicator.
The UNCITRAL Model Law on International Commercial Arbitration, containing 36 Articles, was completed in a mere six years, the Convention on International Factoring, consisting of twelve articles, took fourteen years from start to finish.
The problem is not length as such but the infrequency and brevity of meetings at which the scientific work is conducted, a point to which I shall return towards the end of this paper.
INTERNATIONALITY
Apart from harmonizing measures formulated for the purpose of establishing a common market, whose regulators will have a keen interest in acts in one member State that can produce effects in others, most harmonization instruments dealing with contracts are confined to  international transactions.
The reasons are not hard to find.
National laws regulating domestic transactions are either considered adequate or, if not, are thought best changed by domestic legislation.
Moreover, except in the context of a common market they are not thought to be of interest to outsiders.
In the words of professor John Honnold: A further factor is that States feel more relaxed about harmonizing measures which do not threaten (even though they may in some degree influence) long-established concepts and traditions of their own legal systems governing domestic transactions.
Given that the harmonizing measure is to be confined to international transactions, what test is to be applied to determine internationality?
There are at least four possibilities:
(1)
the transaction itself is cross-border in character in that it involves contractual activity in two or more States;
(2)
the parties carry on business in different States;
(3)
the transaction, even if internal and concluded between persons carrying on business in the same State, produces effects in another State;
(4)
a combination of two or more of the above.
We can disregard (3), which is a prime concern of the EC but does not feature in international Conventions, and concentrate on the others.
There is no uniformity of practice.
The Hague Rules embodied in the 1924 Brus-sels Convention on Bills of Lading contain no express internationality requirement at all, though clearly directed at contracts for the carriage of goods by sea from one State to another, a point made explicit by the Visby amendments.
The Uniform Law on the International Sale of Goods combines criteria (1) and (2) by a somewhat complex formula which requires, first, that the parties carry on business in different States and, secondly, that the transaction fulfil one of three alternative tests of cross-border activity.
This cumbersome formulation has been dropped in the Vienna Sales Convention, which substitutes as the sole criterion of internationality the fact that the parties carry on business in different States, a formulation adopted in the U N Convention of Agency in the Sale of Goods  and the Unidroit Conventions on International Factoring and International Financial Leasing.
Thus it is possible for one of these three Conventions to apply in relation to a purely internal supply-contract in which goods move from one place in a State to another place in the same State pursuant to a contract concluded by acts of offer and acceptance entirely within that State.
It seems likely that the single criterion adopted by the Vienna Sales Convention will become the norm.
It has the merit of simplicity and responds adequately to the desire of States to maintain control over purely domestic transactions, in that the laws of a State are enacted primarily for the benefit of its own residents, not for those situated abroad.
Moreover, confinement of the test of internationality to a single factor enlarges the scope of the Convention, which is an important policy objective.
However, a complicating factor emerged in the preparation of the Leasing and Factoring Conventions.
Previously, Conventions regulating contracts had been concerned with only one contractual relationship, for example, the relationship between shipper and carrier or between seller and buyer.
The special feature of the two Unidroit Conventions is that they each deal with a transaction involving two distinct contracts.
The Leasing Convention covers transactions in which equipment is sold by a supplier to an intending lessor who in turn lets it on lease to the lessee.
The Factoring Convention embraces transactions in which goods are supplied under a contract of sale and the resulting receivables assigned by the supplier to the factor.
Which, in each case, should be regarded as the relevant contract in order for the transaction as a whole to satisfy the internationality require-ment?
The solution adopted in both cases was to look to the transaction the parties to which typically carried on business in different States and to ignore the transaction which in the typical case was domestic.
So the relevant contract for the Leasing Convention is the leasing agreement, not the supply contract, whereas for the Factoring Convention it is the sale contract, not the factoring agreement.
Mention has been made of two considerations relevant to the internationality test, namely simplicity and maximization of the scope of the Convention.
To these should be added a third consideration, transparency.
It is important that each party to a prospective transaction should be able to ascertain readily whether or not his contract will be governed by the Convention.
This point is sensibly picked up in the Vienna Sales Convention, which provides in article 1(2) that: The fact that the parties have their places of business in different States is to be disregarded whenever this fact does not appear from the contract or from any dealings between, or from, information disclosed by, the parties at any time before or at the conclusion of the contract.’
For some reason (possibly through oversight) this provision is not reproduced in the Leasing and Factoring Conventions, which in other respects borrowed heavily from the scope provisions of the Sales Convention.
It remains to be seen whether courts will be prepared to read such a provision into those Conventions, for example by reference to the requirement of good faith as a canon of interpretation.
Bills of exchange raise special transparency considerations, for it is a tenet of the law relating to such instruments that the terms of payment are to be found exclusively in the instrument itself, without reference to extraneous facts.
It is therefore logical that the 1988 UN Convention on International Bills of Exchange should adopt criteria of internationality which involve the form of the instrument rather than the place of business of the parties.
RESTRICTION TO BUSINESS TRANSACTIONS?
Should the harmonizing measure be confined to business transaction or should it embrace consumer transactions as well?
Here again we can see a sharp distinction between the legislative acts of the European Com-munities on the one hand and conventional law on the other.
Consumer protection represents an important plank in the evolving structure of Community law and several Directives have been issued in this field, including Directives relating to consumer credit and doorstep transactions.
As previously noted, the purpose and effect of Directives is not to regulate international transactions but to impose uniform laws operating on domestic transactions within each member State.
By contrast Conventions regulating transactions are concerned almost exclusively with business transactions.
Such Conventions are seen primarily as facilitators of international trade rather than as instruments of social policy.
There are good reasons for this approach.
First, within the European Community the Treaty of Rome and subordinate legislation are the primary instruments of harmonization at the consumer level and their implementation is mandatory for member States.
Given the objectives of the Community and the fact that the Single European Market will constitute the most powerful trading bloc in the world, there is little point in extending conventional law into this field.
Secondly, issues of social policy are peculiarly sensitive and dependent on domestic policy and prevailing social conditions, so that even within the European Community the best that can be hoped for is a set of minimum standards.
It is for this reason that provisions in Conventions dealing with commercial contracts are almost entirely dispositive in nature, the parties being left free to exclude the relevant Convention entirely or to vary or derogate from its effects.
This permissive attitude is generally acceptable to States in relation to business transactions, but is likely to meet strong objection if applied to consumer transactions.
Hence the exclusion of these from the Convention.
THE CONNECTION TO A CONTRACTING STATE
Should the scope of a Convention be limited to transactions in which there is some connection with a Contracting State, and if so, what should be the connecting factor?
At first sight it seems inconceivable to apply a Convention to a transaction having no point of contact whatsoever with a Contracting State, yet that is precisely the effect which ULIS sought to achieve.
Not only is there no requirement of connection with a Contracting State but article 2 of the Uniform Rules provides in terms that: ‘Rules of private international law shall be excluded for the purposes of the application of the present Law, subject to any provision to the contrary in the said Law.’
provide that: This bold attempt both to exclude private international law and to make ULIS applicable in Contracting States even if there were no point of contact with a Contracting State had its supporters but attracted such fierce criticism that no organization concerned with unification has had the temerity to repeat the experiment.
All subsequent Conventions have required as a condition of their applicability not only internationality of  the transaction but also a connection with a Contracting State.
What should suffice as the connecting factor remains a matter of controversy.
The Vienna Sales Convention prescribes two alternative methods of satisfying the connection test.
The first is that both parties to the contract carry on business in a Contracting State; the second, that rules of private international law lead to the application of the law of a Contracting State.
The first limb is universally accepted as legitimate; the second, though having the merit of expanding the scope of the Convention, has been criticized on various grounds.
Where the parties have not chosen the law which is to govern their contract the applicability of the Convention will depend upon the law governing the contract as determined by the conflict rules of the forum, which, of course, may vary from State to State.
This runs counter to at least two objectives of the Convention, namely transparency and removal of the advantages of forum shopping.
A second objection is that where both parties carry on business in Contracting States they can reasonably be subjected to the Convention automatically since it forms part of their national law, whereas parties carrying on business in different non-Contracting States who agree that their contract is to be governed by the law of a third State which is a Contracting State may well have in mind only the domestic law of that State and arguably ought not to be bound by the Convention unless they contract into it.
The Leasing and Factoring Conventions, with a view to expansion of their scope, follow the model of the Vienna Sales Convention but in acknowledgment of the concerns expressed by various States all three Conventions confer a power on Contracting States to make reservations excluding the second form of connecting factor.
Again, the position under the Leasing and Factoring Conventions was complicated by the existence of two contracts.
Accordingly where the second form of connecting factor is not applicable these Conventions apply only where all three parties involved (supplier/lessor/lessee and supplier/debtor/factor) carry on business in Contracting States.
This, of course, is a much more significant limitation on scope than exists in single-contract Conventions such as the Sales Convention, and in this respect the case for the second limb of application of the two latter Conventions is stronger.
The Role of Conflict of Laws
The relationship between the scope and substantive provisions of a Convention and rules of private international law is highly complex and can be treated only briefly here.
First, to the extent that an issue is expressly covered by the Convention it displaces rules of national law that might otherwise apply and thereby renders otiose conflict-of-laws rules designed to lead to the selection of the applicable national law.
Secondly, the Convention may itself prescribe a conflicts rule and thus displace the normal conflicts rules of the forum.
This prescription may be made both in the scope provisions of the Convention and in its substantive provisions.
Thirdly, the Convention may be silent both as to the substance of a particular issue and as to the law by which it is to be determined, in which case it is a question of construction whether the Convention covers the point or merely leaves it to be dealt with under the law applicable under the conflicts rules of the forum.
The last two points raises difficult issues both of law and of policy.
USE OF CONFLICT OF LAWS TO DETERMINE SCOPE
Reference has already been made to three Conventions under which the requirement of connection to a Contracting State is satisfied where the rules of private international law lead to the application of a Contracting State.
This, of course, is not in itself a prescription of a conflict rule, merely a reference to general conflicts rules.
In most cases the same result would probably be reached even without a provision to this effect, given that in international commercial transactions the application of mandatory rules is likely to be limited, so that courts will usually respect the autonomy of the parties in choosing the law which is to govern their relationship.
The principal effect of referring to rules of private international law to extend the scope of a Convention would seem to be to displace a possible presumption that the parties, in choosing the law of a Contracting State, intended only its domestic law to apply (that is, without the Convention) and to impose on them the onus of displacing the Convention.
The effect of a reservation against such a provision by the State of the forum where the conflict rules of that State lead to the application of the law of another Contracting State which has not made such a reservation is unclear.
The better view would seem to be that the court must respect the intention of the legislature of the State whose law governs the transaction and apply the Convention despite the reservation made by its own  State.
On this view the only reservation that is relevant is that made by the State whose law is applicable to the transaction, and reservations made by the State in which the forum is located have no significance as such and operate only if the conflict rules of that State lead to the application of its own law.
PRESCRIPTION OF A CONFLICTS RULE IN LIEU OF A SUBSTANTIVE RULE
In what circumstances is it appropriate for a Convention to prescribe a conflicts rule in relation to an issue rather than settling it directly by a substantive rule?
At least three cases suggest themselves:
(1)
where agreement cannot be reached on the substantive rule but can be reached on the conflicts rule;
(2)
where a particular State, though not opposed to the proposed rule per se , has such a strong policy interest in the particular issue that it would be reluctant to cede control directly to the Convention, though willing to submit to a conflicts rule;
(3)
where the issue is tangential and raises considerations going beyond the scope of the Convention or too complex to be covered in it.
The Unidroit Convention on International Financial Leasing provides a good example of all three cases.
The Study Group at one stage con-templated the inclusion of a provision by which the lessor's title would have priority against even a bona fide purchaser from the lessee.
This met with opposition from representatives from civil-law jurisdictions on the ground that it was incompatible with the possession vaut titre principle and had implications going beyond the field of leasing, and the Study Group eventually concluded that no progress could be made on this issue and limited the statement of priority to conflicts between the lessor and the lessee's general creditors, subject to perfection of the lessor's title in accordance with any public notice requirements of the applicable law.
A similar problem arose in relation to priority as between the lessor of equipment that becomes a fixture to land and the owner or encumbrancer of the land.
Again, the solution finally adopted was to leave this to be dealt with by the lex situs .
The prescription of a conflicts rule, though more readily agreed than a substantive rule, is very much the second best solution.
Apart from the obvious point that it fails to produce uniformity its principal defect is that it leads to the application of a particular national law which is likely to  have been devised for domestic transactions and may well be ill-suited to those which are international in character.
SILENCE OF CONVENTION ON PARTICULAR ISSUES
Since a Convention rule covering an issue displaces the need for resort to the conflicts of laws whilst the non-coverage of an issue necessitates recourse to the applicable law as determined by the conflicts rules of the forum, it may become necessary to decide whether an issue on which the Convention contains no express provision is covered by implication, applying any canons of interpretation laid down by the Convention itself, and if not, whether recourse is to be had to general conflict-of-laws rules or to any particular conflict rules laid down by the Convention.
It is not always easy to distinguish cases in which a Convention rule is to be treated as precluding the solution to a question that might otherwise be available under the applicable national law from cases in which the Convention rule is to be  interpreted as not covering the question at all.
Thus it is often erroneously supposed that a provision of the Convention which merely prevents it from displacing or affecting a particular legal right thereby effectuates that right, whereas in truth the sole consequence of the provision is to leave the matter to be determined under the applicable national law.
So article 7(5) of the Leasing Convention, which provides that nothing in article 7 is to affect the priority of any lien creditor, does not mean that lien creditors are to have priority over the lessor, merely that article 7 itself is not to be treated as dealing with the issue, so that resort must be had to the applicable law.
A rather more subtle case of silence on a point which appears to be dealt with exhaustively in the Convention is to be found in article 7(3), which prescribes a conflict rule to determine the law governing public-notice requirements (if any) needed to perfect the lessor's title against a trustee in bankruptcy and creditors.
This provides that: There follows a set of four rules specifying which law is to apply, depending on the nature of the equipment There would seem to be no gaps here.
But  consider the phrase ‘at the time when a person referred to in paragraph 1 becomes entitled to invoke the rules referred to in the preceding paragraph’.
What law determines the time of such entitlement?
The answer is not to be found in the express provisions of article 7.
Two solutions are possible.
The first is that this is a gap which must be filled by reference to the applicable law under general conflict-of-laws rules.
The second is that one applies the conflict rule laid down in article 7(3) itself on the assumption that its conditions have been satisfied.
This seems preferable.
No doubt it is open to the objection that it presupposes the very point in issue, namely the law which is to be applied, but such a solution seems just as sensible in this context as the rule that the law governing the validity of a contract is determined by the law which would govern the contract if one assumed it to be valid.
The Input of the Commercial Community
There has been a tendency for international inter-governmental organizations to lean too exclusively on the expertise of scholars in the preparation of instruments of unification and to obtain inadequate input from organizations of business men engaged in the particular field under consideration.
Since international trade law is largely dispositive and is designed primarily to facilitate international transactions between business enterprises it is only sensible to try out proposals on those who will be affected by them to see whether they will really work.
Happily attitudes are changing.
Unidroit gave an admirable lead in this respect many years ago in relation to the Leasing and Factoring Conventions, not merely by involving the requisite international leasing-and-factoring organizations in its deliberations from an early stage but also by exposing drafts of the proposed Conventions to critical examination at seminars for professionals in a number of different countries.
The exercise proved valuable not only in securing support for the projects but also in identifying issues requiring clarification or more closely reasoned argument.
This is a procedure which should become standard in future work by intergovernmental organizations.
Organization of Work
Attention has already been drawn to the fact that a single harmonization proposal can take decades to come to fruition.
This is perhaps not so surprising when one bears in mind that the same can happen even with domestic legislation, which is infinitely simpler to enact.
But more thought needs to be given to the organizational method.
The expense in promoting  a project is considerable, since every meeting involves the outlay of trav-elling expenses, accommodation, and subsistence for substantial numbers of participants from many parts of the world.
Project management is therefore a matter which should begin to occupy the attention of the various bodies involved in harmonization.
There are many reasons for the slow pace of a proposal, but if we leave on one side the lack of enthusiasm which can itself defer a project for years, the three key factors are:
(1)
the expense, and thus the infrequency and relative brevity, of meetings of those engaged in the scientific work;
(2)
the pressure of work on already overburdened secretariats of the institutions involved;
(3)
the discontinuity which results from the interval between meetings and constant changes in the membership of the relevant study-group or working-party.
The problem, of course, is that experts and national representatives are busy people, as are the members of the secretariat, upon whom the organizational burden of sending out questionnaires, sifting the answers, preparing reports, and arranging meetings is considerable, particularly since this is likely to involve the reproduction of all documents in at least two languages.
An obvious answer is to have this basic groundwork done by a much smaller group who would meet more regularly and for longer periods at a stretch.
Expenditure on research assistants might also save a significant degree of time and money in the long run.
When meetings are held only once a year, or even less frequently, it is all too easy to forget why a particular provision was formulated and on what grounds one supported or opposed it.
The frailty of human memory is such that it is by no means uncommon for a delegate to criticize fiercely the very rule for which he himself was responsible a year or two before!
There is also much to be said for having a target for completion from the outset and for planning in advance the sequence of meetings that will result in that target being met.
Of course, any plan that is made is liable to be disrupted by supervening events, but at least there will be a plan and a more systematic approach to the management of the project.
Finally, it is important for those involved in the work of harmonization to appreciate that with the making of the Convention their work is only half completed.
It is then necessary to market it, through lectures, seminars, and meetings with governments, business interests, and lawyers, in order to generate a groundswell of support which will help to ensure ratification.
Only then can the work be regarded as done.
An example to us all in this respect is professor John Honnold, who was responsible for the creation of UNCITRAL and was its first Secretary.
His peripatetic labours contributed greatly both to the making of the Vienna Sales Convention and to its ratification in the years that followed.
Attitudes towards Harmonization
The advantages of harmonizing law relating to international transactions would seem fairly evident even to the layman.
But given the reluctance of businessmen, their legal advisers, and their legislatures to modify their national law in favour of harmonization measures it is perhaps worthwhile restating the advantages of harmonization.
The harmonizing measure:
(1)
may fill a legal vacuum by providing rules in a field where national law was previously non-existent or obscure;
(2)
substitutes a single law for a proliferation of national laws and thus within the given field dispenses with the need to resort to conflict-of-laws rules and the opportunity these give for forum shopping;
(3)
is usually available in several languages, official or unofficial, and is therefore more readily accessible than a national law;
(4)
by reason of(1) and (2), facilitates conversance with its provisions and saves time and expense;
(5)
provides a neutral law for parties to a contract neither of whom is willing to accept the law of the other's country;
(6)
offers a legal regime more attuned to international transactions than domestic law, since it reflects the influence of many legal systems, whereas domestic law is focused on internal transactions and may thus be less accommodating of international dealings;
(7)
operates as part of the law of each ratifying State, so that the courts of each such State take judicial notice of it and is established by legal argument, not by the expensive and time-consuming process of adducing expert evidence, often from a different jurisdiction;
(8)
facilitates a common market.
Despite these manifold advantages it is often hard to persuade the commercial community even to take an interest in proposals for harmonization affecting their sphere of business, still less to give the proposals their  support.
Why is this so?
Numerous reasons possessing varying degrees of persuasiveness are advanced.
Traditionally the first and principal line of attack is that existing domestic law is better or, if not better, is at least well known and understood.
This may be true but presupposes that the law in question is the one which will govern the contract, whereas the reality is that for every contract governed by that law there will be another contract governed by a foreign law with which the party concerned may be unfamiliar, which is in a foreign language he does not understand, and which, when put to the test, may prove demonstrably inferior not only to his own law but to the proposed uniform law.
A second line of attack is that the proposed harmonizing measure is inadequate in scope.
Thus the Vienna Sales Convention has been criticized for excluding questions relating to the validity of the contract of sale, the transfer of property, or the resolution of property disputes between the seller or buyer and a third party.
The response of those engaged in the arduous labours which led to the conclusion of the Convention is no doubt not dissimilar to that of the scholar who writes a book on the doctrine of unconscionability in contract law and is then taken to task by a reviewer for his failure to cover breach and termination — in other words, for not writing a different book.
Some limits have to be set to any project.
How they are set is a difficult question to which I shall return, but those who decry as too narrow the scope of a Convention running to over a hundred Articles must surely embody the resuscitated spirit of Oliver Twist who will always cry for more!
Then, of course, there is the inevitable criticism of the drafting.
If ever I get to Heaven (which my friends tell me is unlikely) one of my first requests will be to witness The perfect Draft.
Such a thing is certainly not to be found on this earth; yet those who pick to pieces the open texture or verbal infelicities of an international Convention rarely pause to consider how, when legislation prepared in a single legal system is generally so verbose, obscure, and generally badly drafted, one can reasonably expect more of the product of many hands drawn from widely differing legal systems with different cultures, legal structures, and methods of legal reasoning and decision-making, entailing maximum flexibility, co-operation, and compromise.
This is not to say that all criticism is unjustified.
There are good Conventions and bad Conventions.
The good ones are those which, for all their  rough edges, are found to work and are widely used.
The bad ones do not work and are rightly neglected.
The Geneva Convention on Bills of Exchange is an example of an excellent Convention which has functioned extremely effectively and has been widely adopted.
By contrast, the Uniform Law for International Sales, the forlorn predecessor of the Vienna Sales Convention, is an indifferent product which has not attracted support.
But behind the expressed reasons for antagonism or inertia in the face of proposals for harmonization lies a more fundamental consideration.
It is human nature to be antipathetic to change.
Let me render this more accurately.
It is human nature to advocate change in someone else's affairs whilst vigorously opposing its necessity in one's own.
The force of this NIMBY approach, as it has become known in England, should not be underestimated.
Few individuals or institutions are truly resistant to it.
Even academics, who are supposed to embody the quintessence of detached assessment, somehow respond with a lack of enthusiasm when it is suggested that their own methods of teaching, research, or organization might benefit from review.
This inherent resistance to change is exacerbated by the low priority accorded by our law schools to the teaching of comparative law and, in England, by an unwillingness to grapple with foreign languages, itself both a cause and a consequence of English becoming the new lingua franca.
If the harmonization process is to have any hope of acceleration it is essential for law schools to reduce their preoccupation with national law and their assumption of its superiority over other legal systems and to revert at least in some degree to the internationalism of medieval law teaching.
It is primarily by the spreading of awareness of foreign legal systems among our students that we can hope to accelerate the process of harmonization and to produce practitioners and judges of the future prepared to look beyond the horizon of their own legal system.
In his outstanding study of unification that great French comparativist the late professor René David exposed the kernel of the matter with his customary elegance and felicity:
LAW, ECONOMICS, AND SOCIETY
Commercial Law and Commercial Activity
ROSS CRANSTON
This paper is concerned with a neglected aspect of the relationship between law and the economy.
It is an area distinct, but not entirely separate, from that addressed by the law and economics movement, which focuses on the application of economic theory to matters of legal concern.
The law and the economy area concerns law's role as an instrument of economic policy, both institutionally and analytically.
This paper approaches the topic by examining the motivations, functions, and impact of some aspects of commercial law in market economies, or at least economies moving in that direction.
It is suggestive, rather than conclusive.
Beginning with two case studies, it then turns to the way commercial law has been intended to function, and in fact has functioned to facilitate market transactions in developed market economies.
(Most of the examples come from England, although they could be generalized to other common-law systems.)
This task is approached at a general level, and also by reference to specific legal concepts.
Two Case Studies
CASE STUDY 1: DEBT-RECOVERY LAW IN SRI LANKA
Earlier in 1990 the Supreme Court of Sri Lanka, the country's highest court, opined: It said this in upholding, in the main, the constitutionality of one of a number of bills introduced by the government to facilitate debt recovery in Sri Lanka.
The aim of this legislation, as the Supreme Court noted, is to facilitate economic development, although it is fair to add that lenders both from within and outside the country have been pressing for change for some time.
The matter has a long history and is illustrative of how law can lag behind what is thought to be economically desirable.
In 1934, the Banking Commission of Sri Lanka reported.
It had been established to report on existing conditions of banking and credit, and to consider feasible steps in respect of the provision of banking and credit facilities for agriculture, industry and trade.
In the course of its report it made several suggestions as to reform of the law to increase the availability of credit by removing what were perceived to be legal handicaps: Specifically, the Banking Commission recommended changes in the law of security.
Under the common law of Sri Lanka, Roman-Dutch law, a mortgagee of both movables and immovables can recover payment of the debt secured only through legal action (known as parate execution).
The Commission suggested that the law relating to the mortgage of immovable property should be made to conform to Indian law.
Consequently, a  mortgagee would in some cases have been able to realize his security by sale, enter into possession, or appoint a receiver, all without recourse to a court.
Generally in relation to the mortgage of movables, it recommended a simpler scheme, together ‘with power to the lender to sell off the security in the event of the borrower failing to repay, after giving him due notice’.
Significantly, the Commission concluded its discussion of legal reforms by identifying the unsuitability of the Roman-Dutch law to modern commercial and credit activities.
‘This is the main reason why the mercantile legislation in Ceylon is in its infancy and out of date…
Modernization of the legal system of Ceylon is a necessity for the smooth running of its commercial and banking machineries.’
The recommendations of the Banking Commission were endorsed in part by the Sub-Committee on Commercial Legislation.
The Banking Commission had recommended that the defects in the law which it had identified should be examined in depth by a special commission.
This was the origin of the Mortgage Commission, appointed in November 1943.
The Second Interim Report of the Committee led to the Mortgage Act (Act No. 6 of 1949).
In essence the Report and the Act reject the approach of the Banking Commission: instead, both cling to the Roman-Dutch principles of mortgage.
The Report begins by rejecting the recommendations of the Banking Commission in relation to the mortgage of land.
The reasons given can be gathered under four broad heads: it would be a ‘perilous adventure’ to superimpose one part of a foreign system of law (that is, the English law of mortgage) upon the different system of land law in Sri Lanka; the evidence about delay in enforcing mortgages and its adverse effects on the confidence of investors was thin; the English rule, that a mortgagee should be able to sell the property on default without intervention of the court, would lead to breaches of the peace; and there was a need to protect borrowers.
None of these reasons are overwhelmingly persuasive, except possibly the last.
Although it hardly featured in the Report, the nature of lending in Sri Lanka, and its consequences in the first part of the twentieth century had burnt itself into the collective consciousness of many and clearly influenced the Commission.
The story, in brief, is that in colonial times the British banks would not lend to Sri Lankans, except to the very wealthy or very influential.
To borrow money, Sri Lankan businessmen and agriculturalists had to turn to foreign money-lenders — Afghans and the South Indian Nattukottai Chettiars.
This meant that in the economic depression of the  1930s many Sri Lankan landowners were thus in the hands of foreign money-lenders to whom they had mortgaged their land.
The Land Redemption Ordinance, No. 61 of 1942, resulted from the political pressure exerted by dispossessed landowners.
It was to enable the government to acquire land sold during the depression to pay off debts.
The land was then to be restored to its original owners on the payment of its value in installments.
For our purposes, however, the most important result was that the Mortgage Act 1949 did not change fundamentally the Roman-Dutch law on parate execution.
Apart from the statutory exceptions made after Independence for some of the state banks, parate execution was not permitted.
Then, in 1985, a government-appointed committee, the Wimalaratne Committee, recommended that parate execution in relation to corporeal movables be extended.
Section 85 of the Mortgage Act requires the corporeal movable to be ‘actually in the possession and custody of the agency’(s. 85(1)).
With particular transactions, such as the import of goods, it might be possible for an agency financing them to have ‘possession and custody’ of the goods by a system of control over their warehousing.
In many cases, however, as where the movables are the facilities and stock in trade of a business, such control is impracticable.
Despite opposition from the Bar Association and another government-appointed committee, the Wimalaratne Committee adhered to its views in a supplementary report, because movables in the custody of a borrower, secured by a mortgage, provides in the main the basic security for working capital of a trade or business.
The right of parate execution in this instance will contribute to easy and enlarged availability, and reduced cost, of credit against such security.’
Now as part of the tranche of legislation mentioned at the outset of this section, parate execution is extended in Sri Lanka.
Most importantly for our purposes, the Recovery of Loans by Banks (Special provision) Act 1990 grants to commercial banks, although not to finance companies, the right to parate execution already conferred on state banks.
In introducing the legislation as a whole, the Minister underlined our theme: ‘It is very desirable that interest rates should be reduced to the lowest possible level in order to encourage investment and development in the country.
I hope that the implementation of the new legislation will achieve this objective.’
CASE STUDY II: TRANSFORMATION IN HUNGARY
The current changes in Central and Eastern Europe provide an opportunity to evaluate the role of law in economic change, as those countries change from a centrally planned to a market economy.
What part is law expected to play in the transformation?
How is it doing that, and more particularly what form is it taking (for example, the form of law in a market economy)?
A third question — what impact is the new law having on economic change?— cannot be answered satisfactorily at this early stage.
Before it was dissolved, the Hungarian parliament passed a resolution on 26 January 1990 requiring the Council of Ministers to submit, before October 1990, comprehensive legislation on the reform of ownership.
Ownership is obviously central to the disposal of state property — privatization — in the move to a market economy.
According to the resolution,
This belief in the centrality of law — law to provide a framework for change — echoes throughout the legislation introduced since 1988.
Thus, the preamble to the Company Act, 1988, speaks of the purpose of the Act as being to create up-to-date legal forms, thereby assisting the income-earning capacity of the national economy, the development of a market-type production and distribution system, and the flow of capital (including foreign capital) in the economy.
On encouraging capital flows it reads: ‘By lifting the barriers [facing]the co-operation of economic entities and the citizens it should be made possible to utilize the individual savings for community purposes and to open wider and safer possibilities for the citizen’ ventures.’
No clearer link between law and economic change could be imagined.
Similarly, the Transformation Act, 1989, begins with the rationale: Law, then, is to provide a framework for economic change.
But it is also to channel changes, as with the types of business entities envisaged by the Company Act.
These parallel those in countries from which Hungary seeks foreign investment — joint stock companies, private companies, joint enterprises, limited partnerships, and ordinary partnerships — on the basis that familiarity will encourage investment.
Moreover, the Company Act seeks to encourage foreign investment specifically by providing that a less-than-majority stake does not need government approval — an incentive, of course, to joint ventures.
Significantly, the Act gives a foreign investor full protection and ensures that dividends and its stake on winding up are transferable abroad without permit.
Additionally, the new law has symbolic functions.
This is clearly evident for foreign investors in the Foreign Investment Law, which affirms state guarantees of compensation should nationalization or expropriation occur.
The affirmation is not just by the state, but at the highest level of lawmaking in Hungary, the parliament.
The Act also provides new guarantees and more favourable tax allowances.
Similar provisions in the Company Act have already been alluded to.
Within the country, the symbolic significance of the law is as important as its practical impact.
Although private business initiatives were encouraged from the early 1980s, the legal framework was antiquated and ambiguous.
In the sphere of business entities, public companies limited by shares could only be formed with foreign capital participation under an Act of 1875 and under a 1972 Decree of the Minister of Trade, and limited liability companies could only be incorporated under a 1930 Act.
The tranche of legislation after 1988 symbolizes within Hungary that the transformation to the market economy is fundamental.
Perhaps the symbolism is most striking in the Act on Securities and the Stock Exchange.
The stock exchange was, of course, abolished in 1948 as part of the transition to a Stalinist political and economic system.
The 1990 legislation authorizes the establishment of a stock exchange, sets out the preconditions for its statutes and rules of procedure, provides for its membership and operation, and establishes a system for arbitration of disputes between securities traders and between issuers and traders.
The obvious concern is to facilitate capital formation and to channel it into sectors and areas capable of using it most efficiently.
As yet there is no formal stock exchange, although a handful of securities are traded on the over-the-counter market.
We thus have an apparent paradox: a modern stock-exchange law without a stock exchange, but an established banking system without as yet a modern banking law.
None of this is to suggest that Hungarians believe law will perform a miracle in economic terms.
Hungary depends heavily on Russian energy, and its export commitments in agriculture, processing, and foodstuffs are oriented to the former Soviet Union.
Foreign investment turns on the attitude of international institutions such as the IMF and World Bank and on a major creditor, the Japanese.
Moreover, law has a regulatory as well as a facilitative function in the transformation.
Most notably, ensuring that a few do not profit at the expense of the many and limiting foreign control of the economy are important concerns in Hungary, and will no doubt influence the law.
Markets and Motives
In Western market economies the law has underpinned the market and thus contributed to economic development.
‘Market’, of course, is a term which covers a range of social phenomena.
There is no one market, but many markets.
Some are institutionalized, such as the stock market, the Eurobond market, and the commodities markets.
In a few governments have a prominent role.
Contract law has been of major importance in underpinning the market, although other areas of law have also had a bearing.
In common-law jurisdictions the nineteenth century saw a rapid development in contract doctrine to accommodate the changing market.
Professor Atiyah has argued that in England notions of fairness and equa-lity of exchange, coupled with liability based on reliance or the receipt of benefit, were replaced after 1800 by the notion of contract based on the expressed will of the parties, and liability grounded on promises (offer and acceptance and the intention of the parties).
Whether the transformation is as stark as Atiyah suggests, there can be no doubt that, as he contends, nineteenth-century contract law ‘was closely related to the ideas of the political economists and to the rise of the market economy’.
As professor Friedman points out in relation to the United States, the emphasis on abstraction in contract-law doctrine fitted the economic presuppositions of the market.
Within the law of contract itself, support was given to the market by virtue of the fact that the law enforced market transactions, and enforced them in accordance with rules which generalized and abstracted economic behaviour.
In theory, parties were free to frame their own transactions, which could then be carried out without legal impediment; in the event that a bargain fell through, or if one party balked or proved unable  to perform, the law of contract made freely available the regular judicial processes of the court system, in which economic damages would be awarded to the party aggrieved.
The same applies today: contract law places few limitations on how parties may contract in the market and generally upholds the bargains struck.
Legislation has intruded on free contracting in few cases; particular types of clauses in consumer contracts are rendered ineffective, and in some cases contracting must be in prescribed form.
In transactions between commercial parties, however, the  constraints are usually non-existent or vague.
The approach in England is typified by a statement of Lord Diplock:
In some circumstances, a commercial party may be able to invoke doctrines such as economic duress, that an oppressive term was introduced into a contract without adequate notification, or that another owes it a fiduciary duty.
Common-law jurisdictions, other than England, may press such doctrines into service more frequently than in England, and may develop new doctrines.
This occurs, however, but infrequently in the commercial context, and even innovative common-law courts are reluctant to interfere with commercial bargains.
‘Both [parties]are large and commercially sophisticated companies.
Both parties knew or should have known what they were doing and what they had bargained for when they entered into the contract.’
Statutory requirements that persons bargain  in good faith, or that contractual terms be reasonable, have a relatively narrow ambit, and are interpreted to have minimum impact in the commercial context.
Standardization of contracts is typically unilateral, being devised by particular contracting parties or their trade associations.
If both parties to a contract use standardization, the upshot may be a ‘battle of the forms’.
In some markets standardization is multilateral — to give just one example, Form 100 of the Grain and Feed Trade Association is used internationally for the shipment of feeding stuffs in bulk.
Standardization means efficiency in contracting, since there is no need for the parties to negotiate each deal anew.
Multilateral standardization can also give a party confidence when entering a market, since it knows that it is getting terms no worse than others already operating there.
Market practices are, of course, incorporated in law, both directly and indirectly.
The use of special juries of merchants by Lord Mansfield to guide him on the law is well known — not that he always followed their suggestions.
The practice of special juries was discontinued, but nineteenth-century English and Empire Courts invoked trade customs on the basis of implied contract.
‘A custom of trade, which is a matter of evidence, may be used to annex incidents to all written contracts, commercial or agricultural, and others, which do not by their terms exclude it.’
Thus, the customs or more exactly the usages, on formal markets — for example, the London Corn Trade Association, the London Stock Exchange, and the London Tallow Market — as well as those in particular trades and professions, were recognized and given effect to.
There is even authority that those employing an agent to conduct a transaction in a certain market implicitly assent to any reasonable usages of that market whether or not aware of them.
The rule about the incorporation of customs and usages continues to the present day, as an examination of any textbook on contract law will show.
Impressionistically, however, the courts seem more reluctant now to use customs and usages to imply contract terms, although this is possibly  because they do not draw the distinction clearly enough between mod-ifying a contract and understanding its terms.
Now a custom or usage has to be both the norm for behaviour and such that the parties treat it as obligatory.
And it is a rare judge who will explicitly base a decision on the opinion of ‘intelligent men of commerce’.
Law has also underpinned markets by regulating fraudulent, sharp, or objectionable practices.
Confidence in markets has supposedly been enhanced — the confidence both of those directly involved and of the public in general.
An example is provided by the regulation of securities markets.
Their regulation can be traced back to the thirteenth century and subsequent legislation such as that of 1697 —‘An act to restrain the number and ill practice of brokers and stock brokers’.
Out of the crisis of investor confidence caused by the Great Depression came the best-known scheme of securities regulation, that of the United States.
The problems addressed by the SEC regime included a range of confidence-undermining behaviour, such as the failure to furnish essential information to prospective investors when they were invited to buy securities; the inadequacy of current information concerning companies with publicly held securities; the abuse of the proxy device by self-perpetuating managements; the abuse by corporate ‘insiders’ of their favoured position; the ease with which the securities markets could be manipulated; the lack of financial safeguards for brokers and dealers; the abuses of the investment company device; and the irresponsibility of trustees under corporate bond indentures.
Confidence in the securities markets was one of the features emphasized by professor Gower, whose report led to the regime of regulation for United Kingdom financial services introduced by the Financial Services Act, 1986.
Protection of ‘reasonable people from being made fools of’ was ‘essential if members of the public are to have the justified confidence to invest in productive enterprise through the wider range of opportunities now available to them’.
Functions and Dysfunctions
Law facilitates commercial activity by providing structures within which it can take place.
At one level this can be seen in the attitude of the lawmakers, who consciously shape laws with commercial considerations  in mind.
One aspect is that particular laws are made because these are thought to be more commercially acceptable than others.
Another is the overall philosophy with which lawmakers go about their task.
Particular approaches are thought to be supportive of commercial activity and are adopted with this end in view.
At a second level, law functions to facilitate commercial activity through particular doctrines.
Examination of just a few of these underlines the  channelling and legitimating role which law plays in particular types of commercial activity.
Judicial decisions can readily be found in the common-law world which use commercial utility as a justification in their reasoning.
Lord Mansfield's judgments provide various examples.
In Jenkins v.
Osborne , Tindal CJ referred to the transferability and negotiability of a bill of lading, noted that this was at variance with general principles of law, but added that the exception was founded ‘for the general convenience of commerce’.
Such reasoning can be traced down to the present day, although there are variations on the theme.
For example, a court might express regret about the law, as not representing the interests of commerce, and recommend urgent legislation.
The interests of commerce sometimes have a nationalistic tinge: in a recent decision a United States court referred in its reasoning to the interests in maintaining New York as a leading commercial centre.
Not infrequently in commercial cases the English courts use certainty as a touchstone for decision-making.
This can be traced back as far at least as Lord Mansfield, who said: ‘In all mercantile transactions the great object should be certainty and therefore it's of more consequence that a rule should be certain, than whether the rule is established one way or the other.
Because speculators in trade then know what ground to go upon.’
That was a case when Mansfield wanted to define barraty in a contract of marine insurance with certainty, so that future underwriters and insurers would feel more confident in entering commercial contracts.
In another case Mansfield spelt out the advantages of certainty, that merchants could then depend upon rules, ‘easily learned and easily retained’, rather than upon ‘subtleties and niceties’ or ‘upon speculative refinements from the law of nations or the Roman jus post liminii’.
Mansfield's attitude has echoed down through the centuries to the present day.
Two examples suffice.
In Carles v.
Fancourt , the court denied validity to a promissory note made payable out of the  maker's money to which he would become entitled from his reversion.
Lord Lenyon CJ, said that it ‘would perplex the commercial transactions of mankind’ if negotiable securities were encumbered by conditions, into which those to whom they were negotiated had to inquire.
Ashurst J said: ‘Certainty is a great object in commercial instruments; and unless they carry their own validity on the face of them, they are not negotiable.’
More recently, in a modern banking case certainty arose when the issue was whether a char-terer had paid the owner on time.
Under the charter-party, payment was to be in ‘cash’ into a London bank by a Sunday, but the charterer's London bank did not deliver a payment order to the owner's bank until the Monday.
The House of Lords said that punctual payment required payment on the Friday, if the banks were closed on the Saturday and Sunday, and that the owners could not be said to have waived the breach simply because their bank had accepted the payment order.
‘Certainty is of primary importance in all commercial transactions.’
Unlike Lord Mansfield, however, later English judges have not probed the implications of certainty.
For one thing, they have not addressed the tension between certainty and justice.
Mansfield saw the difficulty in reconciling the two principles, but thought that certainty was the lesser of two evils.
He also saw that if the parties did not approve of a rule laid down by a court — a ‘certain rule’— they could choose to vary it by contract.
Another issue unaddressed is the meaning of certainty.
It is too pat to say, as did Mansfield, that merchants will chose definiteness over ‘whether the rule is established one way or the other’.
Moreover, an inconclusive rule might well lead to a preference for uncertainty, if that can be positively exploited.
And in any event, uncertainty is inherent in the law; its causes and solutions are a recurrent theme of legal scholarship.
Conscious moulding of decisions is not necessary, however, for the law to further commercial ends.
Lawmakers are influenced, even unconsciously, by the dominant concerns of the age, and decisions are affected accordingly.
The underlying themes of Adam Smith parallel those of Lord Mansfield, even if there is rarely a coincidence in particulars.
Atiyah's great work,The Rise and Fall of Freedom of Contract , shows how nineteenth-century English judges, in developing the doctrine of freedom of contract, were influenced by the ideas of political economy to which Adam Smith and his successors gave expression.
Particular studies, such as that by Karl Llewellyn of sales cases in the New York courts in the first part of the nineteenth century, underline that ‘mercantile mindedness’ lead to  particular outcomes.
None of this is to suggest that the relationship between mercantile concerns and lawmaking is linear.
The mercantile community itself has different, indeed competing interests: manufacturer v. dealer, seller v. buyer, banker v. customer, local merchant v. foreign merchant are just a few examples.
Short-term interests may vary from long-term interests.
Mercantile needs may be swamped in a sea of doctrine.
The trend of judge-made law may be set off by a case involving an atypical trade or may be located in a consumer transaction.
And of course other principles may be chosen over mercantile need.
Examination of a number of specific areas demonstrates that law has contributed positively to commercial activity.
The story is complex, and in some respects law has been indifferent and, indeed, antipathetic to commercial needs.
English company and partnership law are well-known examples of the former.
Limited liability for companies was not introduced until nearly a century after the outset of England's industrial revolution.
Sole trading and partnership were the main forms of business organization until the twentieth century, yet partnership law until the partnership Act, 1890, was ‘on many central issues…
Profoundly obtuse and  procedurely labyrinthine’.
Before such paradoxes are explored, however, let us consider some straightforward examples.
The first is negotiability, of great importance in the past to the functioning of financial and securities markets.
To recognize the transfer of contractual rights necessary for negotiability, the common law had to overcome the concept of property as a tangible object and of contract as a personal relationship.
The details of this transformation need not detain us, except to note that change was neither uniformly nor invariably positive.
While the negotiability of international bills of exchange was recognized as early as 1603, and of domestic bills less than a hundred years later, Chief Justice Holt refused to extend the principle to promissory notes, which ‘are only an invention of the goldsmiths in Lombard Street, who had a mind to make a law to bind all those that did deal with them’.
It required legislation in 1705 to overcome this decision, which was consciously obstructive of commercial practice.
On the whole, though, the story is of law playing a facilitative role.
One key development was the exception to the nemo dat rule.
The other was the rule developed in the seventeenth century, whereby claims on a bill of exchange are treated as separate from those on the underlying transaction.
Indeed, in this Steffen suggests a conscious moulding of law to mercantile needs.
‘More likely, the courts, at the urging of the merchant-bankers, were freeing the bill of the bickerings between drawer and drawee, as a first step in a developing money economy.’
Whatever the truth of the matter, these developments before the nineteenth century certainly served English commerce well.
Payment could be made without the transfer of currency, and negotiable instruments acted as a means of credit.
To a very large extent Chalmers' codification did not break new ground in the Bills of Exchange Act, 1882 — adopted with notifications in the United States as its Uniform Negotiable Instruments Law — but reproduced existing law.
One reason for the codification, however, was a fear that the case law was becoming excessively rigid; another, that it could not bear the weight of what, by the mid-nineteenth century, was a widespread abuse of the bill of exchange (notably, through the use of accommodation paper).
Later the holder in due course notion was subject to abuse in consumer transactions.
Today, of course, there is a real question-mark over the importance of negotiability when cheques are rarely transferred, and when non trade-related commercial paper is either not issued or is located per-manently in depositories.
Security over personal property is another area where law and lawyers have had an important  facilitative role.
Credit can be given to further sales, but the risks of not being paid are reduced if security is taken.
Pledge was impractical on a widespread basis in a developing industrial society, since it requires possession by the creditor — obviously inappropriate for goods in transit or to be sold or transformed.
Then clever lawyers devised methods of taking security over personal property, and the courts followed.
Hire-purchase was used in England for pianos, furniture, and sewing machines; after a slight hiccup, the courts gave their imprimatur.
The floating charge obtained recognition shortly before this.
In the path-breaking case of Holroyd v.
Marshall , the court held that a charge applied to factory machinery which had replaced that originally used as security for the repayment of a substantial debt.
Shortly after,In re Panama , New Zealand and Australian Royal Mail Co .
held that a general charge on the undertaking  of a company applied to all its ships, whether or not in existence at the time of its creation.
The law in the United States developed along conceptually different lines.
For consumer sales, instead of hire-purchase there was the conditional sale.
Judges initially were not amenable and denied sellers certain rights both to repossession and to sue for the deficiency.
With time, however, ‘the judges put away their learning and went along with the expressed needs of commerce…the conditional vendor's right to be a chattel mortgagee, when it suited him, was almost everywhere acknowledged’.
In the commercial area, devices like the trust receipt and field warehousing fulfilled the need for security.
A third area where law has facilitated commercial activity is dispute settlement.
As Lord Devlin has put it: ‘An economic system which did not include as a part of itself, or at any rate as an adjunct to it, machinery for settling commercial differences in accordance with the ideas of commercial men would be bad for trade.’
Meeting the need is very much the rationale for the creation of the English commercial court, which has consciously tried to accommodate to the needs of the City of London, especially in international insurance and shipping.
Care, however, must be taken here: dispute settlement does not necessarily involve legal machinery.
Commercial arbitration, which is enforced only indirectly by the courts, has a long history.
Moreover, behaviour can be sanctioned in informal ways.
Indeed, it was informal sanctions which were relied on until very recently in policing fraudulent and undesirable practices in the City of London.
That has proved inadequate (if it ever was adequate) in a larger and heterogeneous City — as the Financial Services Act 1986 reminds us.
Take-overs are the last major area where City regulation survives.
So far I have suggested that law is facilitative of commercial activity.
This, as we have seen in several respects, is only part of the story.
There are many examples of an incongruence between legal doctrine and commercial activity.
These have been a matter of regret for many, including the commercially minded judge.
In 1931 Scrutton LJ said that, ‘in many commercial matters the English law and the practice of commercial men are getting wider apart’, and noted that as a result commercial business was leaving the courts for arbitration.
Karl Llewellyn spent a great part of his life  seeking to reconcile legal doctrine and commercial activity.
Of course it is not surprising that there is this incongruence.
Legal concepts are inconclusive, and so fail to draw distinctions vital in real life.
Llewellyn used the term ‘lump concepts’.
Contract is one such lump concept, since it fails to differentiate the archetypal bargain of the nineteenth century from the type of contracts which feature in modern business activity (for example, the long-term contract).
‘Buyer’ in sales is another, in not differentiating between industrial buyers, intermediary buyers (for example, dealers), and consumer buyers.
Concepts, too, are artificial, far removed from the real world.
The best example is the use of the concept ‘property’ in the English and Commonwealth law of sales.
It is a construct to answer the question of when risk passes.
Maybe it had some reality in sales transactions of other times, when buyers took goods away then and there or a day later.
It is not surprising that in modern times English and Commonwealth courts should try to avoid its worse consequences or, as one of Llewellyn's bêtes noire, that the Uniform Commercial Code should abandon it.
If there is an incongruence between law and commercial activity, how is it surmounted in practice?
One answer lies in the fact that law is not simply what is in the books, but is also the people who work it, the way it is implemented, and the reaction of those to whom it is addressed.
It is here that the notion of contract plays its vital role — not the doctrines of contract law, which in many respects are as arid and unsupportive of commercial activity as a dedicated anti-capitalist could imagine — rather, contract as practice, as putting into words what the parties can and must do, and if need be adjusting, or excluding, particular rules of law.
Thus, if the allocation of risks under the Sale of Goods Act is uncertain, the contract can provide for foreseeable contingencies.
Similarly, if the rule about strict performance in delivery is thought to be unjust, it is overcome by invoicing back.
And in areas such as modern international finance, it is the voluminous documentation which delineates the rights and obligations of the parties: apart from some very basic rules about contract, the law is produced by the lawyers, not the legislature or the courts.
A second reason why law can contribute to commercial activity, although  on the surface unhelpfully incongruent, is its flexibility.
Important legal concepts are pliable moulds, into which different creations can be poured.
Illustrations are the many uses to which the negotiable instrument has been put.
The simplest example is the bill of exchange drawn on the buyer to the order of the seller, which the latter can then discount.
At times, in the nineteenth century, it featured prominently in England in inland trade, between wholesalers and shopkeepers.
Now such sales are on open account and paid mainly by cheque.
In international trade, however, the bill of exchange still operates in this way.
Bills are drawn on buyers, or their bankers, and accepted on the handing over by the seller of the bill of lading covering the goods.
Negotiable instruments, however, have never been only trade-related.
In the 1920s, commercial bills, both international and domestic, were nearly as important an instrument of finance in England as bank advances.
In theory, issues of definitive debt instruments in the Euromarkets are negotiable instruments.
Thirdly there is the fact that in many respects law is not of great importance to business fortunes.
For instance, businesses are able to adjust to a particular regime of liability rules, whether these be liberal or strict.
The explanation seems to be that cost or potential cost of liability in ordinary circumstances is marginal; events such as the massive liability experienced by some Unites States corporations in asbestos claims is very much the exception.
In the usual event, where liability costs are marginal, the prime requirement would seem to be predictability, so that the business can plan, either by taking insurance or self-insuring.
The marginal nature of liability rules was brought home in a recent survey of investment-management firms in the City of London (the organizations which manage pension and insurance funds).
Respondents had sharply different views of what liability they were subject to and about the extent of their liability, and had varying arrangements to meet any perceived potential liability.
Another example of law not being especially important is that businesses avoid it altogether when commercial disputes arise.
Mice adjustment or other re-negotiated terms are the norm, and even if lawyers are consulted, matters will typically be settled rather than litigated.
Conclusion
The relationship between law and economic activity is a vast subject.
This paper has barely skimmed the surface.
It could be expanded to cover other examples, both within and across jurisdictions.
The role of the state has been omitted.
It acts, through law, in a manner which is of benefit to commercial activity.
Even regulation, which is usually thought of as con-straining, is often facilitative of commercial activity.
Yet if the subject is vast, it is not necessarily vastly important.
There are other factors which underpin economic activity in market societies.
Sombart's claim, that accountancy is one of the vital factors in the growth of Western capitalism, cannot be neglected.
Historians and others have written about the boost to economic activity from technology, religion, and the ideas of political economy.
But they have said little about law's part in the mosaic.
And they are unlikely to, because of their unfamiliarity with legal doctrine.
If the story is worth telling, it will need a commercial lawyer to tell it.
THE TRANSFORMATION TO A MARKET ECONOMY
Revival of Commercial Law in Hungary
GEORGE BARACS
The change from centrally planned to market economy requires, one may say as a condition precedent, proper legal framework.
Economic reform is indivisible.
Free markets in goods, labour, and money, denationalization and the reintroduction of private property must go hand in hand.
A prestigious Swiss economic quarterly tops the agenda with the requirement of reforming contract and commercial law, followed by tax and financial reform, privatization of enterprises, encouraging foreign investment, and the elimination of state monopolies and bureaucracy.
Recent changes in the law of Hungary may be briefly reviewed in this context.
The parliament dissolved in February 1990 passed a comprehensive Companies Act and an Act on Foreign Investments in 1988, and in 1989 an act on conversion of state enterprises and co-operatives into companies and also a statute reforming the land law in state and co-operative ownership.
In 1990 a central government agency was set up as an instrument of denationalization of state enterprises, and a statute was passed regulating the issue of securities to the public and setting up a new stock exchange.
The companies act and the act on the stock exchange are considered to be of primary importance for the creation of a free market economy.
The agency dealing with denationalization is also of great importance by giving statutory foundation for deducing title to those (foreigners and Hungarians alike) who seek to acquire state-owned assets.
These are the sources of law, except land law, to be briefly dealt with in this paper.
Land reform is one of the crucial (and most controversial) matters facing the newly elected Hungarian parliament and present law must be considered to be ephemeral.
It appears to be worthwhile to give some historical background to the  statutes to be considered.
Hungarian lawyers before the war were proud of the fact that Hungarian civil law was a non-codified body of law based on the ‘common custom of the realm’ and crystallized in decisions of the Curia and of the five appeal courts.
However, the country as part of the Austro-Hungarian Empire during the liberal period of the late nineteenth century belonged to the German orbit and consequently a body of commercial law (separate from general civil law) was implanted in the form of a Commercial Code (Statute 37 of 1875) following the principles of German commercial law.
The act created the concept of commercial contracts and of traders having a firm registered at the ‘Firm Registry’ and also dealt with partnerships, limited partnerships, joint-stock companies, and co-operatives (which were considered to be business enterprises).
In 1930 a separate act of parliament introduced companies with limited liabilities who were not allowed to issue shares (copying virtually the German GmbH, in Hungarian: Kft).
Some basic principles of the 1988 law followed the concepts of German company law.
There was, of course, little precedent on which the statute dealing with participation of non-residents in the Hungarian economy was based.
Exchange control was introduced in 1930 and has been in force ever since, but subject to the provisions of exchange control it was a basic tenet of pre-communist Hungarian law that foreigners had the same rights as Hungarians in all respects (but for some professions and performing public functions Hungarian citizenship was necessary).
It is obvious that a government agency for denationalization cannot pride itself of having any ‘historical background’, and whereas the pre-war Hungarian stock exchange followed the pattern of Vienna, Frankfurt, Berlin, and Paris, the new legislation tried to make use of all modern concepts (which is specifically true of laws against insider trading).
However, even in this context (in the same way as in the case of joint-stock companies) it must be borne in mind that a share certificate in Hungary (like in many continental countries) is not just a certificate of membership in a limited company but a marketable security, property which may be transferred in case of bearer shares by delivery and by endorsement in case of registered shares.
The Companies Act is divided into two main parts.
The first part contains provisions which apply to all forms of business organizations.
These are partnership, limited partnerships; an organization with corporate personality described as a business association' and a second one described as a mutual undertaking'; and private companies with limited liability (Kft) and joint-stock companies.
All companies have the capacity to acquire  rights and to enter into obligations, to own assets, to make contracts, to sue and be sued in their own name; and there is no ultra vires rule.
There is a register of firms and a register of companies.
The register itself is a specialized department of the companies court, which again is a section of the high court (organized separately in each county).
Limited and unlimited partnerships have no corporate personality but there is little practical consequence of the distinction between having or lacking corporate personality.
Co-operatives, however, are not dealt with by the Act because co-operatives are considered to be part of the socialist economy and rights of members constitute a peculiar socialist form of property.
Companies may be created by the state, by corporations, by companies without corporate personality, and by private individuals whether Hungarian citizens or not.
Non-residents (to be judged according to exchange-control regulations) may also create companies.
However, a controlling interest by a non-resident in any company requires consent to be given jointly by the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Trade.
It is, however, stated among the general provisions of the Act that non-residents have an indefeasible right (provided the assets are available) to transfer their share in the net profits and in case of liquidation their liquidation quota in the capital of the company in the same currency as their original investment.
Undertakings under the control of resident individuals without the participation of a corporation are not allowed to have more than 500 employees.
(Characteristically the restriction does not apply to companies controlled by non-residents.)
Naturally the creation of any company requires a written contract (in the case of a limited company: ‘statutes’) signed by all members and attested by a practising attorney.
Contributions by partners or participants may consist of cash or of contributions in kind.
The creation of any company must be reported to the Companies Court (registry) within thirty days, otherwise the creation is considered to be void.
Companies come into existence by registration with retrospective effect to the date of the contract.
Persons acting in the name of the company prior to its registration are jointly and severally liable.
Some provisions apply to all officers of companies (whether directors, managers, auditors, or members of a supervisory board) in regard to the duty of care, appointment, and cessation of their office.
The concept of deeds or documents under seal does not exist in Hungarian law.
Specimen signatures of those who are entitled to bind the firm or the company must be deposited with the Companies Registry (‘procura’).
All company resolutions are subject to scrutiny by the court.
Companies may cease to exist by effluxion of time, by appropriate resolution or by court order for dissolution of the company.
Claims against members (unless they are in any event protected by limited liability) become statute-barred after five years from the date when the company was struck off.
Detailed Provisions Relating to Individual Forms of Companies
The paper will deal with some distinguishing features only because of the obvious limitations of space and time.
PARTNERSHIPS
Partnership contracts must contain,inter alia , the individual financial or in specie contributions of the members.
Government agencies may also participate in partnerships.
Contributions become partnership property unless the contract provides otherwise, and any stipulation providing for interest or other financial benefit for a partner in consideration of his contribution is null and void.
Also null and void is any stipulation releasing a partner from playing an active role in running the business.
Liabilities must in the first instance be met from the partnership property.
If this is not sufficient the unlimited liability of the members is joint and several.
No prohibition or ‘clog or fetter’ may be imposed upon the right for any partner determining his membership by giving not less than three months' notice in writing.
A retiring partner will remain liable for such partnership liabilities as existed at his retirement for a term of five years.
On 1 January 1982 a Government Decree made it lawful for private trading by ‘collaboration of persons for economic purposes’, and indeed the 1988 Act itself calls unlimited partnerships where only individual persons participate the same name.
The foundation document was to be altered to comply with the requirements of the act relating to the creation of a partnership proper by 31 December 1989.
In the case where members of such type of partnership are solely and exclusively active and/ or retired employees of a corporation, the corporation may guarantee the liabilities of it and the partnership may be formed without any financial contribution by its members, and the members' liabilities are limited to their financial contribution (if any) plus their gross income during the calendar year in which the liability came into being.
Rules relating to limited partnerships are in line with the provisions of other similar legislations.
ASSOCIATIONS
In the context of the Act, an association is a company with corporate personality whose members are all corporations, and it is created for the purpose of ‘promoting harmony of conduct, profitability of the business  and trading interests of the members’.
An association is, in principle, non-profit making and its constitution must, of course, deal with the manner of conduct of the services and other activities and the members', participation and financial contribution and the distribution of any capital remaining in hand upon the dissolution of the association.
It is managed by a council of directors and each member must delegate one director.
The day-to-day management is in the hands of the managing director, and if the number of members or the importance of the functions of the association or its character justifies it, a supervisory board may be created.
COMMON OR MUTUAL UNDERTAKINGS
According to the ministerial reasons given to the Bill this feature is supposed to be a profit-making company with substantial own financial resources solely consisting of corporate members and governed by the council of directors.
The only principle of law (but not business practice) distinguishing this feature from any type of limited liability company is that the members are liable for the company's liabilities as guarantors if the company's own resources prove to be insufficient to meet the liability.
LIMITED-LIABILITY COMPANY PROHIBITED FORM ISSUING SHARES (GMBH-KFT)
This is a strictly private company in that the issue of a prospectus is prohibited and even a single individual may act as the ‘founder of the company’.
It is an important innovation in Hungarian law that a one-man company may be created, and according to the ministerial reasons it was introduced in order to allow the foundation of one-man companies by state enterprises so that they might have the advantage of carrying on trading with limited liability.
In Hungarian law, parent companies are liable for the indebtedness of their subsidiary as guarantors.
A Kft is however, an exception from this rule and in this sense a Kft is the only company with truly limited liability.
The interest of creditors and contractual partners is taken care of by the imposition of a statutory minimum of registered capital.
This is 1 million Hungarian forints (roughly equal to £8,000), and although the contribution of members may differ it may not be less than 100,000 forints each and the amount must be divisible by 10,000 forints .
At least 30 per cent of the registered capital or half-a-million forints (whichever is the greater) must be paid up simultaneously with the foundation of the company.
Every member has a business share and every business share may have several owners, but only one appointed co-owner must exercise membership rights on behalf of all of them.
The interest of the members in the company is freely transferable between the members, but in case of any intended sale to an outsider, first the other members (in proportion), secondly the company itself, and thirdly a person appointed by the members' meeting has a right of pre-emption.
Important matters exceeding the ambit of day-to-day business require a members' resolution, and all resolutions must be entered in a ‘Book of Resolutions’.
In case of a one-man company the founder exercises the rights of the members' meeting.
At least one manager must be appointed in the foundation document of the company itself.
The manager is responsible for keeping the books of account, keeping the Companies Registry up to date, and for the day-to-day conduct of the business of the company.
In the case of a one-man company an independent auditor must be appointed, and if the registered capital exceeds 20 million forints or the number of members exceeds twenty-five or the number of employees on the average exceeds 200, a supervisory board must also be created.
JOINT-STOCK COMPANIES
The minimum limit of the stock capital is 10 million Hungarian forints (about £70,000) and the shares must have a face value representing 10,000 forints or its multiple.
The shares are either bearer shares or registered shares.
Non-residents may only hold registered shares.
Preference shares may be issued up to one half of the registered capital.
The statutes may provide that a separate category of shares may, after the expiration of a fixed term, become vested in a foundation or a non-profit making entity and separate rules apply to such shares if they are designed to benefit the employees of the company.
Shares up to 10 per cent of the stock capital may be issued bearing interest at a predetermined rate and the holder of such share may exercise all shareholders' rights, including the right to receive dividends.
Convertible or non-convertible bonds up to the value of half of the stock capital may be issued.
The company may purchase its own shares up to the value of one-third of the stock capital.
These shares may then be cancelled unless they are resold within three years from their acquisition.
A prospectus must be issued by one or more promoters.
If at least one of the promoters is a corporation then the promoters may proceed with the formation by subscribing all the shares between themselves.
If the prospectus is issued to the public a foundation meeting must be held within sixty days from the last date for subscription.
Voting rights generally follow the nominal value of the shares but the statutes may limit the number of votes exercisable by any one shareholder.
Conversely, the statutes may provide that a government agency or a financial institution holding not less than 30 per cent of the registered capital may exercise voting rights of 51 per cent of the shareholders.
The board of  directors consists of at least three but not more than eleven members.
An independent auditor and a supervisory board of not less than three members must be appointed and if the company employs (in the average) more than 200 persons then one-third of the members of the supervisory board must be appointed by the employees.
Provided all the shares are owned by a government agency or by a financial institution, a joint-stock company may become a one-man company, but if it becomes insolvent the sole shareholder is liable for all the company's indebtedness.
A joint-stock company may participate in other limited companies, and interests acquired in each other may either amount to a share with no significant consequence in the equity; or a ‘substantial interest’(namely more than one quarter of the registered capital) or may be a controlling interest, or two companies may acquire a mutual interest in each other 's equity.
If a company intends to acquire a controlling interest in another joint-stock company, the first must give advance notice in writing to the second.
The notice must also be advertised in the Gazette, and no shares may be acquired by the offeror company prior to thirty days from the publication of the notice.
The subsidiary company is not allowed to acquire shares in the holding company and no person may be a member of the board of directors of both companies.
No company which is fully owned by non-residents or which is controlled by non-residents is allowed to acquire a controlling interest in any other joint stock company.
The Act 24 of 1988 on Foreign Participation in Hungarian joint Ventures
This guarantees first of all full compensation in the original currency of the investment in case of any expropriatory measures and the Hungarian National Bank acts as guarantor.
No licence for setting up a joint-venture company is required unless the company will be controlled by non-residents.
The licence is given jointly by the Minister of Finance and the Minister of Trade, and unless the licence is refused within ninety days it is deemed to have been given.
The foreign investor may participate by furnishing cash or any other tangible or non-tangible asset.
Joint-venture companies must pay corporation tax.
The basic rate is 40 per cent, of the net profits.
The profits in excess of 3 million Hungarian forints in any one current year carry a corporation tax of 50 per cent.
However, in case of foreign participation in excess of 20 per cent of the equity or 5 million forints the assessment is reduced by 20 per cent, but if more than half of the income is derived from manufacturing goods or carrying on the business of a hotel, and the stock capital exceeds 25 million forints and the foreign participation exceeds 30 per cent , then during the  first five years the tax is reduced by 60 per cent and thereafter by 40 per cent .
This may increase in case of ventures particularly important for the Hungarian economy to total exemption from tax.
Joint-venture companies are specifically entitled to acquire land necessary for their own business.
Dividends due to the non-resident, and in case of liquidation its distributable share in the equity are transferable in the original currency of investment.
The Act also provides the setting up of duty-free zones and perhaps for our present purpose it is sufficient to say that companies established in a duty-free zone are treated in every way as if they were established outside of the borders of the Hungarian Republic.
Act 13 of 1989 Regarding the conversion of Enterprises and Companies
The purpose of this Act is to set up a legal framework for the conversion of units of the planned economy into companies and a conversion of one company into another form of company and mergers between such companies.
Units of the centrally planned national economy existed in many forms as they were set up by ministries, ‘centres of production’, and directorates of production and were managed either on the basis of the responsibility of a single individual, namely a state-appointed director, or (particularly from and after the 1956 Revolution) by workers' councils or a council of deputies elected by the whole work-force of the enterprise.
The confusion existing in 1989 is well demonstrated by the provision that the Act applies to: ‘state enterprises, other economic organs owned by the state, enterprises belonging to corporate bodies, to subsidiary enterprises, to co-operatives, artisans.’
A company created by conversion is the general successor in title of the previous economic unit.
Existing claims against the unit shall not by the process of conversion automatically become due.
State enterprises may be converted into limited-liability companies or joint-stock companies, but financial institutions or saving co-operatives may only be converted into joint-stock companies.
The detailed procedural rules (including how closing and opening balance sheets must be established) control as to what part of the assets may be sold or distributed go far beyond the scope of this paper.
The third main chapter of the Act which deals with the conversion of existing companies inter se is a natural extension of the Companies Act.
In case of the conversion of a partnership into a Kft, the Act provides that the unanimous decision of the members is required and they remain jointly and severally liable for five years for the existing indebtedness of the  partnership.
If a joint-stock company is to be converted into a Kft, first all bearer shares must be converted into registered shares.
The registered capital of the Kft may not be less than the whole issued capital of the company under conversion and simultaneously with the registration of the new Kft all shares must be cancelled.
In the case of a conversion of a limited-liability company or of a joint-stock company into a partnership, the above-mentioned rules apply mutatis mutandis .
Mergers between existing companies under the Act are possible between companies of the same type (partnership with a limited partnership, Kft with Kft,), and a Kft may merge with a joint-stock  company .
The amalgamation between two companies may take the form of merger proper (when both companies cease to exist) and the new company becomes the general successor in title of the two companies so merged, or it may take the form of a take-over when only the company so taken over ceases to exist.
The Act contains detailed provisions of the minimum content of the contract of amalgamation.
Resolutions in general meeting (or partnership meeting) of both companies is, of course, a condition precedent and minority members or shareholders must be paid off respectively, their shares purchased and cancelled.
All members of both companies must be com-prehensively informed of all relevant particulars of the other company.
The respective resolutions for amalgamation must be published in the Gazette.
The Statute Setting up the State Asset Agency
This Act gives the legal framework for ‘reducing of the function of the state as owner of the means of production’.
The agency has corporate personality and it works under the supervision of parliament.
It exercises the right of the state as owner in respect of the assets coming under its control.
The cost of its operation is part of the budget and the state assets under the agency's control must not be utilized for the purposes of the
The governing body of the agency is the board of directors consisting of eleven members, all appointed by parliament, but five of them are appointed pursuant to the recommendation of the following bodies, namely: the organizations dealing with the environment, one by the trade unions, one by the employers' organization, one by Social Security, and one by the various organizations presently dealing with state assets.
Parliament also appoints a managing director for five years, and neither the managing director nor any other member of the executive of the organization is allowed to be engaged in business or become a member of the board of directors of any company.
The statute only vests in the agency (with some exceptions) the state-owned assets of such former state enterprises which have already been converted into companies; further, such part of the equity of other companies which was vested in the state before coming into force of the statute of conversion and which are still in state ownership; finally, assets remaining in state ownership after the liquidation of state enterprises and any other assets which are from time to time vested in the agency by separate legislation or a resolution of parliament.
The assets of enterprises created by and working under the supervision of local authorities, as well as all other state-owned assets (for example, shares in the Hungarian National Bank), are reserved for separate legislation.
The agency must first of all set up an inventory of the assets under its control and it disposes of either the management or of the ownership of the assets vested in it.
An important further function of the agency is supervision of the conversion of state enterprises into limited companies.
Both in case of a straightforward sale as well as in case of delegating the management of state assets, the choice of purchaser or manager must be by tender, which is public unless the board of directors of the agency restricts the tenders of those specifically invited to submit offers.
In case of public tender, the invitation must be published in at least two daily newspapers with national circulation.
Expert opinion of independent official valuers must be obtained for ascertaining the value of the asset in question.
If the management of a state asset is delegated to a private manager, a contract between the state agency and the manager must be entered into, the contents of which may be freely negotiated except that the term may not exceed ten years.
The performance of the duties of the manager must be secured by hypothec, guarantee, deposit, and so on.
The agency functions under the supervision of the state auditing board and must submit its audited report to parliament from year to year.
It must also make a submission to parliament containing proposals relating to the policy to be followed next year in respect of the dealing with the state assets.
Act 6 of 1990 Regarding the Creation of a Stock Exchange and on Dealing with Securities
According to the preamble of the Act, it has become clear that the setting up of a stock exchange was necessary for ‘enhancing the flow of capital and for the creation of a market in securities’, and last but not least for the purpose of protecting the interests of investors.
The Act creates a Supervisory Authority, and sets out the provisions for setting up a stock exchange and for the public dealing with securities.
The Act applies to  bonds (unless the dealing with them is restricted), shares (which, as mentioned before, are marketable securities under Hungarian law), and any other securities which may be issued in series and in which the rights of the holder are crystallized.
The Act specifically excludes from its ambience cheques, safe-deposit books, membership certificates of co-operatives, and bills of exchange.
The Supervisory Authority exercises its supervision not only over the operation of the stock exchange but also over all public buying and selling of securities.
No appeal lies against decisions of the Supervisory Authority and its decisions may only be scrutinized in the ordinary course of justice if they relate to the suspension of quotation of securities at the stock exchange.
The Authority itself is supervised by the Minister of Finance.
Its director is appointed by the Council of Ministers.
Its terms of operation are issued by the Minister of Finance.
The issue of a prospectus requires approval of the Authority.
The persons who wish to issue a prospectus must make their submissions to the Authority on the basis of uberrimae fidei .
Dealers in securities require a trading licence from the Authority.
Traders may be companies with limited liability or joint-stock companies with registered shares only whose issued capital is not less than 50 million forints and whose sole object is the dealing in securities.
They must satisfy the Authority that they have all technical equipment to do their job efficiently and that their manager has the necessary professional quali-fications.
Brokers need to satisfy the Authority in a similar fashion except that their issued capital may not be less than 5 million forints in case of a Kft and 10 million forints in the case of a joint-stock company.
No trading licence may be issued to any company which has directly or indirectly interest in an already-existing security trading company exceeding 10 per cent(provided the direct participation is not less than 5 per cent ).
No existing trading company may acquire an interest exceeding 10 per cent in another security trading company.
No security dealer may deal in securities where it acted as an issuing house or in securities issued by itself, or in securities issued by another company where the trader holds an equity interest in excess of 10 per cent.
International trading in securities, that is, trading abroad in securities issued in Hungary or trading in Hungary in securities issued abroad requires a joint licence of the Hungarian National Bank and the Authority.
The Authority also supervises the working of the stock exchanges.
It may issue the licence for the operation of the stock exchange, it may suspend its functioning, it may impose penalties, may suspend the dealing in certain securities, and may commence proceedings in cases of insider dealing.
Except treasury bonds, no bonds may be publicly bought and sold unless  the issuer has been in business for over a year, the prospectus has been appropriately published and the issue is gone through an issuing house, and the prospectus has been approved by the Authority.
The Act contains detailed rules regarding the minimum content of a prospectus (whether it relates to bonds or shares and whether it is issued in connection with a new joint-stock company or an increase of the stock capital of an existing one).
A separate chapter contains provisions regulating the dealings themselves and the content of the bought notes of securities.
A separate, quite voluminous, chapter of the Act deals with the organization of the stock exchange, which is defined as a corporate self-governing body, whose members must be limited companies holding a licence for dealing in securities.
There must be at least fifteen founder members who must inter se put up at least 150 million forints , and the statutes of the exchange must be approved by the Minister of Finance.
The stock exchange functions also as a clearing house in respect of the dealings between the members.
The chief organ of the exchange is the general meeting of its members which must be held at least once every calendar year.
A member who made less than 10 per cent of the average number of dealings in the year immediately preceding the general meeting may not exercise his voting right.
The general meeting elects the council of the exchange, a supervisory board, a board dealing with ethical questions, and also appoints the officers of the exchange.
The Council consists of at least five and not more than thirteen members or one-third of the number of members, whichever is less.
The supervisory board consists of not less than five individuals and its members may take part in the deliberations of the general meeting but have no voting rights.
The ethical committee also consists of at least five individual members, and deals with questions of ethics which may arise in connection with the dealing on the exchange.
The day-to-day administration is the task of the secretariat of the stock exchange.
It is headed by a managing director.
Members of the arbitration court organized for the stock exchange are appointed by the general meeting for a fixed term.
Disputes between dealers and between dealers and issuing houses fall under the competence of the arbitration court, who may requisition the ordinary courts for the purpose of taking evidence or in connection with enforcing the awards made by the arbitration court.
Insider dealings are prohibited, and those who commit such dealings are liable to prosecution in the criminal court with a maximum penalty of two years' imprisonment.
There are detailed rules as to who are insiders and which dealing is deemed to be an insider dealing without the necessity of close personal connection between the parties of the dealing.
The interests of investors are also protected by the duty of the issuer of the prospectus for publishing and advertising corrections which indicate the diminution of the value of the security to which the prospectus relates.
Subscribing investors may under certain circumstances refuse to complete the deal or alternatively the issuing house must repay the investor's money within fifteen days.
The Supervisory Authority and the state prosecutor's office may institute proceedings before the ordinary courts of justice for a declaration that an insider dealing or a misleading prospectus and dealings made thereunder are null and void.
Conclusions
Credit should be given where credit is due.
It must not be forgotten that all the above Acts were passed by a parliament which was elected in ‘The peoples Republic’ with an overwhelming Communist party majority.
One may venture to make the proposition that the roots go back to the short-lived but glorious revolution of October 1956.
In addition, since 1968, the Hungarian economy has become more and more consumer-orientated, although it remained (at least in principle) centrally planned.
One may say that socialist market economy is a contradiction in terms.
Still, to some extent, every modern economy, at least so far as ownership of some means of production or municipal enterprises or financial institutions are concerned, is a mixed economy.
A good example that pre-ponderance of state monopoly did not completely suppress any form of competition is a provision of the Hungarian Civil Code (S. 4(2)) prohibiting ‘unfair economic activities, in particular abuse of superior economic power, the misleading of consumers or imposing unfair prices’.
Act 4 of 1984 contained detailed provisions of unfair competition and was re-enacted by statute 86 of 1990 prohibiting ‘unfair conduct on the market’ and setting up a virtual equivalent of a monopolies and mergers commission.
Apparently the dualistic phenomenon of a body of commercial law separate from civil law need not be reinstated.
The Civil Code is retained as a source of law, the provisions of which apply where an individual piece of legislation is silent.
Hungarian legislation appears to serve well the country's conversion to a free market economy.
A spate of laws (detailed analysis of which would far exceed the limits of this article) passed in 1990 helped the country's emergence from the straightjacket of centralist monopolies.
Comprehensive statutes deal with the direct and indirect taxation of individuals and companies.
Taxes are high but not crippling (income tax  in six ranges increases from 12 per cent to 50 per cent, and corporation tax is set at 40 per cent of the profits but mitigated by many concessions).
Matters of turn-over tax and customs and excise were dealt with by comprehensive pieces of legislation.
Apart from some smallholdings and, quite exceptionally, middle-sized farms, no re-privatization is envisaged.
The privatization of state assets is channelled into a gradual process trying to attract foreign investment but slow in helping the emergence of a new middle-class of small entre-preneurs.
Prices and foreign trade are liberalized, always with the proviso that the relevant minister may impose exceptions in the interest of national economy or emergencies.
One must hope that the several ‘Quangos’ recently set up will help decentralization and will not increase the still-large army of civil servants.
It is submitted that the legislation in Hungary performs the role of midwife in the throes of the emergence of commerce, markets, and business with a commendable degree of success.
It is true that on the embryonic Budapest Stock Exchange only 10 (ten!) shares were quoted on May 1991, and the number of deals on the day were only 280.
It is also true, however, that the quota of imported consumer goods increased from 1989 to 1990 from US$200 million to US$630 million.
Exports to western countries increased from US$ 6.1 billion to nearly US$7.3 billion; the number of joint ventures from 1972 to 1989 was (in round figures) 1,000, whereas in 1990 alone the number of new joint ventures reached 4,000 perhaps with the help of a revival of commercial law the ‘tortuous and costly road of socialism which leads from capitalism to capitalism’ is made smoother and swifter.