

HM FORCES LETTER RATES
Letter Rates From 16th September 1991
INTRODUCTION
This leaflet contains details of letter postage rates for HM Forces effective from 16th September 1991.
Letters to and from members of HM Forces are charged at the concessionary postage rates contained in this leaflet.
In areas where BFPOs do not operate and special arrangements are not in force, concessionary rates to the UK do not apply.
Members of HM Forces posting mail outside the UK, where BSPOs are not operating, must pay full civilian postage rates.
Details of postage rates for parcels to HM Forces can be found in a separate leaflet.
Postal services to HM Forces based in Great Britain, the Channel Islands and the Isle of Man, are those of the normal inland post.
CUSTOMS
All items of letter mail containing goods and dutiable items must bear a customs form as follows:
Letter packets, Small Packets and Printed Papers with contents valued up to £270: Green customs label — CI.
Letter packets, Small Packets and Printed Papers with contents valued over £270: Top portion of green label CI together with a non-adhesive customs declaration form, C2/CP3 (PP70), plus an accompanying despatch note CP2 should be completed.
GENERAL NOTES
HM Forces addresses which include a BFPO number and HM Ships
Postage service to the Royal Navy, Army and Royal Air Force are charged at the concessionary postage rates contained in this leaflet.
HM Forces addresses which do not include a BFPO number
All members of HM Forces stationed overseas at a non-BFPO address may receive mail posted in UK at concessionary rates of postage providing it is clearly addressed to a military type address or diplomatic post.
All items must be clearly marked ‘Forces Mail’ in the top left hand corner.
The concessionary rates do not apply from overseas to UK.
HM Forces families overseas
Letters and packets may be sent to dependants of HM Forces at both BFPO and non-BFPO addresses at the same rates and conditions applicable to members of HM Forces provided they are clearly addressed c/o the serving relative at his military/diplomatic address.
Commonwealth Forces to Homeland
Commonwealth Forces (with the exception of Australian Forces) serving in the United Kingdom o r overseas with British military formations at BRPO numbered addresses are entitled to HM Forces concessionary rates of postage.
All items must be clearly marked ‘Commonwealth Forces to Homeland’.
They must also bear the sender's rank, name, Unit and where possible, the Unit stamp.
This regulation does not apply to Australian Forces who must pay full civilian rates of postage.
Mail addressed to Canadian and US Forces
Mail for Canadian and US Forces should be pre-paid at the HM Forces concessionary rates provided it is addressed to:
Letter mail to Canadian and US Forces not covered by either of the addresses shown above should be pre-paid at the full civilian postage rates appropriate to the country of destination.
Redirection
Letters and packets for personnel of HM Forces are exempt from additional postal charges for redirection when sent to a BFPO overseas.
LETTER SERVICES
Including Printed Papers, Small Packets, Newspapers and Periodicals
Size limits
Letter post items must not exceed 610mm in length by 460mm in width.
If made up in the form of a roll: 1040mm for the length and twice the diameter combined, and 900mm for the greater dimension.
Weight limits
Air Letters to Europe: 2kg
Air Letters outside Europe: 2kg
Air Printed Papers, Small Packets and Newspapers and Periodicals outside Europe: 1kg
Surface Small Packets, Printed Papers, Newspapers and Periodicals outside Europe: 1kg
There is a weight limit of 750g for surface letters outside Europe.
There is no Surface letters facility for letters to Europe.
Instead European Airmail rates apply.
See page 5.
Aerogrammes
The Forces Aerogramme which is available at all post offices may be sent to and from HM Forces worldwide.
A special concession paid for by the Ministry of Defence allows for Aerogrammes to and from HM Forces based in BFPOs 801 to 825, BFPO 655 and HM Ships operating in the seas around the Falkland Islands to be sent without pre-payment of postage.
The MOD from time to time may authorise the extension of this service to other BFPO addresses.
These free items must be endorsed ‘HM Forces Northern Ireland’ or ‘HM Forces South Atlantic’.
Enclosures are not permitted in any forces Aerogrammes.
All other types of mail to and from HM Forces in Northern Ireland and South Atlantic must bear postage at the HM Forces concessionary rates.
Prohibitions and HM Customs
HM Customs pay particular attention to all HM Forces mail arriving or departing the UK.
It is important that Customs declaration forms are correct and fully completed.
Local Customs authorities at overseas bases also have the right to examine and raise charges on mail addressed to HM Forces.
Packaging and Addressing
The make-up, addressing and packaging of items addressed to HM Forces is important.
The edges of large letters and packages should be sealed with good quality adhesive tape, but remember, Printed Papers, and Newspapers and Periodicals must not be sealed.
The BFPO form of address is sufficient, for example:
The country of destination is not required for BFPO address and the addition, for example, of Germany delays the item.
FORCES MAIL RATES TO EUROPE (incl BFPO 655)
Letters, Newspapers and Periodicals, Printed Papers and Small Packets
There is only one class of mail available for letters to and from Europe.
The rates charged are the same as first class inland rates (except that letters up to the first weight step sent at the Forces surface letter rate will be accepted at BFPO address in Europe).
FORCES MAIL RATES OUTSIDE EUROPE
Please use Airmail labels or write ‘Par Avion — By Airmail’ in top left hand corner.
Letters
Not over 40g: 24p.
Each additional 10g or part thereof: 11p.
Small Packets, Printed Papers, Newspapers and Periodicals
Not over 40g: 24p.
Each additional 10g or part thereof: 5p.
SURFACE MAIL RATES
Surface letter mail including Small Packets, Printed Papers, Postcards, Newspapers and Periodicals.
(No service to Europe.)
Letters
Postcards:
18p each.
Small Packets, Printed Papers, Newspapers and Periodicals
HM SHIPS OUTSIDE HOME WATERS
Including BFPO 655.
Letters, Postcards, Small Packets, Printed Papers, Newspapers and Periodicals should be pre-paid at the European Forces mail rate.
LETTER COMPENSATION SERVICES
Ordinary letters: all addresses
The ordinary letter services are not designed as compensation services, but compensation up to a maximum limit of £24 may be paid where it can be shown that a letter was damaged or lost while in our custody.
You are advised to obtain a Certificate of Posting, which must be produced in the event of loss.
Recorded delivery
Fee payable in addition to postage: 30p.
This service is limited to BFPO numbered addresses.
Advice of delivery is not available.
Maximum compensation £24.
Registration
To and from BFPO numbered addresses and HM Ships in home waters.
Letter items only.
Fee payable in addition to postage £1.90.
Advice of delivery is not available.
Maximum compensation £950.
To Forces addresses without a BFPO number.
Letter items only.
Fee payable in addition to postage £1.90.
Advice of delivery is not available.
Maximum compensation £24.
(This is limited by international postal regulations.)
Claims for loss or damage or subject to market value.
Sending Valuables
The ordinary letter and recorded delivery services are not suitable for sending money or valuables through the post.
The leaflet ‘How to send things you value through the post’ gives further advice on which service to use and is available at post offices.
Although correct at the date this leaflet went to print, postal fees, charges, compensation and other conditions are subject to revision from time to time, and services may be added to or withdrawn.
Up-to-date information may be obtained from any post office.
ROYAL MAIL INTERNATIONAL
Pre-paid Services
The convenient way to keep in touch with the folks abroad.
NEW Airpacks
The perfect solution for sending gifts and packages up to ½ kg (excluding the weight of the Airpack itself), Airpacks are sturdy, attractive, convenient and offer excellent value.
Airpacks receive speedy Airmail service and there's no need for wrapping, stamps, weighing or stickers — they're all included in the pre-paid cost of £2.49 for Europe, £4.99 to all other destinations.
They are available now at your post office.
Pictorial Aerogrammes
From inspiring gardens to tranquil rivers, imposing mountains to historic landmarks, Royal Mail International Pictorial Aerogrammes make writing abroad more special than ever.
There are six beautifully illustrated Pictorial Aerogrammes in the range, each capturing a different aspect of Britain at its best.
Available from your post office at just £2.99 for a pack of six, you'll find them as convenient to use as normal Aerogrammes.
Aerogrammes
At just 34p to all international destinations Aerogrammes are great value for money, and the easiest way to get your message across.
Convenient for regular letter writers, they're an all in one stationery and envelope with pre-paid postage.
You can purchase them as a pack of six for only £1.90 at your post office.
Swiftpacks
Swiftpacks are a more convenient way of using the Swiftair service.
Completely pre-paid Express envelopes for up to 150g, depending on the size of the Swiftpack, they come in three sizes and can be sent anywhere in the world from only £2.35.
Swiftpacks are available singly at your post office.
Pre-paid for extra convenience
Royal Mail International Pre-paid Services really do make it easy to keep in touch with your friends and relatives abroad.
You'll discover an extensive range of products available at your post office which don't require stickers, wrapping or stamps — they're all included in the price.
From simple letters through to sending gifts and packets, Royal Mail International provide the pre-paid service to suit your needs.
Airpacks
The easy way to send gifts abroad.
Pictorial Aerogrammes
The attractive way to write abroad.
Aerogrammes
The convenient way to write abroad.
Swiftpacks
The express way to mail abroad.
ROYAL MAIL INTERNATIONAL
International prices and services
From 16th September 1991
Mailing abroad the easy way
THE BEST SERVICE FOR YOU
Whatever you're sending abroad, wherever you're sending it, Royal Mail International can provide the service to suit almost all of your requirements.
From Express Airmail services through to Surface Mail, there are a variety of means to get your message abroad.
This leaflet has been specifically designed to help you get the best from Royal Mail International.
You will find details of all our services for the public and an easy to follow guide to help you get the postage right.
What are you sending?
The ideal Royal Mail International service for your personal requirements depends upon what exactly you are sending and how urgent it is.
From Letters to Small Packets or Printed Papers, you will find the best service for your international mail in the next few pages.
Don't guess it, check it
The easy to follow tariff chart at the back of this leaflet will help ensure that your international mail carries the correct postage.
If you have any doubts about postage rates, then please ask the counter staff at your post office, who will be pleased to help.
Dangerous items and substances
Royal Mail International services, whether surface or air, must not be used for the transmission of dangerous substances such as aerosols, lighters etc.
To determine what may be dangerous, the international postal services has adopted IATA regulations.
For full details please ask a post office to see the ‘Royal Mail International Service Guide’.
AIRMAIL
The Airmail services are the speedy, cost-effective way of keeping in touch with everyone abroad.
There are Airmail services for Letters, Small Packets and Printed Papers.
In fact, you can send virtually anything by Airmail.
Delivery for items is usually 3–4 days to cities in Europe, and between 4 and 7 days to destinations Outside of Europe.
Whatever you are sending by Airmail you should always use an Airmail label or write ‘Par Avion — By Airmail’ in the top left hand corner.
SWIFTAIR EXPRESS AIRMAIL
Swiftair is an Express Airmail Service for important letters and documents and is available to any worldwide destination.
Swiftair items receive priority treatment and separate sorting in this country and in over 140 countries worldwide.
Swiftair provides an effective, economical express service and is available at post offices.
£1.95 plus airmail postage.
LETTERS
With a weight limit of 2 kg, the letter service is ideal for standard needs such as postcards, taped messages, and, of course, letters themselves.
Large or bulky items should be marked ‘Letter’ on the outside.
Please note that Cambodia only accepts letters to 1 kg.
SMALL PACKETS
This is the way to send gifts or goods up to 2kg all over the world.
You should always mark ‘Small Packet’ on the outside.
Packages can be sealed and can contain personal correspondence if it relates to the contents of the package.
Fully completed Customs declarations must be attached.
Please note that Italy only accepts small packets up to 1kg, Australia, Cuba, Myanmar and Papua New Guinea up to 500 g.
PRINTED PAPERS
For printed items such as books, newspapers and pamphlets the Printed Paper Service is ideal.
Do not seal packages but use string or plastic tags to allow Customs examination and mark the package ‘Printed Papers’ on the outside.
Printed Paper items must not contain personal correspondence or tapes.
Weight limits are normally 2 kg although packages containing certain books of tapes may weight up to 5 kg.
See the Royal Mail International Service Guide for full details.
There is also a special Newspaper and Periodical rate for Zone 1 destinations.
Newspapers and Periodicals to Zone 2 go at Printed Paper rates.
POSTCARDS
The Airmail postage for postcards is 24p to EC countries, 28p to non EC European countries and 33p to all destinations Outside of Europe.
SURFACE MAIL
Letters, Small Packets and Printed Papers can also be sent Surface Mail.
This is a more economical service than Airmail but delivery time is longer — normally within 2 weeks in Europe and up to 12 weeks outside of Europe.
Consult the chart for price details.
Please note that there is no Surface Mail to Chad and that there is no Surface letter service to Europe.
EASY WAYS TO SEND MAIL ABROAD
Royal Mail International offers a range of pre-paid products and services to suit your international mailing needs.
They are all available at your post office.
Aerogrammes.
Convenient for regular letter writers, they are an all in one stationery and envelope with pre-paid postage.
Just 34p to all destinations, you can purchase them as a pack of six for £1.90.
Pictorial Aerogrammes.
At £2.99 for a pack of six, Pictorial Aerogrammes make writing abroad more special than ever.
Each one is beautifully illustrated with a different theme, capturing a variety of aspects of Britain at its best.
Swiftpacks.
Swiftpacks are a more convenient way of using the Swiftair service.
Completely pre-paid for up to 150g, depending on the size of the Swiftpack, they come in three sizes and can be sent anywhere in the world from only £2.35.
NEW Airpacks.
Sturdy, attractive and convenient, Airpacks are ideal for sending gifts and packages up to ½ kg (excluding the weight of the Airpack itself).
They receive speedy Airmail service and there's no need for wrapping, stamps, weighing or Customs stickers — they're all included in the pre-paid cost of £2.49 to Europe, £4.99 to all other destinations.
DON'T PAY TOO LITTLE
To avoid underpaying on your international mail, causing delay and an excess charge, the motto is ‘don't guess it, check it’.
The chart at the back of this leaflet tells you all you need to know, but if you are in doubt, simply ask for assistance at your local post office.
CUSTOMS AND VAT
Packets (both Letter and Small Packet services) are liable to Customs examination and must be declared to Customs authorities on special forms.
These, and further information, can be obtained from your post office or by phone from one of our Customer Care Centres.
Royal Mail International services must not be used for sending dangerous goods such as aerosols, lighters etc.
If in doubt check with your post office.
CUSTOMER CARE
There are Royal Mail Customer Care Centres located nationally; please consult your local Phone Book or Yellow Pages.
Alternatively you can call the Royal Mail International Helpline on 0345 585820 for further information about our services.
LABELLING
Whatever you are sending it should always be clearly marked on the outside.
For instance, ‘Printed Paper’, ‘Newspaper’, ‘Small Packet’ etc, and marked ‘Par Avion — By Airmail’at the top left hand corner where appropriate.
PACKING
Most items can be sent in sealed envelopes or packages, but if you are using the Printed Papers service please remember that the packaging needs to be easy to open for Customs examination and to be able to be repacked without additional packaging — the best solution is to use string or plastic tags.
ADDITIONAL SERVICES
International Registration
Similar to the Inland Recorded Delivery service,but for items of little or no monetary value , with compensation for loss or damage of £24. £1.90 plus postage.
Insurance
For mailing high value items, cover up to £1500.
The International Registration Service is not appropriate for items of value .
Insurance fees, in addition to postage are as follows:
Insurance is not available to all countries.
Please check at your post office.
Advice of Delivery
For registered and insured items, 35p.
Special Services for the Visually Handicapped
Surface Mail
Free postage up to 7kg to all countries.
Compensation
For ordinary letters damaged or lost in our custody to a maximum of £24.
Registration £24 max.
HOW TO WORK OUT THE COST
By following these simple instructions, you can be certain that your mail carries the correct postage.
Firstly, select your destination — either European or Outside of Europe.
If it is a destination Outside of Europe then check to see if it is in Zone 1 or 2.
Secondly, check what you are sending.
Is it a Letter, Small Packet, Printed Material and so on.
Thirdly, check the weight of the item you are sending.
Finally, follow the figures across to determine the exact cost.
For example, when sending a letter to Japan, the Zone is Zone 2, the weight is 30g and the cost therefore is £0.99.
Please complete these details and keep for a handy reference.
EXCLUSIVE SCALES OFFER
Now you can save time and money by weighing your letters at home with this traditional letter scale set.
It's yours for just £13.99 (including postage and packing), is accurate to approximately 2–3 g and provides a quick and easy guide for weighing letters up to 100 g.
To obtain your set, send a cheque or postal order for £13.99 payable to Royal Mail International together with your name and address to:
Please allow 28 days for delivery.
Offer expires 30th November 1991 or until stocks last.
ROYAL MAIL STAMPS
For extra convenience we are pleased to announce our new International Stamp Book which has 4 × 39p stamps with Airmail labels for sending 10g letters anywhere Outside of Europe.
This complements the current International Postcard Stamp Book.
Both are available now.
Royal Mail PARCEL FORCE
CODE OF PRACTICE
INSURANCE SERVICES AND ADVICE
At your service
Royal Mail PARCEL FORCE
AT YOUR SERVICE
The Post Office is split into three separate businesses:
Royal Mail
Royal Mail Parcelforce
Post Office Counters
However, they are all related, helping us to give you a higher standard of service.
This booklet contains the Parcelforce Code of Practice, and also give information about the insurance services that Parcelforce offers, for when you need to send something valuable.
It gives only brief descriptions of the basic services as there is more information in the following booklets:
Your Guide to sending parcels in the UK by Parcelforce
Your Guide to sending Express Delivery in the UK by Datapost
Your Guide to Sending International Standard and Economy Parcels
which you can obtain at post office counters.
CODE OF PRACTICE
At Parcelforce, we aim to give you the best possible service and to be fair in all our dealings with you.
However, with a business operation the size of ours,(we handle nearly 1m parcels every working day) it is possible that things will occasionally go wrong.
If they do, it is important to you and us that matters are put right quickly, courteously and effectively.
This booklet is designed to point you in the right direction if you have a problem or complaint and explain when you might be entitled to compensation.
It has been produced with the help of the Post Office Users' National Council (POUNC) and the Office of Fair Trading (OFT).
Our standards of service are rigorously monitored to ensure that performance is maintained at a consistently high level, and we also aim to take good care of your parcels.
We also monitor the way this code works, and regularly consult with the Post Office Users' National Council, whose views are taken into account in representing your interests.
Our performance is reported every year in The Post Office's Report and Accounts, which you can obtain from HMSO, and which gives detailed statistics.
Where to go for help
To help you make the best use of our services, we have a network of Customer Care Units who will be pleased to give you advice or help, and also handle any complaints you may have.
We also have the  Parcelforce National Enquiry Centre, available free of charge on 0800 22 44 66 which is open 08.30–17.30 each working day and can help with all general enquiries and give up to the minute service information.
You will find these useful addresses on page 15.
COMPENSATION & INSURANCE
Basic Compensation
There is no contract between you and the Post office.
The Post Office is legally liable in certain circumstances and within certain limits, for most things that are lost or damaged in the inland post.
To obtain evidence that you posted an item we strongly advise you to ask for a certificate of posting when you hand in a parcel at a post office counter.
This is free; just request a certificate at the counter.
If you do not obtain a certificate of posting we are not legally liable to pay compensation, after all we have no other way of knowing if the item was even despatched.
(There is anyway, no legal liability in the International Economy Service).
The compensation we will pay is the market value of the item up to the maximum Code of Practice Compensation limit applicable at the time of posting.
The limit at 1 April 1991 is £20 per item.
Sending items of value
If you want to obtain a higher level of compensation cover than the basic £20 then we have a range of services available.
However, please note that certain types of goods are excluded from the compensation & insurance cover, for details of these please see page 13.
INLAND SERVICES
Parcelforce Standard
This is our basic delivery service which aims to deliver most parcels within the UK within 3 days from the date of despatch.
Parcelforce Standard includes the basic compensation, up to a maximum of £20 per item, in the event of an item being lost or damaged due to the fault of Parcelforce, its employees or agents.
Parcelforce Standard Compensation
If you require additional cover then you should ask at the post office counter for the Compensation Fee Service, and you will be issued with a compensation fee certificate of posting.
This service offers different levels of cover against loss or damage according to the fee paid.
For details please see the booklet:
Your Guide to sending parcels in the UK by Parcelforce Standard and the current Parcel Rates leaflet.
Please not that you are not covered for consequential loss under this service.
Parcelforce Datapost
Datapost provides a guaranteed timetabled next morning delivery by 10 am to all main UK business centres and by noon to almost everywhere else.
Datapost is our premium service and offers the following insurance cover:
Delay : You may claim a full refund of the Datapost Fee if an item fails to meet its advertised delivery standard.
Loss or Damage : Insurance cover of up to £5000 per item.
Consequential Loss : Insurance from £100 up to £10,000 per item against consequential loss arising from loss, damage or delay subject to policy terms and conditions.
We must ask you to stand the first £100 of any consequential loss.
But after that we offer compensation to cover, for example, loss of profits, additional expenses, loss of market and loss of a similar nature consequent upon loss, damage or late delivery.
There is no additional fee or paperwork for this insurance cover, it is all inclusive within the Datapost service.
For more details about Datapost and current prices, please see the booklet:
Your Guide to Express Delivery in the UK by Datapost — or phone Datapost on 0800 88 44 22 or phone the Parcelforce National Enquiry Centre on 0800 22 44 66.
SERVICES FOR BUSINESS USERS
For businesses sending large quantities of parcels we also offer contractual services, Parcelforce next day delivery services 10, 12, 24 and 48 hour guaranteed delivery.
These services offer inclusive insurance cover of up to £1,000 per item against loss or damage.
These services may also be available for occasional use.
If you would like further information about these services, then please call the Parcelforce National Enquiry Centre on 0800 22 44 66.
INTERNATIONAL SERVICES
International Economy Service
This is our basic international delivery service, available to most of the world.
There is no insurance facility for Economy Service.
Parcelforce may, at its discretion, provide limited compensation for parcels lost or damaged within the UK.
Any such payment would be made on an ex gratia basis and would not imply any admission of liability.
International Standard Service
International Standard Service offers delivery to almost anywhere in the world, and also offers an insurance facility: each item is automatically insured for up to £250 against loss or damage.
Please note that you are not covered for consequential loss under this service.
There is no extra fee or paperwork for this insurance cover, it is included within the International Standard Service price.
For further details about International Standard & Economy Services, and current prices, please see the booklet:
Your Guide to Sending International Standard & Economy Parcels or phone the Parcelforce National Enquiry Centre on 0800 22 44 66.
International Datapost
International Datapost offers an express, guaranteed delivery service to over 160 countries and territories worldwide.
Like UK Datapost, International Datapost offers the following insurance cover:
Delay : You may claim a full refund of the fee if an item fails to meet its advertised delivery standard.
Loss or Damage : Insurance cover of up to £5,000 per item.
Consequential Loss : Insurance cover from £100 up to £10,000 per item against consequential loss arising from loss, damage or delay subject to policy terms and conditions.
We must ask you to stand the first £100 of any consequential loss.
But after that we offer compensation to cover, for example, loss of profits, additional expenses, loss of market and loss of a similar nature consequent upon loss, damage or late delivery.
There is no additional fee or paperwork for this insurance cover, it is all included within the International Datapost price.
For further details about the International Datapost service, and current prices, please see the booklet:
Your Guide to Sending International Standard & Economy Parcels or phone Datapost on 0800 88 44 22 or phone the Parcelforce National Enquiry Centre on 0800 22 44 66.
HELP US TO HELP YOU
Whilst everyone in Parcelforce is working hard to give you the best possible service, we do sometimes make mistakes.
However, the main causes of parcels becoming damaged or going astray are the following:
Inadequate packaging
Incorrect address
Incomplete address
Illegible address
So you can help ensure that your parcel arrives safely; please show the full, correct address including the postcode; if you are unsure about the correct postal address then ask at a post office counter or contact your local Customer Care Unit for advice.
If the address is to be handwritten then please print clearly.
If you would like advice on the correct way to pack and protect the items you send, again ask your Customer Care Unit for advice.
Parcelforce will make every effort to deliver a parcel.
If there is no reply at the delivery address then a card is left, giving the recipient a range of options for receiving the parcel.
Ask your local Customer Care Unit for a copy of the leaflet:
Select or Collect
However, some parcels cannot be delivered, for example because the recipient has gone away or refuses to accept the parcel, in which case we will try to return it to you.
Please remember to include a return, or senders address on the parcel.
WHAT TO DO IF YOU HAVE A PROBLEM
Complaints and problems
We want to know when customers are not satisfied with our services so that we can try to put matters right.
If you have any problems or complaints, please ring or write to your local Customer Care Unit.
You will find their number at the end of this book.
Claims
If you send a parcel that become lost or damaged, or is sent via a Parcelforce guaranteed delivery service and fails to meet its advertised delivery standard, then you may wish to make a claim for compensation.
You will need to follow this procedure:
1.
Ask for a Parcelforce Claim Form, at a post office counter, or call your local Customer Care Unit who will send you one.
2.
Complete the form fully and clearly, attaching the documentation requested on the form.
3.
If you are claiming compensation for damage, please keep the damaged article and its packaging, as we may need to inspect them.
4.
If the item for which you are claiming was sent within the UK, then please try and send the claim form in to your Customer Care Unit within one month of sending the item.
We only keep your  delivery records for a limited time, and if there is too long an interval between the date of despatch and receiving a claim, then we are unable to investigate the problem as thoroughly as we would wish.
5.
However, if the item in question was sent overseas then please wait at least one month before sending in the claim form to allow sufficient time for delivery, but do try to submit it within four months from the date of despatch, otherwise the Foreign Administration may no longer have a record of delivery.
Taking your complaint further
If your Customer Care Unit has not been able to sort out your problem, or if you are not satisfied with their reply, you can take up the matter with your District Manager who will try to help.
If you are still unhappy with the reply you receive you can obtain independent local advice from a Post Office Advisory Committee, whose address can be obtained at your local Customer Care Unit, or by phoning the Parcelforce National Enquiry Centre on 0800 22 44 66.
The Post Office Users' National Council exists to assist Post Office customers who have been unable to resolve their problems.
It is an independent statutory body, which can give you advice and may take up your enquiry with Royal Mail Parcelforce.
There are separate Post Office Users' Councils for Northern Ireland, Scotland and Wales; the addresses are at the back of this booklet.
Arbitration or court action
What happens if you have applied to Parcelforce for compensation, you are not satisfied and you still consider you have a claim?
You can either take court action against The Post Office or apply to the Chartered Institute of Arbitrators.
You must decide at the start whether to go to court or use arbitration; if you use arbitration you cannot start court action afterwards.
Also, you must take arbitration or court action within 12 months of despatching the item.
The Chartered Institute of Arbitrators is completely independent of the Post Office; it offers a simple way of sorting out disputes using written statements and avoiding the need to make a personal appearance.
The Institute will ask you to send a fee, this will be refunded if the arbitrator decides in your favour.
The arbitrator's decision will be given to everyone involved, and will be binding in law.
You can obtain details and forms to apply for arbitration from the institute; its address is at the back of this booklet.
Compensation & Insurance Exclusions
The following types of goods are excluded from compensation and insurance cover:
Diamonds and other precious stones.
Jewellery (other than imitation).
Articles made largely or wholly of gold, silver or other precious metals.
Real fur.
Antiques.
Money (see definition below).
Hazardous or dangerous goods.
Prohibited or restricted items.
In addition to the above, for overseas deliveries there may also be additional prohibited items, which would also be excluded from insurance cover.
For details of these please ask at a Post Office Counter, or phone the Parcelforce National Enquiry Centre on 0800 22 44 66.
Definition of money
‘Money’ means all or any of the following:
Any bank note or currency note, being current in the British postal area or elsewhere.
Coins
Any uncrossed postal order which does not state to whom it is to be paid.
Any cheque or dividend warrant which is uncrossed and made payable to bearer.
Any bearer security (including a share warrant, scrip or substitution certificate, bond or relative coupon).
Any unobliterated postage or revenue stamp valid for current use in the British postal area or elsewhere (except a revenue stamp embossed or impressed on an instrument which has been executed).
Any coupon, voucher, token, card, stamp or similar document which can be exchanged (by itself or with any other document) for money, goods or services.
National Insurance stamps.
ROYAL MAIL REGISTERED SERVICE
If you want to send money or jewellery (as defined above) within the UK, then you can obtain compensation cover against loss or damage by using the Registered Service.
For further information, ask at the Post Office Counter.
PARCELFORCE Datapost
YOUR GUIDE TO EXPRESS DELIVERY IN THE UK BY DATAPOST
Service Benefits
Prices
Range of Services
From 2nd April 1991
HOW DATAPOST CAN WORK FOR YOU
Guaranteed delivery of documents or goods by 10am next day to all main UK business centres, and by noon to almost everywhere else.
Unique double guarantee:
‘Money-back’ guarantee if we fail to deliver by the agreed time.
PLUS
Up to £5,000 insurance cover per item for loss or damage — FREE.
And from £100 to £10,000 FREE cover per item for consequential loss in the unlikely event of loss, damage or delay.
For a collection from your door, just call us — FREE — on 0800 88 44 22.
Or hand your documents or goods into any one of over 3,000 post offices nationwide.
No limit to the total weight of a Datapost consignment — individual items can weigh as much as 30kg.
Datapost offers simple, no-fuss documentation, and has more acceptance points than any other express carrier in the UK.
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION…
OR ADVICE
For further details on Datapost or any other Parcelforce service, or professional advice on the service that will best suit your needs, don't hesitate to call us — FREE — on 0800 22 44 66.
UK DATAPOST — ONE ALL-INCLUSIVE PRICE
(Prices from 2nd April 1991)
Destinations are divided into the six areas below.
With the exception of the Isle of Man, when sending within an area, the UK Mainland rate applies.
When sending from one area to another , the rate in the destination area applies.
Parcelforce — Contract
If you are a regular user of Parcelforce services, taking out a contract could entitle you to discounts and incentives.
For further information, call our Parcelforce National Enquiry Centre FREE on 0800 22 44 66.
The Complete Range of Parcelforce Services
Whatever the size or destination of your consignment we can offer you a service to suit your needs.
Same Day Datapost
Datapost provides you with a same-day service in and between most UK business centres.
For a collection call us FREE on 0800 88 44 22.
Datapost
Guaranteed next-day delivery by 10am to all major UK business centres and by noon to almost everywhere else.
For a Datapost collection, call us FREE on 0800 88 44 22.
Parcelforce 24
Guaranteed next-day delivery to 95% of all UK business addresses by close of business, with the additional option of delivery by 10am or noon if required.
Parcelforce 48
Guaranteed 2-day delivery to 95% of all UK business addresses with an inclusive Weekly Data Report providing a record of all despatches and deliveries.
Parcelforce Standard
Reliable, cost-effective 2–3 day door-to-door delivery nationwide, with the largest acceptance network of any UK carrier.
International Datapost
Guaranteed timetable express delivery to over 160 countries and territories worldwide .
For an International Datapost collection, call us FREE on 0800 88 44 22.
International Standard and Economy Service
Reliable, cost-effective delivery to over 200 countries and territories worldwide .
SWIFTAIR
International Express Airmail for letters and packages
ARRIVES FASTER.
LEAVES A BIG IMPRESSION.
SWIFTAIR INTERNATIONAL EXPRESS AIRMAIL
There are times when a little extra speed can make a big difference to how your mail is received by overseas clients or family and friends abroad.
And that's when you'll want to use Royal Mail International's SWIFTAIR service.
EXTRA SPEED AND ECONOMY
SWIFTAIR is not a guaranteed courier service, but an economic express airmail service available to anywhere in the world.
All SWIFTAIR items receive priority handling and separate sorting so that they meet the first available flight to the country of destination.
And because SWIFTAIR travels within the international postal network it does not incur the high delivery costs of an expensive courier service.
INTERNATIONAL RECOGNITION
Over 140 countries worldwide operate an internal express service.
* And your SWIFTAIR letter or package will go straight into this express stream once it arrives at its country of destination.
The new look SWIFTAIR design is now the same as that used for the international express airmail services of Sweden, Ireland, Portugal and the Netherlands.
With more express items carrying the same design, it will be easier for all countries throughout the world to recognise them and give them priority treatment.
See list for details overleaf.
TWO SIMPLE WAYS TO SEND YOUR MAIL BY SWIFTAIR
There are two ways in which you can take advantage of SWIFTAIR's priority handling.
Swiftair stickers
For letters and packages up to a weight limit of 2kg you can simply pay £1.95 in addition to the normal airmail postage for the weight and destination and affix a red SWIFTAIR sticker to each item.
Swiftpacks
Alternatively, for items up to 150g, you can buy pre-paid SWIFTPACKS which come in three different sizes at the following prices:
These prices are fully pre-paid to anywhere in the world for items up to the weight limits designated above.
If you wish to send an item that exceeds the weight limit on your pre-paid SWIFTPACK the excess is charged at normal airmail rates.
Simply calculate the extra weight and add the correct value of stamps for that particular weight and destination.
HOW TO USE SWIFTAIR
SWIFTAIR stickers and SWIFTPACKS are both available at your local post office.
SWIFTPACKS can also be purchased by mail order from the address given in this leaflet.
Companies with a regular collection can include SWIFTAIR items in their post if they are separated from other mail by an elastic band.
Larger users can take advantage of an account facility.
For further details ring the RMI BUSINESS HELPLINE 
FOR EXTRA SECURITY
Whether you see SWIFTAIR stickers or SWIFTPACKS you can register or insure your SWIFTAIR items to most countries (see the International prices and services leaflet) and a certificate of posting is available, free of charge, on request.
MAIL ORDER SERVICE
If you require a stock of SWIFTPACKS you can order them in multiples of 10 by sending a cheque, made payable to ‘The Post Office’ with your order to:
Discounts are available for larger quantities.
Please write to the address above for details.
PARCELFORCE Standard
YOUR GUIDE TO SENDING PARCELS IN THE UK BY PARCELFORCE STANDARD
Prices
Features
Range of Services
Benefits of a Contract
From 1st July 1991
Introduction
Parcelforce Standard offers you a reliable and cost-effective nationwide distribution service, with delivery normally in 2–3 working days.
This includes Saturday delivery, at no extra cost.
Parcelforce Standard is available at over 20,000 Post Office counters — the largest acceptance network of any UK carrier.
Prices
The simple price structure of Parcelforce Standard ensures it is just as cost-effective to send a parcel 300 miles as it is to sent it 30 miles.
Size and Weight Limits
Individual parcels, except if addressed to Jersey, can weigh up to 30kg and measure up to 1.5m in length, and 3m in length and girth combined.
For parcels to Jersey, the maximum weight is 10kg whilst the maximum dimensions are 1.07m length and 2.0m length and girth combined.
Some Post Offices may not be able to accept parcels over 10kg.
Customs Declaration
A Parcelforce International Customs Pack (PFU5) must be affixed to all parcels for delivery to the Channel Islands.
Packaging Addressing
It is important that you ensure all parcels are adequately packaged to protect them in transit.
The amount and type of packaging will depend on the parcel being sent.
More detailed information on packaging is available from your local Parcelforce Customer Care Unit.
When addressing your parcels, make sure you include your own name and address, and remember to include the postcode in both cases.
Compensation
Parcelforce will, in certain circumstances, pay compensation for items that are lost or damaged in our system — providing you have a Certificate of Posting.
The current level of compensation is up to £20 per parcel.
You should obtain a Certificate of Posting, which is available free of charge at the counter.
You can enjoy a higher level of compensation, if required, by using our Compensation Fee facility.
Simply complete a Compensation Fee Certificate of Posting, which you will need in the event of a claim.
If your parcel is lost or damaged, compensation may be paid up the specified limit according to the fee paid.
Any compensation shall not exceed the market value of the items lost, or reduction in value of items damaged.
Also, no compensation will be paid for prohibited items, including monetary items, or for items that have been inadequately packed.
There is also no cover for consequential loss under this service.
The Compensation Fee facility can also be used in conjunction with Cash on Delivery.
Cash on Delivery
The Cash on Delivery facility provides you with a means of collecting a specific amount of money — up to a maximum invoice value of £350 — upon delivery of the parcel.
The fees payable are shown on the right.
When the parcel has been delivered and the specific amount collected, you should receive payment within two weeks of delivery.
However, if the amount to be collected exceeds £50, the parcel will be held and notice of the arrival sent to the addressee.
The addressee will then be required to pay the Cash on Delivery amount at the delivery office, and, if they wish, collect the parcel at the same time.
Postage Forward Parcels
Available under licence, Postage Forward Parcels enables you to pay for parcels that your customers send you.
The customer is provided with an unstamped addressed label, special wrapper or container.
The parcel is then sent, bearing this label, in the ordinary way but without payment being made at the counter.
The licencee pays the charges on all parcels received in this way.
This facility is not available for parcels sent to and from the Channel Islands or the Isle of Man.
Surcharges
Recipients of unpaid or underpaid parcels will be charged the outstanding amount, plus a fee of 16p per parcel.
Redirection
You'll find full redirection details and fees in the booklet ‘UK Letter Rates.
A Comprehensive Guide’, available at the counter.
Private Boxes
This facility allows you to collect your parcels from your local delivery office, by using a P.O.
Box number.
Full details and fees are available in the booklet ‘UK Letter Rates.
A Comprehensive Guide’.
Poste Restante You'll find full details of the Poste Restante facility in the booklet ‘UK Letter Rates.
A Comprehensive Guide’.
The Benefits of a Parcelforce Standard Contract
The benefits of becoming a Parcelforce Standard contract customer are considerable — both for you and your business.
There are a whole range of features designed to help save you time and money — and all are exclusive to contract customers.
For instance:
Collections
We will collect your parcels for you, at a time that's convenient and agreed in advance.
Flat Rate Prices
We can arrange a flat rate price per parcel with you, based on your individual traffic profile, to give you control over your distribution budget.
Credit Facilities
If you wish, we can arrange to invoice you in arrears, normally on a monthly basis, to help give you maximum financial control.
Easy Payment
Direct debit is by far the most convenient way to pay.
All your payments are automatically taken care of for you, cutting your administration time and costs.
Trakback
Trakback is our Conformation and Proof of Delivery facility.
It's easy to use.
You simply place a barcoded Trakback label on your parcel, then make a free call to our computer centre, to confirm when your parcel was delivered.
Trakback not only helps with your stock control, it also helps you manage your company's cash flow, by letting you know quickly when you can invoice.
There may also be occasions when you need to have a copy of the signature of the addressee.
We can arrange this for you for an additional fee.
FOR MORE INFORMATION ON ANY PARCELFORCE SERVICE, CALL OUR NATIONAL ENQUIRY CENTRE FREE ON 0800 22 44 66
The Complete Range of Parcelforce Services
ROYAL MAIL CODE OF PRACTICE
Royal Mail Standards And Services Made Clear
Introduction
The Post office is split into three separate businesses:
Royal Mail
Royal Mail Parcelforce
Post Office Counters Ltd
However, they are all related, helping us give you a higher standard of service.
This booklet is Royal Mail's Code of Practice.
It gives information about Royal Mail and the standards of service we aim to reach.
Although it gives only basic descriptions of our services, there is more information on the Royal Mail Guide and Royal Mail International Guide which you can consult at post office counters.
The Code of Practice is designed to point you in the right direction if you have a problem or complaint and explains when you might be entitled to compensation.
It has been produced with the help of the Post Office Users' National Council (POUNC) and the Office of Fair Trading (OFT).
At Royal Mail, we aim to give you the best possible service and to be fair in all our dealings with you.
However, with a business operation the size of ours, it is possible that things will sometimes go wrong.
When they do, it is important to you and us that things are put right quickly, courteously and effectively.
Changes in services
Before we make any major change to prices, services or levels of compensation, we consult the Post office Users' National Council as early as possible.
The Council's views are taken into account in representing your interests and well before a change takes place, we publish details in post offices and, where necessary, announce it in the press and other places for media advertising.
Monitoring of the Code
Our performance is reported every year in The Post Office's Report and Accounts, in which detailed information can be found on the number of addresses we serve, the volume of mail we handle and other statistics (you can buy a copy from HMSO).
We also monitor the way this Code works and regularly consult POUNC, who publish their own annual report.
Standards of service
We work on the principle that you should only pay for the services you need.
We produce a range of information leaflets about Royal Mail and Royal Mail International services which are on display at post office counters.
Full information on all services is in the Royal Mail and Royal Mail International Guides.
Inland
We aim to deliver first class mail as soon as possible, with most mail targeted for delivery by the next working day.
In practice this means under our fully independent end to end service measurement arrangements that next day delivery will be achieved for over 9 out of 10 letters within the 100 mile range and currently 8 out of 10 for those travelling longer distances.
The service will be slightly lower for letters collected on a Friday because there is only one delivery in towns on Saturdays compared with two on weekdays.
We aim to deliver 96% of second class letters by the third working day after collection.
(Targets for mail posted in your area and performance for your district for the most recent year are shown in The Post Office's Report and Accounts.)
In general the earlier in the day first class letters are posted, the more certainty there is of next day delivery.
This is particularly important for letters travelling long distances, as it is not possible for first class letters to make the journey between certain places by the next day unless they are posted early.
A map showing the latest recommended posting times in your area is included in the Post Guide booklet delivered to every household in the U.K.
First and second class
The first and second class letter services are used far more often than any other services.
However, such letters receive no special security handling, and we do not therefore recommend these services when sending any letters for which you want cover for compensation.
The following are our special letter services which you should use when you want more than the ordinary letter post.
Recorded Delivery
Recorded Delivery is available for a small fee for first and second class letters.
It gives you evidence of posting and a signature is obtained  when the letter is delivered.
Recorded Delivery is for ordinary letters or documents which have little or no monetary value.
There are no special security handling or compensation arrangements.
Registered
The registered letter service is available for first class post for an extra fee.
You obtain evidence of the date and place you posted the letter or package and special security handling arrangements throughout, and someone must sign for it when we deliver it.
We will pay compensation for loss or damage, at various levels depending on the registration fee you paid.
However, we will not pay more than the market value of the package.
For an extra fee, at the time of posting at your post office, we can arrange cover against consequential loss.
Consequential loss can be where delay or loss of a letter or package could involve you in additional expense over and above its actual value.
Royal Mail Special Delivery
Royal Mail Special Delivery is available for first class letters for an extra fee.
These letters only  receive priority treatment at the delivery office if that day's deliveries have already left the office.
If your letter is not delivered on the first working day after your posted it — as long as you posted it in time to get there — then we automatically refund your fee.
Royal Mail International
International mail involves the postal services of other countries as well as our own, so we cannot give precise service standards.
However, we aim to send off airmail abroad on the working day after it is posted, and to deliver incoming airmail on the working day after it arrives in this country.
The Royal Mail Service booklet contains a guide to delivery times worldwide.
When you send items overseas, make sure that they will be accepted in the country they are going to by checking in the Royal Mail International Guide.
We do not recommend the ordinary letter service for sending things that you want covered for compensation.
The following are our special letter services, which you should use when you want more than the ordinary post.
Registration
The international registration service is similar to the inland Recorded Delivery service, and is not designed for sending items of value.
You can register a letter for any country, but you would only receive a small amount of compensation for loss or damage.
(Some countries do not pay compensation for damage.)
Insurance
You can insure a letter to most countries overseas.
We will pay compensation for loss or damage, depending on the insurance fee you paid.
The insured service gives you evidence of posting, a signature when the item is delivered and special security handling arrangements throughout.
You are not covered for consequential loss.
Swiftair
Swiftair is an express airmail service available for an extra fee for all letters to Europe and letters and printed papers to most other countries.
Your letter is moved as fast as possible in the UK and you receive express delivery abroad where this is  available (see the list of countries in the Royal Mail International Guide).
You can also obtain a certificate of posting if you ask at the counter.
We cannot guarantee a particular delivery time.
Compensation and general conditions
There is no contract between you and The Post Office.
The Post Office is legally liable, in certain circumstances and within certain limits, for most things that are lost or damaged in the inland post.
To obtain evidence that you posted an item we advise you to ask for a certificate of posting when you post a letter at a post office counter.
This is free; just request a certificate at the counter.
If you do not have a certificate we are not legally liable to pay compensation in the inland post.
(There is no legal liability in the international post.)
There are conditions you must meet in all services, such as using proper packaging, addressing things correctly and not sending certain things in the post.
If you do not keep to these conditions, we will not pay compensation.
The maximum compensation we will pay, within the levels set in each service, is the market value of the item lost or damaged in the post.
We will not include the value of any message or information, but we will give sympathetic  consideration to your request for a refund of the reasonable costs you have had in making enquiries about a lost or damaged postal packet.
We change the compensation limits from time to time; the current limits are published in our UK Letter Rates Guide, available at post offices.
Sending Valuable Items
UK
In the inland post, we recommend that you use the registered letter service for sending valuable items.
This is because in the ordinary letter service you only receive limited compensation — less than £25 — for loss and damage, and no compensation at all for money, monetary items or jewellery (as defined on pages 25 and 26).
If you want to be covered for compensation, send money and monetary items by the registered post in a registered envelope sold by The Post Office.
Overseas
In the overseas post, we recommend that you use the insured letter service for sending valuable items.
Otherwise you only receive limited compensation — less than £25 for loss and damage of an ordinary letter — and no compensation at all for money, monetary items or jewellery.
Refunds of postage and fees
If there is a failure through The Post Office's own negligence to provide the service for which you have paid postage or a fee, we can refund the postage or fee.
This is for ordinary and special services, inland and overseas.
Delivery
In all postal services, Royal Mail delivers to the address shown on the item.
We cannot guarantee to deliver to the person.
Helping us to help you
Everyone in Royal Mail is working to give you the best possible service.
To help us to help you, there are a few steps you can take to make sure letters arrive on time and in the condition you sent them.
Correct Addressing and Packaging
Show the full correct postal address which should include the post town and postcode.
Sorting is now almost totally automated; if you use the correct address and full postcode on all the letters you send, you will help to ensure the letter arrives on time.
If you are not sure of a full correct postal address or postcode, ask your local Customer Care Unit (you will find their number at the end of this book, in your telephone directory and in your Post Guide).
Details on correct addressing for international mail can be found in the Royal Mail International Guide.
While we try to make sure that we treat packages in our care with the respect they deserve, goods sent through the post can be damaged.
One of the main problems is poor, or not enough, packaging.
If you would like advice on the correct way to pack and protect the items you post, read the leaflet Wrap up Well or ask your Customer Care Unit.
If we cannot deliver a letter or packet for any reason, we will attempt to return it to you.
To help with this process, you should put the return address on the back of the envelope or packet.
Make sure you pay the right postage on your letter for the weight, the type of service and where it is going.
If you do not it could delay the item and the person receiving it might have to pay an extra charge.
If in doubt, check at the post office counter.
What to do if you have a problem:
Complaints
We want to know when customers are not satisfied with our services so that we can try to put matters right.
If you have any problems or complaints, please ring your local Customer Care Unit.
You will find their number at the end of this book, in the telephone directory and in the Post Guide booklet which we deliver to your home.
We aim to:
Tell customers that we have received their written complaints and claims for compensation within 24 hours of receiving them;
Deal with them all quickly;
Resolve those for the inland post within 6 weeks.
However, claims for the international services may need to be dealt with by an overseas postal service.
If enquiries in such cases have not been completed within 3 months (for registered and insured letters) or 6 months (for ordinary letters) then we will normally settle the claim ourselves.
This is because we understand that you will be anxious to have your claim resolved.
Delay
If letters are delayed, give your Customer Care Unit full details about posting and delivery.
We want to try to find the cause of the problem so that we can improve the service.
It will help us  with our enquiries if you can give us the envelope or the outer wrapping.
Loss or damage
If you:
Send a letter that is then lost or damaged;
Should have received a letter that is lost; or
Receive a letter that is damaged;
then follow this procedure:
1.
Ask for an enquiry form at any post office counter, or ask your Customer Care Unit to send you one.
2.
When you have filled it in, send it to the Customer Care Unit or hand it in at any post office.
Where necessary, enclose the certificate of posting or a clear photocopy.
3.
If you are applying for compensation for damage, please keep the damaged article, and the packaging, as we may need to see them later.
Please apply as soon as possible.
We only keep our records for a certain time, in some cases no longer than 12 months.
Sometimes customers  spend a lot of time finding out the value of an item before applying.
If this is likely to take time, make your first application quickly, and say that the value you have given has yet to be confirmed and may be changed later.
Taking your complaint further
If your Customer Care unit has not been able to sort out your problem, or if you are not satisfied with their reply, you can take up the matter with your District Head Postmaster who will try to help.
If you are still unhappy with the reply you receive you can obtain local advice from a Post Office Advisory Committee, whose address is in the Post Guide booklet.
The Post Office Users' National Council exists to assist Post Office customers who have been unable to resolve their problems successfully.
It is an independent statutory body, which can give you advice and may take up your enquiry with Royal Mail.
There are separate Post Office Users' Councils for Northern Ireland, Scotland and Wales; the addresses are at the back of this booklet.
Arbitration or court action
What happens if you have applied for compensation in the inland post, you are not satisfied and you still consider you have a claim?
You can either take court action against The Post Office or apply to the Chartered Institute of Arbitrators for the matter to be dealt with under their arbitration procedures.
You must decide at the start whether to go to court or use arbitration; if you use arbitration you cannot start court action afterwards.
The Chartered Institute of Arbitrators is completely independent of The Post Office.
Its arbitration procedures offer a simple way of sorting out disputes using written statements, and avoiding the need to make a personal appearance.
You can obtain details and forms to apply for arbitration from the Institute; its address is at the back of this booklet.
The Institute will ask you to send a fee which they will refund if the arbitrator decides in your favour or decides that you should have your fee back.
They will ask you for a full statement of the complaint including the amount of compensation you are looking for and all the relevant evidence.
They will also ask The Post Office for a reply to your complaint and all the evidence they have so that the arbitrator can consider both sides of the case.
The arbitrator's decision will be given to everyone involved and will be binding in law.
The arbitrator may decide that The Post Office is not legally liable but that there are special circumstances in your favour that mean you were not really at fault.
If so, the arbitrator may make a separate recommendation to The Post Office that they give you an ‘ex gratia’ payment.
(This is a goodwill payment, not necessarily based on admission of error).
If you are not satisfied about the outcome of your application for compensation in the overseas post, you may still put your complaint to an adjudicator appointed by the Chartered Institute of Arbitrators.
The procedure in these cases is similar to the arbitration procedure for claims for compensation in the inland post.
But the Post Office is not legally liable for compensation in the overseas post and the recommendation by the adjudicator will not be legally binding.
However, The Post Office will, out of honour, consider itself bound to accept it.
Your inland or overseas claim need not follow all the steps explained above.
You can go straight from your first complaint (to your local Customer Care Unit) to an application to the Chartered Institute of Arbitrators, or even straight to court.
However, it may be in your best interests to make full use of all the options rather than miss some of them out.
If you apply to the Chartered Institute of Arbitrators you must do so within 12 months of posting the item in question.
Similarly, you must bring any court action to get compensation for a lost or damaged inland letter within 12 months of posting it.
Meanings of words
In this Code ‘money’ means all or any of the following:
Any uncrossed postal order which does not say to whom it is to be paid.
Any postage or revenue stamp that is not defaced valid for current use in the British postal area or elsewhere (except a revenue stamp embossed or impressed on an instrument which has been executed).
In this Code, ‘jewellery’ means:
Any precious metal that has been manufactured in some way, including coins used for ornament.
Diamonds and precious stones.
Watches whose cases are made wholly or mainly of precious metal.
Similar articles with a built-in or market value apart from workmanship.
12 MONTHS OF BEAUTIFUL BRITISH STAMPS
Royal Mail Stamps
Free Stamp Bug Calendar inside
British Philatelic Bureau
A Royal Mail Stamps Service
SPECIAL OFFER:
FREE R.S.P.C.A. PRINTS WHEN YOU OPEN A STANDING ORDER ACCOUNT
The easiest way to ensure you don't miss a single issue, is by opening a Standing Order Account with the British Philatelic Bureau.
What's more, when you open your account with a deposit of £20 or more, we'll be pleased to send you, free, a set of four colourful prints of the deservedly popular R.S.P.C.A. issue.
Reproduced from original camera-work by the respected photographer Tony Evans, these endearing prints feature a puppy, a downy duckling, a kitten and a young lop-eared rabbit.
To receive your prints — FREE — simply fill in the attached Standing Order Form, then return it to use today with your deposit of £20 or more.
You don't even need a stamp.
Then, as a customer of the British Philatelic Bureau you can sit back and look forward to Britain's beautiful Special Issue Stamps being sent direct to your door at least nine times a year.
1992
FOR DETAILS OF THE STAMP BUG CLUB, SEE REVERSE
14th January
WINTERTIME
The first of four Special Issues depicting the seasons.
28TH JANUARY
The theme of 1992's charming Greetings Stamps is Memories.
6th February
HAPPY AND GLORIOUS
40th anniversary of The Queen's Accession.
25th FEBRUARY
The Welsh Prestige Stamp Book is filled with evocative photographs of Wales.
10th March
TENNYSON
Commemorates the centenary of the death of Lord Tennyson
7th April
EUROPA '92
Celebrates the theme of Royal Mail's sponsorship of the British Olympic and British Paraplegic teams for 1992, as well as Columbus and Expo '92.
16th June
THE CIVIL WAR
Honours the 350th anniversary of the Battle of Edgehill.
21st July
GILBERT & SULLIVAN
Celebrates the 150th anniversary of the birth of Sir Arthur Sullivan.
15th September
THE GREEN ISSUE
This marks the Royal Mail's commitment to the environment.
13th October
SINGLE EUROPEAN MARKET
Celebrates the coming into force of the SEM on 31st December 1992.
27TH OCTOBER
The Tolkien Prestige Stamp Book celebrates the centenary of the birth of the creator of Lord of the Rings.
10th November
CHRISTMAS
A traditional issue celebrating the Nativity.
MINT SPECIAL STAMPS
The Special Stamps themselves are dispatched in protective packs on the day of issue.
Each set comprises one of each design.
FIRST DAY COVERS
These consist of a specially-designed envelope bearing the latest British stamps, cancelled with a pictorial First-Day-of- Issue postmark: either the Bureau's Edinburgh postmark, or an appropriate alternative (eg. Bethlehem, Wales, for the Christmas issue).
First Day Covers are sent directly to your address inside a protective outer envelope.
Alternatively, you can get blank decorative envelopes from your post office up to two weeks before the issue date.
Then on the day of issue you address the envelope, stick on the stamps, post it in the First Day Cover posting box, and it will receive a First-Day-of-Issue postmark.
PRESENTATION PACKS
The unique story behind each new issue of Special Stamps is brought to life inside Presentation Packs.
Besides a full set of stamps mounted on card and protected by a transparent sleeve, each pack opens up to reveal a wealth of information, accompanied by full-colour illustrations.
COLLECTORS' PACK
The entire year's Special Stamps in a specially-designed folder illustrating the background to each issue.
STAMP CARDS
These are Special Stamps enlarged to postcard size, to show in full their colourful and intricate detail.
DEFINITIVE AND COUNTRY DEFINITIVE STAMPS
Definitive Stamps are available as Low Value (under £1)— and High Value (£1 and over)— stamps.
Like the Penny Black, Low Value Definitives simply have a portrait of the reigning monarch together with the stamp value.
High Value Definitives currently feature engravings of British Castles from photographs by HRH The Duke of York.
Scotland, Wales and Northern Ireland have their own Low Value Definitives, called Country Definitives.
STAMP BOOKS
Three different types of Stamp Books containing Definitive Stamps are available.
Those with distinctive red and yellow covers from post offices and thousands of shops nationwide; those with illustrated covers from vending machines; and Prestige Stamp Books.
A Prestige Stamp Book is issued every year.
However in 1992, we will be seeing two.
The first is on Wales, issued in February; and the second, appearing in October, is on J.R.R. Tolkien, writer of Lord of the Rings.
Each of these appealing booklets contains several pages of text and illustrations — plus a mixed-value pane of stamps, exclusive to each book.
ROYAL MAIL SPECIAL STAMP YEAR BOOK
Each hardcover Year Book, in its own embossed slipcase, is a combination of absorbing reference work and specialist stamp album.
Illustrated lavishly from often rare and unusual sources, it carries detailed information on that year's issues which are themselves included in a protective sleeve.
GREETINGS STAMP BOOKS
These charming first class stamps are designed to be sent on greetings cards.
The theme of the new booklet, released on 28th January, is Memories, and it includes a set of colourful greetings labels.
JOIN THE STAMP BUG CLUB — THE MOST FUN YOU CAN HAVE FOR £3
The best way to find friends, fun and philatelic facts is by joining the Stamp Bug Club.
Once you're a member, you'll receive a copy of Stamp Bug News magazine every two months.
You'll also get a FREE stamp album every year, a brilliant club badge, stickers and a membership card.
Membership for the world's biggest junior stamp club must be the world's biggest bargain; £3 for two years — and for five years, just £5*!
What's more, if you know at least nine other stamp collectors, you can join as a group member for even less — just £2.20 for two years and only £3.50 for five years!
If your school or club does not have group membership already, why not suggest they join?
Simply write your name/s and address on the Stamp Bug Club Application Form attached, and send it with your cheque or postal order to:
THE TINY INVENTION THAT CHANGED THE WORLD
After Rowland Hill invented the Penny Black in 1840, Britain's postal system was adopted the world over.
These days, British stamps are collected in every corner of the world.
Recognised for their excellence of design, British stamps are now more varied and colourful than their tiny black predecessor.
Special Stamps are a case in point.
Issued about nine times a year to celebrate the richness of life in Britain, they are collected by enthusiasts from every corner of the globe.
‘IF YOU COLLECT, WE DELIVER’
Most of our customers rely on a Standing Order Account.
This means that every time new stamps appear, the Bureau will deliver your specific request (anything from a gutter pair to an entire sheet) direct to your door.
If you'd like to open a Standing Order Account for Special Issue Mint Stamps, First Day Covers or Presentation Packs, please complete the attached Order Form.
The nine Special Issues you'll receive in 1992 are titled on the calendar overleaf.
OUR CUSTOMER ENQUIRY LINE
If you have any questions call 031–550 8900, 8.30am to 4.30pm Monday to Friday.
SPRING AND AUTUMN STAMPEX '92
This year, Britain's bi-annual stamp exhibition will be held at the Royal Horticultural Halls, from 25th February to 1st March, and from 20th to 25th October.
This engaging puppy, featured on the 37p stamp, helped the Royal Mail celebrate the 150th anniversary of the R.S.P.C.A.
Each print, including this one featuring a young lop-eared rabbit, measures 210 × 298mm and is sent ready for you to frame.
The downy duckling is another of the free prints you'll receive, when you open a Standing Order Account with £20 or more.
This beautiful long-haired tortoiseshell kitten was chosen to symbolise the many kittens and cats rescued by the R.S.P.C.A. each year.
Presentation Packs — Special Stamps and information pack in one, sumptuously illustrated in full colour.
Mint Stamps — A full set of stamps for each issue, packaged to arrive in mint condition in a protective folder.
Prestige Stamp Books — Recent issues have celebrated London Life, The Scots Connection and Agatha Christie.
Royal Mail Special Stamp Year Book — This beautifully-designed reference work includes the entire year's Special Stamps.
First Day Covers — Special Issue Mint Stamps on a decorate envelope and cancelled on their date of issue.
PARCELFORCE International
SENDING PARCELS ABROAD?
YOUR HANDY FACT FILE
Services
Prices
Destinations
Documentation
Delivery speeds
Weight limits
Packaging
Insurance
PARCELFORCE INTERNATIONAL
THE POWER TO DELIVER WORLDWIDE
PRICES
To work out the price for any service, first find the Price Zone for the destination country in the Country Pricing Zones table.
Then refer to the Price Table above for your chosen service and read off the price shown against  your Price Zone and parcel weight.
For every extra 0.5kg over 5kg, add the amount given in the supplementary table.
If you are using any optional extra services, extra fees are payable, as shown opposite.
OPTIONAL EXTRAS
(Standard and Economy Services only
Express Delivery
Fastest possible delivery from post office in country of destination.
Fee in addition to postage: £2.70
Franc de Droits (FDD)
Pre-payment of foreign Customs charges to avoid inconveniencing recipient.
Outward fee per parcel in addition to postage: £1.60
Inward delivery fee: £1.30
Cash on delivery (C.O.D.)
Parcels will not be delivered until a specified sum (the Trade Charge) has been collected on sender's behalf.
These are all available for an extra charge with standard and Economy Services only, to certain destinations.
Ask for details.
DOCUMENTATION
For International Datapost:
DATAPOST DOCKET
RELEVANT CUSTOMS DOCUMENTATION including commercial invoices — ask at counter
For International Standard or Economy Services:
CUSTOMS PACK
STANDARD SERVICE LABEL where applicable
And for contract customers only DESPATCH ADVICE,(POSTING DOCKET)(contract customers may also use a MULTI-PARCEL C.O.P.
PAD)
SIZE & WEIGHT LIMITS?
Many countries will accept parcels up to 30kg and 1.5m long.
Ask at the counter or call 0800 22 44 66.
INSURANCE
International Datapost
Free insurance against loss or damage up to £5,000.
Free consequential loss cover from £100–£10,000.
International Standard Service
Inclusive insurance against actual loss or damage up to £250 per parcel.
International Economy Service
Limited discretionary compensation for loss or damage.
For details of exclusions and how to claim, ask at the counter or call 0800 22 44 66.
* International Datapost services are not available at all Post Office counters.
For your nearest acceptance point, call free on 0800 22 44 66.
Advice and assistance is always available from the PARCELFORCE NATIONAL ENQUIRY CENTRE .
PARCELFORCE INTERNATIONAL
A range of services to meet your needs
INTERNATIONAL DATAPOST
For guaranteed express delivery, to over 170 countries and territories worldwide.
Free Datapost collection from anywhere in the country — just call free on 0800 88 44 22.
INTERNATIONAL STANDARD SERVICE
For deliveries to over 200 countries and territories worldwide — Europe from 5 working days, and to the rest of the world from 7 working days.
The following optional extra services are available with International Standard and Economy services :
Express delivery
Franc de Droits (FDD)
Cash on delivery (C.O.D.)
INTERNATIONAL ECONOMY SERVICE
For deliveries to most long-distance destinations at reduced rates (Europe from 10 working days, to the rest of the world from 20 working days)
IT'S TOTALLY COMPREHENSIVE
IT'S TOTALLY FREE
THE PARCELFORCE INTERNATIONAL USER GUIDE
Your 100 page User Guide adds up to everything you need to know about Parcelforce International Services, destinations, delivery speeds, customs requirements and much more.
To order your free copy simply call us free on 0800 22 44 66.
THE POWER TO DELIVER